THE ROGVE: OR THE LIFE OF GVZMAN DE ALFARACHE.

WRITTEN IN SPANISH by MATHEO ALEMAN, Servant to his Catholic Majesty, and
borne in SEVILL.



LONDON, Printed for Edward Blount. 1623.

AL ILLVSTRE SENNOR, DON IVAN ESTRANGWAYES ESPEIO DE LA VIRTVD Y NOBLEZA,
Cauallero Titulado, y gentilhombre de la Camara de Su Serenissima Magesdad de
la gran Bretan^a.
SEn^or mio; No he querido encomendarmi Picaro a la protecion de los Reyes, y
Principes. Porque, demas que no conuienen tales personas a sus Magesdades y
Grandezas, an hecho particulares Leyes muy rigorosas, y Pragmaticas seueras
contra los que lo hazen.

Ni tampoco a los Consejeros de Estado. Porque, aunque a caso los tengan, no se
siruen, ni gustan dellos, si no por su proprio interes, o razon de Estado.

A los Iuezes, menos. Porque son enemigos mortales de la pobreza, y de los, que
no tienen dineros.

Pero, a vuestra Sen^oria si; (aunque no sin recelo) por amor de los grillos, y
cien acotes bien pagados. Siendo vuestra Sen^oria Gouernador principal en su
tierra, y vno de los Corregidores de Locanos, y Picaros. Yo se muy bien, que
vuestra Sen^oria puede echar mano a mi Picaro, y agarrarle, para lleuarle a la
Carcel, y detenerle en ella. Yo confiesso, que era todo quanto malo se puede
dezir. Arrojado, y desuanecido, inconsiderado, descuydado, confuso,
desordenado, indiscreto. Era reboltoso, y amigo de nouedades. Tenia sutilezas,
inuenciones, y engan^os. Era importuno, y porfiado, semejante al nauio, que
anda dando bordes en la ribera, y nunca acaba de tomar puerto. Era como vna
pared, que cada momento estaua para desmoronarse, y caer en tierra. No tenia
firmeza en su voluntad; no tomaua resolucion, en lo que auia de hazer; No Sabia
refrenar sus passiones; Hinchosele la cabeca de viento, desuanecio en
embelecos; Dan do consejo a los otros, no sabiendo los tomar para si. Donde
llego a triste fortuna, y suerte, a Lazeria, mezquindad, de sarrapamiento,
estrema miseria, y necessidad, y en fin, a las Galeras.

Con todo esso como los Picaros tienen entrada en las Casas de Sen^ores, no
desconfio, que este nin^o de la Piedra, sera bien recebido de vuestra Sen^oria,
y en toda verdad, deue estimarse en mucho.

Porque, aunque habla mucho, pero no sin sustancia. No se puede dezir ser todo
hoja, y no tener fruto. O, que nuestro Picaro es gran Charlatan; que tiene
muchas palabras, y en ellas poco de que echar mano, que sea de consideracion.
Tira a dos hitos, por diuersos caminos, dando a entender vna cosa con sus
palabras, y haziendo lo contrario en sus obras. Hallara vuestra Sen^oria (como
dizen) enter Col, y Col, Lechuga. Variedad de cosas para entretener, y recrear,
para que no nos enfademos, tratando siempre vna cosa. Trayendo tanta variedad
de razones, quantas colores tiene un Pintor. No es como Elecho, yerua sin
tallo, sin flor, y sin simiente. Las rasuras, que salen de las piecas de
acofar, quando se tornean, en si valen poco, y quando las recogen, hazen bulto;
pero echadas a derretir, se bueluen en muy poco. Tales son las palabras vanas
de los Charlatanes, y Habladores. Que, si los apurais, tienen poca sustancia.

Pero este Picaro, no es holgacan, que esta papando viento, como los fuelles.
Grande es el prouecho, la vtilidad, y ganancia, que del se saca. Estremado es
en sus dichos, y donayres, y comprehend, y encierra muchas moralidades, vnas
dentro de otras. Es muy gracioso: Es (como dizen) vna sal.

Diran algunos; Que es todo intricado, confuso, mal-digesto, reuefado. Mienten.
Antes todo al contrario.

Por el hilo, se saca el ouillo: y por la muestra, y principio de vna cosa, se
conoce lo demas della.

O que natural fuerca de entendimiento! O, como da en el blanco! Como tira a
punteria. No tira, (como otros) a tiento, a troche much, de donde diere, si no
con orden, y buen concierto. Aduertiendo a todos, que no ensucien sus manos en
cosas viles, ni hagan cosa fea, O indecente; si no, que se recojan, y que
paren, y obedescan al freno de la razon.

Mi Picaro, es hombre de bien. No es de aquellos Vellacos de Madrid, que
pregonan vino, y venden vinagre. De los, que prometen cosas buenas y altas, y
despues son ordinarias y friuolas.

No digo mas, sino que me he engolfado en un negocio muy dificultoso. Perdone
me vuestra Sen^oria. No pude menos. Quales las cadenas, quales las ataduras de
es labones nigeridos vnos en otros, son la importunidad de los Amigos, y la
propria promesa? Estando desta manera empen^ado, me fue menester para
satisfazer con mi obligacion; y auiendome engargantado el pie en el estriuo, no
pude tan facilmente sacarlo.

Yo me he puesto las faldas en cinta, para passar mi Carrera; Se mi poco valor,
y flaqueza, y que alo menos, si no he errado, he tropecado. Pero, si vuestra
Sen^oria sera seruido de tenerla por buena, y suficiente, y que he hecho mi
deuer sin falta, O Fealdad, el Torneo no sera malo, teniendo Padrino tan noble
para abonarme.

El que buelue las palabras y conceptos de vna lengua en otra a menester tener
fidelidad, prudencia, y sagacidad, y ygual noticia de ambas Lenguas, y lo que
en ellas se dize por alusiones, y terminos metaforicos, y mirar lo, que en esta
otra Lengua se puede corresponder. Muchos vierten; y las mas vezes, peruierten.

El Picaro, esta trasladado. Plega a Dios, que di mi mano no sea mal tradado.
Traducido, si; Si traslucido, bien esta. El Picaro de Aleman ha mudado su
Vestido; su Traje, no es al modo de Espan^a, si no de Inglaterra. Si yo le he
puesto en su punto y ser, muy venturoso soy. Guarde me Dios, de mala noche, y
parir hija. Ay tal desconsuelo en el mundo como trabajar mucho en un negocio, y
alcabo no suceder como se deseaua.

En algunos lugares, hallo mi Guzmanico escuro como la noche. Pero, yo he hecho
algunos Escolios, para quitar los Escollos. Espero buen puerto. Pero, si a caso
se em brauece la Mar de Maldicion, si las Olas crecen, con la espuma de los
Deslenguados, si este mi pobre Vaxel no tiene fuerca para contrastar las
Tempestades amenazadas, me desnudare, y arrojare con impetu y furia en la Mar,
dexandole a la inclemencia destos Toruellinos, y espiritus turbulentos.
Confiando, que vuestra Sen^oria me dara la mano, para Sacarme fuera de un
Abismo tan peligroso, no sufriendo se anegue y perezca en la Mar, ahogandose en
ella, vno que es tan

Aficionado a vuestra Senoria; como Don Diego Puede -- Ser; de Santa Maria
Magdalena.

TO DON FRANCISCO DE ROIAS, MARQVESSE DE POZA, LORD OF THE HOUSE DE MONCON,
President of the Council de HAZIENDA to his Majesty, and the Courts belonging
thereunto.
OF all those things in this world, which are wont amongst men to cause the
greatest fear, I know not any that may be greater, or of equal compare to
that of an evil intention, and secret ill meaning. And by so much truly the
more, by how much it shall be the more deeply rooted in those that are of
obscure Blood, humble Birth, and base minds. For in such, it is usually more
forcible, and less corrigible. But both of them, the one and the other, are
like unto Hunters; who (taking up some close standing shadowed over with
boughs) lie in wait for our destruction, and even then, after that we have
received our deaths wound, we are never awhit the nearer in discovering whence
our hurt came. These are Basilisks, whom if we view them first, their poison
loses its force, and is of so much the less prejudice; but if they once gain
the hand of us (by getting a kind of dominion over us) they bring us in danger
of our utter undoing. They are a scandal to a Commonwealth, the promoting
Knaves of Innocence, and the very executioners of Virtue; against whom the
wisdom of man is not of power to prevail, or able to guard it self. Of
these kind of men, from whose subtle gins (as traps tending to death) no
person lives secure, I (for mine own part) have ever been more afraid then of
any other beasts, how fierce or hurtful so ever. And more especially in this
present occasion, wherein a large field is laid open unto them, wherein they
may sow the seed of their venom, calumniating me (at the least) with the
reproachful attribute of an ouer-bold and rashheaded fellow, that I should
presume to offer to so powerful a Prince, so poor a gift. Not considering,
that this my boldness first grew from that necessity, where-into their fear
had put me. For, as those Cities that are weakly fortified, meanly manned,
and of small force for defense, have so much the greater need of brave and
worthy Captains to maintain them, by resisting the furious violence, and
sharp assaults of their enemies: So in like manner was it needful for me, to
help my self, and make use of your Lordships protection, in whom, with so
much splendor and glory, are made manifest to the worlds view, those three
parts (Virtue, Blood, and Power) whereof true Nobleness is composed. And
because it is a peculiar property belonging there-unto, to favor and protect
those, who (as to a Sacred place) withdraw themselves thither for their better
safety, I rest so secure under the shadow of your Lordships protection, and
rely so much upon your noble disposition, that you stretching out the wings of
your accustomed clemency, my book shall under them (as Chickens under the Hens
wing) remain free from those that shall seek to wrong it: And together
therewith obtain this happiness, that you making that great, which in it
self is little, admitting a poor Picaro, to become a Courtier, shall give a
being to that which had none before, a work of such Greatness and
Excellency, as shall make your Lordship to appear the more. Whose long and
happy life is desired of no man more then

MATHEO ALEMAN.

To the Uulgar.
TO me it is no new thing (though perhaps it be to thee) to see (O thou
vertue-hating Vulgar) the many bad friends that thou have; that little, which
thou deseruest, and that less, which thou understand: To behold, how
biting, how envious, how covetous thou art; how quick in defaming, how slow in
honoring; how certain in ill, how uncertain in good; how facile to fly out,
and how hard to be curbed in. What Diamond is there so hard, which thy sharp
teeth do not grind to powder? What virtue scapes Free from thy venomous
tongue? What piety do thy actions protect? What defects does thy cloak cover?
What Treacle do thy eyes behold, which do not like the Basilsske impoyson?
What Flower, though never so cordial, ever entered through thy ears, which in
the Hiue of thy heart thou did not convert into poison? What sanctity have
not thou calumniated? What innocence have not thou persecuted? What
singleness of heart have not thou condemned? What justice have not thou
confounded? What truth have not thou profaned? In what green field have thou
set thy foot, which thou have not defiled with thy filthy luxuries? And if it
were possible to paint forth to the life the true fashion of hell, and the
torments thereof, thou only, in my judgment, might (and that truly) be its
perfectest counterfeit. Think thou (peradventure) that passion blinds me,
that anger moves me, or that ignorance violently thrusts me on? No verily. And
if thou could but be capable of seeing thy own error, but suffer thy self
to be informed, (only but with turning thy head aside) thou should find thy
actions aeternized, and even from Adam reproved, as thou thy self art already
condemned. But alas, what amendment may be expected from so inveterated a
Canker? Or who is he, that can be so happy, as to vnclue himself from this
Labyrinth, or to vnseaze himself from thy griping talons? I fled from the
confused Court, and ^hou followedst me into a poor Village; I withdrew my
self into solitary Shades, and there thou made a shot at me, and drew'st
thy venomous shafts at me; never letting me alone, but still vexing and
pursuing me, to bring me under thy rigid Jurisdiction, and tyrannical Empire.
I am well assured that the protection which I carry with me, will not correct
thy crooked disposition, nor give that respect, which in good manners thou
owe, to his noble quality, nor that in confidence thereof I should get free
from thy arresting hand. For thou despising all goodness and civility, (which
are things that never yet came within the reach of thy better consideration)
have rashly and unadvisedly bitten so many illustrious and worthy persons,
extolling some for their wit (though idle) accusing others for their
lightness, and defaming a third of lies and false-hoods. Thou art Mus
campestris, a very Field-mouse, and no better. Thou art still nibbling on the
hard rind of the sour and unsavory Melons, but when thou come to those
that are sweet and wholesome, and fitter for nourishment, thy stomach falls into
a loathing, thou can not feed on them without surfeiting. Thou imitatest
that importunate, troublesome, and eare-offending Fly (through his untuneable
buzzing) the Scarabee, who not dwelling on the sweeter sort of Flowers, flies
from forth the delicate Gardens, and pleasant Woods, for to settle on a
Cowe-sheard, fall upon a dunghill, and other such like noisome places. Thou
do not make any stay upon the high moralities of diuiner wits, but only
content'st thy self with that which the Dog said, and the Fox answered;
this cleaues close unto thee; this, when thou have read it, remains still
with thee, and having made it once thine own, is never again forgotten. O
unfortunate Fox, that thou must be likened to one of these, and must, like
these, be reviled and persecuted, like an unprofitable and mischievous member
in a Commonwealth! I will not enjoy the privilege of thy honors, nor the
freedom of thy Flatteries, though thou would enrich me with all the wealth
of thy praises. For the commendation of wicked men, is but shame and dishonor.
And I rather desire the reprehension of the good; because the end for which
they do it, is like unto themselves, then thy depraved estimation, which
cannot be but bad. Thou take too much liberty unto thee, thou art an
unbridled beast, a headstrong Jade; and, if occasion of matter be offered
unto thee, thou runn'st away with it, thou kick'st, and fling'st, thou
tramplest men's good names under thy feet, thou breakest all bounds of
modesty, and tearest all in pieces that stands in thy way, and whatsoever else
shall seem good unto thee. But these fair Flowers, which thou so scornefully
treadest under thy feet, crown the Temples of the virtuous, and give a
fragrant and odoriferous smell in the nostrils of those that are noble. The
deadly razour-wounding slashes of thy sharp tuskes, and the mortal strokes
made by thy hands, shall heal the man that is discreet, under whose warm
shade, I shall happily be defended from all the storms and tempests of thy
blustering malice.

To the discreet Reader.
IT is usual with some, that are troubled in their sleep with sad and
melancholy dreams, to strive so strongly with their imagination (that without
being otherwise moved at all) after they are awakened and come to themselves,
remain so broken and tired out, as if they had wrestled and tugged hand to
hand with some brave fierce Bull. And such a one for all the world do I find
my self in getting out of my former Proeme, my mind still beating upon the
Barbarism, and dis-equall number of those ignorant Dolts, to whose censure I
submitted my self, it faring therein with me, as with him, who thrusts
himself into a voluntary exile, having not the power afterward in his own
hands to reuerse his banishment. I did engage my self by promise to compose
this book, and now I am enforced to hold my honest word. I must confess I
made a false Vie, and did set up my rest in jest, but now I am driven to see it
in earnest. For it is the word, that binds the Player. I know full well
(considering the rudeness of my wit, and shortness of my studies) that it had
been very fit in me to fear the Carreere that I am to make; and that this
liberty and license of mine is more then needed, and might well have been
spared; But considering with my self, that there is not any Book so bad, out
of which some good may not be drawn, it may be possible, that in that wherein
my wit was wanting, the zeal which I had to profit others, may supply that
defect, by working some virtuous effect; which happiness if I light upon, it
shall be a sufficient reward of my greater pains, and make this my boldness,
m^re worthy your pardon. I shall not need with the discreet to use long
Proemes, nor prolixe circumlocutions. For neither can the eloquence of words
vainly work him, nor the force of speech dotingly persuade him to more then
what is just; nor does his felicity consist in the procuring of his favorable
Censure. I remit my self to his correction; I crave his helping hand to uphold
my weakness, and put my self wholly under his fair protection.

And thou, (O Reader) that art desirous to profit hereby, if thou will but
truly consider me, when I wrote this Book, and that common good, to which I
had then an eye, thou will not conceit, that what has been done therein, was
happily performed by me for private Interest, or undertaken for ostentation of
wit; for I did never so much as pretend it, nor could I find that sufficient
worth in me, to put my self upon my wings in so vain a flight.

Some perhaps will say, That having (like unto Watermen) turned my back and
eyes the contrary way, (who look one way, and row another) I direct this
little Bark of mine, where I have most desire to land. But upon mine honest
word, he is deceived, that so thinks. For it was my sole purpose, to guide
the prow for the public good, if I might be worthy to obtain so great a
blessing, and that my labor might serve to so good a use. Thou shall find
many things not so clean wrought, but like Painters first colors, laid on
with a careless hand and slubberd over, which I did omitto polish and flourish
over for some causes, that gave hinderance thereunto. Others are somewhat
more refined, and better shadowed, which I did willingly avoid to follow, and
was loath to finish them to the full, being as fearful, as careful of
committing some unadvised error, or vn-conceiued offense. Others I boldly
unmasked and laid open to discovery, as worthy to be drawn without a veil,
and fit to be presented to public view. I have much to say unto thee, and
desire so to d^e, yet may not tell it thee. I have written unto thee, yet have
I left out much of what I would have written. Read so, as it becomes thee to
read, and do not scoff at my Fable; and if it shall receive intertainment at
thy hands, accept these lines, which I give thee, and with them, the mind
wherewith they be offered unto thee. Do not cast them, as dust and sweepings
of the house, upon the dunghill of oblivion; consider that there may be some
filings and parings of price; rake them out, gather them into a heap, and when
they come to a convenient quantity, put them into the crisole of thy
consideration; give to them the fire of the Spirit; and I assure thee, thou
shall extract some gold from them, wherewithal to enrich thy self. These
Arrows are not all of mine own Quiver, nor this honey that I set before thee,
all of mine own hiue; much of their sweetness did I suck from holy and
learned men; this is merchantable ware, well-conditioned; and for such I
recommend it unto thee. And because there is no goodthing, which does not
proceed from the hands of God; nor any thing so bad, whereof some glory does
not result to his divine Majesty (as having a part in every thing) embrace,
and give a friendly reception to that which may be profitable for thee,
rejecting that which is otherwise, or whatsoever else is bad, as merely mine:
Albeit I am very confident, that those things which cannot hurt, are wont many
times to do much good.

In this Discourse, thou may moralize things, as they shall be offered unto
thee; Thou have a large margent left thee to do it; That, which thou shall
find less grave, or discomposed, presents it self in the person of a Picaro,
or Rogue; which is the Subject of this Book. Such things as these (which are
not very many) sport thy self a while with them, jest and play the wagge, and
afterward shake hands with them. For at great Feasts, we must have meats for
all mouths; and dishes for all tastes; Pleasant and sweet wines, which must
cheer the heart, and help digestion; and music for to please and delight
the ears.

Vale, Amice.
A Declaration for the better understanding of this BOOK.
Having written this Poetical History, with purpose to have it printed in one
only Volume, in the discourse whereof those doubts might be cleared, which now
(being divided) might offer themselves; it appeared (to my seeming) a very just
thing, to remove this inconvenience, being it might easily be done, and that
in very few words. For which purpose, it is to be pre-supposed, That Guzman de
Alfarache, our Picaro, having (by his study) come to be a good Latinist,
Rhetorician, and Grecian (as we shall deliver unto you in this first Part)
after that he had returned out of Italy into Spain, he went forward in his
Studies, with purpose to profess the state of Religion, and to make himself a
Churchman. But by reason of his often relapsings to his Vices, he left that
course, after he had spent some years therein. Now himself writes his own
life from a-boord the Galleys, where he remained, and was put to the Oar, for
the faults which he had committed, having been a most famous Thief, and
notorious Offender, as you shall see more at large in the second Part. Nor is
it any improprietie, or beyond our present purpose, if in this first Part I
shall set before you some Tracts of Doctrine: But rather seems agreeable unto
reason to present unto you a man of a clear understanding, helped by Learning,
and punished by Time, making benefit of that idle time, which he had in the
Galleys; Being that we likewise see many ignorant poor souls sentenced to
death, who being to spend the remainder of their time in thinking on their
souls health, divert their thoughts from all other worldly things, for to make
a short studied speech when they come to the Ladder.

This Book diuides it self into three parts: In the first, it is treated of
Guzman de Alfaraches going forth of his mothers house, and the slender
consideration of young men in those endeavors which they attempt: And how,
though their eyesight be clear, they will not see, precipitated and blinded
with their false pleasures. In the second, the life of a Picaro or Rogue, which
he underwent, and the lewd tricks which he was led into by ill company, and
the time which he idly misspent. In the third, the calamities, and extreme
poverty, whereunto he grew, and the inconsiderate courses which he ran into,
because he would not take up himself in time; and his obstinacy in not
suffering himself to be ruled by those, who were both able and desirous to
doehim good. In that which I shall write hereafter, I shall (God willing) give
an end to this Story.

AN ELOGIVM Of ALFONSO de BAROS, Chamberlain to KING PHILIP the third, in
praise of this Book, and of MATHEO ALEMAN the Author thereof.
IF we owe somewhat to those Painters, who in a Treasury as it were of
Monuments, or some fair Storehouse, have reserved and lapt up in their linen
clothes (though under lines and dumb colors) the pictures of those, who for
their Heroical Actions, merited their Tables; As also of those, who by their
unworthy carriage gave motion to their Pensils; for that with the pleasing
portraiture of the one, and the abhorred aspect of the other, they awaken and
stir up our Spirits, through the ones fame, to imitation; and through the
others infamy, to fear, and aduisement: Much more obligation (without all
comparison) have we unto those, who to their full life represent these things
unto us in their Histories; who do us more good in what they have written, and
have this advantage of the others limming, that their reports and relations do
work so strongly, and with that perswasiue power upon our imagination, as if
we had really and in truth seen both them and all that they did, with these
our bodily eyes.

In these, and all the rest (if there rests any obligation that may be
greater) we have both the light and the life, from this our Author: For in
this his History, which he now hangs forth (as Painters do their pictures)
in the open street, to the eye of all the world, he has portraited so to the
life, a son of idleness, a loytering Rogue; that there is not any man (though
never so ignorant) but will know him at the first sight, for that he is so
like his father: Who as he is the parent of all Uices, so this his child came
to be the Center and Gulf of them all, suffering them to imbosome themselves
within him, receiving in (as sinkes do) infinite gatherings, not of waters,
but of filth and mire. And being now so far improued in them, that he might
serve for an example and pattern unto those, who should dispose themselves to
enjoy the like kind of life, the Authors drift is, that no man should adorn
himself with such roabes as these: For there is not any one so abhorring
himself, that at so dear a rate will cloathe himself with his Liuerie,
seeing that he paid with a shameful end the punishment of his offenses, and
the disordinate actions, which his licentious desires did commit. Whose merited
and exemplary chastisemen;: is expressed with Categoricall and strong terms,
and with an argument ex contrario; to wit, the reward, and fortunate successes
which shall follow him, who living uprightly, and spending his time well, shall
in his course of life, apply himself to a certain and determined end, and
make himself the opposite, and Antipodes as it were of the inconstant Figure
of this ensuing discourse. Wherein, for his admirable order, and good
observations, bearing in the face of it the resemblance of a History, the
Author has happily attained the name and office of an Historian, and a
Painter; as well in those representations, that are to be seen a far off, as
in those shadows, wherewith he has disguised his instructions, and those his
so necessary rules and aduertisments, appertaining to a political life, and to
Moral Philosophy, whereunto he principally aimed; showing plainly, that
which L^curgus expressed, by the example of those two Whelps of one litter,
whereof the one, through good teaching, and a habit he had gotten, followed the
hunting of the Hare, till he had killed him; and the other, because he had not
been so well bred, in stead of falling to hunting, fell a gnawing the bone
which he found in the way: Giving us to understand by infallible
demonstrations, the known danger, wherein those children stand, who in their
childhood are trained up without obedience and good education by their
parents: For without this curb, they rush into the careere of their youth,
upon the unbridled Horse of their irrational and untamed appetite, which
carries them away headlong, and precipitates them into a thousand
inconveniences, dashing themselves as upon so many Rocks, till there is not
one bone left unbroken, nor one limme left vnrent of their life and goods. He
likewise shows unto us, that that man is no less subject to the like
misfortunes, who, being destitute of some noble Science, or some special
mystery, grounds his hopes upon the untilled doctrine of Natures school: For
without exercising his Talent, or employing his wit, or without putting
himself into some profession, (having experimented that art, to which he is
most inclineable) he usurps offices quite contrary to his own inclination,
omitting none which he not imbraceth, attempting to make trial of all, losing
in all of them both himself, and his time, pretending by his inconstancy and
unsettled disposition, to seem not to be idle; that man being not-withstanding
more idle; who puts his Sickle into another man's Corn, and venters upon a
profession that belongs not unto him, then he that sleeps and takes his ease,
or leads the most retired life. This our Treasurer, Matheo Aleman, has also
well defended himself from the like objections, by those just occupations of
his life, wherein he busied himself; who does teach us as well thereby, as by
his book, finding therein the opposite of this his History, which he
pretends to imply: For being bred up in his tender years in the study of
humane learning, they could not challenge him of keeping His learning need not
call him to an account, how he had spent his idle hours. A Metaphor taken from
Magistrates, of whom their Successors do take an account of what things have
passed in their ^ime of residence in the Office. And this is, pedir residencia.
residencie in idleness: Much less, that in this his History, he has thrust
himself into another man's profession: for that it is so properly his own, and
so annexed to his studies, that the desire he had to write it, withdrewe and
distracted his thoughts from the honorable intertainment of those his
Majesty's papers; (being at that time his Contador) wherein (albeit he were
very sufficient for the exercising of that office) yet it seems that he was
haled thereunto by violence, and against his will; in that he returned
afterward to his former exercise; in the continuation whereof, and by his
watchful endeavors, he has formed this book for us, mixing it with that most
sweet harmony of delight and profit, which Horace requires; inuiting us with
its pleasure, and instructing us with its gravity, taking for its scope, the
public good, and for its reward, the common benefit. And because young men
shall find in him, the obligation which they have to their parents, who by a
good and lawful education, have drawn them out of the darkness of ignorance,
by showing them that North-Starre, which ought to guide them in this confused
Sea of their troublesome life, (being as long to the idle, as it is short to
those that are well occupied) it shall (in point of good manners) be very
unfitting, that the Readers, who are the children of this Books Learning,
should show themselves unthankful to their Master, by not thoroughly
esteeming his just Zeal. And if this shall not save him from their rigorous
censure, the fault must then be in the inevitable contradiction of the
diversity of opinions. Nor is it a thing to be wondered at, but rather
natural, and that cannot be avoided: For most certain it is, that a man
cannot so write, as that he shall please all: And that whosoever should
endeavor it, should but go about to take from Nature her greatest miracle. Nor
do I know which is the greater beauty, either that which she placed in that
diversity, from whence proceed so many diverse opinions; or that of the diverse
forms of men's faces. For, for the rest, it were but to say, that all the world
were but one man, and one taste.

AD GVZMANVM DE ALFARACHE, Vincentij SPINELLI Epigramma.
QVis te tanta loqui docuit Guzmanule? Quis te Spinellus.

Stercore submersum, duxit ad astra modo?
Musca modo, et lautas epulas, et putrida tangis
Vlcera; iam trepidas frigore, iamque cales.
Iura doces, suprema petis, medicamine curas,
Dulcibus et nugis seria mixta doces.
Dum carpisque alios, alios virtutibus auges,
Consulis ipse omnes, consulis ipse tibi.
Iam sacrae Sophiae virides amplecteris vmbras,
Transis ad obscoenos sordibus inde iocos.
Es modo diuitijs plenus, modo paupere cultu,
Tristibus et miseris dulce leuamen ades.
Sic speciem humanae vitae, sic praefero solus Guzman.

Prospera complectens, aspera cuncta ferens.
Hac Aleman vary picta me vest decorat,
Me lege desertum, tuque disertus eris.
GVZMAN* DE ALFARACHE upon his own life.
BOrne without Parents, which in my Cradle
Should have sown such seeds, as might enable
Me to good; My Youth chose Uico for'ts Father,
Whose Step-dame, Fortune, quickly did inslaue her.
My Travels, and my Studies found eft-soone
More Forms, and Changes, then are in the Moon.
But now my building being ruined quite,
Like to a Pillar, I only stand in sight,
Others to fore-warne, what course they run,
Lest, like my self, they chance to be undone.
With this Story, my life now liu's again,
Which in Obliuions pit did dead remain.
Whose blurrs are now in such fair letters writ,
As Time no more shall triumph over it.
An vn-hewne piece of wood, I long have been,
Knotty, and rugged, rinded up in sin.
But polish't now by this neat Worke-mans hand,
And, on the Altar set, as a Memorial stand
To lesson others, how their lives to lead,
While I to them, mine own misfortunes read.
Hernando de Soto, to the Author.
TWo great things I see
In this wise book contained be:
A notable Knave,
And yet the Authors Subject, grave.
In it I discern,
By others harms, how men may learn
Their own faults t'amend,
And shape their course to some good end.
Likewise we may know,
What Love to goodness we must owe.
To teach more, none can;
Nor more be learned of any man.
It Is the Common voice,
So good on either side's the choice.
Picaro honor gains,
Aleman immortal remains.
In GVZMANVM d'ALFARACHIA nobilem Erronem et Praedonem publicum, a clariss.
reique militaris expertiss. Duce Don Diego Puede-Ser captum, vinculis
constrictum, nec sine ouatione in Britannias perductum.
ESte procul Elegi:
Nihil hic Dolente dignum,
Vocem premant Epica:
Non hic celebratur Heroes.
Fl^bili nil opus Lyra:
Facilis hic prostat Uenus.
Sed nec Tuba Mantuana:
Bella canuntur bellula.
Grande nimis reboantes
Davum dedecent Cothurni.
Nec Iambi turbet furor
Hilares Lyaei iocos.
Multoque minus loripes
Fugitiuum dic at Scazon.
Quale iam dic Metri genus,
Nobilis, Guzmane, praedo,
Te tuosque mores sonet
Expertes Legis, Ordinis?
Nam Marini more Dei,
Uitijs nunc irritatus
Leo fremis: Nunc remulcens
Caudam Canis adularis:
Colubrina saepe lingua
Immane quiddam sibilas:
Saepe Sophi meditantis
Pendula seuerus toga
Uitae praedicas maeandros.
Uafer sic, et fallis Omnes,
Et Teipsum multiformis.
Vt stupore plenum fuat,
Quibus hamis and catenis
Illigauit Versipellem,
Et hoc Monstrum cicurauit;
Uoce Qui donat Anglica?
Aureis catenis nempe,
Quibus vinciuntur aures:
Nempe Circeo poculo,
Tumidos quod sopit angues:
Nempe Thracis plectro Lyrae,
Quae sequaces reddit vrsas.
Hisce comprensus artibus,
Retro manibus revinctis,
Curru positus superbo,
Per Britanna regna, (Guzman)
Prodis in pompam publicam.
I. F.

To the exact Translator of the famous History of infamous GVZMAN.
WHen Guzmans Legend was allowed in Spain,
And, though a Rogue, found Prince-like intertaine;
He did over Alps and Pyrene Hills advance
To tell his Tale in Italy and France:
With which their native ears being sweetly stung,
He theeuish stole their heart, and bound their tongue
To speak his praise. At last on Gallick shore
(Standing like Caesar) thence he did implore
Some Pegasus, or winged Argoes aid,
To cross the Britain Seas: Shall they (he said)
Want only my thrice-seuen times printed story?
Nor know my Odysse's? Nor shall my glory
Out-goe my feet? I come no Spy, nor take
A Factious part; No sound of War I make,
But against sin; I land no foreign mates;
For Virtues Schools should Free be in all states.
Straight-wayes thy Gentler spirit (without thirst
Of Fame or Fare) wafts him ashore, and first
Shows him the present garb, the parle, and guise,
In a few weeks; whose Quill both writes and flies
With equal speed: Then shapes him quaint and rare,
That he seems English, nay a Courtiar.
Would you know his Discourse? He biting laughes,
A Comicke Satyr, at small faults hescoffes,
But stabbes the impudent: Now in amorous strain
He sighs a Lover; Now in busy gain
He acts a Merchant; Then in learned weeds
He looks a Student: Ibis-like he feeds
On public venom, and deserves a Shrine
(Sooner then he that styled was Divine)
For purging humors. Now his wishes are
Outstript by favor; Then in Galleys bare
He honors beggary: His whole Theme is Man,
On which nor Crantor nor Chrysippus can
More wisely comment; for his life alone,
Is Precept with Example; So that none
Can better teach by worse means; who by strange
Bifronted posture, Ill, to good, does change.
So Vipers flesh, the Vipers cure has bin:
And sinful surfets, Antidotes for sin.
So an old Bawdes face, Chastnesse does suggest:
Vices true Picture, makes us Vice detest,
More then Grave Platoes wish; For virtues sight
Can less allure, then villainy affright.
Dear Country, then harbor a weary wight,
Be thou a Delos, to this errant Knight:
Give the kind Parabien, and gracious eye
To various mirth: And (Reader) if thou spy
Thy own self in this Magic glass, Refuse
No Surgeons hand, but ('against the common use)
Let the Book censure thee; And thank his pain,
Whose Pen, so gently pricked thy maister-vaine:
And thank his faithful Conuoy; It may be,
Who scorns base fawning; Love may gratify.
More is but Due: for as my Scale designs;
This is the Base, to large and worthy Lines.
Yours I. F.

To Don Diego Puede-Ser, and his Translation of GVZMAN.
AS, few, French Rablais understand; and none
Dare in our Vulgar Tongue once make him known,
No more; our Plodding Linguists could attain
(By turning Minshewe) to this Rogue of Spain,
So crabbed Canting was his Authors Pen
And phrase, even dark to his own Countrymen;
Till, thanks and praise to this Translators pain,
His Margent, now makes him speak English plain.
Leo: Diggs.

On the Author, Work, and Translator.
Who tracks this Authors, or Translators Pen,
Shall find, that either has read Books, and Men:
To say but one, were single. Then it chimes,
When the old words do strike on the new times,
As in this Spanish Proteus; who, though writ
But in one tongue, was formed with the worlds wit:
And has the noblest mark of a good Book,
That an ill man dares not securely look
Upon it, but will loath, or let it pass,
As a deformed face does a true glass.
Such Books deserve Translators, of like coat
As was the Genius where with they were wrote;
And this has met that one, that may be styled
More then the Foster-father of this Child;
For though Spain gave him his first air and Vogue,
He would be called, henceforth, the English-Rogue,
But that he is too well suited, in a cloth,
Finer then was his Spanish, if my Oath
Will be received in Court; If not, would I
Had clothed him so. Here Is all I can supply
To your desert, who'haue done it, Friend. And this
Fair Aemulation, and no Envy is;
When you behold me wish my self, the man
That would have done, that, which you only can.
Ben: Ionson.

THE PRINTER TO THE Discreet and Curious READER.
AFter so much as you have read here, uttered in their just Commendation, let
it be my minute, to be heard in a line or two for my self: which is, that you
would be pleased not to lay my faults on them. I will neither pretend badnesse
of Copy, or his absence, whose province it was to correct it; but pray the
amendment of these few escapes (as you find them here-vnder noted,) before you
begin to read: with hope of your pardon, the rather, because it has been my
care they should be no more.

Ed: Blount.

Page. Line. Fault. Correct. 9. 20. the they then they 11. 23. Labuador
Labrador 22. 18. she could he could 36. 43. tumbled tumbling 56. 24. time Air
61. 40. action actions 83. 13. in clearing indearing 87. 17. those that, and
those that ibid. 22. whereupon, whereunto 92. 15. Zerezano Xerezano 103. marg.
pein pan 109. 55. to be much to be so much 110. 4. many money 114. 16. top toy
122. marg. Cartas Cantos 123. 28. inconheuience inconvenience 156 17. wish to
sell wish you to sell ibid. 28. he told he told me 163. 47. to former to my
former 168. 45. to is* is to 180. 35. for fifty twenty 187. 35 the thee 208 43
vico vico 228. 22. much to to much 236 48 to have have to 239 41 Aprouechom
aproucchan 262 6 indisposition in disposition

A Table of the Chapters and matter contained in the three Books of the first
Part.
CHAP. I. GVzman de Alfarache recounteth who was his Father, and thereupon
takes occasion learnedly to discourse of Detractors, and evil speakers, of
unconscionable Merchants, of Judges, of bad Clerks, of Lites, and Litigants,
and that too much neatness in clothes, and nice dressing, is ill in a Woman,
and worse in a Man. CHAP. II. Guzman de Alfarache goes on, in recounting who
were his Parents, and declares withal who his Mother was; and for our better
instruction, describes the evil conditions and bad qualities of a lewd woman,
of Bawdes; of a sensual and lascivious man, and that the end of dishonest
Love, is the wasting of a man's honor, of his wealth, and of himself. CHAP.
III. How Guzman departed from his Mothers house upon a Friday toward the
Evening, discovering by the way the torments of hunger, and that which befell
him with his Hostess, recounting many not able examples of some Rules of ill
Government. CHAP. IV. Guzman de Alfarache recounteth to a Carrier what had
betided him with his Hostess: And discourses of laughing. After that, he tells
two short Tales; one, of a covetous Physician; the other of two young men, how
they used the said Hostess: And upon the neck of that, falls into a learned
discourse, touching the pardoning of injuries. CHAP. V. How Guzman and the
Carrier did eat of a young Mule, thinking it had been Ueale, being coozened by
his Host in Cantillana, and discourses by the way of the coozening tricks,
which bad Hosts put upon poor Travelers. CHAP. VI. Guzman goes on, in
recounting what succeeded with his Host of Cantillana, who had given him to
eat of his young Mule, and of the misfortunes that befell the said Guzman: And
how it is not good upon the way to quarrel with our Host. CHAP. VII. Man's
misfortune is here discoursed of, and to that purpose you have a story told you
of the gods of those ancienter times: And how Guzman, being thought to be a
Thief, was apprehended; but afterward being known what he was, he was set
at liberty. One of the Clergymen promises to tell us a story, to entertain
the time withal, upon the way. CHAP. VIII. Wherein Guzman de Alfarache
relates the Story of those two Lovers, Ozmin and Daraxa.

THE ARGUMENT.

How Ferdinand and Isabell, King and Queen of Spain, took Baca, a City of
the Moors, wherein Daraxa a beautiful and noble Damozel was taken Prisoner,
whom Queen Isabell brought with her to Seuill, and there left her in the
custody of Don Luys de Padilla. And how Ozmin a young Gentleman well descended,
and inamoured of that Lady, after he had suffered long sickness for the
imprisonment of his fair Daraxa, went to the said City; together with the
diverse accidents that happened to them both.


A Table of the Chapters and matter contained in the second BOOK.
CHAP. I. HOw Guzman de Alfarache, going out of Cacalla toward Madrid, proves
the quality and condition of a miserable man, and upon this occasion, gravely
discourses of the effects of Want, of Shame, and of Castles in the air: And
how he came to serve an Host; and of the wicked disposition of such kind of
men. CHAP. II. How Guzman de Alfarache leaving his Host, went begging to
Madrid; and coming thither, how he set himself to learn to play the Rogue,
and to bear a Basket; where, by the way he discourses of Hunger, of Beggary,
and of Honor which hurts the soul. CHAP. III. Guzman de Alfarache goes on
in his Discourse against vain Honors: where, by the way he offers unto Man's
consideration, what manner of person he ought to be, how to bear himself in
his Office, and to govern himself in those high places, whereunto he is
called. CHAP. IV. Guzman de Alfarache delivers a learned and witty discourse,
conceived by himself, against the Uanity of Honor: touching by the way upon
the Uices of Seru^nts* of Shopkeepers, of Notaries, of Proctors, of Judges, of
Artificers, of Apothecaries, of Physicians, and of Lawyers. CHAP. V. How Guzman
de Alfarache lighted on a Cooks service, and with fair Sentences, and good
Lessons, shows, what he should be that serves. He blames gaming, and
Gamesters. He declares a pretty theft performed by him; he relates the Vices
of Despensero's, Cooks, Butlers, and other the like Officers. Of Lords, abused
by their servants. Of Kings, and their miserable condition. Of the vanity of
Inferiors, contesting with their Superiors. He condemns those Masters, that
ill entreat their servants: And how they ought to carry themselves toward
them. CHAP. VI. Guzman de Alfarache prosecutes that which past betwixt him and
his Master, till being dismissed, he departed from him: And takes occasion
here-vpon, to condemn Idleness and evil Company, and those inueterated vices
in rich men. He recounteth the spoils, and Trophies of Cooks; and tells a
merry Story, that past between himself, and the Cooks wife, his Mistress.
CHAP. VII. How Guzman de Alfarache being put from the Cook his Master, turns
Picaro, and proves a notable cunning Rogue. How he having a great desire to see
Italy, occasion was offered unto him to effect his purpose, by the help of a
theft done upon a Grocer, and how he went sheere away with it, and left Madrid.
CHAP. VIII. How Guzman de Alfarache, clothing himself like a Gallant in
Toledo, makes love to certain Gentlewomen: He tells how things past with
them, and how there, and in Malagon they scorned him; He discourses of
youthful iollity, and of the craft and subtilty of your Spanish women; which
may serve for an Instruction, and warning to all young men. CHAP. IX. How Guzman
de Alfarache lists himself for a Soldier. He tells, whence that ill phrase
grew: En Malagon, en cada casa un ladron; y en lo del Alcalde, hi^oy padre: In
Malagon, every house a Thief; and in that of the Alcalde two: The father and
the son. How in a short time, through ill government, all Guzmans money is
gone; How to his grief he is forced to serve a Captain. Some lessons are
given to young men. To these are added the faults of bad Ministers in matters
of war-fare. CHAP. X. Guzman de Alfarache declares the misfortunes, and the
wants of one that is decayed in his fortunes: And how he followed a Captain,
till he came into Italy; Exercising himself in all kind of thefts great and
small, for the relief and help of his Master.
A Table of the Chapters and matter contained in the third BOOK.
CHAP. I. GVzman discourses of poverty, and of the wrongs and outrages, which
a poor man indureth; As also of Riches, and of the honors that are done unto
the Rich: As likewise of the naughtiness of this present world: And how, not
finding his Kindred, which he sought for in Genoa, he went to Rome; and of a
i^st that was put upon him, before he left that City. CHAP. II. Guzman
discourses of the unhappiness, greatness, and commendation of Necessity and
Want; And how after he was gone from Genoa, he fell a begging. And how, keeping
company with other poor beggars, he was instructed by them, of their Statutes,
and Laws. CHAP. III. How Guzman de Alfarache was not only reprehended by a
learned Rogue, and Doctor in his faculty; but likewise how he learned of him
some new Orders and Capitulations, concerning this his roguish kind of life,
and that which happened unto him in this his upright course; And of many Precepts
and Lessons, delivered unto him upon this point by a Cordouese, an old cunning
Crosse-biter. CHAP. IV. Guzman de Alfarache discourses of the Charity that
we are to use toward our neighbor; He recounteth what befell him with a
Gentleman: And of the free life, and great liberty which a Beggar inioyes.
CHAP. V. Guzman de Alfarache discourses of the quality of men's Consciences,
and recounteth what happened in his time to a notable Rogue, and famous beggar in
Florence, who at his death made the great Duke his heir. He treats of the
ambitious man; And delivers in the end, how he was thrust out of Gaeta for his
counterfetting. CHAP. VI. Guzman de Alfarache discourses of Alms: And being
returned to Rome, he falls afresh to his old Trade of begging. He feignes
himself to have a sore leg. A Cardinal taking compassion of him, takes
order, to have him cured in his own house, and to be laid in his own bed. He
discouers the knavery of Surgeons, having a bad conscience: And how being
cured, he becomes the Cardinals Page. CHAP. VII. Guzman de Alfarache
discourses, how all things have had their time of Empire. He delivers
strange things, touching Truth and Lying. As being Page to the Cardinal; he
declares the Uertues, and the Vices, wherein your Pages exercise themselves.
He relates a pleasant Story of his stealing of some Conserues, and how he was
punished for it. CHAP. VIII. Guzman de Alfarache reuenges a trick which the
Secretary had put upon the Chamberlain, whom he then attended. He tells a tale
of Shame and fear; What it is, and how painted forth. He is received again
into the Cardinals service. And how finely he coozened him of a Barrel of
Conserues. CHAP. IX. Guzman de Alfarache treats of Charity: Discourses of
Masters, kind, and unkind: Tells of another theft of Conserues. His
exercises, and distastes being a Page. He recounteth the tricks he used at
Primera. That it is good to know play; but better not to use any gaming at all.
And how for playing he was put out of the Cardinals service. And how proud
ignorance is the cause of all evil. CHAP X. Guzman de Alfarache discourses of
ill company; of Hospitality; of Patience; and how being put out of the
Cardinals house, he placed himself with the Ambassador of France, where he
played some Knauish prankes. He relates a Story, which he heard from a Gentleman
of Naples. And ending with that, he gives an end to the first part of his life.
THE ROGVE: OR, THE FIRST PART OF THE LIFE OF GVZMAN DE ALFARACHE. The first
Book.
CHAPTER I.
Guzman de Alfarache recounteth who was his Father, and thereupon takes
occasion learnedly to discourse of Detractors, and evil speakers, of
unconscionable Merchants, of Judges, of bad Clerks, of Lites, and Litigants,
and that too much neatnes in clothes, and nice dressing, is ill in a Woman, and
worse in a Man.

CVrious Reader, The desire which I had to recount my life unto thee, made me
make great haste to ingulfe my self therein, without first preparing some
things fit to be related, which (serving as an induction and entrance to the
matter) had been very needful for the better informing of thy understanding:
(for being essential to this Discourse) they would likewise have given thee
no small content. But through too much haste, I forgot to shut the door after
me, and so unawares have left a way of entrance open, for every wrangling
Sophister, and smatterer in Logic, to tax me ofignorance, and to lay it as a
fault to my charge, that I did not proceed a definitione ad definitum, from the
definition to the thing defined. And that before I took upon me to make
Relation thereof, I had not first told thee, who, and what were my Parents,
together with their obscure and confused birth: which so much for so much, or
as far as concerns them in their particular, according to their model, and
proportion in their kind and degree, would without doubt (had I but undertaken
to describe it unto you) been far more pleasing, and more acceptable unto
you, then this mine own life. I will rather prefer that, which is of most
importance, leaving that which is not lawful for me, to others to undergo
that task, and to play out that trick at Cards for me. And albeit it
becomes no man, to participate of that property of the Hyena, to make a
living by ripping up the lives of the dead, as she does maintain her self
The Hyena and her qualities.
by feeding on those carkases which she tears out of graves; I assure my
self, considering the Censurers that are now adays to be found in the world,
they will not want those that will write their Chronicle. Nor is it a thing to
be wondered at, since that this slight shadowing of my Fathers life, seems to
infer, that I pare them too near the quick, or at least, that there went
but one pair of sheeres, between their lives, and mine. And I doubt not, but
thou will out with thy purse, and give me a thousand rash Attributes; the
least whereof shall be either Fool, or Blockhead, or Coxcombe, or the like.
For if I cannot conceal mine own faults, you will say, I will make no bones
to bewray others. Thy reason is good, and I allow of it, but I would have thee
withal to consider, That albeit thou will count me but a lewd It is worse to
be bad, then to be thought so.
Companion, yet I would not willingly seem so to be, though it be far worse
to be so, and to make boast of wickedness. And that by contradicting so just a
Precept, as is that fifth Commandment, touching the honor and reverence which
I owe them, I should go about to cover mine own weaknesses, by laying open
those of my Ancestors. For, it is the birth of vile and base What mind is
that, which is base
thoughts, to seek to grace themselves by disgracing others, which is now an
ordinary practice, which I condemn for that solemn In your great solemn
feasts in Spain, they use to have seven, and in some places eight Prebends
with Scepters of silver in their hands, and Copes of cloth of gold on their
backs, when they assist at divine service, and singing of Anthemes. From which
metaphor this phrase is borrowed.
foolery of six Priests Copes, or double-Feasts; that is to say, for
anotorious, and high point of folly. And a greater there cannot be, because
therein I discover my bend, and show which way the dint of my edge lies. And
my error is not salued, by wounding the good name of my neighbor, or by
traducing my Parent. Besides, the Detractor never hears well, but is evil
spoken of by all men. But to me, it does not succeed so; for in the setting
forth and adorning of this History, (it being necessary that my self must
needs do it) no man but will say, Gods blessing be with him, that so truly
resembles his Parents, casting upon me these their good wishes by the way.
Again, his life was so well known, and all that he did, so manifest to all
the world, that to pretend the denying of it, were mere folly, and an open
Arresto, is a French word: but because it is Spaniolized, I say, Arresto, is as
much as a Decree, or Sentence confirmed in the Supreme Counsel, from which
there is no Appeal. So says Casaneus in his Catol. gloriae Mundi. Arrestum
firmum, and fixum, a quo nemo prouocare possit. And it is a mere Greek Word
(...), placitum, gratum, aequum. That it is pronounced with a double rr: the
reason is, for that the French is a Virile tongue. Resto consignado, is the set
rest agreed upon at Primero, which they may not pass. But jugar a resto
abierto, vale, sin tassa, without limitation; when a man may set what he will:
The Reader may take which sense be best likes.
Arrest, and free liberty given for the occasioning of new matter of
murmuration to be brought against him. And therefore I am persuaded, that I do
them (if I may use that phrase of speech) a notorious courtesy, in expressing
the pure, and true naked Text, wherewith I will give the lie to those glosses,
which have been made thereupon. For as often as any one mentions any thing
of him, or recounts ought of his, he adds thereunto, and multiplyes it with
the Ciphers, which are set to his own Spectacles, or as it pleases him;
sometimes making more, but never less, as the vain comes upon him, and as the
toy for the present takes him in the head. For there is a certain kind of
men, that when matter is offered suting to their purpose, for to make their
tale square, and to hang well together, will lessen a Pyramid of Egypt, and
make of a Gnat an Elephant, gather evidence from surmises; sight from hearing;
and knowledge from opinion, only for to flourish their eloquence, and to
credit their discretion. Thus it usually falls out, and this was to be seen
in a Gentleman a Stranger, whom my self knew in Madrid: Who being much
affectioned to Spanish Horses, and desirous to carry home with him to his own
Country a true and faithful Counterfeit, as well for his own entertainment and
delight, as that he might show the same to his friends. And for that he was of
a Nation far remote, and it being neither permitted, nor possible for him, to
carry them home alive, having in his own stable two of the fairest of
stature, and feature, that were to be found in all the Court: he entreated two
famous Painters, that each of them would draw one, as they should agree upon
their choice; promising (besides their due) a certain reward to him that should
surpass the other in workmanship. The one painted a py'd Horse, with that
perfection, that he only failed in that, which was impossible for him to do,
to wit, in giving him life, and soul. For, in the rest (deceiving the sight,
because it did little, or nothing at all differ from the natural) it would on
the sudden have blinded any careless eye, and at the first blush amazed his
understanding, for that there was no difference between a living Horse and it.
With this only did he fill and finish his Table, giving in the rest Lights and
shadows, as might suit best with each several part.

The other drew a Dapple-gray (that heauen-resembling color) and though his
work were very good, yet it came very short of that before delivered; yet in
one thing, he went much beyond him, wherein he showed himself his
crafts-master. And it was this: when he had painted his Horse, in those other
parts of the Table, where he found blankes, or void places, in those that were
uppermost, he drew admirable Land-skips, and other representations of things
afar off, as clouds in the air; streakes in the sky, and other fiery colors
of the heavens, occasioned by the reflexe of the Sunsetting beams, ruinated
buildings, and other diversities of rare Architecture. And in the lower part,
nearest to the ground; he had graced his work with many fine Groves, dainty
Flowers, green Meddowes, and craggy Rocks. And on the one side of the Table,
that made fittest for that purpose, he had fastened all the furniture,
belonging to his Horse, to the body of a Tree, at the foot whereof stood a
Saddle, Gennet-fashion, so costly, and so curiously wrought, and with that
excellency of Art, as it cannot be in-deered too much, or expressed to that
life it deserves.

When this Gentleman saw his Tables, and liking them wonderful well (as he had
reason so to do) he first paid him, with whom he had first agreed, and not
sticking upon that which he demanded for it, giving in reward to that ingenious
Painter a rich ring from off his finger, he sent him away well satisfied,
having paid him over and above the price for which they bargained.

Now the other grew so fondly conceited, and so foolishly in love with his own
work, and was so vainly transported with hope of a liberal and frank
payment, that he required such an excessive price, as was beyond all reason.

The Gentleman, being strooken blanke, and put to a nonplus, that he should
ask him so much, and that he had scarce wherewithal to pay him, said unto
him; Tell me (my friend) why should thou ask me so much; or why do thou
not consider with thy self what this other piece cost me, whereunto thine
cannot be compared; nor comes nothing near it? For the Horse (indeed Sir,
answered the Painter) your Worship speaks reason. But the very trees, and
ruins, that are in mine, are worth as much as all the others work. To whom
the Gentleman replide; It is neither fitting, nor necessary for me to carry
home with me such a volume of trees; such a bulk of ill combined buildings;
and such a deal of lumber and luggage as is here, when we have many fair and
goodly houses in our own Country. Besides, I have not that affection to these
toys, as I have unto Horses. And that which I cannot otherwise enjoy but by
picture, that alone I desire to carry along with me.

The Painter again made answer; In so great and large a piece; a sole single
Horse will not show so well. And if for nothing else, yet at least for the
delight of the Eye, and the gracing of the Square, it not only imports a
Painter, but even enforces him sometimes to compose a Picture of other
different things, besides the Master piece, that may qualify it the better,
and give it the more delicate luster. So that, this seeming fairer to the
sight, and presenting it self with that pleasure as it does, you will grant me
this, I hope; That it is very fit, that a horse should have his bridle, and his
saddle, together with his trappings, and all other things belonging to a
perfect and complete furniture; especially being so curiously wrought, with so
clean a hand, and such exquisite Art, that if you would give me other such as
these, though they were all of Gold, I would not take them in exchange for
those that you see here drawn. The Gentleman having now found a string
whereupon to play, and caught hold of that, which he most desired, which was
the Picture, that he had already paid for (the other esteeming impertinent,
though in it is kind very good, and much to be commended) and not finding
himself so ouer-stored with money, as to part with so much as he required,
discreetly said unto him; I only bargained with you for the Horse, and (for
that the work is good, and well wrought) I will (if you be pleased to sell it
me) pay you accordingly. As for the furniture, you may keep it to your self,
or bestow it upon those, that have a mind to it, for I have no need of it. The
Painter went away discontented, and unpaid, by reason of the excessive rates
he He that does that which he ought not, that haps to him, which he thinks
not.
had set upon his Picture; and for that out of his own choice, he had wilfully
ouerlashed his discretion, thinking with himself, that because his Work was
more, he should be the more rewarded.

It has been (and still is) a common and general custom amongst men, The
effects of Detractors.
when you entreat them to recite what they know in this, or that other thing;
or to report what they have heard, or seen; or to tell you the truth and
substance of a business, to prepare colors to slicke it over, and to paint
and disguize it, that you can no more know the face of it, then the countenance
of an old Hagge, that is plaisterd over with painting. Every one gives his
shadowings after his own fancy: one while amplifying; another while moving
passion; sometimes disannulling, and sometimes diuerting, as the humor takes
him. Now he stretches it with his teeth, that he may make the Leather retch:
By and by again, he fileth and polisheth it, till he have made it fit for his
purpose, that he may cut and grave therein what he list; putting it an Ace, or
a Sice higher, if it please him so to do. Making, like another Count The Count
Palatines, anciently in Rome, had power and privilege to legitimate Bastards,
to give degrees, and Titles of honor in learning, or otherwise. Vide
Couarru^ias in Vocabulo Palatino.
Palatine, a Fool, a Wise man; a filthy-fac'd fellow, a beautiful person; and
a Cowardly Villain, a valiant Hercules. They set the Caract and worth upon
things, as they please to value them; not remembering, that they may paint a
Horse well enough, though they leave him bare-ridged, and without his
furniture; and report a thing true enough to the life, without commenting upon
it. Just so has it fared with my father, of whom to speak the truth, things
are so falsified, that nothing is now said of him, which was so indeed. They
have (with Celestine) of tres made treze, of three, thirteen; and of
thirteen, three hundred. For every one thinks it fit to add somewhat: so
that Molehils are grown to be Mountains, and such a confused Chaos, and
rapsodie of things huddled one on the neck of another, that there is no
bottom of them, nor can there any ground for them be found: every one
encouraging himself by the additions of others, (one growing still upon
another.) And that wrong which every particular person in himself was not able
to do, by a general helping hand, and common consent of all men, is become
more grievous. There are some deceitful and false tongues, which, like
sharpe-headed Artowes, and hot burning Coals, have gone about to wound the
honor, and consume to ashes the good name of my Parents; whence both to them,
and my self, diverse notable affrents do daily redound. It is to be imagined,
and you may very well believe me, that if it lay in our hands, to make our
own choice (but beggars must be no choosers) out of that mass of Adam, and
first lump of flesh, I would have scrambled hard for one of the best morsels,
though I had been forced to go to Cuffes for it: But there is no help for
that; Every man must be content with that which falls to his lot: we may not be
our own Caruers. But since he that has shared these things amongst us, keeps
them in his own hands, and knows when and where to bestow them, and what is
fittest for every man, let us praise his holy Name. For though I had (God be
thanked for it) my Allud^ng to Jacobs halting.
haltings, though I had natural defects, though I were not without my spots
and blemishes, yet was I so favored by Fortune, that I was nobly borne; and
that they lighted upon a man innobled in his blood, both by father and mother.
La sangue se hereda, y el vicio se apega, Blood is by inheritance, but Vice is
aduentitious, yet cleaves closer then the other, when it once takes hold of
us. He that shall be, what he ought to be, shall be accordingly rewarded, but
shall not purge away the faults of his Parents.

First of all then, I shall give you to understand, That my father, and his
Kindred, were a certain kind of vpstart Gentlemen, that came out of the
Guzmans father.
Levantisco, which is the word in the Original, is taken for an Vpstart, a
Jew, or an Easterling, come - from the Levant And, Estar de Levante, is one,
that has no set dwelling. Covarruvias, vocab. Levante. Against Usurers, and
Exchangers of Moneys.
Leuant, who having no certain abiding, came at length to reside, and settle
in Genoa; where they were ingrafted into the Nobility, and had many large and
goodly Privileges granted unto them. And although they were not Naturals of
that place, yet we shall here put them under that style, as if they had been
borne there. His Traffic and income, whereby he maintained himself, was
according to the common custom of that Country; the which, for our sins
sake, is grown now into ours; which infection of late, has spread it self
through the world, to wit, Usury, Money-bankes, and profitable Exchange of gold
and silver. Even for this, was he persecuted and reviled, defaming him with
that foul name of Usurer. Many times he himself heard that reproachful word
as he past along the streets, it could not escape his ear, yet he was of that
good nature, and gentle condition, that he took no notice of it, but slightly
past it over. For which, they had no reason so to do, since that Vse-money (the
more the pity) has been, and is still permitted thorowout the world. I will
not commend it, and (God forbid) that I should defend it to belawfull (which
some do allow) to take money for money, upon pawnes of gold or silver for some
limited time, or to take (the day being broken) the The Spanish word, is
Rematado. Now Remato, or Trance. is the last bidding for a thing at a Port
sale, which when we are come unto, transit res a venditore, ad emptorem.
Forfeiture thereof, nor other close tricks and conueyances: nor that which
they call by the name of Cambio seco, is a mystery among Merchants, to assign
over Bills of Exchange from Antwerpe to Bezonzon in Lorrain, where there is no
Fair or trade of Merchandise: but Bills are thence remitted to Genoa, only to
gain time, and day of payment. Guzmans fathers devotion.
Cambio seco, a dry kind of Exchange. Nor that money should run from Fair to
Fair, where there was never any intercourse of men, or trading: for those do
but bear about them the voice of Jacob, and the hands of Esau; kind shows,
and rough deeds. And at the shooting of Ionathans flight, or some warning-piece
or other that is given, the deceit is discovered. But such things as these,
(though they laid them to his charge) I my self saw them not, and therefore
cannot give you any inckling of them.

But that which is absolutely understood to be Cambio, an Exchange or turning
and winding of moneys, is a thing indifferent, which may (as it is used) be
either good or ill. And for such (though perhaps unjustly) I do not wonder,
that (being it ought to be esteemed ill) it is not reproved. But that which is
evidently good, being without any shadow of evil, that men should murmr at
this, and speak against it; this is that, which does astonish me, and strikes
me into a strange amazement. To say, when I see a religious person enter at
midnight through a window, into a suspected place, with his sword in his hand,
and his buckler at his girdle, that he is going to minister the Sacrament, were
a mere madness: for neither God will have it so, nor does his Church permit,
that I should be such an errant Ass, as to think that to be good, which is
evidently evil. When a man shall pray, frequent virtuous exercises, hear
divine Service, confess his sins, and often communicate; for men to say,
that such a one is an Hypocrite, I can by no means endure it: and as there is
nothing more scandalous to a good Christian, so is there not any wickedness
like unto it.

My father had a fair large Masse-booke with the full number of David's 150.
Psalms, wherein he had been taught to pray, (I mean in the Spanish tongue)
and a great pair of Beads, whereof every one of them was as big as an
hazell nut. These my mother gave him, which came to his hands when she died.
These he always carried about him, you should never see them out of his hand,
every morning he heard his Mass, humbly kneeling with both his knees on the
ground, his hands joining themselves together at his breast, lifting them up
toward heaven, on the top whereof his Hat hung. Some malicious people (by
way of reproach) did not stick to say, that he did pray in this manner, because
he would not hear the Priest, and that he held his Hat so high, because he
would not see him. But of this, let them judge, who find themselves free from
passion, and let them tell me, whether it be not a perverse and rash censure,
proceeding from a profane kind of people, that have no care of their souls,
and without any conscience at all. But the very truth is, that the maine cause,
and first beginning of their murmuring against him, was; that a Partner of his
in Seuill, being broken, and turned Bankrupt, and having carried away with him
great sums of moneys that were his, he pursued after him, as well to remedy
himself as well as he could of so great a loss, as also to order and settle
some other necessary businesses, which did much concern him.

The ship he went in was set upon and taken; and he, together with the Guzmans
father taken prisoner.
rest that were in her, taken captives, and carried to Argiers: where, what out
of fear, and what out of despair; fear, for that he knew not how or which
way to recover his liberty; and despair, for that he never looked to get
again his moneys; for quietness sake, as one that had not the spirit of
contradiction, or that was wont to gainesay any thing, he renounced his
Religion, and turned Turk. There he married a Moore, a woman of perfect
beauty, and principal rank, with whom he had good store of wealth. For He
turns Turk. He marries a Moore.
in matter of interest, (taking it in the general, in which tracke I still
tread, without prejudice to a great number of noble persons, and grave and
principal Gentlemen; for there are of all sorts in all places) I will only
speak by the way, what I my self knew of some of my fathers kindred, during
the time, that I traded and conuersed with them. They were very solicitous in
Guzmans kindred, what condition they were of.
meddling with other men's houses, and too forgetful and careless of their
own: desirous, that other men should deal plainly and truly with them,
whilst from themselves, you should not get so much as one true word. Willing,
that others should pay them all that they ought, but of what they ought, to pay
nothing at all: to gain and spend freely, (light where it would light for
them, they cared not who did wring for it) for the pawn was already forfeited,
their day was past; and (as the Proverb is) a Roma por todo, at Rome there is
an absolution for all offenses. It afterward so fell out, that my fathers
Partner, to secure himself from after-claps, and to live out of danger,
labored to take order with his Creditors, and to compound for his debts, upon
fair and reasonable conditions, requiring such rates and days of payment, as
that he might both be able to live well himself, as also to pay his debts.

When this came to my fathers ear, that had certain and assured notice of
Guzmans father flies from Argiers. And in what manner.
it, he had a great desire to come away with all the secrecy and diligence he
could possibly devise. And the better to deceive the Moore his wife, he told
her, that he purposed to employ himself in matters of Merchandise, which would
turn much to their profit. He made money of most that he had, and putting it
into Chekines, (a certain coin, that is made of fine Barbary gold) taking
with him all the Jewels he could finger, and so leaving her alone, and very
poor, he came his way with all the speed he could. And not making any one
acquainted therewith, neither friend nor foe, reducing himself to the Faith of
Jesus Christ, repenting himself of his fault, with tears in his eyes, being
his own Promoter, he accused himself, craving pardon for his offense, and
that some favorable penance might be inflicted upon him. Which being enjoined
him, and fully performed by him, he afterward went about to recover his debts.
And this was the chief cause, why they would never afterward trust him, nor
have any charitable opinion of him, were his works never so good, never so
pious. And if you ask other reason, you were as good hold your tongue, you
shall get none other from them, but impertinencies, and answers nothing to the
purpose, such as they have often made me; Once a knave, and ever a knave: Nam
qui semel est, semper praesumitur Once a Knave, and ever a Knave.
esse malus: For he that has once been naught, is presumed to be so still;
and that he will never get out of the way of wickedness, that has once made it
his common walk. Not considering, that no man knows, how God touches a man's
heart, and calls him home unto him, putting him again in the right path, and
whether (agreeable to that authenticke Law) he had reformed his manners or no.

Here you see, without leaning this or that way, or without any the least
inclining to any side, my fathers Mere-stones; the very limits, and bounds,
that do define and determine him; On the one side, stand (as supporters) his
couzening Kindred, and bankrupt Copartner; on the other side, his own
coozening of the Moore. And if it be objected, that he himself brake twice or
thrice, having other men's goods in his hands; if they likewise brake with him,
it is no wonder, that he should not hold. For men are not made of steel, nor
are they bound to hold like nails: for they, even though of iron, do
sometimes fail and burst in sunder, and grow weak and loose. These are your
Merchants stratagems, their fine shifts of wit, which (upon occasion) The
cunning tricks of certain Merchants in their Trading.
they practice when and where they please; especially in Spain, where they
have found the trick of getting. Nor is it a thing so much to be wondered at;
there lies their skill, let it thrive as it will: we leave that to themselves,
and their Confessors, to whom, I doubt not, but they give a large account of
their doings. Only God is the Judge of these things; and let him that absolues
them, look what he does: I see many, that make a common practice of it, but
not a man of them, that hangs for it. If it were a delict, an evil thing, or a
theft, it is a clear case that it should be punished, since for less then
six Royals, we see an hundred poor souls whipped about the town, and sent to
the Galleys.

That I might not vent my self in my fathers prejudice, I could be content to
hold my peace, and to silence what I think: but if I will follow the
Philosophers counsel, I must then say, Amicus Plato, sed magis amicus Ueritas:
Plato is my friend, but the Truth more. I love my father well, but I must
preserve the truth above all things. Conforming my self therefore to that
Philosophical saying, let the world hold me excused, if I canonize this Case
for one of the greatest villainies and rogueries, that was ever put in use, and
such as deserves exemplarie punishment, and that in no mean degree. But
perhaps some one Merchant or other, that is his crafts-master in this kind of
trade, will tell me to my face, Hold your hand, Sir, you are a little too
forward, in what Consistory (I pray) of the Pope and his Cardinals, has
Bankrupture been determined, and condemned for a sin? Who will put an Idiot,
a Galley-slaue, a Rogue, to establish Laws, or to censure those Trades wherein
he has no skill? But I now see how I have erred, in speaking against that,
which I cannot help, and whereof there is so little amendment to be expected.
For I would willingly endure thy taunts, and bear thy reproaches, so that there
might either punishment or remedy be given to this honorable kind of theeuing,
though my own father should stretch for it, and give the Gallows it is first
handsell. Let it run on as it does; for the reformation of such important
things as these, and other of greater moment, grow daily worse and worse; their
Andar de capa cayda. To go with their Cloak fallen, is a phrase that is used
of those, who go loosing both their substance, and their credit.
Cloak is fallen (as it is in the Proverb) from off their shoulders. But what
does this belong unto me? for me to speak against it, is to cry out upon the
Woolfe, where none will come to help me, to stop the Sun in its course,
and to preach in the wilderness.

But I return to that, which they laid most to his charge; which was, That he
was apprehended and imprisoned, for that which thou thy self say, How a
Judge and a Scrivano may be bad.
or that has been dictated unto thee by others. But for that he was rich and
wealthy, and (as some say) for that he had an Alcalde to his father, and a The
Spanish word (...) Elcrivano. i. Scriba publicus, ^rvus publicus, qui acta in
ludicio, vel extra Iudicium, notis vel literis excipit. Vt constat Lege, no^
vaum. 18.. de adoptionibus. Besides that which is alleged by Don Iuan Vela in
his Tract de poenis delictorum, cap. 24. de Notario falsum committente.
Notarie to his Gossip, he by that means came off, and was freed. For there
were sufficient proofs and evidences brought against him; and such suspicions
to induce belief, as might have served the turn to have turned him over. But
one pulls me by the sleeue, and tells me in mine ear, Do you hear, Sir?
Suspicion is no proof, and naked signs, are not of themselves capable of
chastisement. I did look for this conclusion from thee; assuring my self
beforehand, that thou would take them all to be old Wives tales, when they
meet at the Bake-house to set their bread into the Oven; that they are all
lies, and false testimonies, maliciously urged against him. And seeing I have
auow'd, and made good one part unto thee, thou will not deny, but that I have
reason to defend the other, and to give thee my reasons for it. I say then,
that to have Scrivanos, or Notaries, (I may so term them) to be a man's
Gossips, is a bare title, that only suites it self according to the Money,
wherewith every one wageth Law. For in blearing the sight, and picking a man's
purse before his face, some have the soul and conscience of your Gypsies, and
will make of Justice a matter of iuggling, with a hye pass, and a repasse,
come off Jack with a whim-wham; ordering things so, as they shall think good,
and may make most for their profit: so that it shall neither be in the power of
the Plaintiff or Defendant to impeach it, nor in the Advocate to dispute the
right, nor in the Judge to sentence it.

And lest that I should chance to forget it, I pray, hearken by the way to
that, which in the Church of S. Gil, in Madrid, was delivered to the Lords of
the supreme Council, by a learned Preacher, upon a certain Friday in Lent. A
discourse of a worthy Preacher against Notaries.
By way of discourse, he ran through all the ministers of Justice, till he
came to the Scrivano, or Notary, or Register, (or what in that kind you please
to call him) which he purposely forbore to speak of, as reserving that dish
for the last service, and then with these words, he set it before them: Here my
Cart sticks fast, and is so clogged with dirt and mire, and so surrounded and
wedged in, as it were, on every side with filth and mucke, that I know not in
the world how to get it out, unless the Angel of God return once again to
the fish-poole. I confess (my Lords) that for these thirty years and upwards,
I have seen and heard the Confessions of many sinners; who having fallen into
one sin, have fallen again many times into the same. And yet all these, (by
Gods help, and his goodness and mercy toward them) have reformed both their
lives and consciences, and become good livers, and have all put on amendment.
The Wencher, that has lain at rack and manger, and stood at continual
Livery, time, and a filthy Queen has tamed him. The Gamester, a Master of a
Dicing-house, or Keeper of an Ordinary, makes him in the end to see his error;
who like a Horse-leech, goes from one to another, sucking by little and little
their blood from them. To day thou winnest, to morrow thou lofest; the money
runs round, and still it remains, but they that play, I am sure, remain
without it. The famousest Thief, fear and shame reformeth. The rash Railer,
the The Spanish word perlesia, signifies also Prelacie. As if the way to get
preferment, were to rail upon Gouern^ment.
Palsy, from which few escape. The proud man, his own misery does
dis-deceiue him, being conscious to himself, that he is but dirt. The Liar, the
ill language, and the affrents, which are daily cast in his teeth, put a bridle
upon his tongue. The unadvised Blasphemer, the continual reprehensions of his
friends and kinsfolks correct and amend him. All these, either early or late,
at one time or another, reap some fruit, and cast off (like the Snake) their
old skin, although perhaps (within) they wring hard for it.

In all, and every one of these, have I found some marks and signs of their
salvation: Only in the Scriuener, I miss in my account, and am quite out of
my reckoning, nor do I find in him any amendment at all; but is just the same
man to day, that he was yesterday; this year, as he was thirty years since;
for he is still one and the selfsame man: Nor do I know to whom, or how he
confesses, nor who absolueth him: (I speak of him, who does not faithfully
exercise his Office) for they inform, and write down that, which they think
fit, and for two ducats, or to pleasure a friend, or to do a sheecreature a
courtesy (for your mantles, are great meddlers, and your women, not the worst
sollicitours:) they take away this man's life, that man's honor, and a third
man's wealth; setting the gate wide open to an infinite number of sins, in
their insatiable covetousness, in their canine and dogge-like appetite,
through the heat of that infernal fire that is in their soul: which makes
them to swallow down without chewing, be it good or bad; right, or wrong,
another man's goods. And because ever and anon, upon every slight occasion, they
take that which is not their due; and for that the money that is put into the
palms of their hands, their fist being well greased therewith, is in an
instant converted into flesh and blood, and incorporated into one and the
selfsame substance with themselves; they have no more power to cast it off
from them, then they have to shake off the World, or the devil, who sit so
close unto them, that they can hardly be removed. So that it seems unto me,
that when any such is saved, (for it cannot be, that all should be such, as I
have here taken upon me to treat of) at his entrance into glory, the Angels
fulfilled with joy, will cry out one to another, Laetamini in Domino, A
Scriuener come into Heaven, new fruit, new. For Scriueners are not pomi
Paradisi, such fruit grows not there: And with this he ended his Sermon. But
let it pass and go for current, that some good may be wrought upon a
Scriuener, and that there may be some hope his soul may be saved, by changing
his former course of life; yet for all this, fall back, fall edge, go which
way you will to work with him, he will be well enough able to answer for
himself, by A defense of Scriueners, though a weak one.
laying an excuse upon his faults (for iron also may be gilded) and then will
he tell you that these are the rates of old, and that they take no more but
their wonted fees, that victuals and other things grow still dearer and dearer,
and the means to maintain them, worse and worse. That the Kings rents and
prices are variable; that they had not their Offices for nothing, but paid
soundly for them; and therefore must lick himself whole as well as he can,
saving himself harmless out of other men's gettings: And that there is no
reason but that he should be well paid for the employment of his person, and
his pains taking. This has been the course of all ages, and for ought I see,
is like still so to continue: Howbeit, Aristotle tells us, That the greatest
wrong, that Aristotle's saying.
can be offered to a Commonwealth, is the sale of Offices.

And Cleomenes the Spartane, being demanded how a Kingdom might come to be
happy, made answer, When a King should not respect his private profit. A
saying of Cleomenes.
But for a Judge that comes freely by his place, to whom, they have given the
Title of gracious Lord, in hope that he will do the office of God, which
Judges are Gods.
is, to do Justice, and to show Mercy, (and therefore are called Gods upon
earth) that to such a one it should be imputed, that he sels Justice; omitting
to punish the bad, and to reward the good; and that he will salve and cover a
fault in a lewd fellow, or save a notorious offender from the gallows; I
absolutely deny it, and prove this my proposition by plain and evident
Reasons. For who can think, that there should be in the world a Judge so ill,
so unorderly, so impudent and so shameless (for such a one must he be, that
will do such things) tho a mountain of gold should make his Mace, or rod of A
bad Judge, and his conditions.
justice to bend, and compel him to break the Law? Howbeit, there are some
abroad in the world, who stick not to say, that this suing for Offices, and
seats of Justice, goes by certain indirect paths, and by-ways, unusual
courses out of the common track, and vn-accustomed; or (to speak more
properly) by false reports and forged Relations, whereof they make benefit, and
grow thereby into great Estates. And after that they once grow warm in their
places, and see that they are surely settled in them, they then make up their
stock again, and set up for themselves, and begin to play their prizes,
raking and scraping at whatsoever comes within their reach; like unto the
Polypus, A Fish that has many feet wherewith to catch his prey. Derived from
the Greek word (...), Multus and (...), pes.
or Cuttle Fish, that has many claws (like so many Wyers) to catch his prey.
There is not a pore, or joint in all his body, but is either a mouth to
swallow, or a paw to take hold, if you once come within his clutches. Here he
seazeth on Wheat, there on Barley; here Wine, there Oil, besides flitches of
Bacon, clothes both woollen and linen, silks of all sorts, Jewels, money;
from the Hangings in the dining Chamber, to stoop so low as the spice-boxe in
the Kitchen; from the Masters-bed, to the Mules Cratch; from the purest wheat
in the granarie, to the very straw and chafe that lies at the barnes door,
choosing rather to play at small game, then to sit out. From which terrible
griping, and violent hold-fast, nothing can vn-hitch them but deaths
flesh-hooke. For, when the hand takes a bribe, and they once begin to be
corrupted, there is no ho with them, they are marred for ever after by an evil
use, and never come to be good. And so they receive with open hand all manner
of Bribes, as if they were men in pay, and what they wrongfully take, were true
wages, and lawful fees. So, that they observe not Justice, they wink at
thieves, because they offer unto them the first fruits and tithes of their
thefts: they have gotten the favor of some Courtier, to bear them out in
that, which they have bought for their money: whereupon they relying, cast away
all fear of wresting and perverting Justice.

Thus is it, in all your Officers of Justice, as well with your royal
Merchant, as your Retayler; your Alcalde, as your Alguazil; your Judge, as your
Petty-fogger; with him that sells in gross, as him that sells by retayle;
your Iusticer is the Merchant; your Petty-fogger, the Peddler. And (for their
better thriuing in the world) every one has his bonus Genius, or Angel of
guard, either bought outright for his money, (or at least so settled upon him,
that it can hardly be alienated from him,) for those impertinent necessities of
the body; besides that, which God has given them for those that import the
Soul. So that they have two Genij, (as men for the more surety will have two
strings to their Bow:) The Court Genius, which is the Protector of their
bodily goods; and Gods good Angel, that is the Protector of their souls.

So that out of all this, you see something may be gathered, and happily a
great part of it too true; yet for all this, we must not hence presume to
conclude of all: But he that shall fall through covetousness into the like
baseness, which perhaps may be one of a thousand, and the same some base-born
Slave, an ill-bred fellow, or of a vile and abject mind, thou need not wish
him greater harm, or worse misfortune, then has already lighted upon him; for
The punishment that an ciull Judge receives.
he carries with him his own chastisement; He is pointed at (where-euer he
goes) with the finger; he is murmured at by men; he is abhorred of the Angels;
and both in public, and in private, has every man's mouth against him: yet
must we not for their sakes condemn the rest, or think all to be made of the
same lump. And if some particular person find himself aggrieued, and
complain, that he has received hard measure, wise men will consider (as a
thing to be necessarily presupposed) that suites of Law, being in number so
infinite; in nature, so differing; and in their ends so diverse and difficile to
be decided, it is not possible that one judgment should content both sides; or
one Judge (though never so indifferent) please both parties. There will (while
the world stands) be some querrulous men, either with, or without reason, have
they cause, or not cause. Therefore, thou must first weigh, and What he should
do, that (...) a suite in Law.
consider well with thy self, that these things, (I mean your Law-suites)
will require a great deal of care, a great deal of skill, and a great deal
of cunning. And if thou be wanting to thy self in these thy diligences, and
take not the right course, the blame will lie in thy self. Nor is it any
marvel, Que pi^rdas tu derecho, no sabiendo hazer tu hecho: That for want of
good information, thou should lose thy right, and miscarry in thy suite, so
that the fault is not so much the Judges, as thine own. But that the Judge
should deny to do justice, because many times he does not give sentence on
his side, who persuades himself that he is in the right, it is because he
fails peradventure in his proofs, or for that his Adversary made a bad cause
good, and the other a good cause bad, by the evil carriage of the business.
(For much advantage does consist in the handling of a cause.) Or else through
the negligence of the party; or for that he wants means and money to follow
his suite; or for that his opposite is too powerful for him. And therefore it
is not good to tax the Judges, muchlesse those, that are seated in those
higher Thrones, and superior tribunal seats, where there are many good and
choice men, even the best that the Kingdom affoordeth. And suppose, some one
Judge or other out of passion, would rashly and unadvisedly precipitate
himself, not caring which end went forward (be it right, or be it wrong,) yet
the rest will not do so, they bear a better mind, and will not stick to
withstand him to his face.

I remember that a Labuador in Granada, a good crafty Clown, did (for his own
private profit) follow a suite very hard in open Court, against the Lord of the
town where he dwelt. Thinking with himself, that he had to do with Pero
Crespo, the Towns Alcalde, or Constable (if I may so style him) of the Parish,
and that he could have drawn the Oydores, or Judges (appointed to hear his
cause) by the ears, and led them along as he listed; standing one day in the
Placa nueua, or the new-Market-place, gazing hard, and looking busily on the
Porch, by which you enter into the Chancery, which is one of the famousest
buildings (for it is bigness) that is in all Spain; and whereunto (for not
only the curiousness of the Arches and Vaults, but for the fair carriage of
business) there is not any in these times known to be equal unto it: after
he had well viewed it, he perceived that the Kings Arms that were placed in
the Frontispice, had for it is two Supporters, Justice, and Fortitude. Another
Country fellow of his acquaintance, seeing him stand thus gaping as if he had
nothing to do, asked him, why he did not go in to solicit his business?
He told him, I begin to think with my self, that these things are not for me,
and therefore I could wish my self at home again. Why (quoth his friend?)
Why, said he? because Justice is here seated so high, that it is in vain A
witty saying of a Country fellow.
for me to look to have her stoop unto me, and I am not able to reach up unto
her, and therefore would I were well at home.

It is no marvel then (as I said before) that a Judge do not Justice now and
then to some men, though they have Law on their side; but it would seem
somewhat strange, that a man should have a sentence go on his side, that has
not wit to defend his cause. But my father found sentence in his favor,
because he had been beaten to those kinds of businesses, and knew the trace
of them, and was well able to hold plea. Besides, when he had the torment
given him, and was put (as we here term it) upon the rack, he cleared
himself of those imputations that were laid upon him, and attainted those
witnesses that were brought against him of public malice, proving that they
had deposed against him upon idle and vain presumptions, and upon weak and
feeble grounds.

But here (me thinks) I hear a Murmurer muttering forth his malice, telling
me, That my father had a very ill report: That he curled his hair, painted
his face, and did diverse other things, which I pass over with silence, and
willingly omit to speak of: That moneys were still stirring, and came tumbling
in on every side, besides gifts and presents, which coming from two opposite
parties, continually crossed one another. Whereunto I may add the
solicitation of women, who are not the worst Advocates, or the least
importunate Suitors. All which put together, leave such a thorn or sting in my
finger, that I dare not touch upon them. O thou man of malediction, thou do
press me too too hard, thou do weary, and tire me out; I purpose this bout
only, to give thee the best satisfaction I can, and not to answer any more to
thy replies; for it were but to proceed in infinitum, and never to make an end,
to weight upon thy Sophistries, and frivolous questions. And therefore I do
not tell thee, that thou shootest at random, speak non sequiturs, and such
like things, wherein thou can not prevail as thou would, nor make thy part
good; for as much as the truth thereof is otherwise already determined. Yet,
when suites go thus, they give occasion of much mislike and offense; but there
is no remedy, and we must be contented with it, as things that can not
sometimes be possibly avoided: But God deliver thee from such a Judge, qui
habet Legem in scrinio pectoris, that interprets the Law as he lists
himself, and as his own conceit shall lead him, having neither Text, nor
Doctor on his side to make good that he does; and from a Notarie, that is
thine enemy, or any other of those kind of creatures, that are bribed: for
they will falsify orders for their profit, and register things otherwise, then
they were reported in Court. But in case thou will be carried away with
opinion, and the voice of the Vulgar, (which is evermore Vox populi non modo
est infirma, sed ^psa insi^mitas, and morbus.
the weakest, and least true, according to the subject from whence it comes)
tell me, not out of the peoples talk, (whereunto little credit is to be given)
but to speak like a wise man, (out of thine own discretion and judgment,)
whether all that which thou have said, be sufficient to prove, that my Father
was (undoubtedly) faulty.

Besides, if it be the received opinion of some Physicians, that the using of
Complexions, and such like slibber-slabbers, is a kind of infirmity and
sickness Against painting.
in it self, who can say, whether my father were sound or no? And as for your
curling of pates, crisping of hairs, and other greater dishonesties, and
vnseemelier sights then these, I do not commend them; nor allow of those, who
permit them in Spain.

But that which I saw with mine own eyes, for that time that I knew him, and
was conversant with him, I am able to tell thee what manner of man my Father
was. He was of a fair complexion, ruddy, well colored, clean and soft, was
the grain of his skin, and his hair curled, which on Omnium colorum homo.
my conscience was natural unto him: He had a full eye, and that full of life,
resembling in color the watery Turquoys. He ware a foretop, and those his
Locks, which ouerspred his Temples, to give them the greater grace, curled
themselves into rings of hayres. And if God had given him these colors, as
prope^ to him, was it fit (think you) that he should besoot his face with the
same paintings? or is it likely, that he would make such slight reckoning of
these fair pledges of Gods goodness, and embrace such counterfeit stuff to the
ill example of others? But if it be true, as thou say, that he made use of
ointments, greasy ingredients, slabber-sawces, gals of beasts, and the like
artifices; and that those teeth, and hands, which did so much commend him, that
all this, I say, should be done by the virtue of certain Powders, Oxe-gals,
Lees, Latherings, and other such sluttish and beastly confections, I shall then
ingeniously acknowledge whatsoever thou shall say of him, and shall be a
capital enemy not only unto him, but to all those that shall practice the
like. For besides, that they are effeminate actions, fitting only wanton
wenches, and light huswiues, they give occasion to men, to murmr against
them, and breed a just suspicion of baseness in the vilest degree, when they
shall see Painting had, both in a soul, and in a fair woman, but worst of all
in a man.
them thus dawbed over with clay, and wholly composed of those things that are
only permitted unto women; who, because they have not sufficient beauty of
themselves, borrow it from paintings, and varnishings, to the great cost, both
of their health, and purse. And (which to see, is a thousand pities) that your
foul, and worst favored women, are not only those that do this, but even
your fairest, and those that are most beholding to Nature: who thinking thereby
to seem fairer, and to make Nature appear more lovely in Arts dressing, begin
this work betimes in the morning in their bed, and finish it at noone, when
the Cloth is laid. So that I say, (and not without reason) Que la muger, quanto
mas mirare la cara, tanto mas destruye la casa: That a woman, the more curious
she is about her face, the more careless she is about her house; the repairing
of the one, being the ruining of the other. If this then (even in women) be
blameworthy, how much more shall it be in men? O filthiness, above all other
filthiness! O affront, above all other affronts! that God having given thee
one face, thou should abuse his image, and make thy self another. Thou can
not twit me in the teeth, that my love to my father has blinded me, or that
my natural affection to my Country has bribed me, nor shall thou ever find me
out of reason, or in ought that I shall say, to swerue from the truth. But if
there be any discharge or satisfaction in a thing that is evil, I will tell thee
one curiosity, because it falls out patt for this place, and did succeed all,
as it were about one and the selfsame time. Dulce est socios habuisse dolorum.
To thee it will serve for counsel; to me, for comfort, as a common ^uill,
that goes not without its fellows.

In the year 1512. (a little before Rauenna was sacked) there were cruel
wars in Italy. And in this very City, (I mean Rauenn.) there was borne a
strange Monster, which did strike the beholders into great admiration and
caused much wonder. He had from the girdle upward, all his whole body, face,
and head, like unto a man, saving that he had one horn in his forehead: he
wanted his arms, but in stead thereof, Nature had given him two wings like a
Bat: he had figured in his breast, the Pythagoricall (Y) and in his stomach
down to his belly, a well-formed Cross, or Crucifix. He was an Hermaphrodite,
both those two natural Sexes, being in a very proportionable manner well and
truly formed: he had no more but one thigh, and to it one leg with its foot
like a Kites, and the tallons answerable thereunto. In the knotty part, or
locking joint of the knee, he had one only eye. These monstrosities and
unnatural shapes possessed men's minds with extraordinary admiration; and those
that were learned men, and great Scholars, considering with themselves, that
such monsters in nature were usually prodigious, and did foretoken some strange
effects, did beat their brains, and exercise the strength of their wit, in
the speculation and search of the signification thereof, and what this strange
Monster might portend. And amongst many other that were given, only this that
follows, was well received amongst them: That the horn did signify Pride,
and Ambition; the wings, Inconstancy and Lightness: want of arms, want of
good works: the foot, of that bird of rapine, Theft, Usury, and Avarice: the
eye in the knee, affection to vanities and worldly things: the two Sexes,
Sodomy, and beastly filthiness; in all which vices, all Italy did then abound.
For the which, God did scourge them with that his whip of wars and
dissentions. But the Cross and the Y were good and fortunate signs; for the Y
in the breast did signify Virtue: and the Cross on the belly, that if men
(suppressing their dishonest lusts of the flesh, should embrace virtue in their
breasts, God would give them peace, sweeten his displeasure, and abate his wrath.

You see here, (in a case prohibited) that when the whole current ran with a
troubled water, my father followed along with the stream, and did as others
did, and was not the sole and only offender. And therefore more worthy shall
thou be of blame, if thou shall offend, having been brought up in a school of
Christianity, and taught by example what to avoid. God lend us his helping
hand, that we may not fall into other the like miseries: for all of us, even
the best of us, we are but men.

CHAPTER II.
Guzman de Alfarache goes on, in recounting who were his Parents, and declares
withal who his Mother was; and for our better instruction, describes the evil
conditions, and bad qualities of a lewd woman, of Bawdes; of a sensual and
lascivious man, and that the end of dishonest Love, is the wasting of a man's
honor, of his wealth, and of himself.

BUT that I may return again to my Story, I told you before, (if my memory
do not fail me) that (having performed his penance) my father came to Seuill
for to recover his debt; whereupon Law was waged, many offers made either to
give or take; some demands, and some answers: and if he had not thoroughly purged
himself for his health, and found an evasion; that is, if he had not well
cleared himself of being a Renegado, it would have broken out upon him into
the scurfe of the head, or the scratches in the pasternes; all the fat had lain
in the fire, and he had been quite blown up. But he had wrought such a cure
upon himself, and handled the business so handsomely, that they could not
catch hold of him for having the Leprosy, or the dry scab. All things were so
well made up, that they could not find a hole in his coat, or make any mark
or white, to shoot at him; so well was he provided for all comers. Means were
used on both sides, composition offered, but not accepted; the one being
unwilling to Guzmans father compounds with his Creditors; grows rich, and
takes his pleasure.
pay all, the other as loath to lose all. Of this spilt water, he gathered up
as much as he could, making the best of a bad bargain. And with that which
came to his share (be it what it will) it so well served his turn, that the
cards once more were dealt round again, and he come into very good play. His
incomes were such, and his luck so great, that in a very short time, he
gained not only where-withall to dine, but also to sup. He built him a pretty
handsome house, he sought to plant and settle himself in those parts, he
bought him land of inheritance; he had a Garden in San Iuan de Alfarache; a
neat one it was, and of much recreation and pleasure, distant from Seuill
little more then half a League; whither many days, especially in the Summer
time, he went for his passe-time, and made many banquets. It happened, that the
Merchants made a Burse or Pawn for their contractations at the stayres of the
great Church, (like that of Saint Felipe at Madrid) with a place to walk in,
which went round about it, having a Parapet or Wall brest-high on the outside
of it, to separate it from the open street, girt in with great Marble pillars,
and strong chains of iron. My father walking there with other Merchants, there
chanced a Christening to pass by. And (as the talk there went) this child was
said to be the secret son, or (to speak plain English) bastard to a
certain person, that shall be namelesse. My father followed in the tail of
the troop, and entered in after them even to the very Font, for to see and view
my mother* who with a certain old Knight of the military habit, (who Guzmans
^other and (...) w^man: Her condition.
for to maine the honor of his Order, lived by the Rents of the Church) were
Partners in this Ceremony: it was a metall'd thing, a lusty lively wench, yet
grave enough withal; her carriage was very graceful, and full of courtesy,
her self young; beautiful, discreet, modest, and of a well composed and
settled behavior. Her handsome feature needs no other commender, then it
self. He stood steddily looking upon her, all the while that the Exercise of
that Sacrament gave him leave so to do, being astonished to behold so rare a
beauty, if not besotted with it. For, to that her natural beauty of face, and
feature of body, (without any tricking or painting at all) all was so curious
and fitly placed through that whole frame of nature, that one part helping
another, and all put together into one piece, did make such a delicate
contexture, that no pensill can reach to express its perfection; nor
imagination conceive, how to make it better. The parts, and fashion of my
father, I have already largely laid open unto you: this goodly creature, (for
they seem gods and not men, who are not touched with natural affections)
began to perceive his earnest eying of her, and did not a little rejoice in it,
howsoever she did dissemble it. For there is not any woman, (though never so
Women love to be eyed, and to be looked upon.
proud, be she of high or low degree) but does take comfort, and chucke for
joy, to be beheld and looked upon with an hungry eye, be the man never so base,
never so mean. Their eyes being their interpreters, though their tongues were
silent, spoke plain language each to other: manifesting by them their hearts;
for souls on such occasions do not admit of maskes, neither will willing minds
yield to the veil and muffler. For that time, there passed no more betwixt
them, nor ought else done, save only that he came to know, that she was that
Knights Pawn; his jewel, his delight, a morsel that he kept for his own
mouth, over whom he was wondrous wary, and so tenderly affected, that he could
scarce endure to have her out of his sight. In fine, this Gentlewoman went
directly home to her house, and my father was at his wits end, not knowing in
the world how to put her out of his mind. He used, that he might come to the
sight of her again, many extraordinary diligences: but, unless when she went
forth to Mass upon some solemn Feast-dayes, he could not otherwise see her
for a long time together.

The often falling drop, hollowes the hardest stone that is; and steadfast
perseverance still gets the victory: for continuance crowns our actions, and
disposes them to their intended ends. He plodded so long on the matter, that
he found out a trick to serve his turn, using the means of a good old
beldame, a reverent Matron forsooth, an honest Bawd, one of my charitable
Aunts: for such ministers as these does the Devil set aworke, and employ in
his service; with which secret Mines, he ouerturnes the strongest towers of the
chastest women: for that they may better themselves in their raiment, seeking
to gain a widows habit, a Huke, or a Mantle, and that their little Caskets
may be stored with Boxes of Marmalet; there is no treachery which A Bawd, and
her condition.
they will not attempt; no filthiness, which they will not solicit; no
blood, which they will not draw forth; no chastity, which they will not spot;
no cleanness, which they will not fully; no wickedness which they will not
bring to pass. This good creature then, being courted by him with words, and
rewarded by him with deeds, went and came to and fro with papers: And because
the Principles, as they are the first, so the hardest to learn; and because
the greatest difficulty consists in the beginning; and for that, Loaves go
aside, if they be not well set into the Oven, she molded the business well,
using the best sleights she had. And because my father had heard of old, That
Money overcome all difficulties, especially with women.
money leuelleth the greatest difficulties, and makes all things plain and
easy, he did ever manifest his faith by his works, because they should not
condemn it to be dead and fruitless. He was never negligent, nor yet no
niggard. He began (as I told you) by this woman's hand, to sow the seeds of his
love, and prodigally to spend upon my mother; and they both, very willingly,
and very cheerfully, are ready to receive all. And because unto goodness,
gratitude is so due a debt; and that he who receives, is bound to a requital,
and every courtesy deserves its acknowledgement This good mother of mischief
did play her part so well, grew such a good Solicitor, and followed the
business so close, that her diligence meeting in a happy coniuncture, with the
forwardness of my Mothers will, she still went adding more fuel to the fire;
and of a little light stubble, raised in a short time a terrible flame. As we
see many times, ieasting turned into earnest; and things full often to end in
sober sadness, which at the first, were but begun in jest.

My Mother (as ye have already heard) was a discreet woman; feign she would,
but durst not; she had a good mind to the business, but yet she was afraid:
she was sometimes on, sometimes off; her own heart was the Oracle of her
desires; with that she consulted often, what were best to do. And thus
disputing pro and con with herself, ya lo tenia de la haz, ya delenues.
Sometimes (as we see in the handling of Stuffes, or of Cloth) she was on the
right, sometimes on the wrong: one while she would put on a full resolution to
do thus and thus; by and by again, she would turn to a new Conjugation, and
vary the Mood she was in before. In conclusion, whom will not silver win? whom
will not gold corrupt? This Knight was an elderly man, much subject to
spitting, spalling, and coughing, he was troubled with the Stone, with
sharpness of his Urine, and other the like infirmites: she had seen him full
often by her sweet side in the naked bed; where he did not appear the man my
father was, he had not that vigor, nor liveliness, nor that handsomeness of
shape and proportion. And besides, observe it while you live, and you shall
evermore find it to be true, That long acquaintance, and much conversation,
(where Gods fear is not) breeds wearisomnesse, and loathsomenesse at the last.
Novelties please all, especially women, who are lovers of flim-flam Novelties
please women.
tales, and for the receiving and returning of news; like unto Materia prima,
which never cease to desire and seek after new Forms. She was resolved to
have forsaken the old Knight, to shift her of her old clothes, to change her
smock, and was fully bent to fly out, and to break loose, whatsoever came of
it: but her great wisdom, and long experience, which was hereditary unto her,
and sucked from her mothers teat, opened the way, and presented A woman, wise in
wickedness, what one she is.
unto her an ingenious resolution. And questionless, the fear of losing her
pension, kept her aloof off, the thought whereof much perplexed her for the
present, who otherwise was of her self well egged forward, and had a good mind
to the game. For what lesson my Father read but once unto her, the Devil
repeated the same ten times over; so that it was no such great matter now to
win Troy; there was likelihood enough to take it in less then ten years.

My good Mother casts up her account, and made this reckoning with her self:
In this particular, my person loses nothing, I sell no household stuff, I
waste none of my goods; and though in this kind, I afford much kindness to
others, I am therein like unto the Candle, or the Sun in its brightness,
though I lend light unto others, I have nothing the less my self: I shall not
want awhit in my estate, but be rather still at the full. Of whom I have
received so many courtesies, so many gifts, it is fit, I should in some sort
show my self thankful, and not be sparing to him, that has been so
bountiful to me. Shall I be covetous, when he is so liberal? God forbid. I am
now resolved what to do: I will sow my bag at both ends, my jaws shall grind
on both sides, my chaps shall walk every way; and the better to secure my
ship, I will have two anchors to one bottom; that if I should chance to lose
the one, I might still have another remaining to serve my turn. And if the
mansion house should hap to fall, yet if the Doue-house hold up, if that stand
fast, we shall lack no Pigeons, as long as there is a Louer-hole for the poor
fools to get in at.

Having taken these things into her consideration, she treated with this her
bawdy Embassadresse, how, and when it might be; the manner, how; and the time
when. But finding (after long consultation) that it was impossible to effect
her desires in her own house, and that there was no good to be done at home,
for to enjoy each other freely, and to take that fullness of content, which
must satisfy the hungry mawes of greedy Lovers, amongst many other shifts and
tricks, and very good and witty devices, and strange plots, which they had laid
their heads about, for the better success in the business, they made choice
of this which follows.

The Spring had so far advanced it self, that May was in it is ending, and
the Summer was now making his entrance. And the Village of Gelues, and that of
Alfarache, a place of recreation near unto Seuill: And it is rare pleasures.
San Iuan de Alfarache, are now the sweetest and the pleasantest of all that
bordring Territory, none thereabouts was like unto them; besides, the
fertilen^sse and goodness of the soil (which is all one with that of Seuill,
as next neighbor unto it) which that River of Guadalquibir is a famous River,
which thwarteth all Andaluzia: it empties it self into the Sea, near to San
Lucar de Barrameda. It is a great River, whose head rises in the Sierra de
Sigura, or Alcacar, anciently called Tabigensis: from whese springhead, to the
Sea, it runs more then 60. Leagues; it is ancient name was Betis: from whence
that Province is called Betica, of Betus the 6. (...). of Spain. Or from the
Greek word (...), which signifies Deep. Some say it is a Ch^ldee word, and
signifies a House. For that it is the receptacle whither al other Rivers enter
in, as into a house. Some call it Thuria, of (...), which signifies, impetuous,
proud, etc. Vide Couarruuias, and Esteban de Garrib. l. 5. c. 4. fol. 128.
Guadalquibir, makes the more famous. whose watery gullets purling along the
banks, in-rich and adorn all those gardens and fields, that confine
thereupon: so that with reason (if there may be a known Paradise upon earth)
sure the name thereof properly appertains to this particular seat: So fairly
is it set forth with shadow-casting trees, so beautified with curious bowers,
so richly inameled with sundry sorts of flowers, so abounding with sauoury
fruits, so accompanied with siluer-running streams, with clear springs,
glasse-labour-sauing fountains, fresh airs, and delightsome shades, whereinto
the beams of the Sun are at that time denied their entrance, and have not
permission so much as once to peep in. At one of these retiring rooms of
recreation, my mother agreed with her marriage-maker; her Sine qua, non; and
some of the people of her house, to come one day thither to make merry. And
albeit the place, whither they were to go, was not that which my father was
owner of, but was somewhat beyond it, nearer unto Gelues; yet of force they
must, to go thither, pass close by our door.

Upon this care taken, and former agreement concluded between them, just about
the time that she was to come near unto our garden gate, my Mother began
presently to complain of a sudden and grievous pain in her stomach, imputing
the cause thereof to the coldness of the morning, and the freshness of the
weather, and did so cunningly dissemble the pangs and gripings she endured,
that they were faigne to take her down from her Xamuga. A woman's saddle with a
Chair.
Xamuga, which for her more ease in her journey, was borne by a pretty little,
but sure-footed A Sardinian Ass, of all Asses, is the least. A notable
subtilty of Guzmans Mother, for the inioying of his Father, before she came to
be his Wife.
Sardinian Ass. She feigned such extremities of torture, made such pitiful
faces, and such woeful gestures (holding her hand as hard as she could for her
life upon her belly, crushing and wringing it with all the might and maine she
could:) then would she let them loose again, then claspe them together, and
wring each finger through anguish of her pain: other-while she would hang the
head, as if she were fainting and ready to swoune; and that fit past, fetching
a deep sigh or two, she fell to unlacing and vnbracing her self, that all
that were about her (save those that were privy to the plot) did verily believe
that she was wonderfully and mightily tormented, that she made them to melt
into tears, and to have a compassionate feeling of this her affliction. Diverse
passengers chanced in the interim to come by, and every one proposed his
remedy; so many men, so many medicines; but because they knew not for the
present where to have the things that should be applied, nor where to have a
fit place for to minister unto her, their medicines were impertinent, and to no
purpose in the world. To go back unto the City, it was impossible; to go
further forward, dangerous; and to abide thus in the highway, not commodious.
Her fits increased, all stood amazed, as not knowing what to do, nor what
course to take. At last, one amongst the rest, that was there (who was laid
there for the purpose) breaks me in amongst them, and as he passes the
press, cries, Room for the passion of God, make way there, stand farther off,
lest you stiffle her for want of air. Come, let us take her, and remove her
out of the high way; it were cruelty, not to seek to cure her, and a thousand
pitties, that so sweet a creature should be cast away, for want of care and
good looking to. Come, let us take her in our arms, and put her into this
garden house here hard by, in this case we must be content to take that which
comes next to hand.

All approved what he said, his motion was applauded, and so generally well
liked, that it was presently concluded amongst them, That until that fit were
ouer-past, they should crave leave of those that kept the house, to give her
entrance, not doubting but she would be much the better, if they could be but
so happy as once to get her within the doors. They knocked hard and thick, (as
men use to do when they are in haste;) the good woman that kept the house,
made show as if she thought her Master had been there: and as she came waddling
along, bawled to her self: O good God, is it you, Master? O sweet Jesus! I
pray be not angry, that I came no sooner, I was very busy, I could not do
withal, I came as soon as I could. These and the like excuses, her
unprofitable chaps mumbled to her self.

The old Hagge knew well enough what she had to do, she might go in the rank
of those rude Country wenches, that make curtsey, and cry, No chero, no sabo;
No forsooth not I, I am a poor silly old Woman, seeming as if she did not know
how to say B. to a battle-doore. Yet was she a dissembling Hilding, a crafty
old Carrion, one that had learned her lesson beforehand, and received her
instructions from my father, so that she was well prepared for the business.
Besides, she was no Dullard, and for such kind of employments she was no Baby,
but understood very well in such services as these what was fit to be done.

And herein (amongst other things) the rich have this advantage of the The
differen^e betwixt the poor end the rich Master.
poor, That evil servants will not so easily come to the beck and bend of a
poor Master, as well-disposed servants will be ouer-awed by a rich Master, and
won to his lewd commands. The poor man, (though he be never so honest) yet
must he yield sometimes to the violent disposition of his wilful and head
strong servants; whereas honest Country-Swaines, ouer-commanded by their rich
Landlords, become Ministers to their lustfulnesse. So that the poor (though
never so good) having ill servants, are servants to their servants. And the
rich (though never so bad) by being served with good servants, are the only
men that are well served.

My good old Woman had by this time opened the gate, and either not well
remembering, or making show as if she had not known them, full of
dissimulation, she fell thus upon them: What a stir, what a knocking is
here? The Devil take you all for me; beshrew me, if I did not think it had
been our Master. The very fear whereof, lest I might have stayed too long
before I let him in, has not left me one drop of blood in all my body. It Is
very well, what is the matter now, I pray? What would you with me? What is your
Worships pleasure? Have you any thing to say to me? If you have, let me know
your mind, that I may make an end and go about my business; for I have
something else to do then to stand thus idly here.

Then the old Knight answered, and said; Good woman, I pray afford us some
place in your house, where this Gentlewoman may rest her self a while: for a
grievous pain in her stomach, has befalne her here upon the way: she, that
kept the house, seeming to resent her pain, and to be much grieved for it, in
her rude rusticke manner, sorrowfully replyde:

Now a mischief on all such ill luck! O what a grief it is to see, that any
pain should prove so unhappy, as to be thus ill employed upon so sweet a face,
such a dainty bed of red and white Roses! Come in a Gods name, come in, I pray,
for all the house is at your service. My Mother, all this while, said not so
much as one word, only she complained of her grief.

The good old Wench of the house, using her with all the kindness her
Country-fashion could afford, gave them the liberty of the whole house,
bringing them into a lower room, where, in a well-furnisht bed, there were
certain Colchones, or Mattresses; these she presently unfolded, and having A
Colchone, is a kind of Mattresse, quilted with Wool, and basted with Thread,
that the Wool may not slide and grow into Knots.
spread them forth, and made all things fit and handsome, she presently opened a
Chest, whence she took out a very fine pair of sheets, that were neat and
sweet, a fair Quilt, and a couple of Pillowes; wherewith she dressed up a
bed, and made it ready for her to take her rest in. Well might the bed have
been made, the room kept clean, all places sweetened with the burning of
perfumes, breathing forth Pomanders, and other the like odoriferous sents, and
a breakefast provided, and many other dainties and delicacies put in a
readiness for to entertain them withal. All these things, I say, might well
have been made ready beforehand; but it was thought fit, that some of them
should not be prepared; as also that the woman that kept the house, should not
come at the first knocking, as likewise that the gate should be shut against
them, and not be opened until they called, that it might not seem to be a
set match, and lest it might chance to breed some suspicion, and so the
stratagem The Spanish word Eneamisada, signifies a ^ratagem; borrowed from the
wearing of shirts upon their Armor, thereby to surprise the enemy on the
sudden, and to be distinguished from their enemies. It is also a Mask, or
Mummery.
might be discovered, and the maskers made known; for this days plot was
merely no other thing. My Mother, in this her pitiful pain, put off her
clothes, got her to bed, and called ever and anon for warm clothes; which
being brought unto her, making as if she had laid them to her belly, she thrust
them lower beneath her knees, and somewhat apart from her, because the heat of
them did somewhat offend her, fearing lest they might cause some remotion or
alteration in her body, whereby qualmes might arise and weaken her stomach:
With the help of these warm Napkins, she found her self much eased, and
feigned she had a desire to sleep, hoping she should be the better after she
had taken some rest.

The poor old Knight, whose chiefest joy consisted in giving her content,
having placed all his happiness in her welfare, was (honest Cuckold as he
was) wonderfully glad of this, and left her all alone in her naked bed. And
having made fast the door after him, that none could get in to trouble her, he
went forth to recreate himself in those Gardens belonging to the house,
charging his people to make no noise, and that none should come near the
door, enioyning stillness and silence, and that none of them should dare to
open it, till they had farther order from him, or that he came himself: And
for that honest woman of the house, he willed her that she should watch by her,
till she awaked, and that then she should come and call him. My Father in the
mean while was not asleep, but stood with attention hearkening to what was
said, and lay peeping out through the Keyhole (like one that lies in
Ambuscado) of a certain back door, belonging to a little close closet,
whither he had retired himself, till he could spy his time of advantage for to
sally forth, and surprise that desired fort, which he had long since so
cunningly undermined.

Now, when all was hushed and quiet, and that her own Nurse that came with her,
and that other old Bawd of the house, stood like two Sentinels upon their
Watch, ready upon all occasions, to give quick advice, by a certain secret
sign, which might serve in stead of a watchword, when the old Knight should
make head that way, then did my father issue out at that posterne, or little
back-doore of his, that he might see, and confer with his Mistress. And at
that very instant did her feigned pangs cease, and those truer ones of love
began to manifest themselves, giving other kind of twinges, and those kinder
for the place affected. In this swelling kind of sport they continued two long
hours, two years being not sufficient to express those passages that were
betwixt these two new Lovers in this their merry fit.

Now the day began to grow hot, and was entering more and more into his heates,
which forced the Knight to make his retreat toward the house. Which he did the
more willingly, out of the desire which he had to know how his sick Saint did,
whether she were any thing better, and whether they should stay there, or go
forward, or what they were best to do, these were the lines that led him along
to visit her. Upon his marching thitherward, the Sentinels shot off a warning
piece: and my father with great sorrow of heart forsook the Fort, where he
had set up his Standard, and retired back to his Court of guard, and shut
himself up close, where he was before.

Upon the entering in of her old Gallant, she made show as if she had been fast
asleep, and was awakened with the noise that he had made. And with a bended
browe, and angry look, casting her eye a-skew upon him with a coyness of
language, she turned aside from him, accenting her words in a pretty kind of
mournful fashion, pitying as it were and bemoning her self; Ay me; God
help me. Why (alas) have they opened the door so quickly? Was there no care,
no love to be shown unto me, in letting me sleep a little longer? I thought
you, of all others, would not have put me out of so sweet a slumber. But it is no
matter, I shall one day; and with that she sighed, and stopped, as if she had
something else to say, studying more to amuze him, then to declare her self.

This good old Knight of ours, this patient piece of flesh, gently made
answer: By those eyes of thine, then which I adore nothing more, I did not
think to wake thee, it grieves me (pretty soul) that I have done thee that
wrong; yet have thou slept full two hours and more. Two hours? (replide my
Mother:) no, nor yet half an hour: me thinks it is but even now that I
began to shut mine eyes, and in all my life, I never had so quiet and
contented a napp, for that little while that it lasted; (nor did she lie in all
that she said, for she gulled him with a matter of truth:) and looking with
somewhat a more cheerful countenance upon him, she much commended the remedy
which they had given her; telling them, that they had given her her life.

The old Knight was glad to see so much comfort come from her. And by consent
of both parties, they agreed to celebrate their feast there, and to pass away
as merrily as they could the remainder of that day, for that Garden was no
less pleasant, then that whither they intended to have gone. And because their
people were not far off, that had the charge of their provision (for the
other house was hard by) they sent to them to bring back their dinner thither,
and such other things, as they had brought along with them.

Whilst this business was a-doing, my Father found fit opportunity to get out
secretly at the other gate, and to return back to Seuill: where, every hour,
was a thousand years; a moment, an Age, and the time of his absence from his
new Love, a present Hell.

Now, when the Sun was in his declining, which was about five in the Evening,
mounting upon his Gennet, as if it had been but his ordinary walk, he came to
visit this his house. Wherein he found these gallants, he bid them welcome, and
told them he was very glad to see them there, only he was sorry for the
mishap, which caused their stay. For he no sooner came in, but they told him
all that had past. His carriage was courteous; his voice loud and shrill, but
not very clear: He made them many discreet, and fair offers, (for he had
learned a little Courtship) and they on the other side, remained no whit in his
debt for kind words: So that in the end, there was a great League of
friendship professed and confirmed between them in public; but a stricter tie
in secret, betwixt my Father and his Mistress, for the good pawnes and pledges
of Love, that had lately past between them.

But there is a difference between Love, Friendship, and Good Will The
difference that is betwixt Love, Friendship, and Good Will.
Good Will, is that, which I may bear to one that I never saw in all my life,
nor had any other knowledge of him, then that I have heard of his virtues, or
of his noble disposition, or some other worthy parts in him, which makes me to
wish him well, and draws my affection by a violent kind of motion as it were,
to follow after him.

Friendship, we call that, which is commonly concluded betwixt man and man, or
one friend with another, upon some long Treaty or Communication, Similiancie in
condition, or some other pledges of love, and real courtesies, that have
passed between them: so that Good Will, is said to be between those that are
absent; and Friendship, between those that are present. But Love runs by
another kind of course; it steeres by another Compass. That must of force be
reciprocal, a commutation of hearts, a copy or counterpane of interchangeable
kindness, a translation of two souls, where each strives with other with all
their might and maine, to assist there more, where it loves then where it
lives. And this takes its perfection from its object; the perfecter the object,
the perfecter the Love: but the truest Love of all is divine Love. And
therefore we are to love God above all things, with all our True Love, what it
is.
heart, with all our strength, and with all our soul, seeing that he so much
loves us. Next unto that, is your Amor coniugalis, that Love which is between
a man and his wife, and then that which is betwixt neighbor and neighbor, or
one friend toward another. For lewd Love, and that which What lewd Love is.
is dishonest, (whose ground grows not from Virtue) is not worthy of this name
of Love, as being of a bastard-brood.

But hap what may hap, come what will come, fall back, or fall edge;
wheresoever this lewd love reigns, there are all your Witchcrafts, as no
where in the world more; there your enchantments, there your Sorceries. This
lewd love is that, which (like another Circes) alters the conditions of men,
aduentureth through all difficulties, and makes them easy; it is that alone
which tameth the strongest and fiercest Lions. For to say, that there are
Philtra, amorous potions, poisons of love, and the like baits and tricks to
force affection, it is all false: for this alone, is sufficient of it self to
turn a man's brains, to pervert his judgment, to take away his life, to
confound his memory, to draw on diseases, and to occasion sundry shrewd fits
either of melancholy, or of madness. Love ought to be free, and to have the
liberty Love ought to be free.
and power to consigne, and deliver over all the faculties of the soul to the
thing beloved. For the Alcayde, or Governor of a Castle, cannot be said to
give up the Castle, when as by force it is taken from him; so he, that shall
make love by indirect and evil means, it cannot be truly said that he
loves, but that he is forced (contrary to his better will) and violently
carried away with that eager passion of lust and sensuality, which like a
headstrong beast bears a man on headlong to his destruction.

The conversation went forward, Cards are called for, and to play they go.
Their game was Primera at three hands; my mother, she got the money, for my
father was willing to lose to her: and it beginning now to wax night, they
gave off play, and went out into the garden to take the air. In the mean
while, the Cloth was laid, and their supper brought in, and set on the board:
they sit down, they eat, and have sup't. And having given order against after
supper, that a Barge should be made ready for them, and tricked up with fresh
Flagges, and green Boughs: when they came to the water side, they took Boat,
and were no sooner lanched forth into the channel, but they might hear from
other Vessels, which went to and fro upon the river, sundry Consorts of all
sorts of Music, which made a most melodious sound; being an usual and
ordinary thing with them, in such a place, and such a time as that was, being
in that season of the year that was fittest for it. In this manner they were
brought along, till at last they landed; and being now come into the city, they
took their leaves: every one betaking himself to his own home, and his own
bed, save only my fathers contemplative pate, whose rouing head was so full of
fancies, that it could take no rest. My mother too, (like another Melisendra)
full of musing and thoughtfull love, slept with her bedfellow, her old Consort;
her body being prisoner in Sansuenna, and her soul a slave in Paris; her
corpse in one place, and her mind in another.

From that day forwards, such a strong knot of friendship was there knit
Guzmans fathers crafty condition.
between them, and continued with so much discretion and good cunning,
(considering their ouer-venturousnesse, and the danger they might run into) as
could possibly be presumed from the quaint wit, and close conueyance of an
Easterling, dyed into a Genouese, and dipped in the Vat of Usury, who knew well
enough, how to put out his money to the best profit; who could clear you any
account, could liquidate and divide you to an hair, how much loss there was
in measure, from the wastings that arose from the winnowing, and cleansing of
corn; how many grains lost in the refining of such a proportion or quantity
of Metal; nay, she could tell you to a crumme, how much loss there was in an
hundred doozen, between the bread that was broken with the hand, and that
which was cut with the knife. As likewise from a woman The disposi^on of
Guzmans mother.
of that good talent, and those gifts and conditions, which I have heretofore
acquainted you withal, it is enough (if I say no more) that she was an
Andaluz, borne in the town of Seuill, and bred up in that good school, where
she proved so good a proficient, that she ran through the whole course of
her Art, and did all her Exercise for her Degree of a Whore; which she had
laudably taken, by making her appointments between the two Quires, and the
Naves, or Isles of the old Church. Now my mother had her fits and flings before
this time; this was not her first flying out, insomuch, that not having any
thing of her own in her own hands, that was worth the keeping, that very day
that she compounded with this old Knight for her company, and had driven her
bargain with him, she swore unto me, that she put over in trust above 3000.
Ducats, only in Jewels of gold and Plate, besides the moueables of her house,
and her change of apparel for the setting forth of her person.

The time (we see) wears away, and we must wear with it: that runs from us,
and we must follow after it. Every day that opens, discouers new things; and
with the rising of the morning, arise new alterations. And let us labor, and
do all that we can, we may not be excused, nor can the flower of our youth
escape in its due time the cutting Sithe of Death. For there is not the
shortest moment that passes, that does not shorten somewhat of our life. And
the older still we grow, the nearer we are to our grave. The good old Knight
(as formerly you have heard) was an ancient man, and of a feeble An old man,
^nfit for a young woman.
body: my mother, young, fair, and full of wit, and knew so well how to
provoke his appetite upon all occasions, that his disorder opened the door to
his death; for the old Lad, by ouer-doing himself, hastened his own end.
First, his stomach began to fail him, then was he taken with a pain in his
head, after that followed a burning Fever, which after some few fits began to
leave him; but though that ceased, he had never awhit the more mind to his
meat, he could eat nothing: so by little and little he consumed away, and
after some few pulls, he died. My mother not being able to restore him to life,
though she would ever swear unto him, that she was his life, and he hers: But
all that protestation proved to be but a lie; for he was buried, yet she still
lived.

The old Knight left many kinsmen behind him in the house, when he dyed, but
none of them of the same suit with my self, though they colored for it; only
my mother and I sorted well together: as for the rest, they were p^n de diezmo,
cada vno de la suya: like the bread, that the people offer up to the Priest;
every one with a different device, or contrary mark, that his loaf may be
known from others. That good old Gentleman, (God be with him, The actions of
Guzmans mother.
and have mercy on his soul) had but little comfort in this life; and at the
time of his death, they on the one side, my mother on the other, while the
breath was yet in his body, pulled the linen from under him, leaving him a
soul in his body, but not a sheet in his bed: so that the sacking of Antwerpe
(which for the cruelty thereof is grown into a Proverb) compared with this,
was not half so rigorous, nor half so inhumane as this: and all (forsooth)
for fear of a Sequestration to have the goods deposited. But my mother, as she
churned the milk, so she was her own caruer; she was the Tailor to cut out
her own coat, and the worker of her own fortune. She found a time not long
after to put her hands there, where her heart was long before, and fell to
fingring of his money. For she had the chiefest of all his goods in her own
keeping under lock and key, and was Mistress of all that was worth the having.
But seeing her self in danger, and fearing to be put to her iumpes, she
thought it better to steal, then to beg; and like a thief to make a start
out of a bush, then hereafter to ask an alms for Gods sake. They were so
nimble on all hands, that there was scarce enough left where-withall to bury
him.

Some few days were scarce ouer-past, but many diligences were used, for to
make these his goods appear. They set up Excommunications at the Churches, and
upon men's doors, to try if that would do any good, and make the purloyners to
bring in the goods: but all to small purpose; for he that steals, seldom
returns to make restitution. But my mother made her excuse, saying; That the
Knight (God be with him) would still tell her, when he came to visit his
moneys, and ran over his Coffers and his Cabinets, or had brought any thing
into the house; This is thine, (sweet heart) it is all for thee. So the Lawyers
were of opinion, that with this she might very well satisfy her conscience.
Besides, they affirmed, that it was a due debt, and properly belonged unto her;
for though she gained it ill, yet it was not received ill. And howbeit the Act
were not lawful, yet the Compact was justifiable. It was not lawful for her
to play the whore, yet might she by Law have whatsoever was promised her for
the use of her body.

In this man's death, I found that to be verified, which I had often heard
before; That rich men dye of hunger, poor men of surfets, and those which Rich
men dye of hunger.
have no Heirs, and enjoy the goods of the Church, of cold: So that this man
may serve herein for an Example. For whilst he was yet living, they left him
not so much as a shirt, save only that which he wore on his back, which of
courtesy they were content he should carry out of the world with him. Rich
men, for fear they should be sick with eating too much, to avoid hurt, hurt
themselves; since by eating by ounces, and drinking by thimble-fuls, they live
by drams; dying rather out of hunger, then their disease. Poor men, Poor men
dye with ouer-eating themselves.
in that they are poor, every man takes pity of them; one sends, another
brings to them, and all of all sorts, and from all parts repair unto them, to
give them relief, especially when they are in that extremity. And when they
find themselves lean and hunger-staru'd, they make no good choice of their
feeding, for want of some discreet body that should administer unto them, and
order them in their diet: whereupon they eat so much, and glut themselves so
full, that they cannot digest their meat for want of natural heat, and so
choking themselves with ouer-gorging their pannels, they merely die surfeited.

The like happens likewise in your Hospitals, where some devout fools,
tenderhearted women, who go thither to visit them out of mere devotion,
stuff their pockets and their sleeves full of banquetting-stuffe to carry
along with them, sending their servants laden with baskets of regalo's, and
delicate choice Dainties. And thinking therein to do an almes-deed, out of them
charity, they kill them for Gods-sake. In my opinion, this ought not to be
suffered, but this cost should rather be bestowed upon the sickness, then the
sick, and be put into their Keepers hands, that are sworn to have a due care
of them: for by that means, (having the counsel of some learned Physician)
these things shall be better distributed in their proper place, and make more
for their good: And to do otherwise, may prove hurtful and dangerous. And in
this their ill-dispensed charity, not weighing the good, nor the hurt; the
season, nor the sickness; whether it be fitting, or not fitting, they cramme
their crawes, like so many Capons in a Coope, till they can swallow no more,
and so die of the throttle. Henceforth therefore, let it be ordained, that
such things as these, be given to those which minister unto them, who know
better how to dispose of them, or let it be given in money, for to supply other
their greater wants and necessities.

O what a gentle disparate, what a pretty absurdity is this of mine, yet well
grounded in Divinity? how am I leapt from the Oar to the Helm? What A remo,
ad clauum and gubernaculum Nauis: A Metaphor from Galley-slaues.
a Saint John the Evangelist am I become on the sudden, that I read you such a
Lecture? The Oven grew hot, my zeal was kindled, and so these good flashes
flew forth; you may the better pardon this fault in me, because I have made
you some amends in being so short. As it came in my fingers, I took it along
with me; it came in my way, and I could not let it slip: so shall I do
hereafter, as often as occasion is offered. And look not thou on him that
saves it, but to that which is said unto thee. For if thou be clad in a neat
Suit of clothes, and that they sit well upon thee, it is not material, whether
thy Taylour were crooke-back't, or no: that is not a thing to be thought on.
And thus much by way of prevention, that thou may either leave me to my
self, or arm thy self with patience. I wot well, that it is impossible to
be well received of all; for there is not that Vessel in the world, that can
measure men's tastes; nor that Balance, that can equal their likings, or give
an even poyze to such uneven humors. Every one is in love with his own: and
thinking his own judgment to be the best, is thereby the more deceived: For
the most of men have it, for the most part, most depraved.

But I return to my first station, whence I have digressed: for my mother
looks for me, now being the widow of him that first possessed her; and dearly
beloved, and wonderfully much made of by this second Owner. In this change and
alteration of things, between these and those other nuptials, Guzman had two
fathers, by virtue of his mother.
I was between three and four years old: and by the reckenings and rules of
your feminine knowledge, I had two fathers: for my mother was so well learned
in her Art, that she knew very well how to father me on them both. She had
attained to the knowedge of working impossibilities, as plainly was to be
seen, since she had the cunning to serve two Masters, and to please two
husbands; to both of them giving good contentment. Both of them did acknowledge
me to be their son; the one said, I was his; so did the other. And when the
Knight was alone by himself, my mother would tell him, that I was as like him,
as if I had been spit out^ of his mouth; and that two Eggs were not liker one
another, then I was like him. When again, she talked a As they say, cl gato
es estornudo del ^on, as like (...), as (...) had been sp^t out of his m^, or
^z (...) of ^is n^se, f^r his fa^, (...) and (...).
with my father, she would tell him, that I was his alter ego, that he and I
were one, and so would have seemed, if our heads had been cut off, and laid in
a Charger: and that I was himself, made less; and did so truly resemble him,
as if my head had stood upon his shoulders. But I wonder a God, in this
resemblance of mine, (which a blind man might discern at the first blush) that
the mystery thereof was not discovered; that they found not out her craft, and
searched not out the secret of this her deceit. But what with the blindness
where-withall they loved her, and the confidence which each of them had, it was
not perceived, nor any the least suspicion made thereof And so both their
beliefes were good, and both made exceeding much of me: the difference only
was, that in the time the good old man lived, he was my true father in
public, and the stranger in secret. And so my mother certified me afterward,
making large relations of these things unto me.

And therefore I protest, howsoever men may talk, and seek to slander me,
that it does no whit prejudice me; I heard it from her own mouth, and barely
relate unto you what she told me. For it were great indiscretion and
unadvisedness in me, to affirm, which of these two did beget me, or whether
I were the son of a third. Let her excuse me in this, who brought me forth:
for it ill becomes any man to lie, much less to write an untruth: nor would
I that men should say, that I maintain Paradoxes. But that woman, that
professes to love two, deceives both the one and the other, and there is no
trust to be had to her. This is to be understood of a single woman; for the
rule in those that are married is otherwise. It is an old saying, That two is
one; one, none; and three, Roguery. For a woman, making no reckoning of her
husband, (and this is true which I speak) he being alone, is none; and he,
with another, makes one; and with those other two, which are three in the
whole, make up just as much, as those two to a singlewoman. So that according
to their reason, the reckoning is already made. But be it as it may be, and
grant that this Easterling, this Jew, or this Moore be my father; for since
that they have said it, and every one does auerre it to be true, it is not fit
that I should appeal, all parties being agreed. I call my self his son, and
so I take my self to be: since that from that Agreeing with that phrase which
we use to latle children, when we tell them they were borne in their mothers
Parsly-bed.
Mellon-bed I was made legitimate by the holy right of Matrimony. And it is
much better for me this way, then that people should say, that I am ill borne,
and the son of no man.

My father did love us both with that true love, as his actions shall
sufficiently declare. For by the force of this his love, he did tread
underfoot the idolatry of that, which men style by the name of popular Voice,
and common Opinion. For they knew no other name that she had, save the By
reason the old Knight held some Church-liuing in Commendum.
Commendadora; and to that would she answer, as if she had had some Commendum
conferred upon her. But he not regarding any of these things, nor making any
reckoning of the one or the other, setting as light by them, as the least hair
of his head, kept company with her, and in the end took her to wife. I would
have thee likewise to understand, that he did not enter upon this business, a
humo de pajas, suddenly and unadvisedly, without having first well bethought
himself of what he did. Every man knows his own estate best; And a fool
understands more in his own, then a wise man in another man's house.

In this Intermedium, albeit this his Quinta or Garden-house, which he had
purchased, was a place of pleasure and delight, yet it was his undoing, it
was his overthrow: The profit little, and loss much; the cost great, as well
for the keeping of it neat and handsome, as for the feastings and banquetings
For poor men to keep places for pleasi^e, is their ruin.
which were very frequent. Such kind of delicacies as these, and such places
for recreations, are only fit for those, that have other large possessions,
good sure Lands, great and certain Rents, which may quit the cost, and make
the load seem the lighter. But for those that are not well lined, that have
not a strong and able purse, and that have not the world at will, these
niceties, are that Moth that eats on, till it fretteth out and consumes the
heart: it is that Worm in Wood; that Magot in the Nut, which turns all into
dust and rottenness: it is Hemlocke in a cup of Ambar; and poison in a golden
Vessel.

And thus much by the way concerning that point; it is but a touch; and now we
go on. What with suites in Law, what with making love to my mother, and other
expenses, one charge drawing on another, a great part of my fathers state was
consumed, all was almost gone, he was upon the point of breaking, and ready to
turn Estallido: Is the noise which a thing makes when it cleaues, or rends in
sunder. Metaphorice. A Bankerout. How Guzmans Mother got her wealth which his
father had with her.
Bankerupt, as he had often done before; so that it would have been no strange
or new thing unto him.

My Mother was a storer, a thrifty Wench, one that could hold her own; she was
no waster, but lay still on the saving hand: what with that which she gained in
her youth-fuller days, and what she had scraped up in the Knights lifetime,
as likewise at his death, amounted almost to ten thousand Ducats, this was her
Dowry, and so much had he with her.

This money did somewhat refresh his drooping estate, it made him hold up his
head again, who before was upon fainting, and ready to swoune: it was unto
him like a piece of Week or Cotton in a Lamp, dipped in Oil; he began to give
light a-fresh; he spent bravely, got him a Caroche, and a Silla de manos, a
little chair to carry with hands, borne with girthes upon men's Ill gotten
goods what became of them?
shoulders, as well for ease, as state. Not so much for any longing that my
mother had thereunto, as for his own ostentation and glory, that the world
might not take notice of the weakness of his Estate, or that he was going
down the wind. In this kind of fashion did he live to uphold his credit, and
rubbed out as well as he might with his means; but his gains did not equal
his expenses. There was but one to get, and many to spend; but one pair of
hands, and a great many mouths. The Times were hard; the years dear;
dealings, small and bad; little, or no Trading. What was well gotten, is
wasted and gone; and what was ill gotten, has not only consumed it self,
but his owner too. So that at last, all was brought to nothing: Sin, brought
it in; and Sin (on my conscience) sent it packing. For of all that was left,
nothing appeared. The light was now quite out, and my father being taken The
death of Guzmans Father.
with a grievous sickness, was arrested by Death within five days after: and
so shut up his shop-windowes, and departed this world.

Now, for that I was a child, and of small understanding, I did not feel the
want of a Father, nor found any great miss of him when he dyed, though I was
then at that time a doozen year old, and better. And notwithstanding that we
grew poor, the house was still well furnished with household stuff, whereof we
took now a piece, and then a piece, and sold it away by parcels for to buy us
bread, and wherewith to eat. But the wealth of those, that The property of the
wealth of rich men reduced to poverty.
have been rich, has this property, that the remainder of their estate is
always more, then the best estate of those that be poor; and daily more and
more they leave some prints, which discover, like the ruins of Rome, what it
was.

My mother grieved much, for that she had lost a good and honest Husband, and
found her self, not only robbed of him, but also of her wealth, and grown
now so aged, that she was super-annuated for any more Suitors, so that she
could not help her self with her good parts; nor recover her former credit.
And albeit her beauty was not disfigured, yet her years had somewhat defaced
it: And it grieved her exceedingly, that having been so many times sued unto
by many, that she was not now in case to be courted: And especially of some
such person, whose feathers she might have pulled from him; for otherwise,
neither would she have yielded unto him, nor I have permitted it. Even in this
also was I unhappy, since that in-come which my Mother got (as Cats do) by her
tail, did then cease, when I had most need of it. I said amiss, when I said
it ceased: For she was yet fit for action; and would (when she was so disposed)
put on her dressings, and wear her head attire, as being little more then
forty years old. I have known since some old Maids (pussocks in comparison of
her) of greater years, and less handsomnesse, that would call themselves by
the name of young Girls, and little pretty Maidens, and swear (if you would
believe them when they lie) that they came but yesterday out of their swaddling
clothes: And although my Mother did not show so fair for it, she thought her
penny good silver, and would not give her arm for the wringing, or her head
for the washing. And she would rather die and starve for hunger, then bate an
Ace of her former height, or fail one quilate in the touch and finenesse of
her punctualitie.

You now see me here left without a father, either the one or the other, our
goods wasted, and that which is worst of all, bearing a high sail, living at a
great rate, without any person in it to gain a penny, to maintain this port.
On my fathers side, Cid, was the brauest and valiantest Soldier in his time,
and had conquered five Kings of the M^ores, and made them pay tribute. Guzmans
lineage.
Cid did not go beyond me, he was no better a man than my self; for my
possession crossed and divided that Lordship. On my mothers side, I was as well
descended; my great grandfathers being men of great wealth, and of good
esteem in their Country. I had more grafts, then the In Toledo, they term
Gigarrales, certain possessions, not fa^e from Toledo, which are little choice
garden plots, full of Fountains, as also Fruit trees, Vines, Olives, and
Figs, with a little house of pleasure to entertain the Owner. But some of
your Cigarrales are goodly things of great both value, and recreation; but of
as much expense, as profit. Father Guadix says, that it is an Arabique word;
and signifies as much as a little House. A notable vanity.
Cigarrales of Toledo, (for by that name are those Gardens of pleasure
thereabouts called) as I learned afterward. I tell you (as a thing publicly
known to all the world) that my mother was her mothers own daughter, and
trod just in her steps, she set her Samplar before her, that she might draw
out some good work from thence, so that she went along in the very same path
that she did, save only in that of their childbearing; for my grandmother
brought forth a daughter for her comfort, and my father begot a son for my
mothers ruin. If my Mother brought two into the net, my Grandmother brought
two doozen, and made them like Chickens (if the world speaks truth) to eat
together in one pot-sheard, and to sleep in one Henroost, and to be penned up
in one Coope, without pecking one at another, or driven to hood them, as they
do Hawks.

With this daughter of hers, (I mean my Mother) she ensnared a hundred
several persons, vowing and protesting to every supposed father, that my
Mother was his child, and so to all, that she was like them all: To such a one,
in her eye; to another, in her mouth; to a third, in most of the parts and
lineament of her body: nay, to color the business the better, she would go a
little farther, in counterfetting marks and moles in the face, and other spots
in other parts to that purpose; not wanting to tell some, that she did spit
like them, and that she had it naturally from them. She had this (as she was
excellent in many) cunning trick with her, that when any of her sweet-hearts
were present with her, she would call her after his Surname. And if two, or
more were there at the same time, she called her barely by her own name,
without any addition. Her proper name was Marcella, which was burnished and
furbished over with the title of Don set over the head of it; for as she was
called Donna Marcella; so had she her Don or Cauallero for her servant. For
Donna, without a Don, are less compatible, and less comely, then a house
without a bed; a Mill, without a Wheel; or a body, without a shadow. As for
her sir-names, being they were things that merely depended upon her mothers
own free choice and election; and for that she was uncertain thereof, because
she could not well tell who was the true father to her daughter: I must
therefore give you to know, that she did bolster her up, and underprop her,
with the best titulary names she could devise, throwing more noble houses upon
her, then a King of Arms could confer with all his farre-fetcht Pedigrees.
Which to repeat unto you, were to reckon up a Bead-roll of Genealogies, as long
as any Letany, that is solemnly sung at divine service.

The Guzmans were those, unto whom she most inclined, (for she had a great
liking to that name) and my Mother told me in secret, that in her opinion,
which was no more then her own conscience did tell her: in discharge whereof,
she did verily believe, and was fully persuaded (by some likely incounters,
probable ghesses, and other circumstances of time and place iumping and
concurring together) that she was some by-blow of a Cauallero, that was near
of kin to the Dukes of Medina Sidonia. My Grandmother was a wise woman, a
crafty old Dame, and never wanted to her dying day, but had wherewithal to
spend freely, nor was it any wonder; for when it began to wax night with her,
and that it was time for her to shut up her shop, then did my Mothers dawning
of the day begin to appear, and she had her at her elbow, to continue the
trade for her, and the first bargain that she drove, was worth to her
betterthen 4000. ducats, which she had of a rich Merchant, (with whom she held
traffic, and exchanged wares) that was newly come from Peru, who did deliver
her the money by basket-fuls, which was good and quick payment. She never made
bad voyage, she still bore up, lived in plenty, and would not lose a jot of
what was her due. No Christian could carry away her right from her; nor would
she give any first fruits to the Devil.

Now, if we had had the like goodlucke, our misery might have been the less:
Or if, as I was the only son of my Mother, it had been my good hap to have
had a Sister, to have served as a prop to my Mother, as a Staff to her old
Age, as a Pillar to our Poverty, and as a Port to our often shipwracks, we
would have bid a fig in Fortunes teeth.

Seuill stood very fitly and commodiously seated for point of profit, or for
Seuill, and its condition.
any kind of incroaching-getting, and as much is brought thither to be sold,
as there is to be bought. For there shall you meet with Merchants that will
deal with you in all commodities, no wares come amiss. It is Patria communis,
and a free-common for all comers; it is a pasture, without enclosure; a
Gordian Knot, an open field, a Globe without end, a mother of Orphans, and a
shelter for Sinners; where all cry out of want, and yet no man wants. Or (since
not this) that I had been bred up in Court, which is the Sea, that swallows
all; the point, wherein all lines meet, and the very center, whereunto all
other parts have recourse: sure my abilities would not have been less then
other men's; and as I should have wanted no good parts, so should I not have
lackt entertainment. I should have lighted on some good Office or other, got to
be in Commission, and other the like places of profit and honor, wherein I
should have gone as far as another, and have found as much favor, had my
purse been as good: For that will hold any thing fast, and is the only thing
to keep a man in. And had the worst come to the worst, yet could we not have
wanted meat and drink, but should have fared like Kings. For he that shall
have a good piece of land, or the like pledge, either to impawne, or to sell,
shall ever have a chapman ready at hand, either to buy it outright, or to lend
so much money upon it, as to serve a man's present occasions. But I was an
unfortunate man, (as you have already heard) and stood alone by my self,
without any tree by me, either to shadow, or to shelter me. I had many
troubles come upon me, the burden was heavy, my strength weak, my debt great,
and my means small. See then and consider whether it were fit or no, that such
a young Youth as I, that began to crow before I was scarce out of the shell,
and to write man so soon, having such honest parts in me, and good indowments,
should not be made some reckoning off? The best help that I had, was to try my
fortune, by leaving my Mother, and my Country, to see if I could mend my
miserable Estate. I did so, and because I would not be known, I would not
make use of my Fathers name: but that of Guzman, which I took from my Mother,
and of Whence Guzman de Alfarache ^ad his name.
Alfarache, which was the place of my inheritance, as also of my being. With
this resolution, I went abroad to see the World, traveling from place to
place, re-commending my self to God, and well-disposed people, in whom I had
put my trust.

CHAP. III.
How Guzman departed from his Mothers house upon a Friday toward the Evening,
discovering by the way the torments of hunger, and that which befell him with
his Hostess, recounting many notable examples of some Rules of ill government.

I Was a fat plumpe Lad, well fed, and cockerd up, bred in Seuill, never
checked, chid, nor corrected by my Father: My The delicacie wherem Guzman lived.
Mother (as you have heard) a Widdow-woman, my self crammed with Collops of
Bacon, your finest Bread, and your daintiest Cream; your sops of Honey steeped
in Rose Water, more looked on and adored, then a Merchant of Toledo, or at least
as good a man as he, it grieved me very much (besides that the love of a man's
Country is sweet and dear unto him) to forgo thus my house, my kinsfolk and
my friends. But being forced thereunto, I could not avoid it. The desire that I
had to see the world, and to go into Italy to take acquaintance of my Noble
Kindred and Alliance, did much quicken and put life into me.

I set forth, which I ought not to have done (I may be bold to say it) late,
and unluckily. And thinking to meet with some rich remedy, I lost all that
Guzman departs from Seuill to se^ the world; and what happened unto him the first
night.
little that I had. That happened unto me, which befell the Dog in the Fable
with the shadow of his piece of flesh in the water.

I had scarce gone out of the City gate, when (without being able to make
resistance) two great Rivers (like an ouer-flowing Nilus) did break out from
forth mine eyes, watring my face in great abundance, till it was bathed all
over with tears. What with this, and the nights coming on (for it grew
dark) I could not discern any light of heaven; nor perceive so much as a
hands-breadth of earth as I went along. When I came to San Lazaro, (which is
but a little way off from the City, I sat me down there upon the stayres or
steps, by which we go up to that holy Hermitage. There I made a new muster of
my life, suruay'd it over and over, and discoursed with my self thereupon. I
was about to go back again, for that I came forth ill provided, worse
advised, and poorly furnished with money for so long a Voyage, having scarce
sufficient to serve my turn for a far shorter ^ourney. And amongst other my
so many misfortunes, (which when they once begin, Misfortunes seldom come
alone.
come by clusters, hanging like Cherries, one at the tail of another) it was
Friday night; and withal, somewhat dark. I had neither supt, nor had any
beuer that afternoon. Had I gone out of the City upon a flesh day, although I
had been borne blind, my nose would have helped me to smell out some one
Cooks shop or other, where I might have bought a penny Pasty, wherewithal
to entertain my stomach, and to dry up my tears, and so my sorrow would have
been the less.

Then I began to perceive, how much more sensible a man is of the good he
loses then when he inioyed it; and what difference there is between the He
that has not wherewithal to eat, ^ath store of sorrows.
hungry belly, and the full-fed paunch. All troubles pass the better with
bread: Where good feeding fails, there no good follows; no evil which
abounds not; no pleasure that indureth, nor content to comfort us. All fret
and chafe, and know not why, nor wherefore. No man is in fault; and yet they
lay it one upon another; all run upon the haunt, feigning strange Chimera's
in their heads; all is then nothing but government; all is Philosophy. I had a
great mind to my supper, but the devil a bit of any thing that I could get to
put to my mouth, save a little fresh water that ran from a fountain that was
there hard by. I knew not what to do with my self, nor how to cast about, to
bring my self into some one Haven or other. That which did hearten me one
way, did discourage me another. I found my self betwixt fears and hopes; a
steep downe-fall before mine eyes, and ravening Wolves ready to devour me at
my back. My thoughts began as fast to waver, as my feet did to wander: at
length I was vvilling to put my self into Gods hands. I entered into a Church,
I powered forth a short prayer, but whether devout enough or no, I know not.
Nor would they suffer me to dwell any longer on my Orizons; for the hour was
come that they were to rid the Church, and to shut up the doors.

The night was now shut up, and with it my imaginations, but not the tears,
that trickled from mine eyes: In this melancholy humor I fell at last asleep
upon a seat without in the Church Porch. I know not what should be the reason
of it, unless peradventure, that sleep crackes cares, and breaks melancholy
in twain. As that Mountanese gave us to understand, whogoing The con^it of a
Mountanese.
to bury his Wife, went barefoot, and bare-legg'd; his Iacket with its inside
outward; and so in the rest, all was Kim-kam, I know not how. In that
mountainous Country the houses stand apart, and some of them very far from
the Church. And passing by a Tavern, he perceived White Wind was there to be
sold: whereupon he made as if he had some other necessary business to do, and
said unto them; On a Gods name, keep on before, my masters, with this
unfortunate Coarse, for I shall ouer-take you in a trice: So he slunke back,
and went into the Tavern; where taking cup after cup, he soop't so long,
till he was stark drunk, and there fell asleep. Now when those of his
company came from the Burial, and found him stretched out upon the floor, they
called alowd unto him; he after awhile being come again to himself, looking
somewhat heavily upon them, said; Now a pockes of all ill luck: pardon me,
(my masters) I pray, pardon me; for, I swear unto you, that there is not any
thing in the world, that causes more thirst, or more sleep, then sorrow. It
was just even so with me; for it was now Saturday morning, and the Sun was
some two hours high, when I began to bethink my self what I had been
doing; nor should I have vvak't so soon, if the Timbrels, and the Songs, and
the Dancings of certain Women, which came thither that day to keep their
Wake, and to feast, and be merry, with their dubbing, and their bawling, had
not rowz'd me up from sleep. I got me up, (though somewhat of the latest)
hungry, and drowsy, without knowing for a while where I was; so that me
thought I was still as it were in a dream. But when at last I was fully
awake, and found all was true that I or saw, or heard, I said to my self;
Echada esta la suerte, the Dye is thrown, God send me good luck. And with
this resolution, I went forward on my journey; but the devil awhit did I know
vvhither I did go, nor indeed did I much stand upon it; for all was one to me.
At last, I took that way, which offered it self fairest to mine eye; let it
lead vvhither it would, I did not care. What ^ses and Commonwealths are ill
governed.
Which did then put me in mind of those ill-gouerned both houses and
Commonwealths, where the feet perform the heads office. Where reason and
understanding do not dispatch businesses; where they have not the command, it
is to melt a man's gold, (come of it what may come) and afterward to adore a
calfe. My feet carried me along; I followed as fast after them; come good, or
come ill; over hill and dale trudge I. That happening unto me, which befell a
foolish Physician in Mancha; who had no learning in the A ^le of an ignorant
Phis^.
world, never studied any Physical Author; but had gotten together (which he
carried along with him) a great number of Receipts; some for Syrrupes, and some
for Purges, which were distributed into several, either Boxes, or Vyols.

Now this cunning Leech, when he visited any sicke-body, (and looked to be
well paid for his pains, for the good he should do him) he would thrust his
hand into his Satchell, (which he still bare about with him for these
purposes) and then would he take forth one of his recipe's, saying first to
himself, God dispose it to good. And so he gave the Patient that which came
first to hand, without any more ado; work how it would work, that was all
one to him; he would put that still to the venture. In letting of blood, he
kept no account either for the Vein, or the quantity; but would cry, either a
little more, or a little less, as he chanced to blurt the word at all
adventure out of his mouth, casting himself upon Fortune, rushing through
thick and thin; like him that carelessly runs through a Corne-field, where
some Ears are trod underfoot, and some escape without harm; more by chance,
then good cunning. I might then have said to my self, as did he, God dispose
it to good; for I did not know what course I ran; I was ignorant of my way,
nor could I tell, (if my life should have lain upon it) whither I was bound.

But because his divine Majesty sends troubles, according to his own good
will and pleasure, and for such ends, as are best known to himself, they
Afflictions are sent us by God for our good.
turn all to our greater good, if we can have the grace to make true use of
them. They began now to come fast upon me, and followed me at an inch, not
allowing me one moment of content, nor affoording me so much as a
breathing-time from my cares, all the while that I was abroad in my travels:
so that they never left, whither-soeuer I went. But these were not those,
that were sent me of God; but only those which my self went seeking after.
And there is a great deal of difference between the one, and the other: for
those that come from the hand of God, he knows how to free us from Troubles
sent from God, are Jewels:
them; and such as these, are Mines of most pure gold, most precious Jewels,
covered with a little Sward, or light Turfe of earth, which with a little
labor may be discovered and found. But those, which men draw upon themselves
by their vices and sensual delights, are gilded Pills, which deceiving But
drawn on by our selves, are torments unto us.
the sight with a false show of a sauourie taste, put the body out of order,
if not utterly overthrow it. They are green fields, full of venomous Vipers;
stones (at the first sight) of great esteem, but underneath are full of
Scorpions: and lastly, an eternal death, which deludeth us with a short life.

This day having vvearied out my self with going only but two little Leagues,
(which were the first that ever I went) it seemed unto me, that I had
arrived at the Antipodes, and like another famous Columbus, that I had
discovered a new World. Well, I came at length to an Inn, full of sweat and
dust; my feet surbated, my self sad, and above all, with my Mill in very good
state to grind, my teeth sharp, and my stomach faint. It was about Noone, I
ask't what we might have to dinner: they told me, That they had nothing but
eggs; it had not been amiss if they had been eggs: for either The roguery
of an Hostess.
whether the roguish Hostess, through too much heat, clocking over them, or
that the Fox had killed the Hen, some were grown addle, others ready to
hatch; and that she might not lose by them, she had put them in a box, and
had mingled them with other eggs that were good. But she did not deal so ill
with me, God reward her according to her usage of me: she saw I was a young
Lad, ruddy-cheek't, full-fac't, and plumpe withal; that I was a nouice in the
world, and looked like a good honest simple Youth, and that any thing would
serve me well enough: upon this she ask't me; My pretty child, whence are you?
I told her, I was of Seuill: with that, she came nearer unto me, and giving me
a chocke under the chin, she said unto me; Now you little wanton fool,
vvhither wander you? O good God, how did her stinking breath annoy me! with her
very touching of me, me thought I had drawn old age upon me, the attraction
was so sensible to my seeming. This made me imagine, that the utmost of evils
had now lighted upon me, in meeting with such a filthy unsavory Slut. And if
my stomach had been full at that time, as it was empty, I should have spued
out all within me; for my stomach then rose up to my mouth, and my guts had
almost kissed my lips. I told her, that I was going to the Court, and wished
her to give me somewhat for my dinner. Then she made me sit down upon a lame
Bench, and on the top of a little block, she spread a Dish-clout before me,
just for all the world, like unto the Maulkins wherewith she swept her Oven;
and this (forsooth) was my Table-cloth: my Salt-sellar, was the foot of an old
broken Pitcher, or some piece of a pot-sheard, such as she sets full of water,
to make her Poultry drink: and half a Loaf of bread, that was blacker then
her Napery. This preparation made, she presently powered me forth upon a plate
a Froize of eggs, which might more truly have been termed a Plaster of
eggs: they, the bread, the Jar, the water, the Salt-sellar, the salt, the
linen, and the Hostess, were all one; so well did they suit together. I knew
my self to be a young traveler, and therefore held it discretion to make no
reply, but to take all patiently; my tongue was tied, my mouth muzzled, my
stomach empty my guts shrunk, and clung so close together, as if they had
been newly milched. I was as sharp set upon my Froize, as a Hog is after
Akornes, and slopt up my eggs, as a Sow does Wash, I was so eager upon the
business. I made no bones of it, all went clean up together without any great
chewing* howbeit, to speak the truth, I felt the tender bones of those
untimely Chickens to crackle between my teeth, that they made my gummes to
tickle again. I must tell you truly, that me thought, (besides the
ill-fauourednes of the taste, which was not like that of other eggs, which I
used to eat at home in my mothers house) this was but a coorse kind ofvsage;
and such as I had not here-tofore been acquainted with. But I did let that
conceit pass by, and drowned the imagination thereof in my hunger and
weariness; conceiting with my self, that the distance of place, or difference
of the Climate, might be the cause thereof, and that all eggs were not of one
savor, nor of one quality. In conclusion, I digested all things so well, that
I took it for a token of good luck. For it is as proper to him that is
hungry, not to stand upon Sauces, and your fine relishes; as to him that is in
want, to step out into the high He that is truly hungry, will not stick to
eat any thing.
way, and to take a purse. No booty comes amiss to him that is in need. Beg,
steal, or any thing, rather then starve.

I made light of it, my dinner was short, and as quickly dispatched, and took
in good part this my first course, though it could not well be courser. Upon my
bread I dwelt somewhat longer; I fell to that a little more leysurely, pawsing
now and then betwixt every bit; for it being likewise very bad, I was forced to
take longer time; one morsel making way for another, that it might the more
orderly descend down into my stomach. I began with the crust, and ended in
the crumme, which was as tough as Whit-lether, and as dry as a Paste-boord. But
whatsoever it were, were it better or worse, I devoured every jot of it; nor
did leave out of courtesy, the least crumme thereoffor the Ants to feed upon,
no more then if it had been little, and good. That happening unto me, which
does befall good feeders, when they fall close to a dish of fruit; who picking
out first the best and the ripest, do (as in the eating of Cherries) eat up
the greenest and worst last, without once thinking of those that were gone
before. Then did I eat apace, one bit (as they say) driving down another, till
I had made an end of half a Loaf: which, if it had been good, or but any
thing reasonable, or that it had but pleased my eye, (for it was but poor
browne-bread) I would have taken in a greater crop, and have filled up my
pann^ll, with a whole Loaf of at least three pound weight. The year was
barren by reason of the great droughts; and in such times as those, Seuill was
wont to suffer much scarcity; for even in their better, and more plentiful
years, they have had much ado to rub out: what hope can there then be, when
corn is scant with them?

But it is not fit, that I should enlarge my self in this subject, nor open
the mystery thereof unto you, by giving you a reason for it. I am a son of
that City, a Towne-borne child: I will therefore hold my peace; for all the
whole World is one and the same, here and there, and every where, all alike.
For no man buys an Or a Monopoly* Aga^st the ^l Governors and Magistrates of
Seuill.
Office for any other end and purpose, but for his profit, be it public, or be
it private; they will grate and scrape, be it by hook or by crook, to raise a
fortune there-out unto themselves. Few are they, that will part with so many
thousand Ducats, for to do good unto the poor, but to themselves. For ere they
will bestow a farthing-token on a poor body by way ofalmes, they will first
examine the business, and consult with themselves, whether it be a charitable
act or no.

Thus it fared with a Regidor, who being espied by an old man, one of that
Town where he had to do, to exceed the bounds of his duty, and to do things
beyond his Commission, called him unto him, and told him; How now Sinior N,
etc. Is this it, that you were sworn unto, when you were admitted at the
Assembly, to be one of our Company, that you should go about to pick up your
crummes a this fashion, and trot up and down to sharke for these The conceit
of this passage, co^sists in the word Menudos, and its double significat^on.
For Menudo's are brass Moneys: they signify also particular necessities.
Menudo is likewise the intrailes of a sheep, together with the head and feet:
and in birds, the garbage. And these are usually eaten in Spain upon Saturday,
but no other part of the carkase. This last signification sorts best.
Menudo's? To whom he made this answer; Do not you see, how I comply with mine
Oath, since I come for them every Saturday to the Shambles? I bought them with
my money, and I had them out of the poor sheep belly. After this manner all
things pass, in all places; it is the world. They go dividing the spoil among
themselves; they will fetch flower from all parts to make themselves a good
Cake. Claw me, claw thee: to day for me, tomorrow for thee: do thou give me
leave to buy, and I will give thee leave to sell. They make restraints for
selling of Victuals, save only at such set times and places: they set the
prices upon all things, as if they were their own: and when they please they
will sell the same again at what rate they think fit. For all is theirs, as
well what is bought, as what is sold.

Myself am a Witness, that a Regidor of one ofthe chiefest Cities of
Andaluzia, and Kingdom of Granada, had a flock of sheep, an herd of Goats,
and some other milch-beasts; and for that the weather was cold, he could by no
means utter his milk, but every man fell to his Bunnuelo, is a certain round
Fritter composed of Meal, Oil, and Honey: and is more used in Spain, then in
any other parts, in Winter time. It is called Bunnuelo, quasi Punnuelo, because
it is strained or squeazed out of the Fist, and so let fall into the Pan of
Oil.
Bunnuelo's. Now thinking with himself, that he should lose much thereby, if
Lent should grow on, and should not remedy the matter beforehand, he
propounded at an open Meeting, or public Assembly, That the Moriscan
Bunnulero's, or Frittermakers, did rob the Commonwealth. He rated them
therefore at a lesser price, then it stood them in, amounting to little more
then six A Marauedis, is a small piece of brassemoney, 32. of them go to
sixepence.
Marauedis. Well, he was willing in the end to raise them to eight, allowing
them rather a small, then moderate gain.

Hereupon, none would make of them, because they could get nothing by the
bargain. And so in that space or tract of time, he spent the profits of his
Cattle, in Butter, Cream, fresh-Cheese, and other such like things, till the
time of year was come, that he was to put forth his Flocks and Herds of
Cattle into the common fields. And when he began to make his Cheese, then would
he raise up your Bunnuelo's to twelve Marauedis, as they were at before; but
then Summer was coming on, and they shortly to grow out of season. He himself
did not stick to report this crafty trick of his, to teach men how to become
good husbands, and how they ought to beat their brains, to make shift to live.

Now let us return again into our old way, from which we have digrest: for me
thinks it is not meet, that we should lay all the fault upon the Magistrates
and Governors of Towns and Incorporations, being that we may distribute it
as well among others. Let us throw some of this upon your Purveyors, The craft
of a couetou^ Magistrate.
and Commissaries; and not upon all neither, but on some of them, as it may be
four out of five, or so; who like Caterpillars destroy the Land, by robbing of
poor old Men, and desolate Widows, by deceiving of their betters, and by
telling lies, and informing false-hoods to their King; the one for to increase
their lands and inheritances; and the other, to have them confirmed unto them,
that they may settle a good estate upon the Heirs of their house, and have
where-withall to live in fullness, and in plenty.

This likewise is somewhat out of the way from that discourse which I ought
here to treat of, and requires of it self a whole and entire book. I treat
in this of mine own life, and therefore will not meddle with other men's; but I
do not know, whether I shall be able, when a ball offers it self so fairly
unto me, to pull back my hand or no? For there is no man that is Master of
himself, when he is on horseback: How much more is a man unable to contain
himself, in things so generally known? Both the one and the other is
generally embraced, and all walk the same way, yielding the field to the
stronger, crying out Uiuat, qui vincit, let him live that conquers; and he
wear gold that wins it. But alas, how do we deceive our selves? For we are
those that are conquered; and he that deceives, is the deceived. I say then,
that Seuilla per fas, aut per nefas, either by right or by wrong, one way or
other, I know not which (considering her abundance of fruits, and the
dearness of them) suffers sterrilitie, and scarcity; and that year was
there greater want and penury then heretofore, by reason of some secret
disorders, and through the covetousness of those, who should have sought to
remedy the matter, who did study only their own ends, and to make a
particular fortune to themselves. The secret of this mystery past only
between some three or four of them, many were not acquainted with it, who
without considering the ends, took in hand bad beginnings, and devilish
means, to the hurt of their own Commonwealth.

In all my travels, I have ever observed, that these great rich men, and
powerful Rich men are like Whales: for they grow great by the hurt of others.
persons, are like unto Whales, who opening wide the mouth and jaws of their
covetousness, swallow up all that comes in their way; to the end that their
houses may be well provided for, and their revenues increased, without
casting any eye of compassion upon the poor young Orphane; or lending an ear
to the cry of the distressed Damsel; or affoording his shoulders for to uphold
the feeble and the vveake; or opening his charitable hands to relieve the
sick, and him that is in need: but rather under the name of good government,
every man so gouernes himself, that he does the best he can, to draw all the
water to his own Mill. They publish good desires; but they exercise bad
actions. Their pretensions are fair; but their practice stark naught. They
would seem to be Gods Lambs, innocent and harmless souls, but the Devil
only makes profit of them; they fall wholly to his share; he, and none but he
reapes the fruit of them: God has the name indeed, but the Devil has the
shearing of them. There was good store of Rye bread, passable enough, and at a
reasonable price; He that had Wheat, reserved the Flower of the Meal for his
own table, and the refuse he brought forth to sell in the Market, as if any
thing were good enough for the poor Commons. Our Officers and great men
turned to be Bakers, and those went about to burn and waste the Country, which
should have rather been willing to have been burned for it. I can not deny,
but this was punished, and that there were many good men, to whom evil seemed
evil. But in such necessities as these, it is not to be helped by a few.
Besides, the great numbers of those that were interessed therein, did crush
those, that offered to stir against them, because they were poor. And if
poor, it is enough, I need say no more. Let every man make his own
conjecture, and discourse that with himself.

Perceiuest thou not how impatient I am? See thou not that I can not contain
my self? and how that my pen, before ever I thought of lashing out so far,
has slipped upon this Theme. They gave me the yarke with the spur, and I
turned my head to strike where they pricked me. I know not what excuse to make
thee, but to tell thee, that I do as Carriers do, that drive their beasts of
burden before them, who rush the man that meets them against the wall, or
throws him to the ground, and then say, I cry you mercy, Sir. In conclusion,
all the bread was naught, although then it did not relish amiss with me. I
did refresh my self with eating, and did cheer up my heart with drinking, for
the Wines of those Countries are exceeding rich, generous, and full of spirit;
and with this I had pretty well recovered my self, and received new courage.
And my feet, that were wearied out with bearing my belly, though empty, and of
small weight (as being lightly laden) now that it was full, and had his load,
made shift to carry my feet.

And so I went on on my way, with no small care to know, what knacking of
Castanneta, is the stroke or sound, that is given with the Thumb, and the
middle finger, when they dance. And to make the noise the louder, they tie two
hollow thin pieces of wood to their thumb, which are made round after the
manner of your Chesse-Nuts. Castanneta, being derived from Castanna, which
signifies a Chesse-Nut.
Castannetas that might be, which made the Eggs that I had eaten, to dance in
my mouth. My imagination was working to and fro upon this matter; and the more
it did beat upon it, the more misfortunes represented themselves unto me, and
my stomach began to stir more and more: for I could suspect nothing less
then a kind of loathing, seeing how ill they were dressed, of what blackness
the oil, like to that which is in the bottom of a Lamp; a foul Pan; and a
foul bleare-ey'd Hostess.

Thus my imagination running from one thing to another, I met at last with the
truth; and having gone another League, my fancy wrought so with me, that I
could hold no longer. For as it is with your women that are with child, so was
it just with me. Eructations and belchings did come and go from my stomach to
my mouth, till at last I fell a vomiting, till there was not any thing left
within me. And even yet to this day, me thinks I hear those little chickens,
those poor pretty fools, cry still peep, peep, within my bowels.

Being in this miserable taking, I sat me down on the side of a hollow
Ditch, that served for a fence to certain Vines that were thereby; considering
with my self the misfortunes that I had, and was like to run into, much
repenting my self of my ill advised departure. But it is, and ever will be the
fashion of young fellows, to cast themselves away headlong, upon their present
pleasures, without having an eye, or any regard in the world to their future
hurt, or the harm that will follow after.

CHAPTER IV.
Guzman de Alfarache, recounteth to a Carrier what had betided him with his
Hostess: And discourses of laughing. After that, he tells two short Tales;
one, of a couetoas Physician; the other of two young men, how they used the
said Hostess: And upon the neck of that falls into a learned Discourse,
touching the pardoning of injuries.

TRoubled in mind, full of care and thoughts, and pensiuely musing with my
self, I lay all along on the ground, leaning mine head upon mine arm; when by
chance a Carrier hapt to pass by, who went along with empty Mules, which were
to be laden with Wine at the Village called Cacalla de la Sierra. He seeing me
sitting in this melancholy manner, a Young Strippling, all alone, afflicted in
mind, handsome in my person, and reasonably well clad, as one that had been
much made of heretofore, began (as I then conceived) to pity my troubles, and
to take compassion of me, asking me, what the matter was, that I was so sad. I
told him all that had happened unto me in my Inn; and had scarce made an end of
my Tale, when he brake forth into such a You Will of laughing, that he was ready
to burst, and I to break forth into choler. And that face of mine, which
before was as pale as ashes, was set on fire by those coals of anger, which
were kindled in my breast against him. But because I was not then a Cock that
stood upon my own dunghill, nor scarce mine own man; as also for that I found
my self disarmed, and as it were in a desert by my self: I held my tongue,
and said nothing unto him, because I could not crow as I would. For it is
discretion to dissemble that, which a man cannot help; Patiently brooking this
his rather grinning, then laughing: And those ends that are doubtful in their
obtaining, must be thoroughly first consulted on, and be reduced to some certain
grounds and Principles. For opinions are various, and honors vitreous, glassy,
and subject to breaking. And if I should there, at that time, have mis-behaued
my self, happily he would have laid hold on me first, and by aduenturing to
gain upon him, I might have run the hazard, if not the certainty of losing
all. For Competition is a thing to be avoided. But if it cannot be avoided, but
that we must needs have it, let it be with our equals; and rather of the two,
with thy Superiors, then thy inferiors; but have a care that thou do not
ouer-match thy self with those that are too strong for thee, lest they trample
upon thee, and tread thee under foot. Every thing has its Vice, and there must
an account be given of it. But although I did forbear him; yet he had so
heated me, that out of the warmth of that choler, which yet boiled within me,
I could not choose but tell him:

My friend; Do you see me coated for a Fool; or with a Fools Cap on my head?
Or what else is it that occasions you thus to laugh? He, rather increasing,
then ceasing his laughter, as if it had been a task put upon him, or The
description of laughter.
a part that he had been enjoined to play: so fast it came from him, that
gaping with his mouth fist-wide, he let his head fall on tone side, (for he
was not able for laughing to hold it upright:) and laying both his hands as
hard as he was able, one while upon his belly, another on his sides, for fear
of bursting; he was scarce able to sit upon his Beast for falling, and seemed
with his extreme straining of himself, as if he would at every bout have come
tumbled down on the ground.

I was about to answer him some three or four times, but I could never come
to do it: for I no sooner offered to speak unto him, but he presently fell a
fresh to his laughing till he chuck't again; so did his pot run over, when
it once fell a boiling.

God be thanked yet at last, after this great inundation and sudden breaking
forth of waters, (that those ouer-flowings of Tagus could not be greater) began
to fall by little and little, by patches and by pieces, now a word and then a
word, as well as he could, having taken a little breath, delivering his mind
by halfes, like one that stumbles and goes, and goes and stumbles, he blunderd
forth these words unto me: My good Youth, I do not laugh at your ill success,
nor do your misfortunes glad me any whit at all: but I laugh at that, which
happened to this woman scarce two hours since. Did you happily meet with two
young fellows, that were Camerades, and walked along together, and seemed by
their habit to be Soldiers; the one clad in a medley green suite; the other
in a gray or ash-colored cloth, with a white doublet cut to the skin? These
two (quoth I) by your description, if my memory do not fail me, when I left
the Inn, remained there behind, being newly come in, when I went my way, and
called for their dinner. These then (said the Carrier) are those that have
revenged your quarrel. And the jest, that they put upon the Hostess, is that
which I now laugh at. But if you go my way, get up upon one of these beasts;
and as we ride along I will tell you how it was. I thankt him for his
kindness, as I had good cause so to do, considering my present necessity,
rendering him such good language, as I thought might make sufficient payment for
such a courtesy. For good words requite good works, when a man is not able to
pay him, that he is beholding unto, in better money; Kind words current money
in case of necessity.
and that he is in necessity, to whom the kindness is done.

Mounting my self then upon this ill accoutred Gennet, howbeit it was no
better then a plain Ass with a pack-saddle; yet it seemed to me a Silla de
manos, or easy hand-Chayre, a Litter or a Coach, drawn with four horses. For
some succor, in case of necessity, although it be little, yet it helps
much; and that which is but a triffle to him that gives, is an infinite supply
to him that wants: it is like a little stone, that is thrown into a smooth and
clear water, which makes not only many, but great circles also. And then is a
kindness most to be esteemed, when it comes in a good coniuncture, albeit it
always comes well, and never too late, so as it come at last. Now (me thought)
I saw Heaven opened, and my honest Carrier appearing unto me in the shape of an
Angel. His face was as joyful unto me, as that of the desired Physician is to
him that is afflicted with sickness. I say, desired; because (as perhaps you
may have heard) a Physician has three faces. Of a man, when we see him, and
have no need of him: Of an Angel, when we are sick, and cannot be A
Physician has three faces.
without him; and of a Devil, when at one and the selfsame time our
sickness, and our purse ends together, and yet for his private interest and to
gain a fee, he follows us with daily visits. As it happened to a Gentleman in
Madrid, A Tale of a Physician that loved money too well. In Spain your
Physicians fee is ordinarily two shillings; the better sort give four
shillings, and the* best seldom above a ^rowne. The nature of Scr^ants.
who having sent for a Physician, for a certain infirmity, where-withall he
was troubled, every visit that he made, gave him a Crown. The humor ceased;
but his Physician was not in the humor to cease from coming unto him.

Now the Gentleman, when he saw that he was through well, and that his Physician
did still continue his Visits, he got him up one morning very early, and went
to Church.

Now, when the Physician came to visit him, and found him not at home, he asked
his servant whither he was gone. He (like a fool as he was) for there are
servants still inow for their Masters hurt, but few for their profit, told him,
that he was gone forth to Mass to such a Church. My nimble Doctor, putting
spurs to his Mule for to make the more haste, went with all speed to the said
Church, and searching for him, at last he found him; and then said unto him;
What a-Gods name, Sir, do you mean to commit so great an excess, as to go
abroad without my leave? The Gentleman, who knew well enough what he came for,
and seeing that now he had no more need of him, put his hand in his pocket,
took out his purse, drew forth a Crown, and putting it in his hand, told
him; Here, take it; (master Doctor) for by the faith of a Gentleman, I now
perceive, that this sacred place cannot privilege me from you.

See here, how far the covetousness of a foolish Physician carries him; and
how far the virtue of a quick and noble disposition, this other Gentleman.

I betook me to my beast, and fetching my rise, I got up upon his back, and
away we went together: and we had scarce gone a furlong from the place, but
we met with two Churchmen that sat there hard by, expecting some passengers,
that would carry them on horseback toward Cacalla, (for there was their
dwelling) and had been at Seuill about a certain Suit in Law. By their
carriage and their countenance you might well know their good life and their
poverty. They were well spoken men, very kind, and very courteous; the one was
about some 36. years of age, the other above fifty. They made the Carrier
stay, they agreed with him; and, doing as I had done before, they got each of
them up upon his Ass, and we proceeded on our journey.

But all this while, so great was the laughter of this honest man, and so
excessive beyond all measure, that he could scarce go on with his tale: for
betwixt every word he would let go the sluice of his sides, whilst like a Flood
that furiously breaks forth, his laughing suddenly flushes out upon him: and
as in houses, where men vittaile upon the way, a man shall meet many times with
a bare couple of Hens only amongst five hundred persons; and see what they
want in good cheer, they make up with good mirth: so this man's laughter was
threefold more then his discourse; so far did his spleen out-talke his
tongue. These his delays were so many Spears in my sides; every deferring was
a farther provoking: so that I was all this while upon thorns. For he that
has a longing desire to know a thing, would willingly have one word come
treading on the heels of another; and with a quick and nimble pace come (if
it were possible) huddling all at once out of the mouth.

Never any woman that has been with child, did ever more earnestly long for
any thing, then I did to know the success of this business. Me thought I did
consume and pine away while I was held in this suspense, I could have burst
for anger, that my ears were put off, from having a present hearing: for I
could not but expect, that some great matter must arise from such a glorious
and ingenious Fabric, as this made show to be. I began to conceit with my
self, whether some fire fallen from heaven, had consumed the house, and all
that was therein: or whether those young fellows had set the house on fire,
and roasted my Hostess alive: or at least (for a lesser revenge could not be
taken ofso vile a creature) whether or no they had stripped her stark naked, and
hung her up by the heels upon an Oliue-tree, and given her some thousand
lashes, till they had left her for dead: for lesser things then these, his
laughter could not promise. Howbeit, I must confess, had I been then so wise
and considerate, as I should have been, I ought not to have Excessive laughter
condemned.
looked for any great matter, or to presume that any good thing could proceed
from one, that was thus immoderate in his laughter. For even that which is
moderate, does in a kind of manner, accuse a man of lightness, argue
indiscretion, want of judgment, and store of vanity: but that which is
dis-composed, and out of Reasons compass, is (though there be never so much
occasion offered) the mark of a madman, and the only note of an absolute
Ass, or complete Fool.

At last (God be thanked) this Mountain brought forth its Mouse: in
conclusion, he told us, (but with a thousand stops and iumpes, and his wonted
bounds and curuets of laughing) that he having stayed to drink a little A jest
put upon an Ho^esse by two young fellows.
wine, and to tarry the coming of a Companion of his, whom he had left behind,
he perceived, that the Hostess of the house brought in on a Plate, a Froyze of
six eggs; three of them stark naught, the other not so bad; which she set
before them: and going about to divide this their Froyze or Tansey in twain,
it seemed unto them, that it made a certain kind of resistance, refusing (as
it were) to be parted, one piece hanging (like torn rags) at the tail of
another. Whereupon, because this seemed to be somewhat a bad sign, and such as
they did not well like of; they began to search a little more narrowly, what
should be the cause thereof. They were not long in discovering the truth; for
they might discern certain knobs and knurs in it; which, had it bin any body
but my self, he might at first sight have seen how the world went, and where
the fault lay; but being a young Lad, I should easily have swallowed such a
Gudgeon, and should in good manners have slightly past it over. But these were
a little more curious, and more Court-like, and sifted it out so finely, that
they found to their seeming, three little round bumps, like three little
Chickens heads all clotted together. And this cleared the doubt; for finding
the bills of these pretty fools somewhat hard grown and none of the tendrest,
the pad that lay in the straw was presently perceived. And they taking one of
them between their fingers, going about to crush and break it in pieces, it
put forth his bill, and began (though dead) to peep forth its head, and
spoke alowd unto them, and told them plainly, whence, and what he was. So
they covered the Plate, clapping another thereupon, and vvhispered somewhat in
secret amongst themselves: what it was, I then knew not, howbeit afterward
it did manifest it self; for presently one of them called out, and said;
Hostess, have you any thing else for us? she had a little before (in their
sight) bought a Sabalo, is a known fish, and a sauoury, and is called Sabalo,
quasi Sapalo a Sapore. In Latin they call it Alofa, Frista, Clupea. In fresh
water it does vs^ally dye. Rondelecio de Piscibus, lib. (...). cap. 15.
Sabalo, (which is a Fish like a Shad) which she had put upon the ground for
to rub off the scales of it, telling them; I have such a Fish here, whereof
(if you will) I shall spare you a slice or two, other meat have I none. I pray
(mother) said they, broyle it us quickly then, for we must be gone; and if it
stand with your good liking, set a price what you will have for it all, and
we will carry it home along with us. She said, it being cut out into pieces,
every slice will yield me a Royal, and I cannot bate you a farthing of it. They
said, No: they thought it was too much, one Royal profit in the whole, were
very good gains.

At last they agreed for two Royals; for a bad play master never reckons what
he receives, nor stands a hucking for that, which he is to take up upon
trust. It went against her heart to let them have it so, howbeit the gain of
two Royals in four, for so short a time as she laid it out of her purse, did
work much with her, and made her vvilling at last to let them have it. She
cuts it out into pieces, broils two of them, they eat it, the rest they
vvrapt up in a Napkin of her own; and after they had filled their bellies,
being not well contented with their ill usage, in stead of paying their
Reckoning, they reckoned without paying. For one of the young fellows, taking
the Froyze of eggs in his right hand, went directly thither where the old
woman was vnpanching the belly of an old rotten sheep, that had dyed in some
ditch, to make thereof Tripes and Chitterlings, or (as the Spanish word has
it) Mondongo, is a ^odge-podge made of the intrailes and trotters of a sheep,
or other beast, boiled, and sold at every corner of the streets in Spain to
poor folks.
Mondongo's; and with all the force that he had, threw it full in the face of
her, seeling up both her eyes therewith, which looked like an old wall all to
bedawbed with rough-cast. Which plaistred eyes of hers, he had made so blind
and painful unto her, that not daring to open them, she cried out, as if she
had been mad, whilst this his other Companion, behauing himself, as if he
had rebuked him for it, and that he might be ashamed to use a poor old woman
in this uncivil kind of fashion, threw me a handful of hot ashes in the very
face of her, and so they got them out of doors, telling her, as they went away;
Ah you old rotten Carrion, Qui en tal haze, que tal pague, you are now paid in
your own money: what you got by your coozening, you may now put it in your eye.

She was toothlesse, chap-falne, hollow-eyed, and wappering withal, her hair
sluttishly hanging about her ears, unkempt, and as greazie, as it was knotty;
a fouler Swine no man ever saw: mealed she was all over, like a Mullet dressed
with Flower, or a Flounder that is ready for the drying pan; with a gesture so
graciously scuruie, a look so pleasantly fierce, and in all the rest so
handsomely ill-fauoured, that as often as you shall but think either of it or
her, you cannot (if your life should lie upon it) but you must needs burst
forth into laughter.

With this, he ended his story, telling us, that he had now matter enough to
laugh at all the days of his life. Whereunto I answered; And I to weep. Why,
quoth he? Because when time was, I did not do the like: but like a coward (as I
was) suffered my revenge to come from another hand. But I vow (if God give me
life and health) it shall cost her dear; I will make her pay for the old and
the new; I will have my penny-woorths out of her, and make my self that full
amends, that the longest day she has to live, she shall think upon the eggs,
and the Youth.

The good honest Clergymen much condemned their Hostess, and did as much
reprove my speech; for that I seemed to be grieved, that I had not done her a
mischief. They both set themselves against me, and turning toward me, the
ancienter of the two, seeing me so angry and full of choler, spoke thus unto
me:

Your hot and young blood moves you to say that, which your own good nature
and ingenuous disposition will by and by confess to be ill: and I hope in
God, that I shall work so much good upon you, that you will be sorry for the
present, for what you have said, and study to correct hereafter, not only the
acting of any such violent deed, but the very thought of it.

Saint Matthew in the fifth Chapter of his holy Gospel, and S. Luke in his A
discourse touching the pardoning of m^s.
sixth, read us this Lesson; Love your enemies, and do good to them that hate
you. Wherein you are first to consider, that the Evangelist does not say, Do
good unto those, that do ill unto you; but he says; Do good to them that hate
you. For suppose that your enemy should hate you, yet is it impossible that he
should hurt you, unless you will your self. For, it being an infallible
truth, that we are to account those as true goods, which are to continue for
ever: and that those which fail us to morrow, (as they often do) are more
properly True good is that which is ete^all.
to be called evils, for the ill use which we make of them: since that in the
trust that we have in them, and nos ipsos, and illa amittimus, we lose both
them and our selves. We may reckon these our enemies, to be our best friends;
and The goods of this ^orld are not good.
these our friends to be our greatest enemies; in regard of the effects which
arise from the one and the other: for, from our enemies, arises all our true
good; and from our friends, our assured hurt. We may plainly perceive, A
faithful friend, what go^d he may do ^s.
how that the greatest good that we can draw from the faithfullest friend that
we have in this world, can be no more, then to pleasure us, either with his
purse, by giving us all that he has; or by his life, by employing it in those
things that give us content; or by his honor, by not sticking to hazard that
for us, when our reputation shall lie at the stake. In which two latter none
will adventure themselves; or there are so few of them to be found, that I
doubt we shall not be able to produce any example in these times wherein we
live. But say it were so indeed, and that there were some such kind of men now
adays, and should iumpe together in all these three repeated particulars, when
they have done all that they can, it is much less (if in that which is not at
all, a magis and a minus; a more, or a less, may be found) then a Geometrical
point. For, when he has given me all that he has in this world, (were it
never so much) it is too small a substance to free me from hell. Besides, men
do not now adays spend their wealth, and their riches upon the virtuous, but
such as are conditioned like themselves, and assist them in their sins; and
these are the friends that they reckon of, and to these their purse is open.

If for my sake, my friend should lose his life, one minute of time is not
added thereby unto mine; if he should put his honor in peril, nay say, he
should be willing to lose it quite for his love to me, I say, that is not
honor, nor may it be so called: for true honor is that, which is engaged in
the service of God; and whatsoever is otherwise, and has not some reference
thereunto, is false and evil. So that, whatsoever my friend shall throw upon
me, being it is temporal and of no continuance, it is unprofitable, vain, and
of little or no worth at all. But my enemy, proves all pure wheat; all turns
to profit, that comes from him to me; so that my self will be willing to make
true use The good we receive from our enemies.
thereof. For from his ill-wishing to me, do I come to wish well unto him; and
therefore God will vvish well again unto me, and do me good, (though I deserve
ill) for that I do good for ill. If I pardon him a light injury, to me are
forgiven and remitted an infinite number of sins; and if he speak ill of me,
and I speak well of him, his evil language cannot hurt me; and his bitter
tongue shall bring me a blessing; Come ye blessed of my Father, etc. So that by
his thoughts, words, and works, my enemy makes mine to be good and true.

And what is the cause, think you, of this so great a wonder, and whence is
the force of this so excellent a virtue? I shall tell it you, because it is a
thing commanded by God, because it is his express will and commandment so to
do. And if we are to observe that of the Princes of this world, much better
(without comparison) is it, to keep that which is commanded us by the King of
heaven: before whom are humbled all the hearts both of heaven and earth. And
that saying of his, I command you this, is a Gods commandments are sweet.
sweet conserve, which is applied to the distasted palate of him that is
commanded. As if the Physicians should prescribe their sick Patients to take
flowers of Oranges, young preserved Wall-nuts, buds of Limmons, rindes of
Pome-Citrons, the roots of wild The Spanish word is Escorzonera. This ^rbe the
I a^es call Viperina, a species of that which they call Barba de Cabron. It is
called Escorzonera, because it is good against the venyme of Toades, and all
other venymous Vermin; and amongst the rest, the Viper. This Plant was first
found out in Spain in Catalunna, by a slave of Barbary. And in haruest-time
men being slung by Vipe^s, they gave them the juice of this herb, wherewith
they were healed. There is excellent good now in this kind, in the Sierras de
Cuenca in Spain. Vide Mathiolo, lib. 2. cap. 137. Et Couarruuias, verb.
Esco^zonera. We must obey God.
Borage, or Buglosse. What shall I say more? O my good Lord, do not give me
any such thing! for a body that is strong and in health, can by no means away
with it, but is rather unpleasing then otherwise. But for the better swallowing
of these Pills, and to make the relish the sweeter, they are so well candyed
and rolled up in Sugar, that what was hard in it self to be taken down, is
now become sweet and sauoury unto us. The like effect does this sweet Conserve
of Gods Word work with us. I commend (says the Text) that ye love your
enemies. This is a dainty Sauce, made for that sour Morsel, which before was
so unsavory to our tastes. So that, that which goes most against our
stomachs, and which flesh and blood can hardly endure, by reason of its
bitterness, being to our concupiscences and fleshly desires, no better then
very Gall and Wormwood; The Spirit tells us in the voice of a good Physician,
now it is made more pleasant, more sauoury and sweeter for you, since that
Christ our Redeemer has so commanded it. So that if a man should now strike me
on the one cheek, I would turn the other: for it is an honor unto us
punctually to observe those orders which are delivered unto us by those that
are set in authority over us, and not to break them in the least branch or
tittle.

A General does command one of his Captains, that he make good such a strong
place or passage, by which the enemy is to pass; where, if he will himself,
it shall be in his power to overcome him, and to kill him: but his General
tells him; Take heed, I charge you, for it much imports my Service, and it is
my pleasure so to have it, that when he shall pass by you, you offend him not,
but let him go quietly along, notwithstanding that he should give you cause to
the contrary, and provoke you all that he can to fight with him.

Now when this his enemy shall pass thus along by him, and shall brave him to
his face, and revile him with reproachful and injurious terms, calling this
Captain Coward, and other the like disgraceful names, will this Captain
(think you) though thus mightily abused, and affronted in the face of the
whole Army, offer him hereupon any offense at all, or violently set upon him?
No certainly: But he will rather laugh at him, as a Braggadoccio, and
vaine-boaster; and though he could easily have overthrown him, and killed him
at pleasure; yet he does it not only because he would keep that Order which
was given unto him: And if he should have broken it, he had done very ill, and
contrary to his duty, and therefore had well deserved to be punished for it.
What reason then is it, that we should not diligently observe the orders and
ordinances, given us by God? Why should we go about to break them; or seek
even in the least kind of manner to contradict them? If a Captain, for his
pay only, and upon hope of some better preferment (which is a hazard, whether
he shall ever attain there-unto or no) shall be so punctual: why should not
we be as obseruant, since we shall gain thereby God rewards the obedient.
a celestial reward, which is reserved for us? Especially, since that he that
made the Law, had the first handsell of it himself, and submitted himself
thereunto, by suffering and receiving from that unhallowed and sacrilegious
hand of an vnder-officer, a great buffet on that most sacred face of his,
without returning him so much as an evil word, or any angry look.

If God himself could be content to endure such rough usage, and pocket it up
with so much patience: Why should this same Nada del hombre, this same nothing
of man, this res nihili, why I say should he be puffed up with pride, Man ought
to be humble, not proud.
transported with passion, and stand upon his puntos, and terms of honor? And
why, for to receive satisfaction of a poor silly word, shot out vn-awares, or
advisedly; or howsoever (complaining of the infiniteness of the wrong)
breaking forth into rage, should one Christian challenge the field of another,
seeking amongst Infidels, as if he were one of them himself, a The Duel, in
Spain is a capital crime. And therefore the Spaniards, when they (...)1 the
Field, g^e into Barbary to end their quarrel.
place, where to fight it out; or (to speak more truly) to thrust themselves
wilfully into the hands of the Devil their mortal enemy, flying from those of
their Creator?

Of whom we may learn, that when he was to leave this world, and was to seal
his last Will and Testament, he suffered himself to be nailed to the Cross,
his body to be bored, his flesh to be torn, being full of pain, and gored all
in blood, from the sole of his foot, even to the crown of his head, whose
hair did cleave to his most precious blood, being congealed and clodded
together in hard-plotted Knots, and matted, as it were, with the cruel wounds,
occasioned by that his sharp thorny crown, which they scornefully crowned him
withal. And when he was to take his leave of his Mother, and A lesson for the
forgiving of our enemies.
that his beloved Disciple, amongst other his last words that he uttered, as it
were by way of his last request, and charge unto them, and in that his violent
and extreme agony, which was then plucking up his soul by the roots from his
divine body, he prayed unto his eternal Father, that he would pardon those
that had thus persecuted him, and put him to this so shameful and painful a
death.

This mildness of our Savior, was imitated by Saint Christopher: who, Saint
Christopher his ^wer to one that (...) him.
when he had a sound box on the ear given him, calling that to mind, which
his Master had before received, told him that struck him; If I were not a
Christian, I would be revenged on thee. So that revenge then, is a member put
apart from the children of the Church our Mother.

The like blow was given to Saint Bernard in the presence of his brethren; S.
Bernards saying, touching the suffering of i^ies.
and they being very earnest to revenge this wrong done unto him, he ran in
amongst them, telling them, It is not fit, that we should revenge the injuries
done us by others, when as we do all day-long, kneeling humbly on our knees,
crave pardon for our own offenses.

Saint Steven, when they were stoning him to death, does not grieve for S.
Steven prays for his persecutors.
those cruel blows, which bereave him of his life; but his sorrow was, to see
that these bloody Ministers should lose their souls; and grieuing for them,
desires God, even then, when the pangs of death were upon him, that he would
pardon his persecutors, and Saul especially; who being deceived, and zealous of
his Law, thought to merit heaven by looking to the Cloakes and other clothes
belonging to those that were the Executioners; to the end that having nothing
to hinder their arms, they might, being rid of those lets, wound him with
the greater force.

And so fervent was his Prayer; that this glorious Apostle Saint Paul was
afterward reduced to the faith; who like a wise Doctor, well experienced in S.
Paul teaches us to forgive our enemies.
this doctrine, finding it to be so necessary a thing, and so much importing
our salvation, as nothing more, gives us this good counsel: That we should
forget and lay aside all anger; that we should not suffer the Sun to go
down upon our wrath. Rather bless then curse your persecutors: Give them to
eat, if they suffer hunger; and if they be a-thirst, give them drink: which
if you shall not do, the same measure that you mete unto others, shall be mete
unto you again: and as you forgive, so shall you be forgiven.

The Apostle Saint James says; Without mercy shall they be judged, that have
no mercy: and the rigor of justice shall be returned on those that are S.
James instructs us to be merciful.
rigorous.

Very fearful of the breach of this divine precept, was Constantine the
Great; who, when one told him, how his enemies, to affront him, had in contempt
Constantine the Great, and his great patience.
and scorn of him, thrown stones at his picture, wounding him with their
strokes in the head and the face; so great was his modesty, that neglecting the
injury, he began to touch and feel with his hands from place to place all the
several parts of his body: Asking, when he had so done; What are become of
these blows; where are those wounds you talk off? I feel none, nor have I any
pain of all those thou tell me, they have done unto me. Giving thereby to
understand, that there is no dishonor done to any, but to him that will
esteem it so. Besides, he was willing thereby to infer, that whosoever does
thee an injury, shall not escape scot-free, or go clear away with it, though
thou do not revenge it; nay, though thou for thy part should pardon the
wrong that he has done thee: For what injury he has offered unto thee, he
has likewise offered the like unto God, whose, both thou and he art. Duenno
tiene est a hazienda; these goods have an owner; And therefore you must not be
your own caruers. For, if in a Princes Palace, or a Kings Court, any affront
shall be done, it is likewise done unto the Lord thereof: nor shall the pardon
of him that is affronted be sufficient absolutely to excuse the other, because
by that indiscreet act of his, and inferred injury, are likewise injured the
laws of that Prince, the good government of his house questioned, and his
Kingdom scandalized thereby. And therefore God says, Revenge God favors
and defends the wronged.
belongs unto me; and when I see my time, I shall punish the offender:
Vengeance is mine, and mine own hands shall execute the same. Wretched then is
that man, who is thus threatened; for if Gods own hands shall give him his
chastisement, better had it been that he had never been borne. So that thou
must never requite ill with ill, unless thou will that ill shall light upon
thy self. Moreover, thou shall merit much thereby, and thou shall be thine
own play master: for, by imitating him that commands thee, thou shall be made
like unto him. Give way therefore to the ire and fury of your persecutors, that
you may merit Gods favor: Thank him for these outrages and wrongs that are
done you, and you shall in requital receive glory: and obtain eternal rest.
-- And there he rested. --

I would fame have committed to memory that good doctrine which he delivered
unto me to this purpose, that I might repeat it here unto you. For it was all
heavenly stuff. Fine, most fine holy Scripture. From that time forward I
unfeignedly propounded to my self to make true profit thereof. And if it be
well considered, he spoke very home, and well unto me. What greater ^uenge can
there be, then that a man may be revenged if he will? Injury, how foul a
thing it is.
Posse, nolle, nobile, is as true a saying as it is old: And what thing can be
more foul then revenge, being that it is a passion of injustice? And such a
one, as none is more odious in the sight both of God and Man? For it is only
proper unto brute beasts. Revenge is but a kind of cowardice, and a certain
Revenge, what it is.
Actus foeminilis, an effeminate Act, and womanish kind of weakness: Whereas
the forgiving of a wrong, is a glorious kind of Victory. The reuengefull man
makes himself the Reus, when by pardoning, he might be made the Actor; that
is, in stead of an Accuser, the Accused. What greater presumption can there be
in the world, then that the creature should usurp the office of his Creator?
appropriating that unto him, which is none of his; and going away (as we say)
with another man's wealth, whereunto he has no right in the world? If thou thy
self art not thine own, nor in thine own Man has nothing that is his, no
(...) so much as himself.
disposal; neither have thou any thing of thine own in thee, that he, who (as
thou say) has offended thee, can take from thee. Such actions as these, thou
can not commence thy self, they belong unto thy Lord, which is God: Leave
vengeance therefore unto him. God will take it of the wicked, tardius aut
citius, at one time or another, early or late. And that cannot be termed too
late, which is in a continual inclination to its end. And to take it out of
his hands, is a heinous offense, a mighty mis-regard, and a contempt in the
highest degree.

But admit satisfaction should belong unto thee, and that the Law were in thine
own hands; tell me, I pray thee, What thing can be more noble, then to do
good? And what more good, then not to do ill? One only, which is this; To do
good unto him, that does ill unto thee, and does persecute thee, as it is
commanded us, which we are bound to obey. For, to repay ill with ill, is the
Devils office; to do good to him, that does good unto thee, is a natural debt
between man and man; nay, the wild beasts of the Forest do acknowledge as
much, and do not wax furious against those, that do not seek to hurt them.
But to procure and work that man's good, that would do thee a mischief, and
cut thy throat, if it were in his power to do it; this is opus supernaturale,
a work above the reach of nature: it is that divine Ladder, whereby we climb
up by the rounds of Charity, to glorious Eternity; it is that key of the
cross, which opens the gates of Heaven: it is the souls sweet peace; and
the bodies quiet rest. But revenge is a life without quietness; one calls upon
another, and all unto death. Is not he a fool, nay, worse then a madman, who,
if his doublet chance to wring him, will thrust his poniard into his own body?
And what other thing is revenge, then to do ill unto our selves, out of a
desire to do ill unto others? And to pluck out both our own eyes, to put out
one of our enemies? Or to spit against heaven, that it may presently fall
again in our own faces? Seneca understood Seneca's saying touching e^nge.
this doctrine wonderful well, when an enemy of his having given him a box of
the ear in the Marketplace, and all that saw it, did incite him to complain
thereof unto the Justice; he smiling upon them, said unto them, Were it not a
foolish part in me (think you) to call a beast into the Court? As if he should
have said, With that buffet, he like a beast did express his rage; and I like
a man, did scorn and contemn this his brutish behavior. Can there be any
brutishness greater then to do ill? Or can there be any greatness like unto
that, which shall despise the ill that is done him, and set light by it?

The Duke of Orleans having formerly been injured by one, when he was The
French Kings answer.
afterward King of France, he was put in mind, that he might now be revenged
of the wrong he then received: for now it was in his power to do it. But he,
looking sowrely on him that did so advise him, told him; it was not fit, that
the King of France, should revenge the wrongs of the Duke of Orleans. If, for a
man to conquer himself, be counted so great a Victory; Fortior, qui se, quam
qui fortissima vincit moenia.
Why, by subduing our appetites, allaying our anger, and rebating our rancour;
do not we gain unto our selves this glorious Palm? Since that, (besides that
which is promised unto us in the future) even in this life also, we shall
avoid many mischiefs, which may either take away our life from us, or rob us
of this our vain honor, and consume our wealth. O good God, had I been a
good Lad, that which I heard from that good man, I might have been the better
for it all the days of my life. But I was young, and past it quickly over;
that treasure was ill bestowed upon me, I lost it; it was corn that fell in
the highway, it did not thrive with me. His good conversation and doctrine
entertained us to Cantillana, whither we came about Sunset: I with a good
desire to my Supper, and my Companion with an earnest expectation to have his,
but that never came. The two Clergy men made their rank apart, and went to a
friends house that they were acquainted withal in the Town, and we to our
Inn.

CHAP. V.
How Guzman and the Carrier did eat of a young Mule, thinking it had been
Ueale, being coozened by his Host in Cantillana, and discourses by the way of
the coozening tricks, which ^ad Hosts put upon poor Travelers.

WHen the Company, that came along with us, had left us, and were gone every
man his way; I asked my Camerade, Whither shall we go now? He told me. Here Is
an honest Host hard by, one of my old acquaintance, a good fellow, where we
shall be well lodged, fare daintily, and kindly entertained. Well, along we
trudge together, till we came to this his so much commended Inn, having
brought me (as you shall hear hereafter) to one of the veryest thieves, and
arrantest knaves, that there was not such another in all that part of the
Country wherein he lived.

Here new occasion of matter was offered, fresh plates set upon the board, and
such provision, as you may therewith well entertain the time. Was I not
(think you) in fine taking when I leapt out of the Drying Pan into the fire;
and fell into Scilla, seeking to shun Charibdis? Our Host had for his own
use a good strong Ass, and a Galitian Mare, that was a pretty little Tit. And
because men in their necessity, do not stand upon beauty, youth, nor pomp of
apparel; but content themselves only with Night-caps, when their heads are
mangie and scabbed; it is no marvel, if the like should happen even amongst
brute beasts. They were always fellow-feeders in one Stable, one Rack, and
one Field; and he that was owner of them, took no great heed to have them tide
fast, but let them go loose of purpose to the end, that they might help the
other Beasts in the Inn in the repeating of their lessons. Whereby it came to
pass that this Mare grew great with Foale, by living at large amongst this
good company.

It is an inviolable law in Andaluzia, That no such Conjunction, or Commixture
A Law in Andaluzia against the ^aturall covering in horses.
be permitted; and to this end, grievous penalties are ordained. This Mare
then, having in her due time foaled a pretty young Mule, mine Host was willing
to make profit thereof, and to that end nourished and bred it up. He kept this
business very secret some certain days, and was wonderful careful, that it
might not come to light: but because he saw it was not possible for him to hide
this matter long, and to keep it from the knowledge of the world, that he
might not give his enemies advantage of revenge; carried away partly with the
fear of his own hurt, and partly with the greediness of gain, he resolved
(this last Friday night) to kill him. He cuts me out the flesh of it into
pieces, which he powders up in a pickle made of purpose, and made ready against
the next day, (being Saturday) for his Ghests: parts minutiores huius
animalis, vt pedes, ilia, venture, etc. all the intrailes and offals of These
things are commonly eaten in Spain upon Saturdayes, by a custom received
amongst them.
this beast; as feet, tripes, the cragge-end of the neck, tongue, brain, and
the like. We (as I told you) came to our Inn in a very good hour: for he that
travails, takes contentment upon the way, that he may come into his Inn
betimes, that he may have meat to fill his empty guts, and a bed to rest his
weary bones.

My Companion, as soon as he had alighted and taken off his lading, and put up
all things safe, sets up his Asses in the Stable, taking order for their
dressing and their feeding. But I came thither so wearied, that I was not able
when I lighted, to stand upon my legs, but was feign to lie down on the
Uneasy riding causes wearines.
ground, and was not able for a great while to turn my self any way in the
world. For all my muscles and sinews were quite benumbed, my legs and feet
swollen, with their long hanging down for lack of Stirrops, my breech
extremely galled, my parts nearer my priuities full of pain, as if so many
needles had been stuck in my Groyne; my body was all out of joint; but of all
other parts, my belly (for pure hunger) did most pitifully complain.

Now when my Companion had ordered his beasts of burden, and had eased them of
their carriages, and had done all things fitting for one of his profession, my
turn was next to be served, and therefore said unto him; How now (my Camerade)
what think you of the motion? Is it not high-time (think you) to go to
Supper? He answered, It was; the motion he told me, was very good, and that it
was high time indeed: for he meant to be stirring very early the next morning,
and to reach betimes to Cacalla, and so to lade, and away. We ask't our Host,
if he had any thing in the house for our supper? He answered, He had; adding
withal, that we should fare very daintily. He was a burly-kind of man, yet of a
stirring metal, nimble-witted, cheerful both in his speech and countenance,
an eternal talker, but above all a What a manner of creature our Host was.
most excellent Villain. His promising person (I confess) did deceive me:
for, seeing so good a presence, and not having known him before, the Spot at
first sight, made show of a good Card. And hearing him say, that he could feast
us bravely, my very heart and soul did leap for joy within me: Oh, they were
comfortable words! Whereupon, I began with my self to give thanks unto God,
reuerencing his holy Name, for that after our troubles he gives us ease; after
sickness, health; after a storm, a calm; after sorrow, joy; and a good
Supper, after a bad dinner.

I know not, whether I may well tell you or no, of a toung-errour, but a witty
one, which came from a plain country-fellow, whom I knew in Olias, being a
certain Village belonging to Tol^do? yet I shall make bold to tell it you, as
well for that the thing in it self is not scandalous, as also for that it
proceeded from the sincere heart of an Old Christians in Spain are counted the
best, by way of difference from the Moors, whom they call new Christians, as
being but lately co^rted. A (...) of a country fellow.
old Christian.

There were certain good fellows playing at Primera, and the third having
discarded, the second cride, I am Prime; God be thanked yet at last, that I
have got one game since I played, said he, that had the Prime. The other
Country-fellow that was in the interim drawing his Cards, when he had pulled
them, found them to be all of one lineage, and being glad that he had got the
hand of him, suddenly brake soorth at that very instant, and said; Not so much
God be thanked neither, as you think for; for I am Flush. If such a disparate,
or idle toy as this, being not purposely spoken with either due measure, or to
any certain end, but by mere chance, as it were, may be brought upon the
Stage; this is its proper place, and the Scene well laid here, considering what
befell us. Its very well, (said my Companion) to mine Host; Now and thou be
a good fellow, tell me, I pray thee, what dainty morsel have thou provided for
us? This Socarron; el vellaco dissimulado, que solo pretend su interes, y
quando habla con vos, os esta secretamente abrasando.
Socarron, this dissembling Rascal, that was all for his commodity, and cared
not (so as he might get by him) whom he coozened, told him; Yesterday I killed
a very delicate fine young Calfe; which, because the Damme thereof was very
weak; and by reason, (through the dryness of the year) that he wanted
feeding, he caused this Calfe to be killed after it was some eight days old.
The offals; and the intrailes are ready dressed, take what you please. After
this, crying out Presto, be gone, lifting up his legs, and fetching a
friscall or two, he flies away in the air in a trice, clapping his heels with
his hands as he runs along. With this, my heart began to be somewhat lighter
then it was before, and it did rejoice me much to hear him say, that he had
the Calves intrailes; the very naming whereof, did make my Bowels to move
within me. And now taking leave of my former weariness, looking cheerily upon
him, I said unto him; Mine Host, bring us what you think good.

Thereupon, the Cloth was laid in the turning of an hand, our Linen was
clean; and our bread was not so bad as before, but our wine was passing good:
we had also a fresh Sallad set upon the Board in a fair Plate; but for such
washie Tripes as mine then were, I held it no good meat. And had it been
spared by me, either for any of the intrailes, or any one foot of a Calfe, it
would never have grieved me. But these premises might deceive any discreet
judgment whatsoever, making the taste of an hungry appetite drunken with the
very conceit of his promised fare. The Italian, by way of advice, gives us this
good lesson; That in the promises of Women, Mariners, and Inne-keepers, we
should place small confidence: for they that are given to commend themselves,
and their own things, (as all these usually do) they do all (guessing the
whole by the greater part) generally lie. After he had set down the Sallad, he
brings us in two little Plates, in each of which lay a little of this same
Calues-plucke, I say, a little; for he was afraid to give us too much* lest
through too much plenty, hunger being satisfied, and the belly glutted, we
might more easily come to the knowledge of this deceit of his.

Leading us thus ley surely along, we follow the sent we first ran upon, and it
seemed to our taste, that we still did eat, according to that conceit, which
we had entertained of this our supposed tender Veale; and the more we thought
thereon, the greater edge was set upon our appetite; and as we had a longing
desire thereunto, so by degrees we were still calling for the same hand
again. For my Companion, there was no care to be taken for him, all meats
were alike to him; for he was borne amongst Savage people, and bred The defect
which is in Country people in their seeding.
up by brutish Parents, whose palate was seasoned from the cradle with a cloue
of Garlic; and your rude rusticall Clownes, (as a thing not belonging to
their either goodness or cleanliness) in matter of taste can seldom
distinguish ill from good. To most of them, there is a want of perfection in
their Senses; and albeit they see, yet do they not see that, which they ought
to see: and though they hear, yet do they not hear that which they ought to
hear: and so in the rest; but more particularly in the tongue, which was not
given them to murmr against any man, much less against those, that are
gentle and noble, as well in their disposition, as their descent. But these
kinds of vn-nurtured people are like unto Dogs, who snatch and snap at every
thing, swallowing all that comes in the compass of their chaps, without
chewing: or like unto the Ostrich, that will devour a horse-shoo, though it
be never so red hot. And if a double-soled shoo, which had done service three
Winters in Madrid, treading through thick and thin; lodo y mierda, dirt and
turds had been set before such a fellow as this, he would have made no bones
of it, nor found no difference in the going down of it. But that I, who was
daintily brought up, and borne of civil parents, and such as were neat and
curious in their diet, that I should not find out this deceit, my hunger must
needs be great; and this must excuse my error. The desire that I had to eat
something that was good, was exceeding great, so that every thing seemed too
little to feed mine eyes. This cunning Rogue, mine Host, gave it us by way of
distillation, Limbecke-fashion, now a little, and then a little: and therefore
The Hosts craft.
it is no such wonder, had it had far greater defects, that it should seem
unto me a well-ordered Banquet.

Have you not heard it said, Que a la hambre, no ay mal pan? That all bread is
sauoury to the hungry? I say, all seemed to me to be Suckets, and Marmalate;
and me thought I should never have enough to fill my belly. I demanded, if he
had any thing else: He told me, we might (if we would) have the brains fried,
with some butter and eggs. We told him, we would: but we are slower in telling
him so, then he in going about it; nay, almost in the dressing of it. In the
mean while, lest we might not catch cold with standing still, like your
Poste-horses when they have run their stage; he gave us to intertaine the time
withal, a piece of flesh folded and rolled up, made out of the Tripes, (after
the fashion of your roasted Olives of Veale) together with some of the Filme and
rind of the belly. I did not like the taste of it half well; it smelled (me
thought) like rotten straw that is thrown out upon the dunghill. Whereupon I
thrust it from me, leaving it to my Companion, who entered roundly upon it,
devouring it as greedily, as a man would grapes, coming into a Vineyard in the
time of Vintage. Nor did it grieve me awhit to see him fall to it so lustily,
but was rather very glad of it, thinking by this means, that when he had been
full-fed therewith, a greater part of the brains would fall to my share. But
it fell out contrary to my expectation; for he had never awhit the more cloyd
his panch, nor did he cease to lay about him with as good a stomach, as if he
had not all the day, nor night before, eaten so much as one morsel of bread.

The eggs and the brains were set upon the Board; and when my honest Carrier
saw this fine Froyze, he began, according to his old wont, to laugh out alowd,
with as wide a throat, as you can imagine. I did fret, and fume, and chafe with
my self out of all cry, conceiting with my self, that he made himself merry
with my misery, and took delight, to represent to my remembrance A guilty
Conscience is ^uermore suspicious, and full of fear.
those former loathsome things, that had lately overthrown my stomach.

Our Host thereupon looking very soberly on us both, with a watchful eye
observing our behavior, and with an itching ear, listening to hear what we
said; seeing his dis-composed laughter so ill seasoned, and vn-occasioned, (as
he thought) was much moved thereat; fearing, that he had found out his
Knavery: for until then, there was not any matter offered, that might move
occasion of laughter. And therefore he was ielous, that the Fox was now
vn-earthed, and this must needs be it. And because a guilty person carries his
Traer la barba sobre el ombro: Viuir recatado, y con recelo, como hazen los que
tienen enemigos, que van bolviendo el rostro a un lado, y al otro, de donde
nacio el refran.
Beard evermore upon his shoulder; and vmbrae suae imagine concutitur, and is
afraid of his own shadow; because his own conscience does accuse him; and the
committed fault, represents the deserved punishment: Every the least act, or
inkling of any thing whatsoever, he imagines, that it is all meant against
him; and that the very air does whistle forth his offense, and publishes it
to all the world.

This poor Rogue, (albeit a very villain) hardened in roguery, and habituated
in mischief, and being steeped, and layen long in soke, (as it were) in
thefts, and all kinds of coozenages, was now out of heart, and grew silly and
weake-spirited, and was ready to quake for fear. Besides, such kind of men are
commonly Cowards, and have only an outside of men, but no manhood at all. Why
is it (think you) that some men hacke and hew, and threaten to kill and slay,
and like Tygres lay about them? I will tell you the reason of it. They do this,
not out of true metal, but to make others afraid, and to supply by this
roaring carriage; the defect of their courage: being like herein, unto dogs;
whereof, those that are barkers, are the least biters: they are like your
little Meliteos si dizen, porque se ^hian de Malta.
Melitean dogs, or a kind of foysting-Hounds, which are made all of noise and
barking; but if you turn toward them, they clap their tail between their
legs, and run away. Our Host was (as I have told you) much troubled; for
fear, suspicion, and jealousy, is a property, that is still incident to an
evil liver. He had quite lost his stirrops, nor did he know how or which way
to recover his seat; but began to swear with many great and horrible oaths
that it was very good Veale that he had set before us, and that we had no just
cause, nor reason to laugh as we did; and if need were, I could bring you an
hundred witnesses to testify as much.

These words he uttered with much passion; with a face as red as fire, that the
blood seemed to trickle down his cheeks, and sparkles to flash for very anger
forth his eyes. The Carrier lifting up his head and looking earnestly upon
him, told him; Who medles with you, (my friend) what wrong have we done you,
that you are so choleric? We do not touch upon you, no not so much as to ask
you how you do, or how A Metaphor borrowea from women, who cannot ab^ae to be
(...), how old they are.
old you are? Have you any The Spanish word is Aranzel, which is a Decree, or
Law, which sets a tax upon such things as are sold. Tabula est, vbi scribitur
ordo and pretium rerum venalium. derived of a. articulo arabico, and rancel,
que vale tanto, como decreto, determincion, assiento. The Spaniards fashion of
wondering.
Edict, or Proclamation here in the house, that does set a tax or rate upon
laughing; or to what proportion and quantity your ghests shall be tied to
laugh, if at any time he be so disposed, upon pain of some great forfeit? or
is this a general sessing set thereupon, and you alone have got the Monopoly
thereof into your hands? If it be so, good mine Host, let every man weep, or
laugh, as he will himself; and take that a Gods-name which is your due, and
recover your right of us by order of Law. I tell you, Sir, you are mistaken in
me; for I am of that free disposition, that if I were minded to laugh at any
thing of yours, I am not so mealy-mouthed, but I would plainly tell you at
what I laughed.

These eggs now put me in mind of those other, which my Companion here did
eat to day at an Inn some three Leagues hence. Then he up and told all that
had passed, as my self before had delivered unto him; and that which happened
afterward in his presence, betwixt the old Hostess, and my two young
Soldiers; in the relating whereof, he seemed as if he had been bathing
himself all the while in Rose Water, if a man might judge the content he took
in repeating the same, by his passions, his loud laughters, strange visages,
anticke gestures, and the diversities of postures, in the bowing and writhing
of his body, all the while that he was telling him this tale. Mine Host, he
fell as fast a blessing and crossing himself, pouring out Volleys of
Exclamations, calling upon, and often reiterating the name of Jesus, a thousand
times one after another, and lifting up his eyes unto heaven said; Our blessed
Lady be my helper; let her still be present with me! Mal haga Dios, a quien mal
haze su Oficio, let ill betide him, that performs his function ill. And
because in his Theeueries and his Rogueries he was so good a Proficient, he
might rest assured, that this malediction did not belong to him, so well had he
exercised that trade all his lifetime. He began afterward to walk up and
down, and seeming sometimes to wonder, sometimes to complain, at last he cryde
out; I vvonder a-gods name, that the earth did not open, and swallow up this
Inn? How is it possible, that God should dissemble his anger, Mine Host by
railing on the old Hostess, discouers the k^auery of (...) ^pers.
and forbear to punish so vile a woman? Does this old Witch live? is she not
gone down quick to hell? All Travelers have just cause to complain of her;
I now see, that all men have reason to complain of her ill usage; no man comes
away contented from her; all find fault, not one that comes thence well
satisfied, but are sorry that ever they came within her doors. Either all her
ghests are very bad, or she her self: but it is not to be imagined so many
can be all bad; and therefore sure the fault is only hers.

For these, and other the like tricks, no passenger will stay to bait at her
Inn, they have all set a cross upon her door, they bless themselves when
they go by, and make large strides till they be past that wicked house. I
swear unto you, she should be soundly whipped, if she were well served, that all
other coozening queanes, such as she is, might take example by her. Her Sign
was once pulled down, and order taken, that she should not keep victualling
any more. And I much wonder, that she turning again to the old byas, the
officers return not again to punish her anew.

There is something in it, as the Ant said, but what it is I cannot tell you,
that makes her to do as she does. There must be some mystery in it, what ever
it be: for she robs and coozens with the like liberty to day, as she did
yesterday; and now, as last year: And (which is worst of all) she coozens with
that confidence, as if she were commanded so to do. And sure it must needs be
so; for the Guards, the Searchers, the Promoters, and the Alguazils, all see
her dealings, and know them well enough; yet they wink at them, and say not so
much as black is her eye. These I warrant you be her fee'd men, she gives them
good content, and greazes them in the fist with that, which she filches from
others. For if it were not so, as sure as the coat is on your back, they would
have another fling at her, and pay her home again with a pox in her own
kind.

Howbeit (wretched woman as she is) it is punishment enough unto her, that she
lived so long, as to discredit her house. For if she had kept good meat in her
house, and used her ghests well, behauing her self ciuilly, and demanding
reasonable reckonings, her custom would have been good, and all Travelers
would have flockt unto her house. And you know, De muchos pocos hiziera mucho;
Many a little, makes a mickle. For, by carrying but one grain of corn away
with him at once, the Ant fills his granary, and lives in store and plenty all
the year long. And had she done so, the proudest Officer of them all, could
not have set his foot upon her neck, and tear her ungodly gains out of her
throat. But shame light upon her, and all such as she is. The Devil take such
unconscionable Inne-keepers.

When he had come thus far and made his full point, I thought he would there
have left. But he comes about again, giving us this cloze for a farewell:
Blessed be that unspotted purity of the Virgin Mary, that though I am but a
poor man; yet I thank God for it, there is no such ill usage in my house, no
such deceitful tricks; Every thing is here sold for the thing it is: no Cats,
for Conies; nor Mutton, for Veale. Limpieza de vida, es lo que importe, a
clear conscience, is that, which will carry a man through thick and thin. He
may go barefaced through the world, and never be ashamed, that has led an
innocent life. Let every man enjoy that which is his own, and not defraud and
deceive one another.

Here he stopped, and took in fresh breath, which was no more then needed,
considering how fast his tongue walked: And though happily he might think, that
we might the more willingly give him the hearing now that we had supt; yet he
here cuts off the thread of his Discourse, and says no more, giving us in
stead of our second Course, two or three Olives, as big as Nuts. We entreated
him that against the next morning we might have a morsel of his Veale made
ready for us. He undertook that care, and we went to take our rest. Our
boulsters, were our pack-Saddles; and our bedding the clothes that covered our
Packs, which we stretch out as plain as we could upon the bare Floor: and so
we past over that night, as well as we could.

CHAPTER VI.
Guzman goes on, in recounting what succeeded with his Host of Cantillana, who
had given him to eat of his young Mule, and of the misfortunes that befell the
said Guzman: And how it is not good upon the way to quarrel with our Host.

HAd I, the Sunday morning following, when it was day, been Guzman is extremely
bitten by Fleas.
set in the Marketplace in Seuill, or at my mothers own door: I am
doubtful, whether they would have known me or no. For I was monstrously
Flea-bitten by that infinite number of Fleas, which had fed that night on my
carkase, that it seemed they likewise endured a dear year, and that I was
offered up unto them for a prey. And so in the morning I got me up, looking for
all the world, like one that had been sick of the small Pox, or infected with
the Meazels; my face and hands, and all my whole body over, not having one free
place, or one spot of white, no, not so much as you might put a pins point
between; so miserably was I tormented with them.

But fortune was herein so favorable unto me, that what with the weariness
Drinking freely, what it effects.
of the journey, and taking a cup or two ouer-night more then ordinary, I slept
soundly, dreaming heavenly dreams, no noise hindering my quiet rest; till that
my Companion, whose mind ran upon hearing Mass betimes in the morning, and
of his seven Leagues which he had farther to go, did awaken me.

We rise by the break of day, before the Sun was up. And calling presently
for our breakefast, it was brought us in; but it did not like me so well, as it
did my fellow: for every morsel, that went down his throat, seemed to him, as
if he had swallowed so many bits of the brawne of some young tender Peacocks,
and he did so much commend the goodness of it, as if all the world could not
afford a daintier dish. And I was forced so to esteem of it, by laying my
faith upon another man's taste, attributing that defect to mine own bad palate,
which this hungry hound had inherited from the Ass his father. But, to speak
the plain truth, it was stark naught, and as vile meat as a man could eat,
and did not stick to speak it self unto me in a known language.

To me it seemed tough, and unsavory, and of that little which I did eat
ouer-night at supper, my stomach was so sur-charged with it, lying as heavy
within me as Lead, that I was not able for my life to digest it. And albeit I
was somewhat fearful, lest my fellow should find fault with me, yet did I
not stick to say unto mine Host; How comes this flesh to be so tough, and of
that evil relish, that a man can scarce fasten upon it with his teeth? He
told me; Do not you see, Sir, that it is flesh that has been newly killed, and
wants time for the mortifying and making of it tender? Hereupon, my Companion
taking his Q: It is not (quoth he) any lack of mortifying, or hanging in the
air; or that it does not eat tender and short enough, that makes this
Gentleman to be so squeamish: but because he has been fed from his cradle with
spice-Buns, Sugar-Cakes, and fresh Eggs, all other meats save these, are hard
both to his teeth and stomach. I shrunk up my shoulders, and held my peace, as
one that knew full well, that I was now as it were in another kind of world,
and that it was but one days patience more, and then I should be out of danger
of understanding such kind of language any longer.

But for all this, I could not here-with rest contented, but still me thought
this meat had an ill smatch with it, of I know not what.

And as I was thinking thereon, it presently came in my mind what unnecessary
oaths mine Host made the night before, when he vowed and swore it was Veale.

This swearing and staring of his, I did not like half well, and did therefore
think, he did the rather lie, because he did so deeply swear: for the truth
has no need of the confirmation of an Oath, unless it be in open Court before
a Judge, or in case of great necessity. Besides, all such satisfaction, Qui
saepe jurat, saepe per^urat.
as offers it self by way of prevention, before the thing delivered, is
questioned, or called into doubt, makes the faith of the reporter to be
evermore suspected. I knew not what did ayle me, or what might be the cause of
this; for although I did not really conceive any assured ill, I did as little
presume, that there could be any good meaning herein. It was only a touch of
my imagination, a strange apprehension, that I had in my head at that time:
Whereupon I did not long dwell, nor made any great reckoning of it. So passing
it over, I called for a reckoning, my Companion told me, I should let my purse
alone, for he would pay for us both. Whereupon I went aside, leaving him to be
the Play Master: thinking with my self, that out of courtesy, and this our new
acquaintance, he was not willing, that I should pay my share of so small a shot.

I was very thankful to him in my heart for this his kindness, and was not
wanting to sing forth his praises, for this his freeness and love, which he
had shown unto me, ever since that he met me upon the way, giving me my
horse-hyre, and my diet gratis; not suffering me to spend one penny in his
company.

I thought with my self, this world would still hold, and that wheresoever I
went, I should meet with some one or other that would bear my charges, and let
me ride for nothing. I had now taken heart unto me, and began to be prettily
well flesht, and to forget my mothers teat, as if it had been noynted with
Aloes, Worme-wood, or the like bitter stuff, and so in all other things did I
do the like, whereunto I had been formerly accustomed. And because it should
not be said of me, Que delos ingratos estaua lleno el infierno; That hell is
full of ungrateful persons: While he was paying the shot, I was He that
receives a courtesy, ever ought to show his readiness to do that man service
from whom it comes.
willing to show some part of my thankfulness, by leading out his Asses to
drink, and carrying them back again to their cratches, to the end, that
while they were saddling and making all things ready, they might champe upon
their straw, and make an end of their prouender. I put a helping hand to all
that was needful, rubbing their foreheads and their ears, as well as I was
able.

Whilst I was busied in this, I had laid my Cloak upon a bench hard by, which
like Quicksilver, before the fire, or smoke before the wind, was vanished
away in an instant, that I could never set eye on it any more; nor could devise
in the world, what should become of it. I thought with my self, that either
mine Host or my Consort, had, to make themselves merry therewith, hid it from
me in jest. But it was now no more a jesting matter, for they began to swear
in good earnest that they had it not, nor knew what was become of it; I made
diligent search for it even to the very gate which was shut, and had not yet
been opened. There was no body there in the house but our selves, and mine
Host, and therefore me thought it was impossible, that it should be lost, and
that I might peradventure forget my self; and have put it apart in some other
place. Hereupon, I sought up and down all the house; and going out of the Hall
into the Kitchen, it was my hap to come into a back-Court, where I found a
great plash of fresh blood, and hard by it a Mules skin, fairly stretched out
to its full breadth and length, from the which the fect were not yet cut off;
The ears were there at large, and all that part of the head toward the
forehead, near whereunto were those other bones belonging to the head, only
the tongue, and the brains were wanting: Which I no sooner perceived, but I
was presently confirmed in my doubt.

Hereupon I straight go forth to call in my Companion; To whom, when I had
made show of the Hide, that had bound in our breakefast and our supper, I then
said unto him; What think you now, Sir? Are not those things (trow you)
Sugar-cakes, and new-laid Eggs, in comparison of these that we eat at home?
This is that Veale, forsooth, which you so extolled to the skies; and this the
Host, you promised should provide us such dainty cheer.

What think you of the supper now, and the breakefast which he has bestowed
upon us? Has he not dealt well with us I pray? have we not been excellently
well used? He (good man) is none of these coozening Hosts, and cheating
Inne-keepers, that will sell a Cat for a Cony; and put away Mutton, for Veale.
This is that innocent man, that may go unmasked throughout the world, and care
not who sees him, and looks him in the face, he is so honest a man. This is
that integer vitae, scelerisque purus, so unspotted in his life and conscience,
and so free from all ill dealing, that out of his own integrity, made no
bones to curse our Hostess, and the evil usage of her Ghests.

He was strooken so dumpe, and so full of wonder, to see what I had showed him,
that he had not a word to say; but with his head cast down into his bosom,
went slinking away from me, and was so amazed at this strange sight, that all
the day after till we parted company, I could not get from him so much as a
word, save what past at our parting when we were to take our leave each of
other. And that which then came from him, seemed to be drawn out of the very
guts of him, as you shall hear anon.

Howbeit, I was not (as every man may imagine) very well pleased with this
unhappy accident; yet notwithstanding, (that this his flood of laughter might
by this means be dammed up, or the current thereof turned another way,
wherewith every moment before, my very heart and soul was ouer-flowne, and in
a manner, quite drowned.) I was wonderfully ouer-ioyed with this my misfortune,
which did so much the less grieve me, because he had so great a share in it.

What with this (which was vantage enough) and the strong belief that I had
that no man but mine Host could possibly convey away my Cloak, I began
somewhat more boldly to charge him with it; It being ever incident to a good
cause, to put strength into weakness; and to add courage to the He that has
right, has courage.
faint-hearted I began to put it home to him, and told him plainly that he
should answer me my Cloak, and that he had stolen it: But he very scornefully
denies it, i^ering and fleering at me; and the more earnest I was, the more
merry he makes himself. Wherewith my patience was so much moved, that I could
not hold, but threatened him (in my choler) with the Justice; yet did I not
touch at all on this new business, nor spoke one word to him of that which I
had seen. But he, for that I was a young Lad, a poor Boy, and no body to
take my part, began to domineere over me, telling me, that he had a rod for me
in his pocket, and other the like reproachful words, terms only befitting
Cowards, and men of base condition, such as himself. But because worms will
turn again, if they be trod on, and the gentlest Lambs grow mad, if they be
too much wronged, upon multiplying of words one begetting another; and the
latter worse then the former, at last we fell foul. And as the fewness of my
years, and weakness of my strength would give me leave, I tore out half a
brick-bat from the side of a Bench there-by, and threw it at him as hard as
ever I could drive; which, if I had hit him withal, and that he had not hid
himself behind a pillar, I think I had beaten out his brains, and been
fully revenged of the wrong he did me. But he escaped my hands, and ran as
fast as his legs would carry him into his chamber; whence he came forth in
all haste with his sword drawn in his hand.

Here you may see, what manner of men these roaring-Boyes be, since that He
that is faulty (...) coward.
this great Gull does not now seek to defend himself with the force of his
strong and brawnie arms, against those weak and tender twigges of mine;
forgetting, that he said, he would whip me, seeking now to offend me by force
of arms, I being but a grissle, and a poor simple dis-armed chicken. In this
manner then, he makes toward me with his naked sword; whilst I fearing what
might follow, stood upon my guard with two pibble-stones, which I had plucked
out of the pauement. Which when he saw I had now ready in my hand, his courage
began to be abated, and did not dare to draw nearer unto me.

Now with the noise and outcries that were made upon this occasion, the whole
Inn was in an uproar; and all the neighbors there-abouts, hearing the stir,
came flocking in upon us, to see what the matter was. All the whole street
hasted thither, and with them a great throng of people, as well Justices, as
Notaries. There came in two Alcaldes, both at the same instant, and each of
them strove to have the hearing of the cause, laboring to prevent each other.
And the Notaries for their private gain, every one said, that this business
did belong unto him; whereupon they grew at difference and odds between
themselves.

Upon this contention, grew a second quarrel, no less fierce and tumultuous,
then was ours: for on both sides, they dug up their Grandfathers graves,
twitting one another in the teeth with their fathers and their mothers, not
sparing one another wives, ripping up their faults, and the course of life
that they led; wherein perhaps they did not lie: But they would no more
understand one another, then did we. Whilst we were in this hurlyburly, come
in certain Regidores, accompanied with other worshipful Burgomasters of the
Town, who labored to make peace between them, and laid hold on me. Que
siempre quebra la soga, por lo mas delgado: for the weakest must still go to the
wall: and the Skeane there breaks soonest, where the thread is finest. The
stranger, the poor soul, the miserable man, he that has no shelter, no
friends to stick unto him; no great Ones to favor him, he that is deprived of
all succor and comfort, and has no body to defend him, he is the man, whom
the Justice does first take in hand.

They would needs know, what this stir was, and whence it grew. They called
me aside, and took my confession: I plainly told them all that had passed;
but because some that were thereby, might chance to ouer-heare me, I went apart
with the Alcaldes, and told them in secret, that which I knew concerning the
Machuelo, or little young Mule. They were first of all desirous to approve and
verify the cause; but it seeming unto them, that they had time enough to
dispatch all, they used diligence for the apprehending of mine Host; who was
careless of any ill that might come unto him for that offense. And persuading
himself, that all this inquiry was only about the Cloak, made but a jest of
it, and laugh't at it as a thing of nothing, and could no way touch him, for
default of Information, and those due proofs that I was to make, having no
man, besides the Carrier, to witness for me, that I was seen to come in
thither with a Cloak.

But afterward perceiving, that by little and little, this piece of hangings
came to be seen, to wit, the skin, and the rest of the appurtenances, the
copy of my Gentleman's countenance was quickly altered, and began suddenly to
look blanke upon the matter: so that, when they began to examine him, and had
withal before his face showed him the skin; confessing the fact, he was
convicted, not having the heart to deny any thing, but told them the truth of
all that had past.

For it is an assured truth, that base-minded men, infamous in their life, and
ill-conditioned in their carriage and manners, are (as I said before) rank
cowards, and of no courage in the world. For, without having the torment given
him, or before ever that he was threatened with the Rack; vndemanded, he
declared the Thefts, and the Rogueries that he had done, as well in that his
Inn, as his robbing upon the highway, when he was a shepherd: whereby he got
him a Stock, to set up for himself in the world. I all this while listened
very close; looking still when his confession should bring my cloak to light;
but out of the malice and hatred that he bare unto me, that was quite left out.
I used my best diligence I could, to make it appear, but all would not serve
the turn. After they had made an end of taking our declarations, I mean, the
Carriers and mine, because we were strangers, they did in that particular
ratify and approve what we had deposed. And whilst this Plea was depending,
whether or no (till it were determined) they should carry me to prison, and
keep me there (tras paciente, aporreado (as they say) I must have the wrong,
and be beaten too,) there were diverse disputes thereupon. The Notaries were very
glad of this, and they did pretend I should: but one of the Alcaldes stood up
and said, That I had reason on my side, and was in no fault at all: and that
they had no reason to question me any farther; for it was punishment enough
already for me, and too much too, that I was left thus naked in my hose and
dubblet, and was coozened of my cloak. Hereupon, they let me go, but mine
Host, he was led away to prison. And leaving him there, we prepare for our
journey; and all things being made ready, we begin to set forward, passing
along that street, where the Clergymen stood looking for us, each of them
took his Ass, and away we go. By the way I told them the whole success of
the business: they blessed themselves, when they heard of it, and much pitied my
case. But because they could not help it, they committed it to God. My self
and my Companion, what with the long time that was spent in this broyle, and
the haste we had to be gone, we went away without hearing Mass; seeming
rather to fly, then go forth of the Town. I (for my part) never mist Mass
before, being accustomed all my lifetime to that daily exercise of devotion.
From that time forward, it entered into my He that leaves God, God will leave
him.
head, That from so bad a beginning, it was impossible to look for a good
ending. And that now, nothing could succeed well and happily unto me. And so it
fell out, as you shall hear hereafter. Nor can it be otherwise expected, when
we serve our selves, and not God first; and not begin with him, before we begin
our business.

CHAP. VII.
Man's misfortune is here discoursed of, and to that purpose you have a story
told you of the gods of those ancienter times: And how Guzman, being thought to
be a Thief, was apprehended; but afterward being known what he was, he was
set at liberty. One of the Clergymen promises to tell us a story, to
entertain the time withal, upon the way.

THe Egyptians, a great while ago, in those times of old being notable
Soothsayers, (as indeed they were) amongst The Egiptians adoted Fortune as a
goddess.
many other errors, which they had, this was one amongst the rest, that they
adored Fortune, as a Goddess; verily believing, that there was some such thing
indeed. To her, they celebrated a Feast on the first day of the year,
preparing sumptuous Tables, making great Feasts and costly Banquets, in a
thankful acknowledgment of the fore-passed year, and entreating her favor,
for that which was to come. They were fully persuaded, that this Goddess was
she, that had the disposal of all things, giving and taking away at her
pleasure, as supreme Gouernesse over all humane things. This they did, because
they wanted the knowledge of one only true God, whom we adore and worship, by
whose powerful hand, and divine will, heaven and earth are governed, and
whatsoever is created in them both, be it visible, or invisible. It seemed
somewhat strange unto them, and were touched therewith to the quick, when
misfortunes began to light upon them; to see how one mischief came upon the
neck of another; one no sooner past, but another at the heels of them, not
giving them one hour of ease and quiet, never making an end, till they had
made an end of man, and quite overthrown him horse and foot: And how again at
another time (like so many Cowards) they come trooping all at once upon us, and
never leave assaulting us, till they have utterly ruined us, and thrown this
our house of clay down to the ground.

And on the contrary side again, the time does not ascend with that
nimblenesse and quick motion to the top of the highest mountains, as Fortune
does eleuate and lift men up by ways and means, neither seen, nor thought
upon, never suffering them to continue still firm, either in the one, or
the other estate; to the end that he that is dejected, may not despair; and he
that is exalted, may not presume. If the light of faith were wanting unto me,
as it was unto them, I might (giving credit to this their error) happily say,
when such like misfortunes should befall me; Bien veng as mal, si solo vienes.
Welcome is that misfortune which comes alone: yesterday morning I did complain
of little weariness, and of the two demy-Chickens that I had to dinner, going
disguized in your Hermits habit, as unwilling to be known. Afterward, I came
to make my supper upon the stinking panch of a young Mule; and which was worse,
to feed upon the flesh and brains thereof, which was all one in a manner, as
if I should have devoured mine own flesh; I mean, by his The S^e of a Mule,
is an Ass.
fathers side; which may be every man's case, as well as mine. And for an
vpshot of all, the ill luck that I had at last, to be coozened of my Cloak.
Poco danno espanta, y mucho amansa: little losses do only startse and amaze
men at the first, but great ones do quell and daunt a man, making him as gentle
as a Lamb.

What treason has been plotted against me? what squint-eyed Star has
scowl'd upon me? what misfortune followed me, since I came from home? For from
the time, that I first put forth of doors, all things have gone amiss with
me, one mischance being the forerunner of another, and the sad presager of
worser things to come, which like a double Tertian went increasing upon me,
every fit being worse and more violent, then the former, not allowing me the
least intervallum of time, or any space or respit in the world to take any
rest.

Man's life is a warre-fare upon earth, there is no certainty therein; no
settled Man's life, what it is.
assurance, no estate that is permanent; no pleasure that is perfect; no
content that is true; but all is counterfeit and vain. Will thou see, that
this is true? Then hearken to that which I shall tell thee.

The great god Jupiter (for so the Poets faigne him) having created all things
upon earth; and man to be the enioyer of them, commanded the god Content, to
reside in the world, not believing, nor preventing the ingratitude, which
afterward they fell into, following their own proper pleasures and delights,
and bearing themselves in a high and proud fashion: for having this god
continuing amongst them, they did not so much as think on any other. To him
they did sacrifice, to him they offered their oblations, his name they
celebrated with joy; and to him only did they sing Songs of praise and
thanksgiving. Jupiter scorning this contempt, and being mightily offended A
moral Fable of the gods of oldtime, and the Council that was held in heaven
against Mankind.
with man for this strange neglect, called a Council of the gods; and when
they were all assembled together, he made unto them a long Discourse, wherein he
informed them, of the evil Correspondence which man held with him, for that
they did only adore Content, as their true god; not considering the benefits
which they had received from his prodigal hand, being merely his
workmanship, and by him created of nothing. And that therefore they should
deliver their Opinions, what order was to be taken, for the redressing of so
foul an abuse; and what Medicines to be applied for the curing of this their
madness.

Some of the milder gods, out of their tender hearts, and merciful natures,
spoke thus unto Jupiter:

Man, you know, is but a weak kind of creature, framed of a frail and brittle
matter, a corruptible substance, soon dissolved and turned to nothing; and
therefore we think it fit, that they should be helped and held up by us, and
that we should yield them our succor and assistance in all that we can: For,
if it were possible, that we could exchange fortunes with them, and were in
the same state and condition as they are, and every way equal with them, I
doubt me, we should do just as they do. And therefore we are not to make any
great reckoning of the matter: but if we do, and that they must be proceeded
against, we for our parts are verily persuaded, that some mild and gentle
correction will be a sufficient remedy for the present.

Momus would feign have spoke his mind, and his tongue itch't to be let loose,
having already entered into some free language, and would have lash't out
farther, had he not been commanded to hold his peace, and to forbear till it
came to his turn, and then he should have a full hearing. He would gladly
have taken hold on that occasion, to have incensed Jupiter, because it did so
fairly offer it self unto him: but obeying for the present, he meditated in
the mean while on a long Oration, which he meant should make for his purpose,
when it came to his turn to speak. Howbeit, there were not some wanting in
the interim, of equal (almost) condition with himself, and of the same
humor, who stood up and said:

It is not fit (great god of Heaven) to leave so heinous a fault unpunished:
for the offense is infinite, being committed against so infinite a Majesty; and
therefore the punishment ought likewise to be infinite. Our opinion is, that
they should be utterly destroyed, and made an end of at once, and never to have
any more of them created anew; for there is no necessity at all of their being
and living in the world, but may very well be spared. others would not agree
to that motion, but did hold it fit, that great store of Thunderbolts, with
fearful flashes of Lightning, should be thrown down upon them, and consume
them all; and that others more good should be created anew.

Thus as they were delivering their opinions, being more or less rigorous,
according to their several qualities and complexions, till it came to Apollo's
turn to speak, who craving leave of the House, and their favor obtained, in
a grave voice, and with a cheerful countenance, he thus expressed himself:

Supreme Scepter-swaying Jupiter, highest amongst the gods, both in power,
Apollo's speech in man's favor.
and in pity: That grievous accusation, wherewith thou chargest Man, is so
just, that we can not gainsay, or contradict any vengeance, which thou shall
take of them. Yet withal, I can not (out of that great respect which I bear
unto thee) but utter what I think, and plainly to show unto thee, what I have
conceived in my mind, my words being as free from passion, as I hope they
shall be from offense.

If thou destroy the world, in vain then are those things, which thou have
therein created; and it were imperfection in thee, to vn-make that, which thou
have already made; only for to mend that which thou now find amiss: Much
less, would I have thee to repent thy self that thou have made Man; for that
will be but to discredit thy self and thine own work. Besides, how can it
stand with the power and goodness of a Creator, to take too strict a course
against his Creature, and to exceed, by extraordinary means, in his
chastisements?

To destroy these that are now living, and to create others anew, I hold that
not so fit to be done by thee. For thou must either give them, or not give them
free will: if thou give them it, they must necessarily then be such manner of
men, as their forefathers were: If thou not give it them, they shall not be
men: And so thou shall have created in vain that so great and glorious a frame
of Heaven, Earth, Stars, Moon, Sun, together with the composition of the
Elements, and millions more of things, which thou have made in so exact a
manner, and such a singular perfection. So that (which imports your service,
if you will be pleased to take it into consideration) there remains but one
thing to be done to set all right again, without seeking for any other remedy;
or that you shall be driven to use any violent or rigorous proceeding against
them, to the prejudice of your clemency.

Thou (O Jupiter) gave them the God Content, whom they were to have with
them as long as it pleased thee, and no longer: for upon thy will and pleasure,
all things both in Heaven and earth have their dependency. Now, had they been
so wise, that they could have continued thankful toward thee, and have
conserved themselves in justice and obedience toward thee, it had been a thing
repugnant to the goodness of thy nature and justice, not to uphold and protect
them, by enlarging thy favors toward them, and multiplying thy blessings upon
them. But since they have dis-merited this by disobedience, thou ought in
some sort to punish them. For it is not fit, that they should in tyrannous
manner, and with a strong hand possess these so great blessings, to offend
thee thereby: But thou ought rather to take this their god from them, and in
his stead to send down his brother Discontent amongst them, who is very like
in favor unto him, and does resemble him so near, that a man can hardly
discern the one from the other. And so by this means, they will ever
hereafter come to acknowledge their own misery, and thy mercy; thy happy
estate, and their own wretched condition; thy ease, and their trouble; their
pain, and thy glory; thy power, and their own weakness. And then, as thou
shall see cause, thou may distribute thy favors to those that shall deserve
them; and according to thy loving kindness recompense every man according to
thine own good will and pleasure, not making thy benefits alike common to the
good and the bad, by suffering all men equally to enjoy one and the same
happiness. This course being taken with them, I am of opinion, that it will
not only be a sufficient punishment unto them; but will also bring them to a
due acknowledgement of their error. I have spoke my mind and shall now leave
it unto thee (thou mercyimbracing Jupiter) to do that herein which shall suit
best with thine own good liking, and shall make most for thy service.

With this brief advice, he ended his Oration. Then Momus, with his Momus man's
ancient enemy.
venomous tongue, began to lay about him; laboring to exaggerate the offense,
and to set it forth in its vilest colors, induced thereunto not so much for
goodness sake, as that inueterated hatred which he evermore bare unto
mankind. But notice being taken of his passion (which was a known disease in
him) his opinion was reproved, and cryde down by the general voice of that
highest Court of Parliament: All commending the motion that was made by
Apollo. The execution of whose speech was (with an unanimous Mercury, by order
from love, desc^nds on earth, and to what end.
consent) committed to Mercury: Who presently (spreading his wings, and
breaking with them through the air) descended down upon the earth, where he
found the men of this world with their god, Content, feeding and making merry
together, doing him all the honor they could devise, being far from any the
least thought, that this their god should (while the world endured) be
alienated from their possession.

Mercury came to this god, where he was; and having in secret delivered the
Embassage unto him, sent from the gods above, was (though sore against his
will) enforced to yield thereunto. The men were hereupon in an uproar, and
sought to hinder it all they could, and began with might and maine to interest
themselves in the cause; and seeing that there was no remedy, but that this
their god must be taken away from them, they strove to defend him with all the
strength they could make; and taking strong hold of him, they tugged hard for
him, as desirous to retain him still amongst them.

Jupiter perceiving how the world went, and what a coil they kept about him,
came down amongst them, and whilst these men were busied in laying fast hold
on his clothes, (using a pretty slight) he cunningly conuay'd away Content
from amidst his clothes, leaving them Discontent in his stead, with the same
clothes, and the very same habit of raiment, wherewith Content was at that
time apparelled, taking him from thence away with him to heaven. Wherewith the
men that were in this broyle were very well pleased (though thus deceived)
thinking that they had prevailed in their purpose, and obtained what they
desired, since they had their god still amongst them: But it was not so well
with them, as they thought it to be.

This error of those former times (the same deceit yet living still amongst
them) has continued even to this present age. Men did think that Content
remained still with them, and that they had him sure enough here upon earth.
But it is nothing so; for it is only the bare raiment, and outward shape and
resemblance, which they enjoy with them; and Discontent, clapped into his
clothes. And if thou believe otherwise, or conceiu'st the contrary, thou art
vvide of the truth, and a mere stranger thereunto. Will thou, that I make this
plain unto thee? Mark well then what I shall say unto thee.

Weigh and consider with thy self, in any kind of manner thou thy self shall
devise: the Feasts, the Sports, the Bankets, the Musicks, all the delights and
joys, and whatsoever else may most move thy inclination to the highest point
of all, which thine own desire can suggest and paint forth unto thee to the
life. If I shall ask thee by the way, Whither go thou? Thou will answer me
perhaps, and that very proudly: To such a feast of Content. I give it for
granted, that there thou do receive it, and that the place does afford it
thee; the Gardens being fresh and full of flowers; the Rivers plated with their
siluer-streames, and that the Fountains distilling their drops of pearl, may
much cheer and glad thy heart. I suppose that thou have banketed thy self in
sweet and pleasant Arbours, where neither the Sun did offend thee, nor the
air annoy thee. And that thou did enjoy thy desires to their full height,
and that thou had all the sports and pastimes that a man could wish. Yet
notwithstanding, there is no contentment so absolute in this world, which is
not watered with some sorrow. And though in all these things thou had no
distaste at all given thee; but had every thing according to thine own mind:
yet when thou returnest home to thine own house; or layest thee down in thy bed
to take thy rest it is not possible but thou shall find thy self weary, dusty
and sweaty, to have lost thy stomach, or taken cold, to grow heavy,
melancholy, and sad; and peradventure become either mad, or dead. For amidst
our greatest pleasures, happen the greatest misfortunes: And are usually wont
to be unto us Vespers of fear, and of horror; and not Vespers, where the
night passes merrily away from the beginning to the middle, and from the
middle to the end: for in the midst of this thy idolatry, all shall be taken
from thee. Set not thy heart therefore upon them; but slight them, and let them
go by, as if thou did not know them: for there is no trust to be had in them.

Now, by this time, (I doubt not) but thou will ingenuously confess, that this
disguise did deceive thee, these clothes coozen thee, and this mask so blind
thy eyesight; That whereas thou did verily think, that thou had Content
now safe enough in thy hands, thou had nothing more but his outward raiment;
and in it, Discontent. Now do thou see, how there is no Content upon the
earth; and that our true Content is only in Heaven. And True content is in
heaven.
therefore, till thou meet with it there; do not look for it here.

When I resolved on my departure, (O good God) what a deal of content did
represent it self unto me? Me thought, the very thought of it wrought
wonderfully upon me, apprehending no happiness to be equal unto this. With
these eyes of my imagination, I beheld only April, and the beauty of the
Fields in that season; not so much as once thinking on the August, that The
strange alterations in this world.
was to come after: As if I were to suffer nothing, and had been made of some
impossible substance, that could not be subject to perturbations; or these
foolish crosses of the world. Those long and even ways, I conceited as things,
that I was not to go; at least, not to be wearied with them. To eat and
drink at your Innes, and other the like vittailing houses, (as one that did
not know what kind of Vermin, these bloud-suckers were,) I thought they
would have given me my meat for nothing; or if they did take money for it,
that it would have been much better then what you have heard me tell you. The
variety and greatness of things; as Birds, Beasts, Mountains, Woods, Cities,
and whatsoever was inhabited with people, as if I had them all already in my
hand, all did figure forth unto me content, and nothing but content; but could
not find it in any thing, but in a good and honest life.

I did frame in the fabric of my brain, Castles of Content, and that all
things should succeed prosperously with me, and that where-soeuer I came, I
should meet with my Mother, that should make much of me, and my Maid, that
should make me unready, and bring my supper to bed to me, and that should
help me on in the morning with my clothes, and fetch me my breakfast. Good
God, who would think, that the world were so large and so long as it is? I
had seen it in some Maps, and me thought it was all plain and smooth, and
huddled (as it seemed there to be) all together, without any great either
difference, or distance. I did not imagine, there could have been Insipientis
est di^cte non putatem.
so many troubles, and so many miseries in it. But to say, I never thought it,
is a thing that betrays a man to have lineally descended of a race of
Coxcombs, it is a property, that belongs only unto fools; it is the excuse of
rude and ignorant Asses, the child's help, and the careless man's refuge. For
he that is wise and discreet, ought ever to think on things aforehand, to
forecast the worst; and to prevent a mischief before it come.

But I did like a simple Youth, (as I was) having neither wit nor government in
me; and therefore I was justly punished, for that living so at ease as I did;
and being as it were in Paradise, I would go abroad into the world; and like
my first forefathers, could not see when I was well, but I know not out of
what vain humor, must go seek after the knowledge of good, and ill. How
many things began I then to call to mind, when I came out of the Inn without
my Cloak, and was not only coozened, but made a common laughing stock, to as
many as looked upon me! I, would feign have then been feeding on the fleshpots
of Egypt: O how I did long to be at home again! But (as the saying is) elbien,
hasta que se pierde, no se conoce. Man knows not Magis carendo, quam fruendo,
etc.
what happiness is, till he want it.

We were all sad and heavy, and iogged on along in a sullen and melancholy
kind of fashion; and now my honest Carrier was no more so full of his
laughing, as he was before; the wind was laid in that corner, by the trick
that mine Host had put upon him. Before, he threw stones on my house top,
thinking to break the Tyles, and crack my Roof: but when he found his own
to be made of glass, he left his flinging, withdrew his hand, and kept
himself quiet. It is less ill, and more discretion to consider with a man's
Moral lessons.
self, before he speak, what he may chance to hear; and before that he do a
wrong, whether it may be returned upon himself, or no? It is not good for a
man to thrust himself wilfully into danger. For when a man shall take too much
liberty to himself; he shall find a tongue for a tongue, and a hand for a
hand. All things have their equal measure; like do, like have: And he that
will be honored of all, must honor all.

If it enter not (yet at least it ought) into thy consideration, that what thou
have said or done in secret, either shall, or may be pu^shed by some one or
other to the world, and that thou may meet with such a one, that either in
word, or in deed, may reply that unto thee, which thou would not willingly
hear, and less endure: Do not stand upon thy strength, nor rely too much on
thine own might: For though thy affront be not written in thy forehead; yet
will it be made known to all the world. Do not make those thy enemies, whom
with good usage thou may make thy friends. For it is not good to have any
enemy at all, though never so weak. For from a little spark, arises
oftentimes a great flame. What thing's so fair and beautiful in it self;
what more worthy wisemen; what more befitting brave spirits and valiant
Gentlemen; then to measure their action by the rule of reason, to bridle and
reine in their passions, and to carry an even hand in all that they do; to the
end that they may not act any thing vn-aduisedly, and put themselves upon
extremities? Do thou not see, how the world is now altered with our Carrier?
He was now as silent as the night, not a word that comes from him. He laughs no
more, but hangs down his head in his bosom, not daring for shame to lift it
up. Our good honest Clergymen rode mumbling their Mattins to themselves; I was
thinking on mine own misfortunes: and when all and every one of us were as it
were in a wood, even in the thickest of all our contemplations, (every man
thinking upon his own business) two Ministers of justice, with their Officers
at their heels, came in pursuit of a Page, that had stolen from his Master
great store of money and jewels. And by the marks that were given them; it
should seem it was Guzman apprehended for a Thief, and his sufferings.
such another strippling as my self. They had no sooner spide me, but they
cryde out aloud: Ah thou thief, have we caught thee? we have thee safe enough
now, thou can not escape our hands: And presently hereupon they struck me
off the Ass (my brother) with their Fists; and when they had me down, laying
fast hold on me, they fell a searching me, thinking to have found the
stolne-goods about me.

They took off the Pack-saddles, searched the Pannels, leaving not so much
Sergeants and Catch-poles, an uncivil kind of people.
room, as you may put a pins-head between, which they did not narrowly pry
into: and when they could find nothing there, then they began to exclaim,
and cry out upon me; Ah, thou thief, confess and tell us the truth; for we
will hang thee here presently, if thou delay us any longer. They would not
hear me, nor admit of any excuse I could make for my self; and in despite of
the world, without any other cause given, (save their own self-will and
opinion) I, and no other man, must needs be the fellow. They gave me many
blows, thumpes on the breast, boxes on the ear with the backs of their hands,
and many other outrages, wherewith they tormented Man's depraved disposition,
what effects it works.
me, and all, that I might not be suffered by them to speak for myself, and
to pronounce something in mine own defense. And although it did much grieve
me, to see how ill I was used by them, yet I could not choose but laugh to my
self, for that my companion was worse dealt withal; laying more load and
harder blows upon him, than me, as a receiver and concealer of this theft, and
that he was my partner and sharer therein.

Do thou not here perceive the perverse inclination of men, who have scarce
any feeling of their own miseries, when they see those of their enemies, to be
greater then their own? I was not half Cater-cousins with him, because by his
means, I had lost my Cloak, and sup't upon a Mule. And therefore I did bear
mine own hurt the better, because he suffered somewhat more than my self.
They did beat him without mercy; they had no pity of him in the world, but
were still bawlling upon him, that he should discover, whither he had carried
these goods? and to what secret place he had conveyed them?

The poor man that was as innocent as my self, and as free from any such
fault, as the child that is newborn, did not know in the world what to do.
He thought at first that they had been but in jest with him; but when he saw
they were in earnest, and past so far beyond the bounds of sport, and that it
was now no longer a jesting matter, A Proverb.
He cursed the dead to the devil, and all those that should but shed a tear
for him. This sport did nothing please him, and wished by this time with all his
heart, that he had never seen me. The Gown (as they say) was now brusht
clean, not a specke to be seen; all was unfolded, and searched over and
over, but nothing at all to be found: and though the theft appeared not, yet
the rigor of their punishing ceased not: But as if they had the Law in their
own hands, or had been to fit upon us as our lawful Judges, they did use us
most cruelly both in word and deed: perhaps it was given them so in charge
amongst other their instructions. Now they being weary with punching us, and
we with suffering it, they began to bind our hands, and pinion our arms, to
carry us back with them to Seuill.

Let it be in thy Letany, that God would deliver thee from committing any
offense against these three Holy's; The holy The holy Inquisition is well
known to the world, what severe courses they take. The seuerest and cruellest
Officers that are in all Spain. What base and vile people, are the Sergeants
and Catch-poles.
Inquisition, the holy Hermandad, in Castile is a certain Tribunal, that has
a great Jurisdiction, and punishes the fautls committed in the fields, which
has great prerogatives and exemptions from the kings of Spain: And is in that
respect amongst them, that it is styled by the name of Santa, or holy.
Hermandad, and the holy The Cruzada is an Indulgence which the Popes granted
to those, that went to conquer the Holy Land, which is now granted to the King
of Spain, by way of Subsidy against Infidels and Heretics, giving some
final alms toward so pious a work.
Crusada: But if thou be faulty, then pray, That the Lord would deliver thee
from the holy Hermandad: for the other Holy's, having (as they have) upright
Judges, men of truth, knowledge, and Conscience; their Ministers
notwithstanding and Under-officers, are of a different condition. And your
Sergeants and Catch-poles belonging to the holy Hermandad, are in the general,
a kind of most lewd and wicked people; men without Souls, and not worthy to be
spoken of, or named amongst honest men. And very many of them, for a very
little matter, will not stick to swear that against thee, which thou never
did, nor they never saw, more then the money which they took, to bear false
witness against thee, (unless thou bestow the wine upon them, or otherwise
content them, by greasing their fist.) They are in conclusion, of a rascal
kind of race; very Varlets, Buckle-bosomes, Collar-catchers: in a word, they
are Sergeants, and Catch-poles; and so by consequence, thieves, passants, or
but an Ace less; and (as we shall tell you hereafter) those that rob the
Commonwealth where-soeuer they come, as if they had a Commission for these
their open thefts. And now (my honest Sergeant) me thinks I hear thee mutter,
that I speak amiss; telling me, that thou (for thy part) art a very honest
man, and do exercise thy Office well, without abuse unto any. I confess as
much, and say, that thou art such an one, and that I know thee to be so. But
tell me, my friend, (and let us speak it in secret between our selves, that
no body may hear us) do not thou know, (and confess ingenuously) that this
is truth which I speak of thy fellows? if thou know as much, (as thou can
not choose) and that it is so indeed; I talk to them, and not to thee.

Now had we quite lost our Clergymen, we shook hands with them at the first,
who walked afoot their way, and we ours. Shall I tell you, what I thought with
my self? if you will give me the hearing, I will. Trust me, all the blows
that I received, nay, Death it self, would not have been half so grievous
unto me, as to see my self brought back again, in this manner to mine own
Country, if their resolution had held: if they had carried me to any place,
where I was unknown to it, and it unto me, it had not been a Pins-poynt
matter. I should have set light by it, and cast it at my heel, especially
considering, that in the end I must be set at liberty, and come off clear;
and that the truth would at last show it self, and make it known to the world
that I was not the man, they took me to be. We were drawn along like dogs in
a pair of couples, afflicted in that manner as thou may imagine, (if ever
the like misfortune should happen unto thee.) I know not how it came to pass,
(but so it was) that one amongst the rest looked steadfastly upon me, and said to
one that was by him; How now, what is this? I fear me we have taken our mark
amiss, and through our too much haste, have run into an error. The other
answered; Why think you so? He replide; Do not you know, that he; whom we
are to seek after, wants his left Thumb; and this Youth you see, is sound in
that part? Whereupon they went to read their Requisitoria is a Judges Warrant
to another, wherein he requires him to execute his command. Guzman, set free.
Requisitoria, which did set down the marks, whereby they should know him,
and they found they had been deceived almost in every one of them. But
questionless, they had a great desire to beat somebody, and so fell upon him
that came first to hand. Presently thereupon, they vn-pinion'd us, and loosed
our hands, and craving pardon, that they were so much mistaken, they went their
way, and left us soundly paid for our pains; taking some few The Spanish word
Quarto, is a kind of brass coin, whereof four make 3. pence.
Quarto's of the Carrier, for the sight of the Commission, to moysten their
mouths herewith, at the next Inn that they should light on.

No ay mal tan malo, de que no resulte algo bueno.

There is no ill so bad, from whence there does not arise some good. If they
had not stolen my Cloak from me, by having that upon my back, they would not
have perceived, whether I had been sound of my thumbes, or no? But had it so
fallen out, that they should have come to know any such thing by me, it had come
so out of season, that rather then I would have confessed the fact, I would have
first endured a thousand torments. In every thing I had very good fortune. My
money spent, my Cloak stolen, my belly hungry, Guzmans good fortune what is
was.
my cheeks buffeted, my neck out of joint, and my teeth bathed in blood, with
the bobs on my nose, and the dashes that they gave me on the mouth. My
Companion, if he were not worse, was no less ill entreated then my self. And
when they had used us both thus hardly, to make us amends, they cry us mercy,
saying; That we are not the men. I pray mark, what a pretty kind of pardon
this was, and in what good time it came: first, they fall a beating of us,
before they examine us; and when they have almost maimed us, to make us amends,
forsooth, they ask us forgiveness.

The Clergymen were now near at hand, we presently overtake them; they blessed
themselves when they saw us. But I up and told them, what was the cause of our
liberty; for my Companion was so banged about the chappes, that he durst not
dare to speak, for fear he should spit out his grinders.

Every one got upon his Ass, and we began to spur on, but not with our
heels; because with them we were not able to reach to our Saddle-skirts. And I
assure you in good faith, it were a world to tell you, what a bargain we had
of it; how the Fair went, and what a market we made of it.

Then said the younger of the two Clerks; No more of this (my friends) it is
enough. That we may forget part of these sorrows past, and intertaine the way
with some merriment; when my Companion has ended his The Clergymen in Spain,
when they travel on the way, have certain set prayers to say.
Devotion, I shall relate a Story unto you; much whereof happened in Seuill. We
took it all as a favor; and the other having now ended his Orizons, attending
this Discourse with a deep silence, and an earnest desire, we looked still
when he should begin.

CHAP. VIII. Wherein Guzman de Alfarache relates the Story of those two
Lovers, Ozmin and Daraxa.
THE ARGUMENT.
How Ferdinand and Isabell, King and Queen of Spain, took Baca, a City of
the Moors, wherein Daraxa a beautiful and noble Damozell was taken prisoner,
whom Queen Isabell brought with her to Seuill, and there left her in the
custody of Don Luys de Padilla. And how Ozmin a young Gentleman well
descended, and inamoured of that Lady, after he had suffered long sickness for
the imprisonment of his fair Daraxa, went to the said City; together with the
diverse accidents that happened to them both.

AS soon as they had mumbled up their prayers, (which they quickly dispatched)
they shut their Prayer-bookes, and putting them in their Alforjas, (which is a
kind of Wallet) all of us giving diligent ear unto him, the good Priest began
his promised History after this manner:

The Catholic Kings Don Ferdinand, and Donna Isabella, being at the Siege of
Baca, it was so well fought on both sides, (being as bravely defended, as it
was valiantly assaulted) that for a long time it was not known which side had
the better, or where the advantage was like to fall, (Fortune had so equally
spread her wings.) For albeit, the Kings Forces were the greater, and did exceed
the other in number of men; yet the Moors (being likewise many) were
wonderfully strengthened by the good disposition of the situation of that City.

The Queen Donna Isabell remained in Iaen, making provision of all things
necessary for the Camp. And the King Don Ferdinand went forth in person to
supply the Army; which he divided into two parts: In the one he planted his
Ordinance, recommending the care thereof to the Marquesses of Cadiz, and
Aquila, to Luys Fernandez Portocarrero, Lord of Palma, and to the Commendadores
of Alcantara and Calatrana, besides other Captains and Soldiers. In the other
himself was encamped, accompanied with the chief of his Nobility and
Gentry, and most experienced men of Arms; so hedging in the City on every
side, that it seemed as a Center in the midst of a large Circle.

The two Camps lay some half League the one from the other, if the compass
had run right; but because their passage was stopped, they beleaguerd the other
half along by the mountain; and by this means were distanced one from the
other a League or thereabouts: and because they could hardly succor one
another, they agreed (the Council of War having so thought it fit) to make
certain Trenches and Castles; which the King in his own person did often
visit. And albeit the Moors did labor by all means possible, to hinder this
design, yet the Christians made good their Work, valiantly defending what
they had undertaken; there being not a day that past over their heads, wherein
there were not two or three (if not more) skirmishes that past between them;
many on both sides being both hurt and slain. But because the work, (being a
thing of so great importance) should not cease upon those that wrought thereon,
a sufficient Guard did continually attend both night and day: it happened, that
Don Rodrigo, and Don Hortado de Mendonca, Adelantado of Cacorla, and Don Sancho
de Castilla, being of the Guard; the King commanded them to make good that
place, till that the Condees of Cabra, and Urenna, and the Marquess of Astorga
should enter with their Regiments for a certain exploit that was to be put in
execution. The Moors, who (as has been said) were very watchful, seeking to
disturb the work, descended from the top of the mountain with some 3000.
Foot, and 400. Horse, and set upon Don Rodrigo de Mendonca. The Adelantado and
Don Sancho began the fight with them; and now the battle growing hot between
them, the Moors were relieved by many other that sallied out of the City. King
Ferdinand being there present, and seeing how things went, commanded the Condee
de Tendilla, that he should assail them on the other side, so that the battle
by this time grew very bloody on both sides.

The King then seeing the straight wherein the Condee was, and that he was
wounded, manfully fighting against the Moors, he gave order to the Master de
Santiago to assist with his forces on the one side, and to the Marquess of
Cadiz, the Duke of Nagera, and the Comendadors of Calatraua, and to Francisco
de Bouadilla, that they should charge them with their troops, where the
Artillery was planted. The Moors thereupon drew forth another third Squadron
against them, and it was bravely fought on both sides, as well by the Moors
as the Christians. And the King being himself in this conflict, discovered by
those of his Camp, they armed with all the haste they could, and went forth
to aid him. And so thick were the Troops of those that came to succor him,
that the Moors being unable any longer to make resistance, betook themselves
to flight, the Christians still having them in chase, making great slaughter of
them; pursuing them even to the very suburbs of the City; whereinto many of
the Soldiers entered, and got rich pillage; taking some of the principal
persons prisoners; in which number was Daraxa, a Moorish Damsel, the only
daughter of the Alcalde of that Fort. Her beauty was her own, and the most
perfect one, that ever eye had seen: her years were rather shorter, then
full seventeen; being so well grown in the bud, that she was now ready for
the blowing. And being in this true height of excellency, as is here set
down, it was raised much the higher by her discretion, gravity, and graceful
carriage: She spoke Spanish so well, that a man that had not known her, would
have taken her to have been an old Christian: for she might have past amongst
those that speak the purest Language.

The King did highly esteem of this Lady, accounting of her as of a jewel of
great price. And therefore sent her as a treasure to the Queen his Wife, who
made no less reckning of her, receiving her very graciously, as well for her
own desert and worth, for that she was of principal rank and quality, being
descended of Kings, and the daughter of so honorable a person; as also for to
try whether she might be a means to make the City to yield, without farther
fight, and shedding of blood. Whereupon she treated her with all kindness, and
the best usage she could devise, far exceeding the fashion of those her
other Ladies, which were nearest about her person. So that, not as a Captive,
but as a Kinswoman, she entertained her in the kindest manner that could be,
greatly desiring, that such an excellent piece of nature as she was, and where
such surpassing beauty did possess the body, there the soul might not with
foul Paganism be sullied and defiled. These were sufficient reasons of
themselves to have her still in her sight, besides the content she received in
talking and conuersing with her. For she was able to give her so good an
account of the state of the whole Country, and of every particular passage in
those wars (though she were but of young and tender years) as if she had been
of maturer age, and the wisest Counselor in the Kingdom. And albeit the King
and Queen happened afterward to meet in Baca, (that City being rendered up into
their hands upon certain conditions) yet the Queen would never suffer Daraxa
to be from her side, for that great affection which she bare unto her,
promising the Alcalde her father, to do her many particular favors. Her
absence did much grieve him: but the love which he saw their Catholic
Majesty's bare unto her, did somewhat lessen his sorrow, conceiving that much
honor and profit would redound unto her thereby: And so rested himself
contented, and pocketed up his grief in silence. The Queen (as I told you)
would never be without her, and at length carried her along with her unto
Seuill; where, out of the desire she had to win her to be a Christian, for
to dispose her thereunto by little and by little, using no violent, but
tractable means; she took her one day aside, and said thus unto her:

Thou can not by this time (Daraxa) but truly understand how well I affect
thee, and the great desire I have had to give thee content: In requital
whereof, I shall entreat thee for my sake to grant me one request; which is,
that thou will exchange this attire thou now wearest, and put on such clothes
as I shall inuest thee withal, appertaining to mine own person; and to wear,
and enjoy them, being that thy beauty will be much aduantaged by this habit of
ours.

Daraxa mildly made answer; I shall willingly perform, what your Majesty
shall be pleased to command me. For, by obeying you herein, (if there be any
discretion in me, or any consideration of worth in this my weak
apprehension,) I shall from this day forward think the better of it, and hold
it for good, for doubtless it cannot be otherwise, but that these your
Majesty's ornaments will add a grace to my imperfections, and your rich
dressings supply my poor defects.

Daraxa (replide the Queen) it is not your modesty that can make you derogate
from your self. For if ever Nature made a perfect work, she sum'd it all up
in thy self. But not to insist upon the praise of that, which can not
sufficiently be expressed, we graciously accept of this your service, and the
willing tender you make thereof unto us.

Now was Daraxa apparelled after the Spanish fashion, residing certain days
in the Palace, till such time as their Catholic Majesty's departed from
thence, to go to the siege of Granada. And therefore as well for the troubles
that attend the Wars; as also that she might take some savor in the things
of our Faith, the Queen thought it fit to leave her in the house of Don Luys
de Padilla (a man of quality and a Favorite) where she might entertain her
self with Donna Eluira de Guzman, his Daughter and a Virgin; to whom was given
in charge, the care of her entertainment, with express order to use her with
all respect; and that she should want nothing that might give her content. And
albeit she were accordingly received by them, being feasted and courted with
all the pleasures that place could afford; yet it grieved her much to see her
self so far from her native home, besides other causes, which gave her much
more discontent, but those she did not discover; for with a cheerful
countenance, and a pleasant semblance, she made show, that seeing it was her
Majesty's pleasure so to dispose of her, that she did esteem it as a favor;
and so did express it in her looks and gesture.

This Damsel, her Parents had betrothed to a Moorish Gentleman of Granada,
whose name was Ozmin: whose quality and condition, together with his
disposition, was in all points suitable to that of Daraxa. He was young, rich,
of a sweet behavior, personable, discreet, and above all very valiant, and
full of courage, and every one of these parts well adapted, and disposed to
receive many other, which as they were fit for him, so they did well become
him. Besides, he was so dextrous in the Spanish tongue, as if he had been bred
up in the heart of Casiile, and a natural of that Country: (it being a thing
as worthy commendation in virtuous young men, as it is a glory to those
parents, who breed up their children in the knowledge of tongues, and exercise
of Arms.) He loved his espoused Lady with all the tenderness that a Lover
could, insomuch that he did (in a manner) commit idolatry, out of the
reverence and respect that he bare unto her; and would (might he be suffered
so to do) have set up her Statua upon the highest Altars. On her, he did
wholly employ his memory; for her all his senses kept continual watch and
ward, and his will was more hers, then his own: Nor was his Spouse (who was
made all of thankfulness) any whit his debtor. Their love was as equal, as
was their quality, and their affection did truly correspond with their even
condition. But surpassing all the rest, was that most honest course of life;
wherein they conserved themselves. The sweetness of those discourses which by
Letters passed between them, those lovely messages which were sent to and fro
each to other, can not be indeered according to their true desert. They had
visited and seen one another very often, but never treated of love mouth to
mouth. But their speaking eyes parled many times, when their tongues were
silent, which never omitted the occasion to talk together. For both of them
many years before, and yet not very many, because they were both but young,
but to speak more properly, had even from their childhood loved and visited
each other at their pleasure. The parents were knit in so perfect a friendship,
and their children in such straight knots of the fastest love, that to make
this harmony the fuller, they did all desire to be nearer linked (if possibly
it might be) by a strong Alliance: And by this marriage it had taken effect,
had it not, when all was in a manner concluded, been crossed in an unlucky
hour, and by the rigor of some austere Planet, when Baca was besieged.

But upon this revolution of things, and these warlike commotions, it was
thought fit to defer it for a while, waiting for a more convenient time,
wherein their marriage might be solemnized with greater mirth and iollitie, and
such triumphs and feastings performed, as the youthfulness and qualification
required of so sweet and lovely a couple; and seemed necessarily to suit with
the estimation and greatness of both their parents.

You have heard already who Daraxa's Father was: Her Mother was her own
Kinswoman, daughter to a Sister of Boabdelin, King of that City, who had
treated this Match between them. And Ozmin was cousin German to Mahomet, King
of Granada, sur-named The Little. Now that all these fair designs, had
contrary success to their desires, and that Fortune had bent her browe against
them, Daraxa remaining now in the power of those their Catholic Majesty's; and
being left behind in Seuill, as soon as Ozmin heard of it, the exclamations
that he made; the sorrows which he uttered; the sighs which he vented, (as
they were the true Heralds that proclaimed his hearts-griefe;) so did they move
all men to compassion, who could not choose but share, (and that in no small
measure) with him, when they saw such lamentable effects of his great
affliction.

But because the loss was so solely his, and the wound put so home to his very
heart and soul, sorrow did so seize upon him, that in a short time it took
hold upon his manly (yet delicate) body: so that all the whole frame thereof
was out of temper, and fell at last into a grievous sickness, as dangerous and
difficill to be cured, as the remedy was distant, and the cause unknown. The
effects whereof daily increased with mortal signs of death, because the cause
increased; and the medicines that were ministered unto him, being not rightly
applied, did him no good at all. And which is the worst in maladies, the
Physicians did not truly apprehend the nature of his disease, being the most
essential point, for the restoring of a man to his former state of health. So
that his afflicted Parents, despairing of his recovery, had now rendered up all
hope of life; and the Physicians, they had given him over, being of opinion,
that it was impossible he should live; their judgment being strengthened and
confirmed by all those accidents which did jointly concur, and openly
express themselves, in this his painful torment.

But when this sick Lover was treading the last step of life, that he had to
go, and even entering into the doors of Death; a conceit came suddenly into
his head, which representing it self to his imagination, wrought so
effectually with him, that he seemed to draw some fruit from it, and to be
somewhat better then he was: And though his sickness were yet still full of
danger, yet compared with that miserable estate wherein he stood before, the
amendment could not for the time be greater. And out of the longing desire that
he had to put that in execution, which his conceit had formerly entertained,
plotting in his imagination, how he might come to get a sight of his beloved
Spouse, he gained breath, and grew somewhat stronger, stoutly resisting those
things, that might hinder his intent.

Whereupon he licenced his sorrows, and shook hands with melancholy, taking
his leave of them both, bidding them farewell for ever, and did now wholly
intend his health; and by this means began by degrees to grow better and
better, clean contrary to the expectation of those, who had seen how low he
was brought, and in what a desperate estate he was.

True is that old Adage, Desire subdueth fear, trampleth on the neck of
inconveniences, and leuelleth all difficulties, be the way of them never so
steep, never so rocky. And a good and cheerful heart in a sick man, is the
best Sirrop, and the most comfortable cordial in the world; your Amber, your
Coral, your Pearl, your Gold, and all the rabble of your other restoratiues
are nothing unto it. And therefore it is good for a man to make himself as
merry as he can. And when thou see a man once to wax merry when he is sick,
thou may boldly say he mends.

Now then, by this time, our Gentleman is up upon his feet, and though yet
weak and scarce able to walk up and down in his Chamber (his long sickness
having yet made his legs unable to bear his body) he forthwith furnished
himself of a Moore, to be both his Guide, and Interpreter, who had for a long
time served the Kings of Granada as an Intelligencer And putting up good store
of gold and jewels for that journey, and taking with him a good horse, that was
brown Bay, with a Petronell hanging at the arson of his Saddle, and his Sword
and Dagger girt to his side, upon a certain night by them appointed they
depar^ed out of the City, in the fashion and habit of Spaniards; and going by
the way, knowing well how to coast the Country, as being well acquainted with
those parts, they passed within view of the enemies Camp, and having left that
behind them by by-pathes, and secret passages they came to Loja. Where, being
near unto the City, it was their hard fortune to meet with a Captain of the
field, who went gathering up of men which had fled from the Army, and forsaken
their colors. Now as soon as he spied these two, he took hold of them. The
Moore feigned he had a Pasport, seeking for it one while in his bosom,
another while in his pocket, and other parts about him. But because he could
not find it, and for that the Captain perceived he had been out of the rode
way, which made him shrewdly to suspect them, he took them along with him, to
bring them back again to the Camp.

But Ozmin not dismayed herewith, nor suffering any alteration of countenance,
with great boldness and free la^age, making benefit of the Noble-mans name* in
whose power his Spouse was, feigned himself to be his son, stiling himself
by the name of Don Rodrigo de Padilla, and that he came with a message to their
Catholic Majesty's from his father touching Daraxa; and that his health
failing him (which was witnessed by his wanne looks) he was making home with
all the convenient haste he could. Other-whiles, he affirmed he had lost both
his Pasport, and his way; and that to return again thereinto, he had betaken
himself to that path.

But this would not serve his turn, for he still insisted to have them go
back, whilst they either did not, or would not then understand, that he did
not care a button whether they returned or no? His pretension only was, that a
Gentleman of that rank and quality, as he pretended himself to be, should
have blinded his eyes with some few Dubblons; for there is no Generals hand,
that can equal the seale-Royall, which is of so much the more power with us;
by how much we find it firmed and instamped with that more noble metal. For
your poor Shag-rags, and silly snakes, that steal from the Army to return
home: for these (I say) they have teeth, and sharp ones too, and on such poor
souls as these, do they only exercise their power, executing those orders
which are made against such kind of fugitives: But not on them, from whom they
have hope of profit, and may make good gain; for this is that they seek for.

Ozmin suspecting whither these brauings of his did tend; and finding on which
foot he began to halt, followed him close, and began thus to speak unto him:
Misconster me not (Noble Captain) nor think, that it shall grieve me a whit
to return once more back again, nor were it ten times one after another,
should it trouble me to reiterate the steps that I have trodden; nay, I would
willingly repeat the same way again and again; if my health (as you see)
were not wanting unto me; but since the necessity of my return is made
evident and plain unto you: let me entreat you, Sir, not to put me to that
trouble, seeing it is as much as my life is worth, considering the weakness
wherein I now am. And with that, taking a rich ring from off his finger, he put
it into his hand, which was as if he should have thrown Vinegar upon fire; for
he straight grew cool upon it, and kindly said unto him; Sir, God be your
good speed; for I well perceive that you are as you seem to be a man of
principal note, that does not serve the King for pay, nor would out of your
nobleness and point of honor forsake the field, but upon so great an occasion
as this. I shall weight upon you to Loja, where I will give order, that you
pass forward with the more safety. And so he did, remaining both good friends;
and when they had reposed themselves a while, they took their leave.

Attended with these and other the like misfortunes, they arrived at length at
Seuill; where, by the information that he had gotten, he came to know the
street and house where his Daraxa dwelt: he vvalked many a fair turn
thereabout at different hours, and on diverse days, but it was never his good
hap to see her: for in regard she walked not abroad, nor went to Church, she
spent her whole time in her needle, and in recreating her self with her
friend Donna Elvira.

Now Ozmin perceiving the difficulty to compass his desire, and the suspicion
which he might give, (as ordinarily all strangers do, in vvhat-soeuer place
they come: for all men's eyes are upon them, desiring to know who they are,
whence they come, what they seek, and how they live, especially if they
frequent one street more then another, and cast a careful eye either upon the
vvindowes or the doors of some particular house.) Hence arises envy; hence,
a muttering and murmuring of the multitude; and hence, (though none be
interessed in the business) an hatred without a cause. And some vvhisperings
were already begun; vvhereupon he was enforced, for the avoiding of scandal,
to forbear for some few days, vvhilest his servant in the mean while
performed that office, as being a person of less esteem, and therefore the
less observed. But he making no discovery, did only comfort himself in
walking that way in the night at extraordinary hours, and in embracing the
walls, kissing the doors and thresholds of that house.

In this forlorn kind of hope he lived some time, till at length that fell out
which sorted with his desire. For his servant taking the care upon him to
round the house three or four times aday, found out in the end, that Don Luys
was a making up of a certain Wall that was fallen down. Then did he take
Occasion by the fore-top, aduising his Master to put on a poor canuasse
Frocke, or the like base garment, and to thrust himself in amongst the rest,
as a Labourer in that Work. He liked well of the invention, put it in
execution, leaving his servant to look to his horse, and the wealth and
Jewels that were in his Lodging, that he might help himself there-withall,
if need were. And so he went forth to this work: vvhither, when he came, he
demanded, if they had any work for a stranger; they told him, they had. For
his wages, it is to be supposed, that he for his part was vvilling to be
hired at any rate, rather then to sit out. So he now sets himself roundly to
his work, striving to out-worke them all: and albeit, through his many
crosses and discontents, he had not yet recovered his perfect health, yet (as
the phrase is) he drew strength out of weakness: for it is the heart that
commands the flesh. He was the first still that came to work, and the last
that left off: and when all the rest were vvilling to take their ease and
refresh themselves, he was still seeking out something, wherein he might
busy himself: insomuch that being found fault vvithall for it by his
Fellow Laborers, (for even in misfortunes Envy likewise has a hand) he made
them answer; That he knew not how to be idle. Don Luys, who noted his
diligence, had a liking unto him, and was resolving with himself to take him
into his service for the affairs of his house; and more particularly for the
keeping of his Garden. Hereupon he demanded of him, whether he had any skill
in that kind? He told him, A little; and that the desire that he had to do him
service, would in short time enable him much more. He was well pleased both
with his speech and person; for he had found him in every thing, to be as
sufficient, as he was careful.

The Mason had made an end of repayring the wall, and Ozmin was now Gardener to
Don Luys: nor until that day, was it ever possible for him to see Daraxa. But
such was his good fortune (Fortune being willing so to have it) that the Sun
shone bright that morning, the sky was clear, the heavens propitious,
scattering the clouds of his former disgraces, and discovering a new light; by
help whereof, he saw the joyful haven to his long-indured ship-wracks.

And the very first Evening that he exercised this his new Office, he saw his
Spouse coming all alone, softly pacing her steps through a spacous Walk, beset
all with Myrtles, muske-Roses, Iesmines, and other Flowers, gathering here and
there one, vvhere-with she adorned her hair. Now by her attire, he would
never have known her, if the true Original had not well agreed with that
lively counterfeit, which he had imprinted in his heart: as likewise, that he
did plainly perceive, that so great beauty could not belong to any body but
her self. He was much perplexed when he saw her, and debated with himself,
whether he were best to speak to her or no: but his bashfulnesse being as
great, as was his prevention, being hindered by the shortness of that time
wherein she passed along, he hung down his head, making holes in the earth
with a Dibbe that he had in his hand, for the setting of a few choice Slips.

Daraxa turned her head aside, and when in the casting of it, she saw this new
Gardener; she steadfastly began to look upon him: and viewing well that side
of his face (which did most conveniently discover it self unto her) that
place did represent it self to her imagination, where she had so often beheld
her Beloved, (so like did he seem unto her:) vvhereupon, such a sudden
sadness seized upon her, that fainting she fell to ground; and when she came
to her self, taking hold on the Rayles of the Garden, which were wrought of
well-ordered Canes, (according to the fashion of that Country) she sent forth a
most sorrowful sigh, attended with infinite store of tears; and leaning her
hand on her rosy cheek, she called many things to remembrance; wherein, if
she should have insisted upon every particular, and perseuered in the
recordation of them; she might easily have been the author of her own death.
But she did put them off as well as she could, with another new desire which
she had, to intertaine her soul with his sight; deceiving those conceits, with
that little parcel of Ozmins face which represented it self unto her.

Hereupon she rose, but accompanied with a general trembling, (her whole
body and heart, panting and shiuering with an aguish fit of Love) and turning
again to contemplate anew the image of her adoration; which the more
attentively she beheld, the more lively she transformed the same into her
self. It seemed unto her that she had been in a dream, but when she
perceived that she was awake, and that her sight served her, she was afraid it
was some ghost or Fairy-apparition. But afterward, when upon better view she
saw it was a man, a very man, and no Phantasma, she wished that it might be
he, whom she loved. Notwithstanding, she was mightily perplexed in mind, and
cast many doubts with her self, not being able to devise who this man
should be. For his sickness had laid a palenesse on his cheeks, which had
lost their wonted colors; but in all other things besides, as his favor, his
feature, his proportion, and carriage did assure her of the truth: yet his
office, his habit, and the very place wherein he stood, made her discard all
such kind of thoughts, and to dis-deceiue her self: and again, it grieved her
to be drawn out of this error, persisting obstinately in her wish, not being
able to abstain to discover her particular affection unto him, for the
resemblance which he had of him, whom she so dearly loved: whereupon, out of
those her doubtings and anxieties to know what he was, she said unto him;
Friend, whence are you? With that, Ozmin suddenly, and in a starting manner
casts up his head, looking upon his beloved and sweetest pledge, but his tongue
being knit close to the roof of his mouth with the fullest knot of Love;
having not the power to speak a word; and not being able, no not for his life,
(so great was his passion) to answer her with his tongue, he replied with his
eyes, watering the earth with that abundance of tears, which fell guttering
down his cheeks, as if they had flowed from two clear fountains. And with
this, these two dear and faithful Lovers came to have true knowledge each of
other.

Daraxa answered him in his own language, distilling ropes of Pearls in round
oriental drops down her lovely cheeks. And now were they ready to exchange
imbracements, at least some sweet words of Love; when lo, in the instant there
entered into the Garden Don Rodrigo, son and heir to Don Luys, who being
inamoured of Daraxa, did always wait upon her steps, that he might thereby
enjoy the occasion to contemplate on her beauty. Now, that they might avoid all
suspicion, they no sooner spyde him, but Ozmin returned roundly to his labor,
and Daraxa walked leysurely along, as she was wont to do. Don Rodrigo perceived
(by her sad semblance, and inflamed eyes, grown red with weeping) an
alteration in her countenance, and presuming that somewhat had offended her,
(for her looks did show she was not well pleased) he made toward Ozmin, and
asked him what the matter might be of her discontent: who, albeit he was not
fully as yet recovered of his fore-passed perturbation, yet enforced by that
necessity whereunto he was driven, told him; Sir, as you see her now, so was
she when she came hither, she did not exchange so much as one word with me; and
therefore told me no part of her mind, nor do I know whence this her passion
should proceed. Especially, this being the first day, that I entered into this
place: so that it was neither fitting for me to ask her the question, nor
discretion in her to open her heart unto me. With this answer he went his way,
with purpose to learn it out of Daraxa her self. But the more he entertained
himself in this displeasing subject, the larger steps she made, speedily
wheeling about to her Lodging, shutting the doors after her as she went in.

Diverse Euenings and Mornings these two Lovers luckily met, inioying upon
several occasions some flowers, and honest fruits from the tree of true love,
wherewith they gave some ease unto their griefs; Intertaining their true
pleasures, with the desire and hope of that happy time, wherein without
shadows and interruptions, they might freely enjoy each other. But this
content of theirs was as short, as vnsecure. For the extraordinary continuation
of their companying together, and their close discourse, (and that in the
Arabicke tongue) and her excusing herself (for his sake) from the conversation
of her friend Donna Elvira, had already given sufficient distaste to all those
of the house, and Don Rodrigo himself was horne-mad, enraged so with Jealousy,
that he knew not what to do. Not that he had any the least imagination, that
the Gardener did treat with her any thing that was unlawful, or made any love
to her: but because he saw, that he was made worthy to be entertained with so
much frequencie in that sweet conversation of hers, which she did not exercise
so freely with any other in the world.

THE ARGUMENT.
Going on in the discourse of the adventures of these two faithful Lovers,
Ozmin and the fair Daraxa, are delivered at large the troubles, ielousies, and
the sorrows that befell them.

MVrmuring, being the natural daughter of Hatred and Envy, is ever more busily
laboring to stain the lives of others, and to draw a curtain of darkness
over their bright-shining virtues. And amongst people of base and vile
condition, (where most commonly she keeps her Court of Audience) it is the
only sauce to move their appetite, without which their daintiest dishes have
no relish, nor their best morsels any savor in them. It is a bird of the
flippantst vving, which as it moves with most nimblenesse, so it does the
greatest mischief. There were not some wanting, that tossed words from hand to
hand; some adding, and others inuenting matter upon this their so great
familiarity, till the ball at last came to ground, and this whispering to Don
Luys his ear, by one who thought to work out himself a fortune thereby, and
to grow into favor with his Lord, by this his supposed honorable piece of
service.

This is that which the world does practice, seeking to gain great men's love
at other men's cost, by tricks and lies, when in the naked truth there is not
cloth enough to shape a garment according to their mind. An office, worthy
those, to whom their own worth is wanting, and have nothing either in their
actions, or their persons, that may deservedly recommend them.

Don Luys attentively gave ear to these well-composed words, and painted
speeches, on which such fair colors were laid. He was a wise and discreet
Gentleman, and therefore did not suffer them to dwell, where these men had
placed them, but gave them only passage to his imagination, leaving a room
empty for to receive the reasons of the defendant, to whom he had left the
door open, and would by no means give way to have his ears stopped, albeit
he were somewhat offended with the occasion of the scandal. Many things did
he cast in his mind, but still the farther he went, the farther he was from
the truth. But that which did most trouble him, was the suspicion which he had,
that the Gardener was a Moore, who was cunningly come thither to steal away
Daraxa: and persuading himself that it was so, his understanding was
presently blinded therewith. And that which is ill considered on, many times,
nay, for the most part; the execution of that advice is scarce gone out of
doors, but that repentance presently enters the house. Upon this surmise, he
was resolved to take hold of him, and to clappe him fast. Ozmin, without any
resistance, or show of Sorrow, or any other alteration of countenance,
submitted himself to be shut up in the Hall, the fittest place the suddenness
of his surprise could afford for the present. And leaving him thus under lock
and key, he made toward Daraxa, who by the hurrie and tumult of the ministers
and servants of the house, knew already all that had past, there having been
some few days before a muttring of this matter about the house. She showed her
self much agrieued with Don Luys his manner of proceeding, forming complaints,
how he had put in doubt the goodness and unspotted innocence of her life,
setting the gate wide open to Suspicion; and that with this blurre which he
had given to her reputation, every one might think as he listed, and as his
fancy should stand affected, to censure her honor accordingly; for there was
not any suspicion so bad, whereunto he had not by this his unadvised act,
opened a gap to it is entrance.

These, and other vvell-ordered reasons, delivered with an affection of the
mind, and freeness of spirit, made Don Luys quickly repent himself of what he
had done. He now wished with all his heart, (after Daraxa had thus newly molded
him) that he had never attempted any such thing, being angry with himself, and
much incensed against those, who had put this into his head. But that he might
not show his lightness, in being thus misled, and ouer-facile to be wrought
upon by other men's persuasions, but that what he had done, he had done it upon
good consideration, and as the weightinesse of the business required,
dissembling his sorrow, he spoke thus unto her:

Dear Daraxa, I acknowledge the wrong I have done you, and ingeniously
confess that your complaint is not without just cause, in that I proceeded
against you in this uncivil fashion, without having first examined the
Witnesses to the full, who have deposed, (as it should seem) thus wrongfully
against you. I am not ignorant of your own worth, as likewise that of your
parents, and Ancestors, from whom you are descended. I know, that the merits of
your own proper person have purchased of the King my Master, and his noble
Queen, all that love, which a true and only heir can gain of his loving and
tender Parents, having conferred upon you many prodigal and public favors.
To this I must give you to understand, that they placed you in my house; to the
end that you might be served therein with all care and diligence, according to
your own will and pleasure: And that I am bound to give account thereof,
according to the trust that was reposed in me. For which reasons, and for that
which my service deserves at your hands, you ought to correspond (that you may
not be unlike your self) with that fair carriage which is due unto my
loyalty, and the consideration of these things that are now in question. I
neither can nor will conceive, that there can be any thing in you that may
seem unbefitting your breeding, or give the least blemish to your honor. But
the great familiarity which you hold with Ambrosio (for that name had Ozmin
put upon himself, when he first entered to serve as a day-labourer) together
with his talking unto you in the Arabike tongue, has somewhat troubled me, out
of the general desire that all here have to understand what manner of man
this fellow is, and what his first beginning, neither you, nor my self having
seen or known him heretofore. And this being satisfied, you shall rid others
of their doubt, and my self of an impertinent and tedious trouble. I beseech
you (as you are worthy) that you will resolve us of this scruple, assuring your
self for mine own part, that as much as in me lies, I shall ever be ready
to serve you upon all occasions that shall offer themselves, wherein I may be
serviceable unto you.

Daraxa stood curiously attentive to that which Don Luys had delivered, that
she might be able to make answer unto him, (albeit his good understanding had
already prevented her with reasons) in case that any thing had been
discovered. But out of that short term of time which she had to bethink her
self (laying her former thoughts aside) she was driven to make use of other
more material to that proposition which was made unto her, wherewith easily
(leaving him well satisfied) she freed him of his care, making good use of it,
to be more wary hereafter, that she might enjoy her self, as she was wont,
with her beloved; and therewithal she thus said unto him:

My Lord, and Father; (for so I may truly call you) Lord, for that I am in
your power: and Father, for the tender care which you have of me. I should ill
correspond with that obligation whereunto I am bound, and those continual
favors, which I receive from their Majesty's by your means, and by your
intercessions daily augmented in my favor, if I should not deposite in the
Cabinet of your discretion, my greatest secrets: sheltring them with your
shadow, and governing my self by your wisdom: and if with the same truth and
plainness, I should not fulfill all your just desires. And albeit to recall
things to my remembrance (which I may not forbear to recite unto you) cannot
but be a great grief unto me, and even a matter of no small martyrdom; yet
with this I will repay your kindness, and make you become a debtor to my
sorrows, and give you assurance thereby in how much I esteem your love.

Sir, you have already vnderstoood who I am, for it is notorious to you, and
all the world; and how my misfortune or good hap (for I can not, till the fruit
wax ripe, by seeing the end of so many troubles, condemn the one, or commend
the other:) brought me to this house of yours, even at that very time, when a
marriage was in Treaty for me, with a Gentleman of the best both worth and
rank in Granada, being a near Kinsman of those Kings, and anciently descended
from them.

This my Husband (if I may so style him) was bred up, being then about some
six or seven years of age, with another child a Captive Christian, much about
the same years, whom his parents bought for his service and entertainment.
They ever went together, played together, eat together, and usually slept
together, out of the great love that was between them. See whether these were
not pledges of friendship which I have repeated unto you. And so well did my
Husband love him, that had he been his equal, or his nearest Kinsman, he
could not have loved him better. He trusted him with his person; for he was
very valiant; he was the Feoffie of all his pleasures, the Companion of his
entertainments, the Treasury of his Secrets, and in substance his second self.
In conclusion, they were in all things both of them so like, that nothing did
difference them, but their Religion, whereof (out of the greatness of both
their discretions) they never argued, that they might not dis-brother
themselves. For no brothers in the world could love better then they did. And
well did this Captive deserve his love (I spoke amiss, the word Brother better
befits him, and so I should have called him) for his faithful carriage, his
composed behavior, and his Gentleman-like proceeding; in so much, that if we
had not known him to have been borne of mean parents that got their living
by their handy-labour, in a poor Cottage, who were captiuated and made slaves
at the same time, we should verily have believed, that he had descended from
some Noble blood, and generous offspring.

This honest man (I should say honorable; for his virtue deserves that style)
was the Messenger of our entertainments, the Post that ran between us* for
being so faithful as he was, he was the only man that was wholly employed in
that business. He brought me Letters and presents, returning back by him such
due requitals, as in like cases usually pass betwixt those that truly love.

Now, when Baca was delivered up, and he found there, he was set at liberty,
together with the rest of the Captives that were at that time within the City.
But I am not able to say, whether his joy to recover his freedom, or his
sorrow to forsake us, were the greater. This himself can best tell you, as
also whatsoever else you shall desire to know besides, if it please you to ask
him, which is no hard matter for you to do: for this man I speak of, is that
very Ambrosio, which is now in your service, it being Gods will that he should
come hither, for to be a comfort unto me in these my afflictions. I lost him
before ever I thought of it; and when I least looked for him, I found him
again. With him I ran over the whole course of my misfortunes, since the
first time that I was graduated and took degree in them; with him I did
cherish the hopes of my adverse fortune, entertaining a painful life, for to
deceive the wearisomnesse of alingring and tedious time. If this comfort (for
that it is in my favor) shall offend you, follow your own will, for mine
shall ever be subordinate to yours, which you may dispose of at your pleasure.

Don Luys was strooken with astonishment and tenderness, as well for the
strangeness, as the pittifulnesse of her Story. Besides, he was much moved
with her manner of proceeding; for she went on in her Discourse without any
pausing, perturbation, or other accident, whereby he might conjecture, that it
was a made tale, or invention of her own upon the present. Which carriage she
did credit the better, by letting fall from her eyes some effectual tears,
which were able to soften hard Marble, and to rent in sunder the rocky Diamond.

With this speech of hers, Ambrosio was loosed out of prison, without being
questioned of any thing, that he might not wrong the report which Daraxa had
given of him: Only laying his arm about his neck, looking cheerfully upon
him, he told him. Now I know Ambrosio) that thou have some noble blood about
thee; and though this should be wanting unto thee, thou art able to give it thy
self by thine own virtue and nobleness. For by that which I have lately
heard of thee, I am obliged henceforth to use thee with that fairness as thy
worth deserves. Ozmin told him; In this, Sir, you shall do like your self;
and the good which I shall receive from you, I shall ever make it my glory,
that it came from the largeness of your hand, and from so noble a House as
this is. This past, he was permitted to return again unto the garden, with the
same familiarity as before, if not with much more license and freeness of
liberty. So that now they talked together as often as they would themselves,
without any scandal at all.

In this interim, the King and Queen had still a care to know how it was with
Daraxa, as well in the state of her health, as otherwise; whereof particular
advice was given them from time to time, who were very glad to hear of her
well-doing; and did continually in their Letters recommend her very dearly to
the care of Don Luys, with express charge to use her with all kindness.

This favor of theirs wrought so much, that as well out of the desire to stand
in grace with their Majesty's, as out of Daraxa her own deserts; not only Don
Rodrigo, but most of the principal Cauallero's of that City, wished in their
hearts she were a Christian, that they might make love unto her, pretending to
take her to Wife. But because Don Rodrigo had her (as has been said) in his
custody, he was in the common opinion of the World, amongst all the other
riualls thought to be most favored by her. The case was very clear, and this
suspicion not without great likelihood. For of his quality, condition,
behavior, and fair proceeding, she had had very good trial; and ostentations
of this nature, and apparences of such commendable parts as these, are not wont
to be of the slightest moment, nor the lowest round in the Ladder, that climbes
unto honor. For when a man shall have made public demonstrations of his
virtues, and his noble carriage, it is to be presumed he will be no less
beloved, then he is known; and so get advantage of those, who (when it shall
come to matter of opposition) shall be vnder-valued by opinion. But as if these
Lovers had exchanged their souls, and none of them possessed that which was
his own, they were as firm in loving, as far from offending.

Daraxa never gave way by any dis-composture, or unjointed behavior, or any
other occasion whatsoever, whereby any one might presume more then other upon
her favor; howbeit, all of them adored her, left no means unsought to procure
her love, nor no nets vnspred, seeking by trains to draw her within their
reach, but none of them had any ground, whereupon to build their hopes.

Don Rodrigo perceiving how little his services did avail him, how his labor
was in vain, and the small remedy that he found, since after so many days
spent in her continual conversation, he remained in the same state as he did
the very first day, neither better nor worse, for ought he knew, it came into
his consideration to make use of Ozmin, thinking by his intercession to get
into her favor; and taking this to be the best and surest way to work his
ends, being one morning in the garden, he brake thus with him:

Friend Ambrosio, Thou can not but know the obligations which thou have to
thy Religion, to thy King, to thy Country, to that bread which thou eatest of
my Fathers, and to that desire, which we have of thy good. I conceive, that as
a Christian of that quality, which thy works do publish, thou will correspond
with that thou professest thy self to be.

I come to thee, moved thereunto by a great necessity (which now offers it
self unto me) whereupon does depend all the increase of mine honor, and the
safety of my life, which wholly lies in thy hands. If discoursing then with
Daraxa, amongst other reasons, thou shall work her by force of Argument, that
she forsake this false Sect, wherewith she is now infected, and make her to
become a Christian, thou can not but see what good will come thereof: first,
Salvation to her own soul; next, good service unto God; thirdly, great
content to their Catholic Majesty's; fourthly, honor to thy self in thy
Country; and lastly, to my self perfect happiness. For, desiring her to
Wife, I mean to be married unto her, and the benefit shall not be small which
thou shall make by this voyage; for it shall be as profitable, as it shall be
honorable unto thee; and therefore strain all the wits thou have to bring
this good purpose to pass. For besides that thou shall be rewarded by God,
for the soul which thou shall gain, I for my part will, with many requitals,
and those real, recompense the life which thou shall give me by thy good
diligence in this business, and if (exercising thy power with her,) it shall
be my good hap to win her by thy intercession. Do not refuse to do me this
favor, since thou can do so much with her: And because there are so many
ties upon thee, to induce thee hereunto, it is not fit that I should press
thee any further, or be too importunate with thee. To whom, when he had ended
his exhortation, Ozmin made him this answer:

My very good Lord; The same reason, wherewith you seek to bind me, ought
likewise to oblige you to believe, how much I desire that Daraxa should follow
my Religion, which very earnestly, diverse, nay infinite times I have persuaded
her unto. My desire is no other, then your own; and therefore I will use all
diligence in this particular cause, as in a thing wherein I am so much
interessed. But loving her betrothed friend, and my Master so dearly as she
does, to treat with her to turn Christian, were but to double passion in her,
without any other fruit at all: For she has some hopes yet alive in her, that
Fortune may turn the wheel again, flattering her self with some accident or
other, whereby in time she may come to enjoy her desire. This is all that I can
yet learn from her, she is still harping upon this string, and (for ought
that I can perceive) very constant in this conceit of hers. But that I may
comply with that, which you command me, I shall (though I were sure my labor
should be fruitless) return once more to treat with her in this kind; and
when I have done, I will acquaint you with her answer. The Moore did not lie
in any one word that he said, had he been rightly understood; but (not thinking
on a thing so remote) Don Rodrigo gave credit, not to that which he truly, but
to that he formally delivered. And so (though deceived) he had some confidence
with him, and was not clean out of hope. For Quien de veras ama, Se-enganna,
con desengannos: He that truly loves, is deceived with that, which ought to
dis-deceiue him.

Ozmin (when Rodrigo was gone) remained so sad to see the open instance which
was made to his own hurt, that he was ready through jealousy to run out of
his wits. Which did so afflict him, that from that day forward you could never
get a cheerful look from him, and making things impossible, seem possible
unto him, he did wrestle and struggle with himself; imagining, that this new
Competitor (being powerful in his own House and Country) might use some
tricks and devices, wherewith to hinder his intent, being so sollicitous as he
was, and so earnest in the business. He feared again on the other side, lest
she might be wrought to alter her former affection; for many batteries make a
breach in the strongest walls; and with secret mines they are blown up, and
laid level with the ground.

Out of this jealousy of his, he discoursed in his thoughts of Tragical
ends, and disastrous accidents, which presented themselves unto his fantasy,
which he did not so much believe, as he did mightily fear, because he was a
perfect Lover.

Daraxa seeing how her dearest beloved had for many days together continued in
this melancholy mood, was very desirous to know the cause of this his sadness:
but she could not wring it from him, nor did he speak a word of that unto her,
which had past betwixt him and Don Rodrigo. She (poor Gentlewoman) knew not
what to do, nor which way to work him to be merry; howbeit with sweet
words, uttered from a daintier tongue, pleasant smiles, and a constant heart,
much augmented by those fair eyes, whose warm tears did be-dew her tender
cheeks with those cristall waters which did slow from them, she softly breathed
forth (having first sent forth many a sigh, as heralds of her sorrowful
mind: these few words unto him.)

Lord of my life and liberty; my betroathed, whom I honor and obey, what
thing can there be of that force, (I being alive, and in your presence) that
should thus to my hurt torment and grieve you? May my life peradventure be the
price of your joy? or how will you be pleased to dispose of it, whereby my
soul may be freed from this hell of sorrow, wherein for your sake I am
tormented? Let the cheerful heaven of your countenance, scatter those clouds
wherewith my heart is ouer-cast, if I am able to do any thing with you; if
the love which I bear you deserves ought; if the grief wherein I am may move
you to pity; if you will not that my life receive its burial in your secrecy,
I beseech you to tell me the cause of your sadness. Here she stopped; for her
tears had choked her utterance, sorrow working on them both, one and the same
effect; for he could not answer her otherwise, then with the scalding tears of
love, each striving with their own to dry up the others, seeming both to be
one and the selfsame thing, as long as their tongues were thus tied, and the
current of their speech stopped.

Ozmin, with the oppression of his sighs, (for he closely smoothered them)
fearing (if he should vent them) to be ouer-heard, did so long resist them, by
returning them back again unto his soul; from whence they would have broken
out their way, that he fell down into a swoune; and so deep an one, as that
he lay for dead. Daraxa knew not what to do, nor how to fetch him again, nor
which way to comfort him, nor could she conceive what might be the cause of
this so great and sudden an alteration, having formerly been accustomed to
show himself merry and cheerful. She was very busy in wiping his face, in
drying his eyes, putting her fair hands upon them; after she had dip't a rich
hand-kerchiefe, that she had about her in the water, imbroydered with gold and
silver, inter-wouen with diverse other glorious colors, and scattered here and
there with pearl, and other devices of wonderful both worth and workmanship.
So much was she transformed into this pain of his; and her senses so wholly
taken up in seeking to recover him, that had this fit continued but a little
longer, Don Rodrigo might have found them little less then arm in arm; for
Daraxa had his head leaning on her knee, and one side of his body folded in her
Gown, when he first began to come to himself. Now when his Senses were come
again into their proper places, and all was well, thinking to have taken his
leave of her, Don Rodrigo on the nicke, comes into the garden. Daraxa (though
much troubled) came off as handsomely as she could, leaving through haste her
curious hand-kerchiefe on the ground, which was quickly taken up by Ozmin, who
presently had it in his eye.

Now when she saw that Don Rodrigo drew nigh, she went her way, and left them
two alone together: Rodrigo (when he saw the coast was clear) ask't him what
he had done in the business? He told him, (as he had at other times) that he
found her so firm in her love to her betrothed friend, that she will not only
not be won, (as you pretend) to be a Christian: but if she were so, yet for
his sake, she would willingly turn Moore; so extreme is her own folly, the
love of her Religion, and of her husband. I treated your business with her;
and to you, because you attempt it, and to me, because I propose it, she
bears us both that hatred, that she is resolved, if ever I speak word
thereof again, never any more to see me; and as for you, you see, she no
sooner saw you, but she went her way. So that I would not have you weary out
your self in this suit, nor spend any more time in it; for I see it will be
but in vain, and a hopeless piece of work. Don Rodrigo was stricken deeply
into his dumpes with this so resolute an answer, delivered with that
sharpness, which made it the more sour and unfit for relish. From that time
forward he began to suspect that Ozmin was rather in his prejudice, then
profit, and did rather dis-aduantage, then advance his pretension. Howsoever he
thought at least with himself, that though Daraxa might happily have given so
distasteful a reply, yet it did ill become him to report it unto him, in that
rough fashion as he did, making himself, as it were, master and ruler of the
roste: but such impossible things in their encounter are Love and discretion;
for evermore a man is so much the more confounded and troubled in himself, by
how much the more he loves and affects: hereupon did represent it self
unto him that strict league of amity and friendship, which Daraxa reported to
have been betwixt him and his old Master, he imagined, that love was still
alive in him, and could not be persuaded, that the ashes of that fire were yet
grown cold. With this conceit (which was reinforced by his passion) he was
fully bent to put him out of the house, informing his father how unfitting it
was; nay how dangerous to permit (where Daraxa was) such a one, as might
intertaine her in the Discourse of her former Love, still putting her in mind
thereof, especially it being their Majesty's intent and purpose to have her
turn Christian: which would be hard to do, as long as Ambrosio was there. Let
us, Sir, (said he) make some trial by sundring them some few days one from
another, and then we shall see what effect it will bring forth.

Don Luys did no whit mislike his sons council, and presently picking a
quarrel, where no cause was, (for of great men we must not ask the reason of
things; and a Captain with his soldiers will be bold now and then to make
fifteen of two ^ights) he dismissed him of his service, commanding him, that
he should not so much as once dare to pass by the door. And he took him so
on the sudden, that he could not take his leave of Daraxa. And so obaying his
Master, faining less sorrow, then what he felt, he removed his body from
thence, for that pledge he could carry whither he listed) but for his soul,
that abode still with her, in whose power it had formerly so long remained.

THE ARGUMENT.
Continuing the Story of the love of Ozmin and Daraxa, are recounted the
troubles and griefs that befell them both: as also those public Feasts, that
were made by diverse Knights and Gentlemen, for to glad and cheer up the
dis-consolate Daraxa: and of the valor which Ozmin in disguise and unknow,
did perform in them.

DAraxa seeing so sudden a change, began to suspect that his former sorrow had
its birth from that new success; and now by the sequel assured her self it
was so: whereupon adding one evil to another, sorrow to sorrow, and grief to
grief, wanting the sight of her espoused Lord; albeit the poor Lady did
dissemble it all that she could, yet this was that, which did most trouble
her. Give them leave to weep, howl, sigh, cry, and talk, that find
themselves afflicted: for albeit they do not therewith take away the burden
of that pain which they endure, yet it does lessen sorrow, and makes the load
somewhat lighter. She was so deprived of all content, so heavily sad, and so
bodily afflicted, that you might read her griefs not only in her face and
countenance, but throughout all the course of her carriage. Our inamoured Moore
would not change his estate and condition of life; for as he went clad before,
the same style he still continued, and in the habit of a day-Labourer, he
followed his painful fortune: therein he had had good success, and he hoped
the like with advantage. He daily followed his work hard, where there was
ought to be got, going in this sort from place to place to prove his fortune,
trying if by this means he could come to hear or hearken out any thing that
might import him, or serve his turn concerning Daraxa: for no other end or
interest in the world had he but this, to labor so hard as he did; for he had
liberally to spend with a large hand for many days together, out of the means
that he had brought from home in money and in Jewels. But as well for that
which has been said, as also because he was well known in that habit,
that he might have the freer license wheresoever he came, and himself remain
safe in his person under this disguise, lest his designs might otherwise be
overthrown, he continued his wonted wear.

Those young Canallero's that served Daraxa, knowing the favor that she bare
to Ozmin, and that he was now no longer servant in Don Luys his house, every
one did covet him for himself and his own ends, and happy was he, that could
make the first purchase; so general was their desire to have him theirs.

But Don Alonso de Cuniga got the start of all the rest, being a Gentleman of
that City, one that was borne to a great estate, young, gallant, and rich, and
one that was confident, that others want, and his wealth, by the help of
Ambrosio, should carry the business. He commanded him to be sent for,
entertained him in his service, did him many known good turns, made him more
aduantageous proffers, gave him many kind and loving words, and in conclusion,
a kind of friendship was begun between them, (if any such thing may be found
between master and man:) notwithstanding, inasmuch as man is compatible, it is
commonly called by the ^ame of Priuancie or Inwardnesse; whereinto men grow by
some deserving service, with whom having run over some passages, he came in
the end to discover his desire unto him, promising him great rewards: all which
was ^ut an opening unto him of his old wounds, and a ripping up of his sores,
to make them greater then before: if he were ielous before of one, now he had
two Corriuals, and within a short time after, he knew of many which his Master
had discovered unto him, and which way they marched, and the means whereby
they thought to prevail: but for his own part he neither sought, nor desired
any furtherance of others, save only his good intelligence, believing (as he
verily persuaded himself) that solely his intercession should be sufficient
to effect it.

I am not able to imagine, much less to express the grief which he
conceived, seeing himself now the second time to be made a Bawd to his own
wife: and how fitting notwithstanding it was for him to past* through all these
pikes with a discreet kind of dissimulation.

He entertained him with good words, for fear lest it might happen unto him,
as it did with Don Rodrigo; and if he should carry himself violently and
inconsideratly with the rest with whom he had to deal with, he should find
his hands too full, and give himself a great deal of trouble, and in the end
lose all, and not come to the knowledge of any thing concerning his
bestbeloued. And if we will peaceably enjoy the end of our desires, we must put
on Patience and sufferance in the atchieuement of them.

He bore him fayrely in hand, albeit his heart was all on fire, his various
thoughts gave him many a shrewd battle, and assaulted him on every side,
galling him in such cruel manner, that like a Bull enraged, he knew not how to
help himself, nor whither to fly for succor, nor behind whom to run, nor
could he find any comfort for to ease those intolerable torments which he
endured. The Hare was single, the Grayhounds many, and all light-footed, they
had certain Falcons too in their favor, that for all their high place, would
not refuse to stoop to their Lure, for hope of reward: to these I may add a
number of she-friends and acquaintance, coming to visit and banquet with
Daraxa, who too too usually set fire to the honor of many a fair Lady, and
blow the coals of Lust in many Noble houses of good report and honest fame:
many Ladies and Gentlewomen enter (for such they are in appearance) and all
forsooth under the fair name of Uisites; some, out of the difficulty they find
at home in their own houses to effect their purpose; others, to work deceit,
and to bring innocent Dames, by one device or other into the same net, wherein
themselves have been caught. Of these kind of creatures there are great store,
the world is full of them, and the practice too too common. Nay, out of the
principallest and grauest sort of Ladies, the Devil has not been careless in
working them to become pot-lids, and couers to these boiling vessels of
concupiscence. These are those silver Plates, that cover many a sweet morsel,
after which your Gallants so eagerly long to lick their lips, and are so
sharp set. All these things did he fear, and many more, but most of all Don
Rodrigo, to whom both himself, and the rest of the Riuals bare great hatred
for his false arrogancy, whereof he cunningly made use, to have them thereby
to desist from their purpose: and the more to daunt and amate them, he made
them all believe, or at least would feign have them so to think, that he was
the only man that was like to carry Daraxa, as having the best means and
opportunity, (besides his own desires) to grow into her Love and favor.
Hereupon they spoke courteously unto him, but in their hearts they wished him
hanged; they powered honey to him out of their mouths, leaving rancour and
poison in their breasts; they saluted him kindly, but cursed his very bowels and
intrailes, desiring to see them burst in a thousand pieces; they smiled upon
him, but as dogs do grin at Waspes, they longed to have a snap at him: this
is the common fashion now in Court, and more particularly amongst those of the
greatest rank and quality.

Now let us return again to Daraxa, and speak of the torments which she
suffered; of the care which she took to know what was become of her dearest
Love, whither he was gone, what he did, how it was with him in his health, how
he spent his time, and whether he had got him some other new Mistress; and
this did trouble her most: for albeit mothers have likewise some sorrow for the
absence of their children, yet notwithstanding the case is not alike: for they
only fear the life of their child, but a wife the loss of her husbands love,
lest some other woman with fawning blandishments, and smooth flatteries should
draw his affection from her. What days so sad as those, what nights so
tedious, as for a woman to weaue and vn-weaue her thoughts, like Penelope's
Web, with the chaste desire of her beloved Ulysses?

I shall utter much by being silent in a passage of this nature, for to paint
forth such a sorrow as this, small was that cunning, which a famous Painter
used upon the death of a young damsel, who after he had painted her dead,
stretched out to the life lying in her Coffin, he placed round about the
Coarse, her parents, her brethren, her kinsfolks, her friends, her
acquaintance, and her household servants in their proper places; and with that
grief which was fitting for every one of them in their several degrees: but
when he came to her father and mother, he left off to finish their faces,
giving every one license and free liberty to pourtrayt forth such a sorrow,
according as he himself should there with be affected; for neither words nor
pensill were any way able to manifest a parents love, or the sorrow that they
conceived, save only some actions, which we have read of Heathen people. The
same course must I take. The pensill of my rude tongue, shall be but a gross
vnhewen stick, fit only to form blots and blurres; and therefore it shall
be wisdom to leave it to the discretion of the hearer: and to him that shall
understand History, to refer it to his consideration in what manner such
passions as these are to be apprehended. So that every man may measure it by
his own imagination, judging others hearts by their own.

Daraxa was so surcharged with sorrow, that her outward remonstrances
manifested her inward afflictions. Don Luys seeing her so wholly taken up with
melancholy, as also Don Rodrigo his son, both of them for to cheer her up,
ordained certain feasts; as that of the running of Bulls, and their juego de
cannas: And because the City was so well fitted for these pastimes, it shortly
after took effect. Now those that were Actors in these sports, had every one
of them his several device, wrought in different sorts of silks and colors,
expressing therein their diverse passions; one, his Despair; another, his Hope;
this, his Captivity; that, his Jealousy; some their Joy, some their Sorrow,
and some their being in Love, and the like. All which, and more too, did meet
in poor Daraxa.

As soon as Ozmin knew that this appointed feast was to be performed, and
that his Master was one of the number he thought with himself, that it were
not time ill spent to see his Mistress, by giving some proof of his valor, and
setting himself forth that day amongst the rest. Which being come, just as the
Bulls began to rune, he mounted upon his horse, both he and it being in every
point very well fitted. His face was scarfed with watchet Taffata, that he
might avoid the common eye, and his Horse had his eyes vayled with a bend of
black. He feigned himself to be a stranger; his servant went before him,
bearing in his hand a goodly strong Lance, he rounded the whole place,
beholding many things of admiration which were therein: but above all, the
beauty of Daraxa did outshine the rest, as the day does the night; and in her
presence all the other Dames were but darkness. He placed himself right over
against her window; whither he was no sooner come, but he saw the place much
altered, every man flying as fast as he could from a fierce Bull, which at that
instant they had let out of the Paddock; it was a Bull of Tarifa well grown,
cunning in the carriage of his head, and as stout as a Lion, and as full of
rage. Who was no sooner let forth, but giving two or three nimble bounds, put
himself into the midst of the place, making himself Master of all that Round,
to the great affright and terror of all that were there. He turned his
frizzled front from side to side, whilst diverse darts were thrown at him,
which he did easily shake off, and used such art, that he would not suffer
them to gall him in the flank, or other his inferior parts: and this he did
avoid, by using certain light friskals, which he performed so dexterously as
they could not touch him. Now, there was not a man in all the place that durst
to encounter him a horseback, and those that were a-foot, durst not expect
his coming, nor look him in the face, though he were never so far from
them. So that for very fear they left him all alone, and not one man save
only Ozmin, and his servant, was to be seen any thing near him in all that
circuit of ground.

The Bull, as if he had rode on the wings of the wind, ran with all the
speed he could, directly toward this Gentleman; so that he was forced to
betake himself suddenly to his Lance, which he had not taken into his hand,
when the Bull was first let loose, and lifting up his right arm, bearing his
Lance for his best advantage, whereat was fastened Daraxa's Handkerchiefe
which she left behind her in the Garden (as you have heard heretofore) with a
graceful kind of actiuenesse, and a gallant aim in the carriage of his arm,
he charged home upon him; and making way by his neck, he ran his Lance
quite through his body, which made no stay till the point thereof had nailed
the hoof of one of his farther feet to the ground, leaving him there for
dead, without any motion in the world; there only remaining in his hand the
short broken truncheon of his Lance, which he casting away from him in a
careless fashion, he victoriously, but modestly quitted the place.

Daraxa was much rejoiced in the sight of him: for when he first made his
entrance, she knew him by his man, who had sometimes also been her servant; as
likewise by his handkercher, which after the Bull was slain, he wore about his
arm. All that were there present, with a general murmr, remained full of
admiration, giving him due commendation, in clearing the happiness of the
stroke, and the strength of this unknown Knight. Nor was any thing else in the
mouths of the multitude, then the discoursing of the brave performance of this
business, delivering the manner thereof one to another; and though they had
all seen how it was, yet every one spoke thereof a-fresh, and it seemed to
them as a dream; some in wonder clapping their hands; others highly extolling
his valor; one speaks with his fingers; another stands amazed; a third
blesses himself; a fourth lifts up his arm; a fifth acts it with his hand,
all of them having their mouths and their eyes full of joy; a sixth bows down
his body, and suddenly leapes up again in the air; some bend the browe, and
some being ready to burst with content, make graceful Matachines, with many
other pretty Antike-gestures.

All which to Daraxa seemed so many degrees of glory* Ozmin withdrew himself
out of the City into certain back-Gardens, out of which he formerly came; and
(leaving his Horse, and changing his clothes, with his Sword under his arm,
returning in the habit of Ambrosio) he came to the place; taking his Stand
where he might see what he most desired, and was seen again by her, who
loved him more then her own life. They took great pleasure in beholding each
other; howbeit Daraxa was very fearful, lest some misfortune might befall
him, standing there a-foot amongst the multitude: she made signs unto him,
that he should get up upon a Scaffold: but the made show that he did not
understand her meaning, standing there still, till the Bulls began to run.

By this time the evening was far spent, and with the approaching of the
night, those that were to sport at the juego de Cannas, made their entrance in
manner following:

First of all, the Trumpets, Fifes, and Drums, accompanied with diverse other
sorts of Music, presented themselves, being cladde in rich Liueries of sundry
colors; after whom followed the Azemilas, or Sumpter Mules, laden with bundles
of Canes.

The Companies that were to maintain this sport, were likewise eight,
answering to the number of their bundles of Canes. Every one had his Sumpter
Cloth of Velvet cast over the Canes, richly imbroydered with the Arms of their
Master in Silk and Gold, the Garrotes belonging thereunto, being all of silver.

After these, entered two hundred and forty Gennets, richly furnished for 48.
Knights, which were five a piece for every man, besides that which came in with
the Canes, which made up fix in the whole. But they that entered first on the
right hand, came in two Files, opposing themselves against the adverse part.
The first two horses (which as if they had been yoaked together, ran on in
an even and equal course) were assisted by five others of a side, bearing
their Owners Targets at the Arson of their Saddles, offering their fairest show
to the eyes of the Spectators; wherein were depainted their Emblemes and their
Motto's, set forth with fair Scarfes, rich Ribbonings, Tassels and Buttons of
the best both silk and gold, with sundry other borderings and costly
imbroyderies, every man suting himself according to his own humor, and
particular fancy. Most of the Horses had their Pettrels stuck full with Bells,
all their other furniture and trappings being very rich and curious, they had
sumptuous head-stals of gold and silver, set with precious Stones, as thick as
they could stand each by other: it shall suffice, for the better amplifying of
what I have spoken, that they were in Seuill, where there is no small store of
them, nor make little esteem of such things; and that these Knights and
Gentlemen were Lovers, Competitors, rich, and young; and the Lady for whom they
strove, present amongst them. These entered in at one gate of the Place, and
when they had given it a round, they issued out at another near unto that by
which they entered. So that the one did not hinder the other either in their
coming in, or their going forth: and thus they past in very good equipage as
could be desired.

The Horses having quit the place, these Gallants entered in again, the whole
eight squadrons running two and two together, well attired themselves, with
their Liueries attending upon them (as before has been delivered) and with
their Lances in their hands, which they strongly brandishing, made the stock
and point thereof seem to meet together, whose nimble shaking caused every
single Lance to appear to be four. Presently upon this, encouraging their
proud Gennet with their loud shoutes and cries, and wounding their Satin sides
with their sharp Spurs, you would have thought them rather to fly, then
run; their Masters, and they, seeming but one ioynt-body, so closely did they
keep themselves in their seats. Nor is this any Hyperbole, or ouer-indearing
what was done, since that in all parts almost of Andaluzia; as Seuill, Cordoua
and Xerez de la frontera, they bring forth their children (as it is commonly
said) from the Cradle, to the Saddle, as in other parts they accustom them to
carry Canes. And it is a wonder in such tender years, to see such hard
steeles, and such dexterity and agility of body. For to do these things, is an
ordinary exercise amongst them. They gave a turn about the Place, running to
and fro from all the four parts thereof: and then leaving the place for a
while (to recover fresh breath) and to give some pawsing to the Spectators)
they entered again, as before, (changing still their Horses) with their Targets
on their arms, and their Canes in their hands.

Then they divided themselves by six and six (as the manner there is) and in
a handsome well-ordered fashion began their sport. Wherein having continued for
the space of a quarter of an hour, or thereabouts, some other Gentlemen thrust
in amongst them to part the quarrel, beginning with their fresh Horses a
well-prepared skirmish, both the one and the other from all parts of the Place,
ranging and marshalling themselves in such good array, observing such due both
time and measure, that it seemed a very fine contrived dance: the beholding
whereof, as it held the people in suspense by possessing all their faculties;
so did it give them singular content. But this sport was interrupted, and
wholly disordered by the sudden approach of a furious Bull, which they had let
loose from the other side of the place. Those that were a horseback, changing
their Canes into Iauelins, (which they had ready at hand) began to cast
themselves into a ring, seeking to shut him in on every side: but the Bull
stood stock still in the midst of them, not knowing whom he should first set
upon: he cast his eyes upon them all, tearing up the earth with his forked
feet; and whilst every man stood in this manner expecting his chance; one bold
Rogue amongst the rest comes athwart him, provoking him to fury with his
tottered Cloak, and his shrill shoutes, but little needed any such
instigations: for the Bull presently thereupon, like one mad with rage,
forsaking the horsemen, made after him with all the eagerness he could, who
took himself to his heels as fast as they were able to carry him; he flies
from the Bull, the Bull after him, and never gives him over, forcing him to
take Sanctuary under Daraxa's window, just there where Ozmin then stood; who
deeming it a place of privilege for this fearful young fellow, and reputing
it a kind of injury offered to his Lady and Mistress, if there he should
receive any ill entertainment, as likewise to himself, if this poor Rogue
should suffer for his coming thither; as well out of this respect, as also for
that he was incensed against those, who strove to get the honor of the day,
and to win grace by doing something bravely in her presence, breaking through
the thickest of all the people, he went out against the Bull, who forsaking him
he formerly followed, made directly toward himself. All that beheld this,
thought him either foolish or mad, that should so desperately put himself
forth to encounter with a Beast of that courage and fierceness, looking every
minute, when he should take him up between his Horns; and tossing him up
aloft, break every bone of him in pieces. All of them with loud voices cride
out unto him, Take heed, for the passion of God, if you love your life, look
to your self; for if you had a thousand lives, they are all in danger of
losing. You may by this time imagine with your selves, what a poor taking his
Spouse was in: for mine own part I know not what to say therein, save that she
was as a woman bereft of her proper Soul, and was become an insensible body,
through too much Sense. The Bull bowed down his head for to fasten his blow
upon him, but this was but an humbling himself to the sacrifice, for he never
came to lift it up again. For the Moore wrything his body aside, and with
extraordinary quickness unsheathing his sword, acting it all in an instant, he
gave him such a cut in the neck, close unto the horn, that parting the bones
of the brain in funder, he left his head hanging by his winde-pipe, and there
he lay for dead.

This done (as though he had done nothing) sheathing his sword, he presently
leaves the Place. But the common rout that love novelties, and hunger as well
to hear, as to tell strange tales, (besides many horsemen, and footmen, that
began to flock about him, to know who he was) pressed so hard on every side to
see him, and so thronged him both before and behind, that they had almost
stiffled him, being scarce able to wagge amongst them. In the Windows, and on
the Scaffolds, began a new murmr of admiration, like unto the former, there
being a general joy amongst them all, for that this thing had happened at the
conclusion of these feasts, so that nothing else was talked of, save only
those two wonderful accidents of that Evening, doubting which were the greater
of the two; and taking in good part this second course which he set before
them, he left their palate well pleased, and their mouths seasoned with a
good relish, to recommend such brave actions in perpetual remembrance to all
succeeding ages.

THE ARGUMENT.
The Story continues of these two illustrious Lovers, Ozmin and Daraxa; wherein
is declared her sorrow, and his grief, with diverse other accidents; and how
for to comfort and cheer up Daraxa, there was a Tourneyment, or Iusting
performed by many Knights, and Gentlemen of worth, wherein Ozmin bore away the
bell, and had the glory of the day: yet all this could not make Daraxa merry.

THis day Daraxa had (as you have seen) her pleasures interrupted, her joys
intermixed with griefs, her delights false, and her contents unsavory: For
scarce had arrived the comfort which she took in seeing that which she most
desired, but on the sudden it was ouer-taken with fear of danger: it did
likewise torment her, to think with her self, that she knew not how, nor upon
what occasion to see him once again, nor how she might feed her fill,
satisfying the hunger of her eyes, on the delicate food of her sweet desire.
And because Pleasure appears not, where Sorrow is in place, it could not be
discerned in her countenance, whether these Feasts had given her that
contentment, for which they were intended: As well for this, as for that these
Gallants were somewhat more heated then before, being set on fire with that
beautiful fayrenesse, and fair beauty of Daraxa, desirous more then ever to
entertayne her with pleasures, and that fitting occasion might be offered to
come again to the sight of her; in this their pride of heart, and heat of
blood, they ordained a Tourney, wherein Don Rodrigo was to be the Challenger.

And some few nights after, the Challenge was published with great store of
musical Instruments, and bright-burning Torches, that all the streets,
together with the great Place, seemed to be all on a flame: in this solemn
manner they set up the Challenge, where it might best be seen and read of all
that passed by.

There was a place for Tourneyment near unto the Gate, which they call the
gate of Cordoua, adjoining to the wall, (which I have sometimes seen and well
known, though now decayed) where the Knights and Gentlemen went to exercise
Arms, and to prove their Lances: there Don Alonso de Zunniga, being but a new
beginner, did likewise practice amongst the rest, desirous to show himself in
this Tourney, for the great affection which he bare to Daraxa. He was afraid
he should rather lose then get honor in this Tourneyment, nor did he stick in
all Companies publicly to say as much; not because he wanted either strength,
or courage; but because in all things whatsoever, Use makes masteries: for they
that have only the bare Theoricke, and naked speculation of things, be they
never so skillful in this their contemplative knowledge, they err in their
aim, be they never so confident in their vnder-takings. And in this, of all
other he was most unwilling to err, the thought whereof did much afflict him,
yet made him with-all more careful how to behave himself in the business.

Ozmin on the other side desired to have as few enemies as he could, and
because he might not Tourney, nor thought it possible to be admitted into the
number, he would feign have somebody to enter the Lists, that might ouer-throw
Don Rodrigo's pride; for that he was more ielous of him, then of all the rest:
more to effect this his purpose, then any mind that he had therein to do his
Master service, he spoke thus unto him:

Sir, if you be pleased to grant me free liberty of speech, I may happily deliver
that unto you, which may be of some profit unto you in this so honorable an
occasion. Don Alonso dreaming of nothing less, then that he would treat with
him touching such Gentleman-like exercises as these, but rather supposing that
he would entertain him with some discourse touching his Love, said unto him;
You are too slow in unfolding your self, considering the haste I have to hear
thee, and the longing desire which I have to know what it is thou will say unto
me.

Sir, (quoth he) I find, that of force you must be present at this famous
Tourneyment, the noise whereof, as it has filled every man's ear, so it is now
all their talk: nor do I wonder, that where the reward of a glorious name lies
at stake, men go on fearfully, out of their great desire that they have to
gain it. I that am your poor creature, will do you the best service I can,
by instructing and enabling you in that which you are desirous to attain unto
in the exercise of Horsemanship, and the use of Arms, and that in a short
time; no way doubting but my instructions shall bring forth good fruits of
what I promise. Let not this seem strange unto you, nor let my youth scandal
my skill; for I must tell you, they being things whereunto I have even been
bred, they are familiar unto me, and I dare boldly boast my knowledge in them.
Don Alonso was much ioyed in hearing him, and giving him many thanks for this
his voluntary offer of his love and service: he told him; If thou performest
what thou speak, thou shall bind me much unto thee. Ozmin made answer; He
that promises that, which he cannot perform, is as wide of his word, as he is
from the work; and means nothing but deceit; but he that stands in those
terms, as I do now, where tricks cannot serve the turn, he must of force,
(unless he be a fool) accomplish more in deeds, then he promises in his
words.

Take order, Sir, that Arms be provided for your own person, and mine, and
then you shall quickly know, that by how much the slower I have been in my
offer, by so much the sooner I will bring it to effect: freeing my self from
this debt, but not from that obligation which I have to serve you. Don Alonso
presently gave order to have all things necessary provided, and when they were
fitted for the purpose, they went forth to a place a part, where that day,
those that followed till the determined time of the Tourneying, they spent
their time in the exercises which that solemn Feast required. So that in a
very short time, Alonso learned to keep his seat so sure, as if he had been
locked to his Saddle, bearing his Lance with so graceful a carriage, and
cowching it in his wrest with so comely a diportment, as if he had many years
been practiced in the Feats of Arms: vvhereupon were very good helps, his
clean proportion of body, accompanied with a smart and nymble kind of
strength, which gave no small graceful success to his performance.

From his dexterity in vaulting on his horse, passing lightly from one Saddle
to another, from his directions in his teaching, and from the shape,
proportion, fashion of his body, from his behavior, besides the garb of
Ozmins language, Don Alonco began to think with himself, that it was
impossible this man's name should be Ambrosio, much less a Labourer, unless
perhaps he labored with his wretched Fortunes, whereof he seemed to make
show. He discovered by his actions the lively splendor of some principal
person nobly descended, who by some various success of Fortune, wandered up and
down in this disguise: and not being able to contain himself in quiet, till
he were rid of this doubt, taking him one day aside, he spoke thus in secret
unto him:

Ambrosio, it is not long that you have served me, but in this short time you
have been with me, you have bound me much unto you: your virtues, and your
noble kind of carriage speak what you are; and therefore it is in vain to
seek any longer to conceal your self: under the course veil of these base
and vile clothes, and under this poor habit, which thou now wearest, lies hid
a nobler office, and a nobler name, (like Jewels lap't up in leather-Cases.) I
now know by manifest signs which I have noted and observed in thee, that thou
do, (or to speak more properly) have deceived me: for, that a poor
Labourer, whose person you are willing to represent, should be so general
(especially being so young) in all kind of knowledge, but more particularly in
the exercise of Arms and Horsemanship, is a thing almost (let me call in that
word again, and say) beyond belief. I have seen in thee, and plainly
perceived, that under these hard clods of earth, and muddy shells, is enclosed
the finest gold, and the purest oriental Pearls the world can afford. What I
am, it is already well known unto thee; what thou art, I am yet to seek;
howbeit (as I say) the causes are known by their effects, and that thou can
not any longer conceal thy self from me. I swear unto thee by the faith
which I have in Jesus Christ, and by the Order of Knighthood which I profess
and maintain, to be thy both faithful and secret friend, keeping that under
the Lock of Silence, which thou shall deposite in my bosom, assisting thee in
all that I am able, both in my purse and person. Give me an account of thy
fortune, that I may in some sort cancel the debt, wherein I stand bound unto
thee for those real courtesies, which I have received from thee. Hereunto
Ozmin thus replyde:

So strongly (Sir) have you coniur'd me; so squiz'd the Grapes in the
vvinepresse, that you must of force wring that from my Soul, which with any
other strayning in the world, save by these the Presses of your Gentleman-like
proceeding, were impossible to be drawn from me. Complying therefore with that
which you command me, putting assured confidence as well in your person, as
your promise, I shall give you to understand, that I am a Gentleman; my native
Soil Saragoca in Aragon; my name Iayme Uiues, which I borrowed from my father;
for so likewise was he called. It is not many years since, that following an
occasion, (it being the nature of young men to be in action) I fell into the
Moors hands, and was made a slave, by a subtle kind of treachery, and false
play of certain fained friends; which, whether it were occasioned through
their envy, or my misfortune, is too large a tale to tell you. It shall suffice
that I deliver unto you, that being in their power, they sold me to a Renegado,
one that had renounced his Christianity; who, how he did use me, it is enough
to have named his condition. He led me along with him, till he had brought me
to Granada, where a Gentleman bought me, called Zegri, one of the
principallest persons in that City. This man had a son of the same years
with my self, whose name was Ozmin, who because he was the very picture of my
self, as well in age, as in stature, feature, favor, condition, and all
things else whatsoever: for that I did so truly resemble him, he was the more
desirous to buy me, and to use me the better, that it might breed the greater
fastness and friendship between us. I taught him all I could or knew,
according as my self had learned of my friends at home in mine own Country,
which was the more perfected in me by the frequent practice of such like
exercises, being of that common use with us, as nothing more. From whence I
reaped no small benefit; for, by conuersing with my Masters son, my knowledge
was thereby increased, which otherwise I might happily have forgot: and
experience teaches us, That men by teaching, come to learn. Hence grew to be
refined both in the son and father, that affection which they bore unto me;
trusting me with their persons and wealth; so much did they rely upon my truth
and honesty.

This young Gentleman was a Suitour to Daraxa, daughter to the Alcalde de Baca;
(my Mistress, whom you so much adore:) the marriage was treated of, and upon
the point to take effect; for the Articles of agreement were already drawn,
and no doubt the match ere this had been concluded, had not the wars hindered
it, and the present siege that was then laid unto it, whereby they were forced
to defer it till some fitter time.

Baca was shortly after yielded up, by occasion whereof, this intended Marriage
hung in suspense. And because I was then Dominus Fac-totum, and the only man
in favor and trust with them, I went and came with presents, and other
inter-changeable kindnesses, from the one City to the other: it being my good
fortune to be in Baca at that time, when it was rendered up; and so I recovered
my liberty, together with many other Captives. I would feign have returned home
to mine own Country, but I wanted money: In the end I had notice, that a
Kinsman of mine was abiding in this City. Two things did concur to draw me
hither; the desire I had to see this place, (being so noble and magnificent a
City) and the supplying of my wants, the better to perform my Journey. I
continued here a great while, without finding him, that I sought for: for
hearing no news of him, but such as were uncertain, it turned to my utter
vn-doing; by finding that which I did not seek for, as in such cases it
commonly falls out. I went wandering up and down the City, and having little
money, and much care, it was my hap to meet with a rare piece of Nature, an
admirable Beauty; (at least in my eye, howsoever in other it might be
otherwise) but that is all one, being that is only fair, which most pleases.
To her I delivered up all my faculties, leaving to my self not one of them to
live with me: I made now no more any reckoning of my self, nor possessed any
thing which was not hers. This fair workmanship is Donna Elvira, sister to Don
Rodrigo, and daughter to Don Luys de Padilla, my old Master. And because
counsel (as the saying is) springs from necessity, seeing my self so wholly
lost in her love, and not finding any means to manifest my affection, together
with the quality of my person, I held it my best course to write Letters unto
my father of the recovery of my liberty, and that I was indebted in a thousand
double Ducats; and that he would be pleased to supply me with so much moneys
for my relief. Which business succeeded well; for having sent me the whole
Sum, and a servant with a horse for my journey, I put my self into good
Clothes, and fitted my self with all things necessary according to mine own
mind. The two or three first days I began to make that street my walk, giving
many a turn at all hours of the day, but could never have the happiness to
see her. Now, from my continual walking that way, I began by some suspicious
people to be observed, who seemed to have a watchful eye over me; wherefore,
for the avoiding of Spies, I withdrew my self from my wonted walk, and
betook my self to a more retired course of life.

My servant (to whom I imparted my Loue-businesses) thinking upon some course
for me, advised me (as being elder and better experienced then my self)
finding a certain piece of Work going forward in my Lords house, to suite my
self like a day-Labourer, and to change my name, that I might not be known,
and so rank my self amongst the rest, that are hired to dig and carry away
the rubbish from the Masons work. I began to consider with my self, what
might happen thereupon; but because Love over comes all difficulties, and Death
is too weak an adversary to withstand its force, all fear was laid aside,
every thing seemed easy unto me, I put on a resolution to entertain his
advice, and so I did accordingly. At that time there befell me an vn-expected
accident, which was this; When the Work was finished, they received me into
the house to be their Gardener. Then, and never till then, was that happy day
that I long looked for: my Moon was now come to her Full; and I was now
climing to the height of my good fortune: for the very first day that I
supplyde that place, and had but newly set foot within the garden, I luckily
met with Daraxa; she wondered to see me there, and I no less to behold her. We
gave an account each to other of our lives, relating our mutual misfortunes;
she recounting hers, and I mine; not sticking to tell her, how far I was in
love with her friend, and in what fast Fetters she held my heart: entreating
her withal, that since she had such clear knowledge both of my parents and
self, and how nobly I was descended, she would be pleased to favor my
pretension, and to work so with her by her good intercession, that I might
come (by the holy Rite of Marriage) to enjoy the fruit of my hopes. She
promised she would, and did (I assure my self) all that in her lay to
accomplish my desire. But because Fortune was evermore too too niggardly-handed
toward me, when these our tender loves (like young Plants) began to gather a
little strength, and were in the way to shoot up higher; the sprigs being rent
off, the bud was blasted with a sharp Easterly wind, and some malicious Worm
lay gnawing at the root, till at last it withered to nothing, and was quite
consumed: for I was on the sudden banished the house, not knowing why, nor
wherefore; falling thus from the highest top of happiness, to the lowest depth
of misery. He that with the stroke of a Lance killed the first Bull, he that
with the edge of his sword made the other fall dead at his foot, was my self.
She saw me well enough, and knew me too, and was not a little glad of it, which
I did plainly read in her looks, and her eyes did express it to the life.
And in this occasion (if it were possible) I would likewise strive to make some
notable proof for to please my Mistress, who shall eternize my actions, by
giving the world to understand who I am, and at what valuation I ought to be
rated amongst the rest. My inability to execute this my desire, makes me even
ready to burst with grief; and if I could purchase it with my blood, I would
willingly let loose the Sluices of my veins to obtain my wished end. Thus
(Sir) you see, I have freely laid open unto you the whole success of my love,
I have given you a true account of it, there remaining nothing to my self in
the reckoning, save a gross sum of disgraces. And with that word he stopped.

Don Alonso, who listened earnestly all this while unto him, when his ears were
let loose (for to others tongue had tide them to his mouth) threw his arms
about his neck, clasping him close unto him with straight imbracements: Whilst
Ozmin in the mean while strove to kiss his hands, but he would not suffer
him so to do, saying; These hands and arms are to be employed in thy
service, that they may thereby deserve to gain thine. It is no time now to use
compliments, nor to alter as yet the courses you have hitherto held, seeing
your own will is not in disposition to do otherwise. As for the Tourneyment,
let that never trouble your thoughts, for you shall enter in with the rest, and
doubt you not of it, for it shall be so; therefore pluck up your spirits, and
set your heart at rest. Ozmin once more made offer to kiss his hands, humbling
his knee on the ground. Don Alonso did the like, making many proffers of
prevention: so forcibly did this new bond of friendship tie them each to other.
Thus they past in large conversation the rest of those days that remained,
till the very time and hour, wherein the Tourneyment was to be performed.

I told you before, how that Don Rodrigo for his great arrogancy, was secretly
misliked by most of these Gallants. And therefore Don Alonso thought with
himself that he had now met with that he desired. For Iayme Viues entering into
the Tourney, he was well assured, that he would eclypse his honor, and beat
down his pride. Ozmin for his part likewise did desire it as much. And before
the hour of arming was come, that he might see Daraxa enter the place, he
walked up and down there a while, wondering to see it so richly adorned: the
Hangings of Cloth of Gold and of Silk, were such and so many, as are unable to
be expressed; such variety was there in the colors; such curiosity in the
windows; such beauty in the Ladies; such richness in their dressings, and
their clothes; such concourse of all sorts of Gallants, that all being put
together, seemed to be one inestimable Jewel; and every particular by it
self, a precious Stone set therein. The Tilt-yard, which divided the Place
into two equal parts, ran quite athwart the midst of it; and in a convenient
place was a Scaffold set up for the Judges, right over against the which were
the windows appointed for Daraxa and Donna Elvira, who upon two white
Palfreys, their furniture being black Velvet set with silver Oes, and sutably
frindged, entered well attended: Who after they had rounded the Place, took
their Seats. Where Ozmin leaving her, hasted away, because anon after, the
Challengers were to enter; who within a little space made their arrival,
wonderful well set forth, and in very good equipage. The Ho-boyes, the
Trumpets, and other instruments of Music sounded without ceasing, till they
were seated in their places. Afterward entered the Defendants, and Don Alonso
was one of the first; who having performed his three courses, and those
singular well (that few did better) he presently returned home.

Having before obtained license for a Caualeere, a friend of his, whom he
expected from Xeres de la frontera, Ozmin in the mean while attending his
coming. They came in both together to the place; and Alonso being his Padrino,
presented him unto them. The Moors Arms were all black, his Horse suitable,
without any plume in his Helmet; instead whereof with great curiosity, he had
made a Rose of Daraxa's Handkercher, which was an assured token, whereby she
might know him. He put himself in his posture, and as good luck would have
it, he was to run his first Lance against one of the Challengers Abettors:
The signal was given, they made their Carreere, Ozmin hits his Adversary on
the Beuer, where he brake his Lance; and giving him a counter-buffe with the
Truncheon of his Staff, he removed him from his Saddle, and fell with that
stroke to the ground over his horse crupper, but he had no other harm, save
what he suffered with the weight of his Armor. For the two last courses, Don
Rodrigo put himself forth, who lighted with his first Lance on the left arm
of the Moore, near unto the shoulder, remaining wounded by him in the
pouldrons on the right side, where he brake his staff in three pieces. With
the last Don Rodrigo mist and Ozmin brake his near the sight of his Helmet,
where he left behind him a great splinter of his Lance; so that it was
generally thought, that he had shrewdly wounded him; but his Helmet defended
him so well, that he had no great harm.

The Moore having broken his three Lances, went his way wonderfully ioyed with
his Victory; but much more Don Alonso who had brought him as his Champion into
the field, and could not find any place large enough to intertaine his joy.
They quitted the Place, and went home to his house to disarme himself,
suffering no man else to see his face. And putting on his ordinary apparel, he
secretly went out at a posterne door on the backside of the house, returning
to behold his dear Daraxa, and to see that which passed in the Tilt-yard. He
had gotten so near unto his Mistress, that they might in a manner have shaken
hands: they looked steadily each on other, but he evermore bare his eyes sadly,
and with a heavy cheer; but she beyond all degrees of sadness, supposing that
the cause of his sorrow might be, that she had not cheered him with some
gracious cast of her eye. Nor could she tell what to think, so much was she
amazed, to see him Tilt in black both Horse and Armor, being it is a sign
amongst them of evil luck. All this put together, wrought in her a most deep
melancholy, and continued so extremely passionate therein, and was so
surcharged with sorrow, that the sports being scarce ended, her heart trembling
in her body, she left her window, and hastened home. They which did accompany
her, did much marvel that she went away no better pleased, seeming to take no
contentment in what was done, and withal began to murmr and mutter amongst
themselves, every one suspecting that, which his own malice did suggest unto
him.

Don Luys, like a wise Gentleman, as often as he heard any reasoning thereof,
spoke still in her excuse; the like he did with his sons that Evening, when
he found them grumbling at her carriage, telling them that an afflicted soul
weeps in the midst of mirth, and that there is not any thing that can minister
matter of joy and gladness to man or woman, that is absent from those, whom they
best affect. Good things are so much the more esteemed, by how much the more we
enjoy them with known persons, and our particular acquaintance.

Toward strangers, there may (no doubt) be many intertainments given to move
pleasure and delight; but (alas) they have no feeling of them; their thoughts
are otherwise taken up, and in them the increase of sorrow is so much the more,
by how much in others they see the greater joy. I blame her not for it, nor do
I think it a thing so strange; but rather imagine it to have proceeded from
her great prudence, then any dislike she had of our sports, and do merely
attribute it to her grave and sober behavior; whereas the contrary would have
argued too much lightness, and an unsettled kind of carriage, which
imputation, women that prize their virtue and goodness, study to avoid.
Besides, she is far from father and mother, and from her best-beloued; and
(though free in her usage) yet a Captive in her condition, and that in a
strange Country, not knowing how to remedy her self, nor when she shall find
the means. Let every man examine his own bosom, let him but make her case
his own, and then he will tell me another tale, and ingenuously confess,
that he should find himself affected, just as she is now. And in doing
otherwise, is (as it is with him that is in health) to bid the sick to eat
and be well.

This discourse having past in secret amongst them, they treated afterward in
public of the Zerezano, how bravely he had behau'd himself that day; and how
(albeit they desired much to know who he was) they could never get any more out
of Don Alonso, then what he told them at first, and they believed it was true.
Daraxa's melancholy increased daily more and more, but the cause thereof none
could guess aright: they were all wide of the mark, none came near the Butt:
of all that shot their bolts; some fell too short, and some flew over. All did
judge amiss, inuenting in the mean time all the entertainments their wits
could devise to give her content: but should they have broken their brains in
the study thereof, they had never been nearer their purpose: for she was as
far from being capable of the delights they devised for her, as they were
from entering within the Circle of her desires.

THE ARGUMENT.
Continuing the Story of the noble loves of these two disconsolate Lovers, it
is now recounted how Don Luys, for to cheer up the gentle Daraxa, brought her
to a pleasant Village, whither Ozmin repairing, was set upon by a company of
Clownes. And in the defense of himself he slew four of them outright, and
wounded many others. For the which fact he was committed to prison, and
sentenced to death; together with the diverse and sundry accidents that insued
thereupon; and how in the end he was set at liberty. And how himself and
Daraxa turning Christians, their happy Nuptials were solemnly celebrated in the
presence of the King and Queen of Spain.

DON LVYS had a house in Axarafe, and other possessions belonging thereunto, by
the vert ue of his Mayorasgoship, in a little Village appertaining to Seuill.
The season was temperate, being then about February, at which time the Fields
seem to put on their new apparel; thither they agreed to go to make merry,
and to recreate themselves for some few days, that they might not leave this
path untrodden, to see if by this means they could divert her sorrows. With
this she seemed somewhat pleased, and made show of better cheerefulnes then
before; supposing, if she went forth of the City, she should find some
means or other, to see and speak with Ozmin. They made ready their Recamara,
and all fitting provision for such a business: and it was good sport to behold
the hurly burly and confused noise amongst them, as of him that had the charge
of Gray-hounds, of that other, that was to go along with the setting dogs, the
Tumblers, and the Kennell of the hounds; of a third, that carried Hawks
a-field; of this man bearing the Owl, that his Piece on his shoulder; of some
with Crossebowes in their hands; othersome with Mules laden with Bedding,
Hangings, and other household stuff, and all of them trooping together,
laughing and making themselves merry with the conceived joy of this Feast.

Don Alonso having notice hereof, comes me to Ozmin, and tells him that their
Mistresses were gone abroad into the Country to take the air, and disport
themselves, and that they were to remain there some time: but when they would
return again, that he knew not. This news was nothing displeasing unto them
for two respects: the one, for that they might (happily) meet there with the
fewer Competitors in the pursuit of their Loves; the other, that they might
have the better occasion not to be known. The nights were neither clear, nor
dark, nor cold, nor hot; but with a pleasant noise of stillness, and delicate
dark clearenesse, heaven and earth were both so ouer-spred, that the heart of
man could not imagine a fitter night for the purpose.

These two loving friends, and friendly Lovers, agreed to try their fortunes,
and to see what prize they could make in the choice of two such rich Bottomes
as these were, laden with so much Honor, Beauty, and Wealth, the greatest
treasure the world can afford. They disguised themselves, apparelling their
bodies with good honest Country clothes, like plain Husbandmen, and set forth
about Sunset upon two hackney Iades; and when they came near unto the
Village, some quarter of a League, or there-abouts, they alighted at a certain
Farme-house; to the end, that by marching thus on foot, the lesser notice might
be taken of them. Which might then have fell out very happily for them, if
Fortune had not wheeled her self about, and turned her back toward them; for
they arrived in very good time, even then when their Ladies were in the Balcon
intertaining discourse, wholly fitting themselves for conversation, and mirth,
as the company, or occasion should give cause.

Don Alonso durst not draw too near, for fear of frighting the game; and
therefore entreated his Companion to make the winde-lase, and to negotiate
alone for them both; because he being beloved of Donna Eluira, and well known
to Daraxa, he had no reason to hide himself from them. Ozmin then by degrees,
(with a careful kind of carelessness) stole nearer and nearer, singing in a
low Base as it were, humming between the teeth an Arabique song; which (to
those that understood the language) were clear notes: But to those that knew
it not, and were neglectfull thereof, it seemed no more then an ordinary La,
La, La. Donna Elvira (hearkening unto him) told Daraxa; Even on these rude
kind of people God has bestowed his gifts, if they knew well how to use
them. Do you not observe that savage fellow, what a sweet and well-tuned voice
he has; and how he rellisheth and ayreth his notes, and how merrily he chants
it, as if his mother had brought him into the world with a prick-song? But this
is in him as water that raines it self into the Sea without any profit. By
this you see (said Daraxa) that all things are esteemed according to the
subject wherein they subsist. These country Clownes, if in their tender age
they be not trans-planted into a political and Civil life: and if they be not
removed and changed from their barren, to better grounds, and wholly stripped of
that rugged bark, wherein they are born, it is a thousand to one if ever they
come to be well behau'd. Whereas on the contrary, those that are Citizens, and
naturally of a good disposition, are like the Vine, which if it continue a
year undressed and vntrim'd, it yields fruit notwithstanding, though it be but
a little: but if you return to prune and husband it aright, it acknowledges
the good it has received, and renders a very large and thankful recompense.
But this fellow that sings here now, is such a knotty piece of Timber, such an
arrant Clown, that the best Carpenter in the world cannot with his Axe nor his
Plainer, hew him into fashion, or shave him to any smoothness of civil
carriage, but for ever remain an unprofitable block. It is a torment to me to
hear this Turtle sing; if it please you, let us go hence, for it is time to
withdraw our selves, that we may take our rest.

The Lovers well understood one another; she the Song, and he her words; and to
what end she spoke them. The rest of the Ladies went their way, only Daraxa
remained a little behind after the rest, and speaking to him in the Arabicke
tongue, willed him to stay there: where he stood waiting for her, and in the
mean while, walked carelessly up and down, but still with an eye toward the
Window, to see when she should make her return.

The baser sort of people, (by a secret kind of instinct) do evermore bear a
natural hatred to those that are Noble; as the Lyzard to the Snake, the Swan
to the Eagle, the Cock to the Francolino.
Phesant, the Crab to the Cuttle-fish, the Dolphin to the Whale, Oil to Pitch,
the Vine to the Cole-wort, and the like. And if you ask, (as desirous to know,
what is the natural cause thereof,) I can show you no other reason for it,
more then that the Adamant draws unto it the Iron that the Marygold follows
the Sun, the Basiliske kills by Looking, and Swallow* wort helps the Sight.
For as some things naturally love one another, so othersome hate and abhor by
a celestial influence; the reason whereof mortal men have not to this day
been able to reach unto. And that things of diverse kinds have this property,
it is no vvonder, because they consist of differing compositions, dispositions,
and inclinations in nature: but that reasonable men, both the one and the other,
molded of one and the same earth, of one flesh, of one blood, of one beginning,
created-forme, and the selfsame end, living under one selfsame Law, being
of one and the same Religion, and all of them in all and every part, (as
farre-foorth as they are men) so one selfsame substance; that out of that
Similiancy, man naturally loves man: that yet (I say) there should be that
contrariety and unsavory taste; that this Raskallity, and base off-scumme of
the earth, more hard then Flint, or the Gallician Nut, should persecute the
Nobility with that vehemency as they do, is a matter to me of great admiration.

That night certain young Lads of the Parish likewise walked abroad, and
lighted by chance upon these two Strangers: and at the very first encounter,
without any cause or reason in the world; no occasion being given them, began
to flock together; and gathering themselves into a ring, began to cry
amain; A Woolfe, a Woolfe, the Woolfe is come: and throwing therewithal
little stones by hand-fuls on their heads, (as they had showred down from
heaven) they shrewdly be-pelted their Pates: so that they were forced to fly,
unable to make any longer stay, their intertainment was so bad. And so they
returned without any more ado, Ozmin being dis-appointed (which did much grieve
him) of taking his leave of his Mistress. They went thither where their horses
stood; and on them to the City, with purpose to return late again in the
night that they might not be discovered. But this forecast stood them in
little stead: for if Lightning and Thunder should have fallen from heaven, and
though they knew it should either burn or dash them in pieces, there was one
Rogue amongst the rest, that would rather lose his life, then carry himself
ciuilly toward them; and only out of no other end but to do mischief and
villainy. Scarce had they the next night following set foot in the Village, but
that a knot of these mad-caps being met together, and knowing them to be the
very same whom they abused the night before, one with a Sling, another with a
Yard, this man with a Bore-speare, that with a Batt, some with Staves, some
with Spits, not sparing so much as the Peele and Maulkin of their Ouens, (as if
they were to go out against a mad Dog) they jointly set upon them: but they
found them better provided then they were the night before; for they had
brought with them good Iackes of Male, and steel Murrians, and strong
Bucklers. On the one side you might see stones, Cudgels, and loud showtes; and
on the other, many strong blows, and cutting slashes with the sword; and on
both such a tumult, and such a stir, that with the noise thereof, the whole
Village seemed to be up in arms; so like a little war did this fierce fight
appear. Don Alonso, in crossing the street, was vn-awares with an unlucky
stone struck on the breast, and fell to the ground, wanting strength to recover
himself to return afresh to the fight. Wherefore as well as he could, he
crawled up, and withdrew himself aside, while Ozmin in the mean time drove
them up before him in the street, working them much harm: for some of them
(and those not a few) were sore hurt, and three left dead in the place. The
tumult increasing, all the whole Village came out at once, and stopped the
passage, that he could not, though he would never so feign, have fled from
them. There was got now on the one side of him a Turfe-breaker, a sturdy stout
Rogue, who with the Bar of a door struck him such a cruel blow on the
shoulder, that he forced him upon his knees: but it did nothing benefit him,
that he was the Alcalde's son; for before that he could come to double his
blow upon him, (which he was about to do) he gave him such a slash, that he
claue his head in twain, as it had bin of a Kid or a Calfe, leaving him lying
like a Tunny on the shore, having rendered up his life in satisfaction of his
Roguery. So many charged him on every side, and laid such load upon him, that
being unable any longer to defend himself, he was taken by them.

Daraxa and Donna Elvira, saw and heard all that had past between them, (but
with much sorrow to see such uncivil outrage) even from the very first
beginning of the Fray, as also what a coil they kept, when they had caught him
thus alive, and had him in their hold, and how they bound his hands behind him
with a Cord, as if he had been one of their fellow-rogues. All of them on all
sides entreated him ill; one buffetted him, another puncht him, a third kicked
him, throwing on him a thousand disgraceful affronts, wherewith they sought
to be revenged on him for all the wrongs he did them, who (before he was their
prisoner) durst not look him in the face.

What a beastly and a shameful thing was this, to use a man thus, when he was
not able to make resistance, his hands being bound to the peace? A thing never
to be done by any, but such base Villains, and dogged Clownes, which kind of
coorse usage is natural and proper unto them. But what becomes now of Daraxa?
how does she brook this misfortune? how is she able without swouning, to see
his person thus basely abused, who did so much love and adore his shadow? on
the one side to see him prisoner, on the other, to see some wounded, and some
slain, and her honor lying in the midst between them both? for she knew well
enough, when the case should be laid open, Don Luys of force could not but
ask, what Ambrosio made there, and what occasion drew him thither.

In this confusion, necessity drove her to sit in council with her self what
course were best to be taken. To prevent therefore farther mischief, she
devised a Letter, which when she had sealed, she locked it up in a little
Cabinet that she had, to the intent that when Don Luys should come unto her,
she might make show thereof for her own discharge.

Now by this time the day began to appear, and yet the people were not
quieted. They had sent unto the City to give notice of what had happened, to
the end that information might be taken how things had past, and to open the
business. And when the Notary was come, they began to examine Witnesses;
whereof many (without being called) made their voluntary appearance. For ill
men, of themselves inuit themselves unbidden, only out of a desire to do that
is ill: and of enemies, become friends, to condemn the innocent. Some swear
that Ozmin had six or seven, besides himself in his company; others, that he
was seen to come out of Don Luys his house, and that some cryde out of the
window, Kill them, kill them. Others, that the people of the Town resting
secure and quiet, they wilfully set upon them; others, that they came and
challenged them out of their houses; there not being one man amongst them all
that swear a truth. God deliver us from such Clownes, for they are as stiff as
Oaks, and of the same toughness of nature, cruel, and hard-hearted: if you
will have any fruit from them, they must be used like Akornes, beaten down
with Cudgels and dry blows; for they will sooner suffer themselves to be
plucked up by the roots, though it be to the utter ruin of themselves, and
their estates, then to bow or stoop, be it never so little. And if they be
once minded to persecute a man, they will periure themselves a thousand times,
though the matter in question be not worth a straw, only out of an inclination
to do that which is evil. And the ill is so much the worse, that these
wretches think, that they do God good service therein, and that their souls
are saved by it: and it is a wonder, if they confess their fault, and repent
themselves of this their rancour and malicious poison. The deaths and wounds
received, were proved upon him, and the poor Gentleman laden with yrons, and
put in safe custody. Don Luys, as soon as he had notice hereof, hastened to
the Village, his daughter informed him of the business, acquainting him truly
with all that had past: he inquired likewise of Daraxa, who told him the same
tale, and that she had sent for Ambrosio to come thither, for to dispatch him
thence with Letters for Granada, and before that he could get to speak with
her, they had these two nights together beaten him with Cudgels, and pelted him
with stones; so that, though her Letters were written, and lay ready for him,
she could not come to deliver them into his hands. Don Luys desired her, that
she would show him the Letter, as well to see the contents thereof, as also for
his own discharge, she being by their Majesty's committed to his custody. She
(though she seemed loath so to do) condescended at last to his request, and gave
him the Letter, how beit little entreaty would have served the turn; for she
desired nothing more, then to have him see what she had writ. And taking it
from forth her Cabinet, she said unto him; I give it unto you, that you may
perceive my truth, and conceive no jealousy, that I write any thing worthy
the hiding from you. Don Luys took the Letter, and going to read it, found
that it was written in the Arabicke tongue, wherein he had no knowledge. He
then made inquiry for one that could read and interpret that Language; the
Contents whereof were, that she signified unto her father, what a grief it
was unto her, to live thus divided from him; and that she desired to be
certified of his welfare; and if the desire she had to see him did not
ouer-sway all other respects, she lived otherwise in as full content as any
woman in the world, being more made of by Don Luys, then any of his own
children: And therefore besought him, that in acknowledgement of this his
kindness, and courteous intertainment, he would be pleased to remember him
with some Present worthy his desert.

And because in such like hurly-burlies as these, words multiply more and
more, and together with the stir, reports, gather-strength, and increase; and
for that every one canonizeth his own presumption, according as he is in love
with it, they began to murmr against Don Luys, and the people of his house.
The Mustard was got up already into their Noses, and their fingers began to
itch; but he, like a wise and discreet Gentleman, (as he was) thought fit for
the present to dissemble the matter; and seeming to take little notice of their
malicious proceeding, he removed his whole household, and returned back to the
City.

Now, vvhilest these things thus succeeded, Granada had yielded her self to
the Conquerours, upon such conditions as the Chronicles mention, and as by our
forefathers has been reported unto us. Amongst those other Nobles that were
found there at that time, were the two fellow-father-inlawes, Alboacen father
to Ozmin, and the Alcayde de Baca: both which besought to be baptized, desirous
to become Christians: which Ceremony being performed, the Alcayde entreated
their Majesty's he might have license to go see his daughter Daraxa: which
being granted, they told him he should be advised from them ere long, how and
when it should be. Alboacen thinking that his son was dead, or taken Captive,
used all diligence to know what was become of him, but he could never get any
inkling thereof. For the which (as he had good reason so to be) he was
wondrous sad, not only as he was his only child, but being also such a son,
so well qualified as he was, and descended of such rich and noble Parents, the
only hope of their House. The Alcayde had no less feeling of it then he, as
well for that he loved him as dearly, as if he had been his own; as also
for the grief Daraxa would conceive, when she should come to hear the
tidings of this heavy news. Their Majesty's on their part had dispatched a
messenger unto Seuill with express command, that Don Luys should presently
without delay repair unto them, and bring Daraxa along with him; with that
respect and good usage, wher-withall they had put him in trust.

Upon the receipt of these Letters, she (being acquainted what order was given)
was at her wits end, and ready to run mad, because of force, upon this
occasion, she was to depart, grieuing thus to go away, before she should see an
end of this business not knowing what would become of it; and sorrowing beyond
measure that her dearest Love should be left behind her in prison; and that now
when he had most need of her help, she must in this his greatest extremity, be
driven to leave him to shift for himself. Her thoughts were all in a
confusion, her imagination was troubled and her heart (through the weight of
her griefs) as heavy as Lead, calling her self a thousand times more
unfortunate, then Misfortune it self, and of all other the most wretched woman.

She was resolving to finish all at once, and together with her Love, to lose
her life, with a perplexed, but almost-settled mind, it was in her
deliberation to have acted a most cruel error upon her self, in token of
that chaste and true love which she bare to Ozmin. But Daraxa, whose passion
had not quite out-gone her judgment, like a discreet Lady, (as she was)
correcting her cruel determinations, taking up her self when she was in the
height of her speed, she resolved to trust her misfortunes in the hands of
Fortune her enemy, expecting what-euer she would give them; and being that the
utmost evil, was death, she would not despair of the game till she saw the
last man borne. But this resolution of sufferance could not stop a sea of
tears, which burst with a swelling Tide from forth her eyes. The standers by,
supposed this to proceed out of her ouer-ioy, that she was to return to her
own Country, but they were all deceived, so that every one spoke to her, but
none did comfort her. Don Rodrigo came to take his leave of her, who with a
countenance bathed with those cristalline tears, which dropped from her
heavenly eyes, spoke unto him in this manner following:

Noble Don Rodrigo, I might very well seek to persuade you with abundance of
reasons to that good work, which upon this present occasion I pretend to
present unto you, and to crave your furtherance therein. Which in its own
nature is so just, that I cannot forbear to ask it, nor you to grant it,
being that your self is so much interessed therein: you know (though I should
not tell you) the obligation we have to do good; which as a natural and divine
Law speaks particularly to every man's soul and conscience. Nor is there any
man so barbarous, that is ignorant thereof: and this carries so much the more
force with it, by how much the stronger the reasons are that are alleged;
amongst the which, a principal one, and not the least, is, that we apply this
good unto those, that have eaten of our bread, and been entertained in our
service. And because I know you can not be unlike your self, my intercession
may seem the less needful. But that which I shall entreat at your hands, is
this: You know, that Ambrosio was servant to both our fathers: first to mine,
then to yours: And therefore we are both bound (but I the more) to do for him;
having put himself through my default in that necessity, wherein now he is, the
cause in hand no otherwise concerning him, but as I was interessed in the
business. By my hand he was thrust into this danger, I was the sole causer of
it; and therefore I stand charged with it, and must put it to my account. If
you will therefore free me from this debt; if you desire to give me content; if
you purpose to bind me unto you, that I may for ever remain the thankful
acknowledger of your love and kindness, it must be, that by laying upon your
shoulders this weighty care of mine own desire, that you seek by all means
to procure his liberty, which in the reckoning is mine; and my request unto you
is, that you endeavor it with that earnestness, as I do desire it. Don Luys,
(whom I have ever found my singular good Lord) will, before I go hence, use
all possible diligence in his own person, with his friends and kinsfolk; that
the one ayding the other in his absence, may free me of this debt, for the
which I stand engaged. Don Rodrigo promised to do his best, and so they parted.

Now, for that this poor Lady had left her best beloved in this great peril
of his life, she was much grieved; and by so much the more, by how much the
farther she was from him; so that when she came to Granada, she did not seem
to be the same she was.

Don Alonso, though he had escaped their hands, yet being sorely bruised in his
breast, he was forced to keep his bed, so soundly had the Clownes banged him.
But when he afterward heard, that his Companion was carried prisoner to
Seuill, he got him out of his bed, posted thither, took infinite pains,
trotting up and down, and never ceasing to solicit his friends cause, as if
the case had been his own. Notwithstanding, what with the complaint of the
Plaintifes; the accusation of Witnesses; the evil inclination of the Judges,
(either upon information, or corruption; not favoring the Defendant,) besides
the slain and wounded (which were many) he could not save him, together with
diverse other his good friends, from being condemned to be hanged at the common
Gallows.

Don Rodrigo was in a great rage, that his father and himself should find so
little respect, as to hang up a servant of theirs, that had not offended the
Law, had he had equal hearing, and a fair trial. On the other side, Don
Alonso stood much in maintenance of the Defendant, saying, that it was not to
be permitted; nor could the Law condemn a Gentleman, so nobly descended as
his friend Iayme Uiues was, to be hanged: And that in case the fault were far
greater, yet the difference of quality ought to save his life: At least it
ought to privilege him from hanging, it being the Law, that, in matters
deserving death, Gentlemen should not be hanged, but be-headed. The Judges and
the rest of the Bench were distracted in this Case, and knew not what they were
best to do. Don Rodrigo, he styles him his servant; Don Alonco, his friend;
Don Rodrigo pleades for him by the name of Ambrosio, and Don Alonco, by that of
Iayme Viues, a Gentleman of Zaragosa; who, at the feast of their Bulls, had made
such noble proof of his Valor, as the whole City could well witness: And
that in the Turnament (he being his Padrino, or Champion that brought him in)
vn-horst one of the Challengers, showing that day great tokens of his worth and
Valor. The difference was so great, the names so contrary; the qualities
alleged so discrepant; that the Judges, to clear this doubt, resolved with
themselves to take declaration thereof from himself. They demanded then of
him, whether he were a Gentleman or no? He answered that he was nobly
descended, and of Royal Blood, but that his name was neither Ambrosio, nor
Iayme Viues. Then they willed him, that he should manifest his name, and the
quality of his person. Whereunto he made answer, that his punishment might
excuse him for not discovering himself; and being that he was undoubtedly to
dye, it was no more necessary to tell it them, then it was material, to suffer
either the one, or the other death. Then they desired him to deliver, whether
he were the same man Don Alonco had reported, which had so bravely killed the
two Bulls, and gotten such honor in the Tourneyment.

He replide he was; but that he had neither of those names, whereby they called
him. And because he was so loath to declare his Lineage (conceiving him thereby
to be a man of quality,) they demurred upon the business, to see if they could
work the truth out of him, to know who he was; as also to wind out the
reasons, why these two noble Gentlemen should so earnestly undertake his
defense. And which did not a little startle them; they saw the whole City did
generally desire his liberty, and stood strongly affected toward him. Hereupon
they dispatched some presently away for Zaragosa, that they might learn out
the truth, and give knowledge of his Birth. But having spent some days
therein, and used many diligencies, they could not meet with any (for all their
strict inquiry,) that could give them notice who he might be, nor could devise
what manner of Gentleman he might be, either by his name, or any signs or
tokens by them given, who failed not to describe him at full unto them. Being
returned with this ill Dispatch, albeit his friends did much importune for him,
and the Magistrates of Justice did often require him, that he would lay open
his quality and condition, yet he would not do it, nor was it possible to
persuade him thereunto. So the Judges (the time limited being fully expired for
farther respite) sore against their will, much pitying both his Youth and
Valor, not being able to cross the course of Justice, being pressed so
earnestly by the importunity of the adverse party, they confirmed their former
fentence.

Daraxa, nor the two fathers were asleep, whilst these things were in doing;
for they had made their Majesty's acquainted with the whole carriage of the
business, and were by them informed of the truth thereof. Many petitions they
put up, and no sooner one Memorial given, but another was a drawing to second
their fuit: Daraxa, she in her own person did solicit the life of her
espoused husband, begging it by the way of merced and grace: But their
Majesty's answered nothing thereunto. Yet secretly they dispatched Don Luys
presently away, with their kingly provision to the Judges, that they should
deliver unto him the Bill of the whole indictment, in every point as it was
taken from the beginning to the end, together with the prisoner, for that it
did much concern their Highness service. Don Luys posted away (as he was
commanded) with all the speed he could; whilst poor Daraxa, her own father,
and father-in-law melted into tears, considering the haste which the Judges
would make in dispatching this poor innocent Gentleman. Which they so much the
more feared, for that their Petitions received so slow an answer. They knew
not what to say, or think of this so long a delaying of them, without giving
them any answer off or on, either good or bad, or any the least hope of life.
This did exceedingly grieve them, but they knew not how to help themselves,
nor had they left any one stone vn-remoued, but made all the means and friends
they could. But that which did most daunt them, was, that the maine danger did
consist in the delay.

Whilst they were thus stricken into their dumps, and doubts (for what
comfort can there be in so dangerous a suspension?) Don Luys (as you heard
before,) spurred on a main, with much both speed and secrecy. And as he
entered the gates of Seuill, Ozmin was led forth of the prison, to be carried to
his execution. The streets, and every place through which they past, were full
of people; all was tumult and noise, and not a person, but wept and shed
tears, to see so handsome a young man, so well favored, so valiant, and
well-belou'd for those famous deeds which he had publicly done, to be so
untimely cut off: And the more was their sorrow, to see him dye without
confession. Which made them all to think, that he did it to escape death, or
to prolong his life: but he was silent, and spoke not a word, nor showed any
sign of sadness in his looks, but with a smiling kind of countenance beheld
them all as he passed along. They made now and then certain stops, to see if
they could exhort him to confess himself, laboring all they could to
persuade him, that he would not lose body and Soul both at once. But he
answered them not a word, but held his peace all the while. The people
continuing thus in this confusion, and the City waiting on this sad spectacle,
Don Luys came, making the people give way, pressing through the throng, to
hinder the Execution. The (a) Alguazils thought it was a resistance of Justice,
and out of very fear which they had of Don Luys, for that he was a stout and
valiant Gentleman, and dared to oppose himself to any danger, they forsook
Ozmin who was under their guard, and with a great hurry and clamor, they ran
to give account of what had past, to the Magistrates, whose authority (they
thought) it more nearly touched. Whereupon they came to know, what might be the
cause of so great disrespect done unto them. He put his hand in his pocket, and
taking out the Kings Order, he delivered it unto them, which was by them, to
their great contentments, most willingly obeyed. And so they brought Ozmin
(being accompanied with all the Gentlemen of that City, and the common joy of
the people) to Don Luys his house; Where that night he was entertained with a
gallant Mask, setting up many Torches and Cressets in the streets and
windows, for to give the more general content: And in token of their great
joy, they would have celebrated those days he stayed there with public
feasts; for now they knew who he was. But Don Luys would not give way
thereunto; but tying himself to his Instructions, carried him as his prisoner,
along with him the next morning, being kindly used, and well entertained upon
the way, according to the greatness of his rank and quality.

Being now arrived at Granada, he kept him secretly with him some few days,
until such time as he had order from their Majesty's to bring him to Court.
Who when he was come before them, they ioyed much in the sight of him; and
whilst he was standing thus in their presence, they commanded Daraxa to be
called forth. Now when these two Lovers thus suddenly met in such a place as
that was, so unexpectedly, and so far beyond their hopes, every man may make
his own heart judge of the wonderful joy which they received in this happy
(but unlooked for) encounter, and imagine with himself what each of them did
think and conceive thereof. When each others eyes had fed their fill, the
Queen made toward them, and told them that both their fathers were become
Christians: howbeit, Daraxa knew so much before. She desired them to do the
like, which she should receive as a singular favor from them; but that no
other love, nor fear should enforce them thereunto, save only that of God,
and their own salvation. But howsoever, whether they did so or no, (for she
would not compel the conscience) her pleasure was that they should now
instantly enjoy their liberty, and dispose of their Estates and Persons,
according to their own will and pleasure.

Ozmin would feign have answered the Queen with all the joints and sinnewes of
his body, making them so many tongues, to render thanks to her Majesty, for
this so great a benefit; signifying that he was very willing to be baptized;
and them addressing himself to Daraxa, in the presence of their Majesty's, he
entreated her to do the like. Daraxa, whose eye was never off from her dearest
Ozmin (so hungry was she in beholding him) shedding a few sweet tears from her
Rosy cheeks, directing her looks and speech unto their Majesty's, she told
them, That since it was Gods will to inlighten their understanding, and by many
tribulations, to bring them to the knowledge of his truth, she was disposed,
and that unfeignedly, and with a true heart, humbly to submit her self
thereunto, and to the obedience of their Majesty's, under whose protection and
princely hands, she reposed both her self, and all that she had. So anon
after, they were christened with a great deal of Ceremony, naming the one
Ferdinand, and the other Isabell; according to that of their Majesty's, who as
Godfather, and God-mother gave them their names at the Font. Within some few
days after, their Nuptials were celebrated with a great deal of glory and
ostentation, many Presents and other courtesies being conferred upon them in
that City, where they lived all their lifetime, and left behind them an
illustrious and noble offspring, which continues yet to this day in much
honor and reputation in their Country.

We went hearkening to this Story, with a great deal of Silence, being led on
attentively with it, till we came within sight of Cacalla: so that it seemed to
have been measured just out for that journey, so truly did the one iumpe with
the other. Howbeit, it was somewhat more enlarged by the Author, flourished
over with finer phrases, and a different Soul, to that which I have delivered
unto you.

Our honest Carrier, who remained mute from the beginning to the ending (which
was no more then all of us did) began now to find a tongue, and was the first
that opened his mouth. Alight (my masters) quoth he: For here I must leave
you: my way lies along by this path. And with that he calls unto me, Come
hither, (my young Gallant) let us make up our reckoning before we part.

When I heard this, I was almost ready to hang my self, it was the bitterest
draught, that ere went down my throat. Is it e'ne so, (said I to my self?)
Well, let it go: for I did verily believe, that all that past between us, had
been in the way of friendship. Well, I dis-mounted, and got not up so lightly
before, as I now came down heavily: for I knew not in the world what answer to
make him, save only to ask him, how much I was to pay him for the riding of
nine Leagues? See what these Gentlemen give, so must you. For your lodging and
your diet, you are to pay me three Royals more. The Vmbles of the Mule I now
found to be dear meat unto me (and that they stuck a little also in his
stomach:) but that which grieved me most, was; That I had not money to pay for
it. And therefore I came unto him, and told him; My friend, ^o, here is your
money for the reckning, so much you say is my part of the shot; but for my
horse-hyre I owe you nothing; for you your self, without any entreaty of
mine, desired me to get up, inuiting me thereunto of your own accord.

What a Devil (quoth he) mean you by this? Marry gupp with a murraine, you
are a fine Gentleman indeed; do you think to ride a cock-horse on free cost?
you are a pretty Youth indeed. I replyde upon him; we fall to scuffling; the
Clergymen inter -posed themselves; they were to vmpire the business between
us: They condemned me to pay for the meat of my Beast for that night. I did so;
making an even reckoning with my purse, having no more left me in all the
world, but twenty Marauedis, to bear my charges that night.

The Muletier went about his business; The Clergymen, and my self, entered
into Cacalla, where we take our leave, every man betaking himself to his own
way.

THE ROGVE: OR, THE FIRST PART OF THE LIFE OF GVZMAN DE ALFARACHE. The second
Book.
Wherein is treated, how he came to be a Rogue; and by being so, what happened
unto him.
CHAPTER I.
How Guzman de Alfarache, going out of Cacalla toward Madrid, proves the
quality and condition of a miserable man; and upon this occasion, gravely
discourses of the effects of Want, of Shame, and of Castles in the air: And
how he came to serve an Host; and of the wicked disposition of such kind of men.

THOU see me here in Cacalla, twelve Leagues from Seuill, upon Monday in the
morning, with my purse pennilesse, and my patience remediless: and accused (as
you have heard) for a Thief, by way as it were of Prophecy, presaging what I
should be hereafter. I suffered enough the first day I set forth; the second,
more. For my care increased, and it rained down hard upon him, who was too wet
already; one mischief ouer-taking another. I had lately money in my purse, and
meat to put in my belly: and griefs (as the Los duelos con pein, son menos.
Proverb is) are the better ouer-past with bread. It is good to have a father,
it is good to have a mother; but to have meat to put in a man's mouth, is better
then them both. The third day was to me, as it were, a day of death: for then I
had my full load of miseries. I found my self then like a lean Dog, barked
at by others; grinning with my teeth upon all those that came round about me;
turning head against all, but not daring to bite any: my cares continued with
me; with them, their barking: and having hedged me in, set all upon me at once:
but that which most troubled me, was; That I had not where withal to spend,
nor any means to defray my necessary expenses. I knew then, what a Blanca, is
a small price of ^oney, Lat. As, assis. The effects of Want.
Blanke meant; and that he that does not seek to gather, does not make any
reckoning of it, nor know the worth thereof, till he feels the want of it.
This was the first time, that I looked that Heretic Necessity in the face: I
knew him then by his Character, but afterward I did better consider him by his
effects. How many dishonest actions does it venture on? what cruel
imaginations does it represent unto thee? what infamous things does it
solicit? what disorders does it drive thee into? and what impossibilities
does it not attempt? I weighed also with my self, with how little our mother
Nature is contented; and having given much to many, yet none of them rest
contented: all cry out, They are poor, publishing their wants to the world. O
thou Epicure! O thou ryotous Glutton! thou lavish Prodigal! why do thou talk
thus foolishly, that thou eatest and swallowest down so many thousand Ducats
yearly? Say rather, that thou haft so much Rent coming in; and that thou
keep'st it in thy hands, but not that thou eat'st it out: and if thou do
eat it out, why do thou keep such a complaining? seeing thou art no more
man, then my self, whom poor Lentils, dry Fitches, old Beans, hard Pease,
and Biscuit that is ^enowed and moth* eaten, keeps as fat and fair, as those
that have daintier feeding. Thou will not tell me, nor can thou (I think)
give me a reason, what should be the cause of it. For my part I know not: but
if ever thou have been in want, or should (which is possible) be put to
shift for thy self, and be driven to need and to lack, thou would then be
able to tell me another tale. I vvish no man that ill luck, but only lament
mine own misfortunes. She is the Mistress Necessity the best (...).
to all things, a subtle I nuentresse, by whom your Thrushes, your Pyes, your
Iack-dawes, and your Parrats are taught to speak. I plainly began to
perceive, how Adversity makes men wise: in that very instant, me thought,
Adver^ makes men wise.
I discovered a new light; which as in a clear Glass, did represent unto me
things past, things present, and things to come.

Till this present I was a mere Cockney, and well might that name suit with my
breeding. For (as it is in the Proverb) Hijo de la viuda, bien consentido, y
mal dotrinado: the son of a Widow is well fed, and ill taught. I had many
chips to be hewne out of me, and the first stroke of the Axe, was this trouble
that did light upon me; which did so wound the maine timber, and so touch me to
the quick, that I know not how to indeere it unto thee. I saw my self
abandoned, and so dangerously ingulphed, that I knew not where to find harbor,
or to put into any port for to save my self. My years were few, my experience
less, it being fitting, that they should both have been greater then they
were. And which was worst of all, (knowing by manifest signs, that my ruin
was near at hand) being willing to ask counsel, I did not know from whom I
might receive it.

I entered into a reckoning with my self, and was making my Account; A poor
man's account, to what a reckoning (...) comes.
which I found to be very bad; my charge was great, and my cash small: I was
about not to have gone any farther; for to go on I wanted means, as I likewise
did for to carry me home. I was ashamed, being I was come away from thence, to
become again (as it is in the Proverb) an Hindge to the door; (which,
howsoever that open or shut, it remains still in the self same place) or to
put my foot upon our own Threshold, in the open sight of my Mother, my
friends, and my kinsfolk. God help me, how many, from that day to this, have
I seen to be utterly undone, and merely out of this respect! I was (I say)
ashamed: how many Virgin^ have left off to be so, and have lost their
Maiden-heads, by thinking themselves to be tide in thankfulness for a To be
(...) modest e (...) at is (...), (...) cause of great hurt.
paper of Sugar-Comfits, and some Loue-verses; or because some vain fellow
has given her music at her Window, and made her fall in love with him, by
the help of another man's quality; with that very Song, which with a sweet air
and graceful voice another sung for him? How many block-heads (out of shame of
denial) have entered into Sureti-ship for others, and have paid the debt,
themselves being utterly undone thereby; and the children (through the fathers
folly) for want of maintenance, sent to some Hospital? How much money has bin
lent and borrowed, for the continuing of friendship and kindness betwixt man
and man; whereby in the end it so falls out, that he does not only lose his
friend, but his money too? Nay more, many times it so comes to pass, that he
that parted with his money, has not meat to put in his mouth, and is ready to
starve for want of food; and he that had it of him, has over and above to pay
him; and yet the other dare^ not ask it him, and all (forsooth) for that he is
ashamed to speak to him.

I would have thee to know, (if thou know it not already) that Shamefastness
Shamefastness, what it is likened to.
is like unto a web in a Weauers Loome; if one thread be broken it rauels the
whole Work. In those things, whereby hurt may arise unto thee, and drive thee
to narrow shifts spoil the work, and break the threads in sunder, and I
assure my self thou will rather thank me for it then think arnisse Good
Advice.
of my counsel. And the inconvenience which thou must suffer, (having done
that which is desired at thy hands) let him smart for it that craves it, rather
than thou, when thou have done it.

For Modesty and shamefastness in such a case, when it stands upon a man's
making or marring, is a thing that is only proper unto fools. It is fit, that
thou should have a kind of modesty in thy self, not to do (no not when thou
art alone by thy self) any foul or shameful act: but for any other, what
know thou of what color he is, or of what metal he is made? Free thy self
from him, in that which shall nearly concern thee; let him not tie thee up
like a Dog, with a chain and a clogge, behind the door of thy ignorance:
cut, or slip the Collar; get loose, and run away from him, as fast as thy
legs will carry thee. Only be ashamed to do any thing (as I said before)
that is shame-worthy. For that which thou call Modesty, is no Modesty, when
to be used. Shamefastness in some things, is notable ignorance.
better then mere foolerie: if I my self had not been ashamed, I should not
have wasted so many sheets of Paper, as this volume contains, to acquaint
thee with the sad Story of my miserable life: whereunto I might add many more;
but I now ride post, and must hasten away, promising to deliver unto thee
far greater things concerning my life, if God say Amen.

I tell you, it would have grieved me very much to have returned home without a
Cloak, especially having come forth with one upon my back. Not was I willing
to be laughed at, (which they could not choose but do) to see what a
single-sole Gentleman I was, and how like a naked cottage I looked, or a bare
wall without hangings: Besides, I made it a point of shame, and stood much upon
it. And that having put on a resolution at my departing, it had been
pusillanimity in me, and baseness of mind, to have had but so much as a bare
thought of returning back again. I thought, I should never have the like
occasion again, (though I think, never any man but my self, played such an
idle trick) and therefore when I was once on my way, it stood not (me thought)
with my reputation to hang an arse, and to pull that foot back, which had
already set it self so forward: I made it a matter of shame, which turned
afterward to my undoing; but am not now ashamed to speak this as boldly, as I
did vnder-go it foolishly: for such another Ass as I, was there never.

The good old Hostess ran still in my mind, who, I make account, will fall
ere long into my hands; whom, if it be my chance to light upon, I believe she
shall not get from me with her Kerchiefe on her head: I will make her walk
with her hair about her ears, and throw her (Sir-reuerence) in the dirt. I
have water enough in store for her, ^o set her up to the chinne: I am resolved
to be revenged on her, by treading on the very neck of her, and setting my
foot on her old withered windpipe, throwing her first to the ground, as thou
would throw a Dish-clout.

Would to God (thou paltry proud Boy, thou unruly young man, and thou
senseless old Ass) that I had either then understood, or thou did now know,
what manner of thing Shame is, what point of honor and reputation, considering
the great disorders that thou do, and the idle courses that thou runnest.

I said with my self, my Reputation lies upon it; my Honor is engaged; I must
and will go on, my trust is in God, and I hope he will not fail me. Having
thus set up my rest, I resolved to pass forward, with purpose to make a
journey to Madrid. For there was the Court, where was all the bravery and
gallantry of the world, nothing to be seen, save Roses and Lillies great
plenty, and abundance of all things, with many Knights of the order of the
golden Fleece; many Dukes and Grandes of Spain; many men of Title; many
Prelates; many Knights of the Habit, with many principal Gentlemen of
extraordinary rank and quality; and above all, a young King newly married.

I thought with my self, because I was a handsome young Lad, well shaped, and
of some reasonable good fashion in my behavior, that they would have gone
together by the ears for me, striving who should have me away with him. O how
many things did present themselves at once unto me! How far, in this
simplicity of ours, are our deeds, from our It is easy to think on a thing,
but bard to bring it about. How both these are painted.
thoughts! What made dishes; what hot, what cold; what boyld, what roast? For it
is easier to think, then to do. Businesses may be soon conceived, but they
are not so easily effected. Both which in my imagination I thus paint forth
unto thee.

To think upon a thing, I suppose to be like unto a pretty little Boy, riding
upon a Hobbyhorse, with a Winde-Mill made of paper, which he bears in his
hand upon the top of a Cane, or some little stick, that comes first to hand.
But to bring that thing to pass, I liken that to an old man, bald-headed,
weake-handed, lame-legged, who leaning on two Crutches, goes to the scaling of
a high wall, that is strongly defended. Have I spoke too much? I say it is no
less. For things oftentimes seem to be well disposed of in the night, when
the Candles are out, and all is dark, taking Pillow Counsel proves vain.
counsel with our pillow: But the Sun no sooner appears, but they vanish
away in an instant, like thin clouds in the heat of Summer. He that could
have seen me, when I made this account, might easily have perceived with what
care, and breaking of my sleeps, I framed these things in my thoughts. But
they were Castles in the air, and fantastical Chimera's, and had scarce put
on my clothes when I had put them all off again, and thrown them from me. I
plotted many things, but none of my proiects did hit right, but fell out
cross, if not quite contrary to what I had proposed. All was vain, all lies,
all illusion, all falsehood, and deception of the imagination, and like Duende,
is one of the spirits that fell with Lucifer. Tesorode Duende: Or Duendes
treasure, we say to be that Estate, or (...), which is all consumed and gone,
and a man knows not how, being vanished like a spirit.
Duendes Treasure, all cold embers, and dead coals.

Now, I go onward on my way, and having gotten me a short Cane in my hand, in
stead of a walking Cudgel, me thought, all the while I had that, I had my A
Plimmouth Cloak.
Cloak on my back; but it did neither do me that credit, nor keep me so
warm, as that would have done. Only it served me to underprop mine arm now
and then, whilst I gave breath to my weary legs.

As I was trudging along, a couple chanced to overtake me, traveling that
way on their Mules: I thought with my self, Could I now hold out lustily, and
keep company with them, they could not in kindness but pay my charges. But
Pescar con Mazo is properly a Mallet wherewith Car^ters dr^ (...) Ch^.
Maco, no es renta c^erta. To fish with a Pole, is no certain rent. Nor, is it
to think, and to be wise, all one. They To suit this with an English Proverb,
I know not.
are two differing things. They had never a boy between them, to go along and
look to their Mules; they did not ride very hard, though their hearts (as I
afterward found) weary very hard toward me. They rode gently enough, but they
were cruell-minded men. Their pace was softer then their bowels, for any
compassion that was in them.

I iogg'd still along, and kept close with them: and when we had gone some
three Leagues, or there-abouts, it was near about Noone. My heartstrings were
ready to break with trotting and galloping after them, because I would not be
cast behind. For, though their gate were easy, yet it put me (considering my
youth and weakness of body) to the height of my speed. These were men, or
rather Beasts in men's shape, for they spoke not a word. And I believe they were
monstrous covetous; and some there are that are so near, that they will not
part with their spittle, if they knew it would serve for a medicine. These
miserable wretches would not exchange so much as one word with me, because
they would not help me (if need had been) with some intertainment on the way.

Had they entered upon some Discourse, or told me some such Story, as did my
honest Clergy man, I should not have been half so weary as I was. For good
company, (wheresoever we chance to light upon it) is a kind of Good company,
what effects it works.
meat and drink to the Soul: it cheeres the hearts of Travelers; it
recreateth their minds; it refreshes their bodies; it makes them forget their
weariness; it riddeth the way; it eases our grief; it expels melancholy;
it lengthens man's life, and by a particular privilege that it has, it makes
horsemen, of footmen. We came in together into the Inn where we were to
bait; but I in that case, that there was but little difference betwixt me, and
one that is dead, I was e'ne quite out of heart, and clean tired out. But that
I might get me a morsel of bread to put in my mouth, I was forced to buckle up
my self, to bestirre my stumps, to lay aside all ceremonies, and to forget to
stand upon my points. Moreover I strained my self beyond my strength; humbled
my self more then stood with my nature; applyde my self to wayt upon them, to
put their Mules into the Stable, and to carry their luggage into their lodging.
They were sound and lusty, and had their healths about them, but I had got the
Plague by meeting with them. For at the first dash, one of them says unto me;
Stand aside (my young Gallant) get you gone, we have no need of your service.

O Traitors, enemies to God (thought I to my self) how uncharitably do these
men begin with me? what hope can I have from them, that they will give me
victuals; or if I should faint on the way, that they would take pity of me,
and set me up behind them? They are set down to dinner: I stood right over
against them, but somewhat aloof off, thinking they would have been so
tenderhearted, as to afford one bit or other from their trencher: but I fell
short of my hopes.

There came thither at that time a Franciscan Friar, who was on foot, and all
in a sweat. He sat down to rest himself, and anon after, pulls me out of his
Wallet (which hung on his left shoulder) a Loase of Bread, and a piece of
Bacon. I was so horrible hungry, that I could scarce stand upon my legs, or
fetch my breath, so faint was I grown for want of food.

But not having (white-Liuer'd Whore-sonne, as I was) the courage (out of a
dastardly kind of bashfulnesse) to speak unto him to relieve my want: I looked
pitifully upon him, and besought him with mine eyes (which is a good dumb
eloquence) that he would give me a bit of something for Gods sake.

The good Friar, who read my Petition in my looks, (with all the haste he
could make, as if his life had lain upon the speedy doing of it,) said; Blessed
The Franciscan Friars Charity.
be God, Though I should want my self; yet seeing thee in that necessity thou
now art, I would rather go without my self, then to see my poor brother
lack.

Take this (my pretty Boy) quoth he; and much good may it do thee. O to see
the wonderful goodness of God, the eternal Wisdom, the divine Providence;
the infinite Mercy, which in the bowels of a hard stone, does sustain a poor
silly worm, and provide it food, and fills all things living with his
heavenly bounty!

They that were able, and had vvherewithall, would not (out of mere
covetousness) give me so much as one crumme from their table: and what
relief I could not draw from them, by all my serviceable endeavors, I had from
this Mendicant, this poor beggarly Friar, only for Gods sake, and out of
mere charity, seeing in what extremity I was Quien proprias necessidades
no tiene, mal se acuerda de agenas. He that never knew what want meant, has
little feeling of another man's misery. Mine was before them, they saw it, and
with it my tender years, and that I had almost broken my heart, having spent
and tired out my self to keep company with them; yet were they not sensible
of my weariness, took no pity at all of me, nor did commiserate my wants.

My good honest Friar, did freely share his victuals with me, wherewith I
filled my belly, and was well satisfied. If that good man, as he went
toward Seuill, had been to go my way, he had ransomed me from my
misfortunes, and had made me a happy man: but we were to run a contrary
course, and to take several ways: yet when he was to go his way, the good
man (I shall ever call him by that name,) gave me half a Loaf that he had
left, and bid me farewell, telling me, Thou must content thy self (my child)
with this; had I more, more should thou have.

I put it in the lyning of the lappet of my Iacket, and fair and softly set
forward on my way. By that time I had gone three Leagues more, it was night,
then did I supper my self upon my bread, without any other meat in the world;
nor was there any that would give me ought else to eat.

It was the Carriers day, and some of them Inned there: Mine Host of the house
bid me go in, and sleep upon the Straw, I did so, and past over my travel,
as well as I could, being poor and needy, and must do as I might, seeing I
could not do as I would.

I had made a light Supper, (which you may well believe without an oath) for I
did not rise the next morning with a full stomach. But when I was about to
depart, and ready to leave the Inn, my Host comes unto A hard-^rted Host.
me, and demands a Quarto of me for my lodging. I had it not, and therefore
could not pay it him: the cunning Rogue had a great desire to have stripped me
out of my Iacket, which was of very good cloth.

When I saw I was put to this straight, and that he was so eager upon me, my
eyes were brimme full, and ready to run over with water. One of the Carriers
took pity of me that was there, (for they are not All Carriers are not K^es;
some have Souls to be saved.
all Blasphemers, and fellows that have no Souls) slept in between us, and
said, Mine Host, Let the poor Boy alone, I will pay it for him. His fellows
asked me: Sir, whence are you, and whether go you? He made answer for
me, that had paid for me. What uncivil people are ye to ask him that
question? Is that so hard a matter to be known? you may easily guess, that
he is run away either from his Father, or his Master.

Mine Host then said unto me: How say thou my Boy, will thou take wages, and
dwell with me? As things then stood with me, me thought it was no badde
bargain; yet it seemed harsh unto me, that I should now learn to serve, who
from my childhood, had been taught to command. I told him I would. Get you in
then (quoth he) and rest you here, for I will not employ you in any other
service then the Stable, for the delivering out my They have little ^ay in
Spain, and no Oats at al. Their ordinary feeding for Horse, is chopped Straw,
and Barley.
Straw and my Barley, and see that you keep a good account, and score up
truly, what every man takes, that neither you, nor they may be mis-reckoned.
Take you no care, Sir (quoth I) I shall do it to a hair.

And thus I remained there a while, having victuals without allowance, and
feeding (as they say) upon free cost; and for my work, that was rather a
sport unto me then otherwise, and help well to pass away the time. For till
those nights that the Carriers came, there was little or nothing to do; as
for other ordinary Passengers, it was not a trouble, worthy the talking of.
There I learned to steep Barley in warm water, to make it increase a third
part, and to give false measure; I had the cunning strike of the hand; I knew
how to Hincar el pulpejo.
hollow it with mine arm, and to run over the Mangers; and if any man did
put me in trust to look to his Beast, and to give him his Prouender, I would
be sure to coozen him of one third part of his measure. Some of my Yongsters
would come in now and then very neatly, in their tricksie Manc^billetes de
ligas y vigotes.
Garters, and their trim Mouchato's, as spruce as could be, carrying the show
of Gentlemen, but the Devil a Page or Lackey that they had to attend upon
them. It was good holding the Basin to these: they are your only Dons, to
endure a fine Shauing.

With these, we drove a good Trade. For we came unto them, and taking charge
of their Hackneys, we did set them up in such places as were appointed for
them, where they had the remains of that the others had left, which went for
one half of their allowance; and the other half they were presently supplide
with (though but bad measure;) but when they came to pay, we gave them a
reckoning for the whole. And into the bargain we had our Hens, and our Pigs,
if not now and then the Foale of an Ass, that did help to share with them.
For bountiful natures, and minds that are magnificent, never stick for
trifles, nor offer to stand for small matters; Magnanimus non curat de minimis.
so that we had all that we could ask, and they never made any more bones of
the matter. Our mouths were the measures, never weighing the set prices of
things, nor the Sizes set down in the Proclamation, nor what the Justices had
ordered in that kind, which were formally hung up in every Inn, with a
particular tax to every thing there specified. For those are never kept, and
therefore made little or no reckoning thereof at all. Only they are set up
there at our doors, to the end that the Alcalde and the The Notary.
Escriuano may lick their fingers, and receive some monthly profit from the
fees belonging thereunto. And to take occasion to see, whether they had fixed
up the Cedula or no, with purpose to pick a quarrel with them, if they
neglected the doing thereof, and so make them pay soundly for it. For the
Stable, it is already well known, what every Horses allowance is, and how much
it comes to a piece, both for their Straw, their Prouender and their Standing.
For the Kitchen, that was sport alone to us, it made us all merry, for we were
quick upon that call to come in, and nimble (as having learned our lessons
aforehand) in the bringing in of our reckoning. So many A Marauedi, is the
thirty two part of a Ryall, which is six pence.
Ryals (Gentlemen) and so many * Marauedis miche ye God diche you, and you are
heartily welcome. Being ever sure to reckon rathere a Ryall over, then a Blanke
under.

Many (like good wise men as they were) would never examine the reckoning, but
lay down their money presently, saying, Lo (my friend) there is your due. But
some fresh-water-Souldiers, that were but Nouices and young Travelers, plants
of the first Leaf, would ask us wherefore? How can it come to be much, etc?
But this was but to cut their own throats, and to make us to inhaunce the
reckoning the higher; for when they once put us to that iumpe, (besides the
raising of our prices in the general) we did always find a trick to add
something, though it were but for the boiling of their Olla, is a pot or P^k
(...) wherein ^sh, and other things are sed* by the Figure Metonym. The Olla is
taken for that which is boiled in it. Olla podrida, is a very great one,
containing in it diverse things, as Mutton, Beef, Hens, (...), Sawsages, Piggs
feet, Garlic, Onions, etc. It is called Podrida, because it is sod leisurely,
til it be rotten (as we say) and ready to fall in pieces. And it is therefore
^earmed Podrida, for that it is like fruit that is ouer-ripe. Andreas Bacius,
A Roman Phisician, in his book de natura Vinorum, says; That Olla Podrida, is
the same as Poderosa: To wit, powerful by reason of its greatness, and the
variety of the things contained in it. In English it may well bear the name of
Hodgepodge. Couarruuias, verb. Olla. This Olla, is in Spain the common'st
meat of all other, and in most esteem. They eat the meat first, and suppe
up their Caldo or broth afterward.
Olla, and such like toys; so that by this time there were many wanting for to
make up the full reckoning, which they were forced to pay in the end, by way
of fine or amercement for their folly. For had they (like others) taken their
payment quietly, they had not been so soundly lash't. For you must understand,
that the word of an Host, is a kind of definitive Sentence; there is no
appealing from it, but to the Purse. Nor is it swaggering or roaring that can
serve the turn; your brauings will little benefit you; for your Hosts, for
the most part, are a company of old Catch-poles, dogged Curres, who out of a
scuruie condition that they have, will with a still mouth hunt dry-foot after
you, till he come to some good Town, and then he will bawle upon you (like
old Crier) and when he has set you up, will accuse you to the Justice, That
you would have set his Inn on fire, or that you did bastonado him with a
Cudgel, or that you would have forced his wife, or his daughter; and only
that he might do thee a mischief, and be revenged upon thee. Besides, we had
some Lures in our house to catch foolish birds with-all, and had some shows of
provision for poor Travelers; which were such, that no man that had come
into the Inn afoot, would have stayed to go out a horseback: if thou
chance to forget thy self, and to leave any thing behind thee, give it thy
good word, unless thou have the better luck; for it shall be laid up sure
enough for thy finding.

What shall I tell thee of the thefts, the tyrannies, the impudencies, and the
villainies, that daily pass in your Innes and Victualling-houses? There is
neither the fear of God, nor of his Ministers amongst them: and for matter of
Justice, either there is none at all to be had against them, or else they take
part with them: But God forbid, that we should believe any such things of
them; for it is not to be supposed, that your Justices will be corrupted: But
be it so or not so, take it as you will, the remedy thereof were a matter of no
small importance. For it is a thing worthy the following, that many Wainmen,
and those that go up and down with Carriages, do refrain their Trading,
through the great expense and charges of your Innes. Traffic ceasseth every
where, out of the fear that they have to be bitten by your Hosts, and
Victuallers, who receive good payment for evil usage, professing a kind of
public theft.

I have been an eyewitness of seeing many things touching these kind of
insolences; which to deliver, would require a large Discourse. And should we
hear the like amongst Barbarians, we should censure them accordingly; and
yet, when we see the same here at home before our eyes, we are not moved
thereat. But I swear unto you, that Profitable conueniences for Trauellours.
the mending of the high ways, the repayring of Bridges, and the reforming of
Innes, is not that which requires less care, then matters of greater moment,
in regard of commerce and traffic. Howsoever, when I shall leave this house,
I have not far to go.

CHAPTER II.
How Guzman de Alfarache leaving his Host, went begging to Madrid; and coming
thither, how he set himself to learn to play the Rogue, and to bear a
Basket; where by the way he discourses of Hunger, of Beggerie; and of Honor
which hurts the soul.

THIS being too lazy a life for me, I did not like it half well; and the
less, for that it did not sort to my purpose. For I was no better (to speak
the best of it) then an Inne-keepers Boy, which is somewhat worse then a
blind-man. I had a mind to be a Traveler, and thereon had set up my
resolution, and therefore would not (though it had cost me a thousand lives)
have been found there in such a base Office, as that was. There did daily
pass by the door many haggard-Hawkes, young wandering Lads, much about my
years and growth; some with money in their purse, others begging an alms for
Gods sake: whereupon I said with my self, What a devil ails me? or what
scuruy metal am I made of, that I should be more cowardly, and baser-minded
then other men? in that I am not sensible, how much I wrong my self; and out
of a faint-heartednesse, and like a Crauen (as I am) should stoop to pick out
a poor living, out of such a dunghill kind of life, as this? Hereupon I took
heart unto me, and set a good face on the Cuzman resolves to part with his
Host.
matter; and so bidding mine Host God b'wy, I went forth to seek my fortune,
carrying some Copper-money along with me, gotten in a good war; and some
other lawful purchases that I made: but my store being small, it was quickly
gone. When all was spent, I fell a begging: some would give Guzman falls a
begging.
me an Ochauo, is a kind of brassemoney, whereof two make three farthings.
Ochauo; but most would say unto me, Pardon me (my Boy) I have not for you.

With this poor Ochauo, and other his fellows, I did eat now and then with a
gaudeamus, according to my gettings: but this Pardon me (my Boy) I have not
for you, did me no good in the world: I might have sat down with a pereamus,
for any comfort that I found in it. Charity was very cold, and it was no
marvel; for it was a dear year, and there was a general scarcity
thorow-out the Kingdom. And if there were a dearth in Andalusia, how great
then must the want be in the Kingdom of Toledo? and far greater in the
Inland. Then I heard that Proverb verified, Librete Dios de la enformedad que
baxa de Castilla, y de hambre, que sube del Andaluzia, When there is a Plague
in Castile, the insetion is geuerall. And when there is a a famine in
Andaluzia, the dearth is over all the Land. Guzman leaves begging. What shift
he makes to live. Guzman comes to Madrid; and in what kind of fashion.
God deliver thee from the Plague, that comes down from Castile, and from the
Famine that comes up from Andaluzia.

Now, because I found begging to be but a poor Trade, and all things else at
excessive rates; food and raiment being dear commodities, I grew so out of
heart therewith, that I resolved to follow that occupation no longer, though my
wants should be never so great. Hereupon, I was minded to make the best I could
of those Clothes that I had on my back: then I began to unbind the Book,
and to divide it into Leaves: that is, to separate one thing from another, that
all might not go away at once; sorting my clothes into several parcels,
consuming one piece after another, till all was gone; selling this, chopping
that, and pawning the other, till I had not a ragge left.

So that when I came to Madrid, I looked like one that had newly come from the
Oar, or some gentile Rower returned lately from the Galleys, I was so lightly
clad, having nothing on but a Canuas pair of Breeches, and a course Shirt; and
that none of the cleanest, but as foul as foul might be; all to tattered and
torn, and so rotten with age, that it was ready to fall from my back. And
this I was forced to do, to keep life and soul together, and all little
enough to serve the turn.

Seeing my self thus out of reparations, and all to be rent and torn; howbeit
I sought after Service, thinking to win credit with my good words, no man
would trust me the more for my fair tongue, but grew rather ielous of my
evil conditions; insomuch that I could not meet with any that would give me
intertainment, admit me into his service, or suffer me to come within his
doors, because I was without a Cloak, and so nasty in my other clothes;
that out of a very loathing, they were able to turn a man's stomach. They did
think, that I was some roguish little Thief, and that if they should take me
in, I would filch some thing from them, and betake me to my heels when I had
done.

Seeing my self in this desperate state, counting my self, as it were a lost
man, I began to follow the Trade de la Florida Picardia, exercising all your
Cony-catching tricks, knauish prankes, fine feats, with slight of hand, and
whatsoever Rogueries come within the compass of that prowling office. The
shame that I had to return home, I lost it upon the way; for traveling afoot
as I did, it wayed so heavy, that I was not able to bring it along with me: or
perhaps, they that stole my Cloak, carried it away with them in the Cape
thereof; and this is sure the likelier of the two. For ever since that time I
have been troubled with a lazy kind of yawning, and a * Feuer-lordane, a The
Spanish word is Calofrio: Lat. Paroxysmus, frigus si^ul and calorem inducens:
and nomen habet a calido and frigido. Hunger and Shame, mortal enemies. Guzman
begins to ^rne Ticaro.
which did prognosticate the Disease I should be sick of to my dying day. A
Pockes upon Shamefastness, which hung still upon me, and yet I had none of it;
for I began to free my self from that irkesomenesse, and that little shame
that was left me, I turned into ^mpudencie: for Hunger and Shame could never
yet be made friends. My former Modesty (I confess) was merely out of my
shallowness of wit, and now I find, that it was even then a foolish kind of
Simplicity. And in those days, I played the child, as others of my age do: but
now, like a Vyper, that has stung me unawares by the hand, I have shook that
Vermin from off my fingers ends. I fell in with other Tasselgentles, much
about my size and pitch, that were high Flyers, and cunning in the catching of
their prey. As I saw them do, so did I, as well as I could: but because I was
but newly entered, and was not yet come to that true flying to seize the
Partridge in foot, I did assist them with my best endeavors, refused no pains,
followed their steps, and walked their stations; whereby I came to pick up my
crummes, and to gather a few Blankes together. Thus I sailed up and down,
fetching my boords to and fro, still sounding as I went along, to see how many
fadome I was off from the shore, and what new Country was upon discovery.

I could now hunt out for my supper, as well as the best of them, and knew
certainly where to have it; but I was to take heed, that I played the true
Clock-keeper: for if I failed of my hour, (especially at your Monasteries, and
Religious Houses) and did not truly keep the due time, limited and prescribed
by them, I was shut out, and left in the dark: so that I had now learned the
fashion, to show my self a mannerly Ghest, by staying rather for Need is a
diligent ^ayter.
others, th^n that others should stay for me. This loytering kind of life was
not without its cares; and as idle as it seemed to be, it was painful enough
unto me: for, while I led this Roguish life, I learned to play at Cock-All, at
Handy-Pandy, and at Nine-holes* from these I went a Form higher; I knew how to
play at Noddy, One-and-thirty, Quinolas, and Primera: in a short time I
profited so well in these my studies, that I past on to the upper Form. I
could cogge a Dye handsomely, and if I had good luck, all was mine own
(especially if I met with weak Gamesters.) Nor would I change this life of a
Picaro, this roguish life of mine, for the best that any of my Ancestors ever
led.

I had a months mind to the Court; and I went daily refining my wit; I set a
new edge upon my understanding, and enriched my brain with new Philosophy.
And seeing others of lesser worth then my self to grow from a little, to a
great deal of wealth; and from mean beginnings, to come to mighty matters,
and to eat their bread without begging, nor expecting it from others hands,
(which is the bread of sorrow, and the bread of blood) yea though it should be
bestowed upon thee by thine own father: out of a desire Bread of Sorrow, what
(...) is.
that I had to attain to this glorious liberty; and that I might not (as many
others) be punished as a Vagabond, and run the censure of a wandering Rogue, I
applied my self to carry such burdens, as my weak shoulders were able to
bear.

The Fraternity of Asses is a great Brotherhood; for, even men have been
willing to be admitted into this Company; and have been glad to yield
themselves to carry unclean and heavy Loades, with as much patience, as the
silliest Ass alive, as if they had been borne for no other end, but to ease
them of their burdens. Now, if men are grown to that basen^sse, that they
will quite the Ass of his Hamper, and clap it on their own backs, only to
gain an Acumbre is a Ia^ or Pitcher, containing about a Pottle, little more or
less, and is one man's all^wance in wine. The Acumbre we di^ into four
Measures, called Quartillo's. It is an Arabicke word. All things are hard in
the beginning.
Acumbre more of Wine, that they may drink the freelier, when they have done
their work: see in what ample manner their Assishnesse extends it self;
what a strong hand it has in the world, and to what a mighty Corporation it is
now grown.

But to let this pass, I confess unto thee, that I was somewhat cold in the
matter at the first, and fell to it with an ill will; but above all, I was
wonderful fearful: for being a thing that I was never used to before, it
suited illfauouredly with me at the first, and worse afterward, when I was
entered into it: for all beginnings have their difficulties; and are not so
easy at the first as they seem to be: but after I had taken a relish of this
Roguish life, and found the sweetness of it, I could tread the true Tracke of
it, and was grown so perfect, that I could have gone blindfold to my work,
and not have stepped a foot out of the way.

What a fine kind of life was it, what a dainty and delicate thing without
Thimble, Thread, or Needle; without Pinsers, Hammer, or Wimble, or any other
Mechanical Instrument whatsoever, more then one only bare Basket; like unto
those of your Brethren of the Order de Anton Martin, (though unlike to them in
their goodness of life, and solitary retiredness) I had gotten me an Office
whereby to live: and such a kind of Office, as seemed to be a bit without a
bone; a back, without a burden; a merry kind of Occupation, and free from all
manner of trouble and vexation?

I did often think on the life that my Parents led; and that, which I had made
trial of in this so short a time; as also, that which they had undergone to so
little purpose, and to their so great cost. O* (said I to my self) what a
burden is the weight of Honor? And what metal is there, that can equal
Honor, what a burden it is.
it in poyze? To what a world of inconveniences, is that man liable, who is
driven to make use of it? How warily, and how circumspectly must he go to
work? What a deal of care, and sudden passions, come upon him? What high and
slender ropes must he run up and down upon? Through how many thousands of
perils must he sail in this vaste Ocean? Into what infinite troubles must he
thrust himself? And amidst how many Brambles, and Bushes, and pricking*
Thorns, must he im-bryer, and entangle himself withal, and scarce get out of
them, without leaving his ^ece behind him, if not his skin? What a thing is
it, that my honor must be subject to the mouth of the dissolute, and to the
hand of the indiscr^t and unadvised man? The one by word, the other by action.
Against which, all the wit and force of man is not able to prevail, nor to
turn that unruly tide, when it shall break in upon us. What frenzy of Sa^n,
what malice of the Devil was it, to marry this foul Abuse unto Man, which is
able to make him run mad, and irrecouerably to lose his wits? As if he did not
know, that Honor True Honor, is the Daughter of Truth.
is the Daughter of Truth. And see how much a man is Virtuous, so much is he
Honorable, and no more. And it is impossible, that my honor should be taken
away from me, as long as my Virtue remains with me, which is it is proper
Center. Only mine own Wife may take away mine honor from me (according to
the opinion of Spain) by taking away first her The honor of a man's Wife, what
it is.
own: for she being one and the selfsame thing with my self, my Honor and
hers are one, and not two, as being but one, and the same flesh; and whatsoever
shall be said in the contrary, it is but scurrility, mere wit and invention,
and the idle dreams of a fantastic brain. Happy is that man's life, that
neither knows what Honor means, nor seeks after it, nor has any thing to
do with this Titulary top.

I was ever of the mind, that if that man that pretends Honor, should but
truly open his eyes, and look upon it without partiality, considering (not
carried away with passion) the effects thereof, he would not stoop to take it
up; nor touch that with his hand, whose burden must either break his back,
or make him sink under the weight thereof to the ground. O how troublesome a
thing is it, first to get it? how difficult afterward to keep it? how
dangerous to hold, how easy to lose, as depending on the common estimation and
opinion of men? But if it rely upon the Vulgar, and that be the What the
honor of the Vulgar is.
proppe that must vp-hold it, it is one of the greatest torments that Fortune
can give, or man suffer in this life, who desires to end his days quietly,
and to pass his Carreere peaceably, without being crossed in his Course. And
albeit men plainly perceive, that this which I say is true, and they see the
experience thereof daily before their eyes, yet they will not stick to hazard
their lives; nay to give their very Souls for it, as if that should save them
another day.

Thou think it no honor unto thee, to cloth the naked, to feed the hungry,
nor to exercise (as thou ought) those good deeds, that belong to thy
Christian Honor, what it ought to be.
function, and many other things, which I know, and am silent in; and thou
know them to thy self, though thou do dissemble them; thinking that
others perceive it not, and that thou carryest things closely, when as indeed
thou dancest but as it were in a net, and all thy actions lie open to public
view, which my pen shall omit to set down, that I may not point them forth unto
thee as it were with the finger, and whereof perhaps, when I shall have
delivered thee my mind, thou will make no more, if not less reckoning of it,
then of a blast of wind, or a puff of smoke, that presently vanishes, and
is no more seen.

Can thou think it an Honor unto thee, that the Hospital should be
maintained with the droppings of thy Tap, and the Scraps of thy Kitchen, (when
there is not a Dog, that waits at thy Trencher, but fares better?) Can
thou think it an honor unto thee, that thy Mules should have their Linen and
their Woollen clothes, whilst Christ (in his members) dies out of very cold,
not having wherewith to cover his nakedness? Can thou think it an Honor to
thee, that thy Horses should be as fat as their skins can hold, that they are
even ready to burst again with the fullness of their feeding, while the poor
fall down at thy gate for want of food, their weak legs not being able to
support their hunger st^ued bodies? No, thou can not. And I presume, the
practice of every good Christian is far otherwise. And this is that honor,
which every man ought highly to esteem, and may justly seek, and hunt after
it. But that which thou call honor, may more properly be termed Pride, or
foolish estimation, which makes men fall into Hecticks, and P^ysicks, and with
a canine appetite to catch greedily at that Honor, which is no sooner had,
then lost. And not only that, but with it the Soul; (which is a thousand
pities) which every good Soul ought to avoid, and bewail.

CHAP. III.
Guzman de Alfarache goes on in his Discourse against vain Honors: Where* by
the way he offers unto Man's consideration, what manner of person he ought to
be* how to bear himself in his Office, and to govern himself in those high
places, whereunto he is called.

ALBEIT, (as being then but a Youth) and newly (as they say) Honor, how
prettily it is here compared.
crept out of the shell, this being the first flight that ever I made, I had
run through many miseries, and suffered much want, yet I past them all over as
easily as I could; imagining still in my mind, that Honor is like unto your
early fruits, that are sooner ripe then the rest, and brought first into the
Market, which though they be excessive dear, and not to be had, but at a high
rate, and unmeasurable prices; yet all do equally buy them, and pay alike for
them, even from him, that has a purse to bear it, as from him, that has not
the like ability. What a great presumption and shame is it, that a poor
Husbandman should buy half a pound of your first Cherries that come into the
market, which may chance to cost him the price of so much bread, as would very
well serve to sustain himself, his Wife, and his Children? O holy Laws, and
O happy Kingdoms, that shall put a bridle to this abuse, as a thing tending to
the general hurt of a Commonwealth! For (there being no restraint in that
kind) they buy, and eat thereof without limit, or moderation, never growing
weary of buying, nor glutted with eating: Which too timely, or rather untimely
fruits, breed no good nutriment, corrupt the blood, cause raw concoction, and
engender evil humors, which afterward pay their bodies with sound Agues,
sharp Fevers, strange Parasismes, and other the like grievous, and painful
infirmities.

I swear by the faith of an honest man, that such a devouring of Honor, will
cost thee more then one purge. I was never ambitious in this kind, never
greedy of this honor, never gave it a good look, since I first knew it;
especially, when I saw Pages, Seruing-men, and Prentises forsake their old
Trades, to follow new courses, and to get themselves into some odd Office,
Honor ill placed upon so^e.
or other, as far repugnant from their nature, as heat, from cold, and as
much differing from their disposition, as heaven is distant from the earth.
Yesterday, thou would have sent thy Servant to one of these fellows, to will
him to come to thee, and when he had come, given him an Ha, or a Nod, or a
plain Counted a disgraceful word in Spain. As if here in England we should
in scorn Thou a man.
Vos, which was as much, if not more, then he deserved. And now that he has
got but an Office upon his back, he sends the next day for thee by a Porter,
where thou must sue and entreat that he will be-friend thee in such a
business, and stand with cap in hand, crowching unto him, giving him the
Worship, with a Sir-reuerence at every word, beseeching him, that his Worship
would be pleased to do you this or that favor.

Tell me, is not that true of this man, which is spoken of that proud Bird the
Peacocke, who to other day having scarce ever a feather to cover his
nakedness, does now boast his silken plumes, and spread abroad his golden
train? If this be true, it must likewise then follow, that when this painted
puff shall have his tail plucked, all his gilded feathers, and rich
imbroyderies taken from him, which natures richest hand has so curiously
wrought; if any misfortune befall such a man, and that he once come to be
stripped of his honors, down goes his goodly train, and his plumes being
pulled from him, is just the same man, as he was before.

And if you shall but weigh and consider this thing well, you shall find such
Touching Honor, and the honored.
men as these, not to be men of Honor, but men honored; for they that are
truly honorable, have this honor from, and in themselves, and no man can so
pill and pull their feathers, but that fresher and goodlier plumes will come up
anew in the place, and be more glorious to look to then before.

But the honored, that receive their honor from another, one while you see
them; another while you not see them. So long as the merry month of May
lasts, so long are your flowers fresh and fair to see to: As these flowers,
so are those favors, which the Favorite receives from the Prince, or person
that favors him. They soon fade; they had but their time, and that's gone, and
they with it: And then they return to be the same men they were before.

Whilst the sap is in the bough, it is green and flourishes; but when it
goes back into the root, it dies and withers for the time. So it stands
with your Favorite; his Honor flourishes like the green Bay Tree, while his
Princes favor shines upon him; but when he calls this in again unto himself,
as the tree does the sap, and it returns to the root from whence it came,
his honor is nipt in the head, and is no better (if not much worse) then he
was before his rising. So have I seen some men mounted on high, employed in
great affairs, and to have held great places of Dignity and honor in the
Commonwealth, which might have been put into the A reprehending of those that
are So^s and Do^s, and yet seek after Offices, and Places of great preferment.
hands of Gentlemen of approved good judgment, and excellent parts, and
thought themselves happy, if they had been conferred and bestowed upon them.

To these men I have called as I have lain in my bed, and cryde out unto them:
How now (my friends) whither away go ye with these Offices? Who (if they hear
me) might very well answer: I vow to God, I know not my self: I think they
are therefore given us, that we should make our profit of them, feather our
nests, and in-rich our selves, as well as we can. But thou do not consider
(wretched as thou art) that the burden which thou bear, thou neither truly
understand, nor is it properly belonging to thy profession: and that in
losing thine own Soul, thou ouerthrowest withal another man's business, and
art bound in conscience to make him recompense, for the wrong thou have done
him.

Do thou not know, that there belongs more to the dispatch of business, and
deciding of differences betwixt party and party, then there does to the sowing
of a Garment, or the shearing of Cloth, or tolend such a Gentlewoman your arm,
when you Usher her along the streets; which grace she vouchsafes to afford
thee, for that hands sake, which did advance thee?

Peradventure, thou may have been asked the question, or thy self may
perhaps have made some secret scrutiny in thine own bosom, whether thou did
find thy self of ability and sufficiency to perform thy charge; or whether
thou had the knowledge and understanding to do things well and handsomely,
without wronging thy Conscience, going thy self to hell, and carrying him
along with thee, that did confer thy Office upon thee? But some babbling
fellow here-abouts, which I suppose to be some one Barbers man or other, (for
they are commonly a kind of Climactericall and dangerous prattlers) will give
me this short answer: We can. It is a strange thing to see the humors of
some men. Consider with me (for Gods sake) what business has with it so many
tricks, so many shifts, and so many difficulties, as has this? We are all of
us men (the best of us are no more) and when the wheels are once set a-worke,
we imagine, they must go well enough of themselves, without any care, or
looking to of ours. O what a pity is it, that thou should then begin to
learn an Office, when thou should come to use it! O what a grief, to see a
man's practice out-runne his knowledge! he being as unfit for the Place, as the
place for him.

The Pylot is fearful of governing his Ship, (not only in tempestuous weather,
but at all times, even in the calmest Sea, and fairest Season; by reason of
those sudden accidents, and various casualties, which hourly, nay, every
minute may befall him) although he be his Arts-master, and thoroughly
understands, what he has to do upon all occasions. And thou, which never
saw the Sea, wast never taught thy Compass, nor know what belongs to the
Art of Navigations: Will thou, I say, venture to steer a Ship, and ingulph thy
self, thou know not whither, no^ into what danger? What would thou think
or say, when thou see a Boy fumble on the Citterne, and when he should come
to play before thee, not to be able to strike a true note; what a tearing would
this be to thine, or any other musical ear? O how harsh would it sound? And
yet all this while, thou do not, or wilt not perceive, that when thy self
come to understand thy Place, or to think, that thou understand it
(which is the truer of the two) for want of knowledge, thou have not only lost
that, but thy Lords love together with it, and the time which thou have spent,
and nothing left to comfort thee withal, but the fooleries, which thou have
committed therein. Follow thine own trade, and exercise thy self in those
things, thou well understand, thrust not thy Sickle into another man's
Harvest, and meddle not with those things, that are fitter for others, then thy
self. But this is not so much thy fault, as of those that thrust it upon thee,
who have more, then thou, to answer for it: it is a Commutation, that lies
heavily upon the Conscience. But to proceed.

Even now, but to day, have I known these kind of men, mean, poor, and
miserable creatures; on the morrow after, they have risen up in a strange
fashion, utterly unknown unto me (like him that dies his Beard, or being old
and strooken in years, grows to be young again,) exalted, and set aloft,
looking big upon the matter, expecting to have the first Cap, and to be
first saluted by those, whose servants they might well have been, and that in
mean and base offices, and yet have thought it preferment good enough for
them. I knew very well, which way he would go, that led the dance; and whence
this violence did proceed, by altring things, and putting them out of their due
course, thrusting out the naturals, to bring in strangers. I likewise was not
ignorant, that those that did murmr and repine thereat, had good reason so to
do; for by giving unto every one, that which of right belongs unto him, the
gall of Envy and Malice is thereby broken and split in sunder. For it is an
case to the sick stomach of a State, when Offices seek men, and not men
Offices, whence great scandal and infamy does arise. For by how much the more
high Places make them to be known, that do not deserve them, by so much the
more they mak^ the owners of them to be contemned and despised. And these
undeserved dignities* go not away without their payment. For as they are an
affront to those that hold them, when they are unworthy of them; so they suffer
dishonor in themselves, by being conferred on such undeserving persons;
Leaving him likewise, who did bestow them, subject to In^amy, Detraction, and
Obligation to make satisfaction to the State, for the wrongs occasioned thereby.

Here I alight, and make a stand, shutting up my conceit within it is bounds,
that it may not straggle too farrre. This ware I sell you as mine own, and
recommend it unto you for good, unless you undervalue it for the sellers
sake. And I must needs confess, that this offspring of my brain is worthy a
better father. But do thou dispose of it, and compose it, according as thy
self shall think fit, by amending such faults as thou findst amiss. And
though it be a beggars Brat, and the son of a Rogue, yet conceive withal,
that we are all men, and have all of us understanding; and that El habito no
Cucullus non facit Monachum.
haze el Monge: it is not the Coule, that makes the Friar. Yet in this, as in
all things else, I submit my self to thy censure, and am willing to receive
thy correction.

Now by this time, thou know my weakness, notwithstanding I would have thee
to know, that there was not that day went over my head, wherein I did not run
over my beads, besides other devotions that I did. And although I hear thee
murmr, that it is a common practice amongst Thieues and Ruffians, to have
their Rosario. Las cu^ntas para rezar. Latin, Sphaerulae, Precatoriae, Corona.
Rosario still in their hand, faining themselves to be very devoutly affected
toward our Lady: Think, and say what thou will, I care not a rush, for I
desire not thy good opinion, nor seek to win any credit from thy mouth.
Every morning, the first thing that I did, was to go to Church to hear Mass;
that being done, I afterward began presently to cast about, how I should spend
that day, for the getting of something to sustain my self withal, and to
keep me from staruing.

I once remember, that having layen somewhat long a-bed, and finding my self
not half current, I thought it not fit, that day, to take any pains for my
living: it was a Festiuall-day, and to Church I went, where I heard high
Mass, and a very good Sermon by a learned Augustine, upon the fifth A
Discourse upon the S. o^ Mat.
Chapter of S. Mathewes Gospel, where it is said; Let your light so shine
before men, that they may see your good works, and glorify your Father which
is in Heaven: where by the way, he bestowed a little sprinkling upon your
Clergymen, your Prelates, and such as were beneficed: telling them, That
they Clergymen charitably reproved of their faults.
had not these great Rents given them for nothing; that they were to look
rather upon the greatness of their charge, then into the greatness of their
Reuenew; and that these good things were not conferred upon them, to fill the
belly, and to cloth the back, and to waste and consume these good blessings
of God in unnecessary idlements; but in feeding the poor, and clothing the
naked, and in dispensing to the needy, and those that are in necessity; over
whom God had set them as Stewards, and no otherwise; or to speak more
properly, has appointed them his Administrators over this his Hospital. And
that in putting this Steward-ship or Administration into their hands, it was
more particularly thrown upon them, then any other, as on men of all other the
most to be trusted, and (by reason of their Profession) least interessed in the
World: mercifull-minded men, wholy retired from the world, and from those
confusions which accompany it; to the end, that with the more care, and the
less trouble, they may apply themselves to this Ministry, wherewith they
were in-trusted.

Would to God they would open their eyes, and look to whom they give, how,
and on what they do distribute it; for it is another money, and not their
own, whereof a strict account will be taken of them. Let them not therefore
abuse the trust, that is reposed in them; God never sleeps; he is still awake
and se^th all our Actions. Nor will it boot them to use tricks and devices to
defraud him but in a Farthing, or to coozen him of the least Mite. For as it is
the gain of Judas, so shall they receive Judas his reward. He said in the
general, that their manners and behavior should be like unto the Lantern^ in
the Admiral, to the rest of the Fleet, by whose light, all the rest What
manner of ^en Church-m^n ^ght to be.
of the Ships should steare their Course, and still have an eye upon it,
without troubling themselves in other worldly affairs, and matters of profit
to their purse, which is contrary to their Profession, and to that obligation,
whereunto they are bound by Gods Word, which cannot lie.

I remember ver^ well, (...) then call to mind a certain friend of my fathers,
how ill he disposed (...) which he had got, and the ill example which he left
behind him: this was his end; and with this the Preacher ended.

Many other excellent good things did he utter to this purpose, and strongly
confirmed what he delivered with forcible reasons; which for the in-decencie of
my profession, I willingly silence; nor is it fitting for a man of my fashion,
to make mention of them.

That night my sickness increased upon me; my bed was none of the best, nor
much softer then a piece of an old Matt, that is full of holes, and thrown
Guzmans miserable condition.
upon the dunghill, as good for nothing. The cattle went grazing on the
humane Pasture of my miserable corpse; I awaked with their nibbling* fell a
scrubbing, and finding no disposition in my self to sleep, I made a
repetition of the whole Sermon to my self; as one, that understood very well,
that Every man, even the meanest, is bound to be virtuous, and to have a good
conscience.
albeit his speech tended more particularly toward Churchmen, yet it did in
the general appertain unto all; from the Myter to the Crown; from the most
powerful Prince, to such a poor Caytiffe as my self. Lord be merciful unto
me, I began to think with my self, that this did as well concern me as them:
and that I was a kind of Something; that I had a soul to save as well as
they; and that there was some reckoning to be made of me too. Then I began to
examine my self, What light am I able to give to others; or how can it be had,
much less, shine in a man, whose office is so vile, and so base as mine? Yes
(my friend) quoth I: and it belongs also unto thee, and therefore I speak it
unto thee; for thou likewise art a member of this mystical Body, equal with
the greatest in substance, though not in quality. Bear thy burdens well and
faithfully; make not your Vintage out of other men's Grapes; do not nimme and
purloyne by the way; conueying from the Basket to the Breeches, into pri^y
Pockets, and false Linings, that which is none of thine. Do not shrink the
shoulder, as if thou had the dead weight of Plate upon thy back; and do not
thou move as slowly, when thou have but two Loaves to carry, as when thou art
laden with two Beams, or maine pieces of Timber.

Make a conscience of thy gettings; be moderate and temperate in thy What your
Porters that carry baskets, and the like burdens, ought to do.
gains; not demanding more then thy labor is worth; use all men well, but
bestow thy pains on the poor for nothing; offering that freely, as thy first
fruits due unto God. Be not dishonest, be not vicious, be no Glutton, nor no
Drunkard: call thy conscience to an account, be sure to keep a true score and
reckoning with it: for, in so doing (like that poor old woman in the Gospel)
thou can not want the comfort of lifting up thy heart, and thy eyes unto
Heaven, saying; Blessed be the Name of the Lord. For even in Rogues there is
some virtue, some spark of goodness; and this in thee shall be thy Light.

But in my judgment, both now, and then when I heard the Sermon, (that we may
return again to our former consideration) what he spoke (besides that which
concerned the Clergy and the Communalty) had especial reference unto Princes,
and their ministers of Justice, whereof I should have spoken when I made this
my Digression. These are truly said to be the Light; and in that sacred
Chapter House, or in the greatest part thereof, all is Light, Light, how it
ought to be in those that be are Office.
more and more Light still, to the end (to leave them the more inexcusable)
that they may not allege hereafter, that they had not any Light at all.
Consider with me, that the Light ought to subsist (as the Agent) in some
subject (as the Patient) whereon to work. As for example, in the Wax, be it
Torch, or any other thing whatsoever. I say then, that when any such kind of
person, be it another, or be it thy self, shall represent himself, as a Light
unto me, thy good works, thy fair behavior, thy civil carriage, thy zeal,
thy Rules for him that gouernes others.
holiness of life, is that which makes thee to shine, and to give Light unto
others. What thing is it then, think thou, to have an Office thrown upon
thee, or some great dignity or other? It is a putting of Wax to this Light, to
make it shine the more: but tell me then, what is the office of the Light? It
is to go with his heat, drawing and sucking the Wax still toward him, that
it may burn the brighter, and maintain it self the better. Even so must thou
do with thy Office; thou must drink it in, as it were, and incorporate it into
this Light of thy virtues, and honest course of life, that all men may see it,
and imitate it, bearing thy self so uprightly, that prayers may not move thee,
tears may not soften thee, gifts may not corrupt thee, menaces may not daunt
thee, anger may not overcome thee, hatred may not disturb thee, nor affection
deceive thee. Again, which offers it self first to our sight, the Light, or
the Wax? You will grant me, the Light: if so, then so behave thy self, that
thy Office, which is the Wax, may be seen after thee; and Offi^rs compared to
the (...), and to Wax.
that the Office may be known by thee, and not thou by the Office. It often so
falls out, that the Wax is much, and the Light is little; whereby the Light
comes to be drowned and quenched in it; as in case the Torch should be great,
and the Weke small. Other-times it happens, that the Light is turned Bad
Officers, and their evil effect^.
down-wards; and so by melting the Wax above, it is presently extinguished and
put out.

So we see, that the good in thy self is so little, and the Office which thou
art put into, is so far beyond the measure of thy Merit, that that little
Light thou have, is smoothered on the sudden, and so thou remainest in
darkness. Other-whiles, thou turnest these thy virtues toward the ground, by
inclining thy self unto evil: for thou do make thy Office to melt as it
were at the top, and to waste and consume its light, by thy robbing, by thy
coozening, by thy ouer-commanding, and contemning the poor: using in his
Cause, delays; in that of the rich, all possible speed: with the poor thou
deal'st rigorously; with the rich, gently and mildly: on the one thou frownest,
on the other thou smilest: the poor thou proudly tramplest under thy feet; but
the rich thou salutest with Cap in hand; bowest thy body, using him in all the
rest, with a great deal of love and kindness. And while this is in doing,
Death comes on thee unawares; it seizes suddenly upon thee, thy life is
quickly at an end, but thy damnation remains for ever. Others there are, who
(as I said before) draw Light from their Office; and whereas they themselves
ought to be the Light, they are indeed but the Wax. Would thou know the
condition of these men, and what they do? I will tell thee: What, I pray, is
the property of Wax? To go by little and little, wearing and wasting away;
haling the Light violently after it self, till they both go toppling out,
vanish away at last, and come to nothing. Just so is it with these kind of men;
they live in that manner, (hiding their Light under a Bushel, concealing their
good Works, and burying all Virtue and Goodness in them) that they make no use
of it, nor esteem it: only they esteem the Office, which they have made
their Light: this, they go forcing, as it were, by violence, they tugge and
hale it unto them, that they may incorporate it into themselves, that they may
reap their profit by it, skimme the Cream from it; and not only that, but to
draw away its very heart-blood. And so by little and little, together with it,
they themselves likewise consume away. Ill they lived, and ill they dye: as was
their life, so was their end. What does he think with himself, that suffers
himself to be made Wax, when he takes from one that which is his right, or
that which he justly deserves, and does transfer it on a fool, or some
vn-worthy person, whom he has a desire to pleasure? Shall I tell thee what
becomes of this man in the end? He melts and drips away like Wax, not knowing
how, nor which way he comes to be consumed: his health decays, his honor
diminishes, his wealth wastes away, his friends fail him, his wife, his
children, and his kinsfolk, are taken from him by Death; on whom, as on the
proppes of his house, leaned all his God ^sheth (...), and (...) what manner.
pretensions, he is swallowed up with Melancholy, as it were in a grave, or
some deep pit, yet knows not the cause why, nor whence it should proceed. But
the cause (my friend) is, that these are the whips of God, wherewith he
scourges them temporally in this world, in that part which shall pain them
most, besides that which he reserueth for their farther punishment, in the
world to come. And his divine Majesty, for the comfort of the righteous, is
willing, that those, that do dissolutely sin, by doing public and open
wrongs, contrary to all right and reason, should be corrected in the sight of
men, and in the open view of all the world, to the intent that they may
magnify him in his justice, and draw consolation unto themselves from his
mercy, which is also made known in the chastisement of the wicked.

Would thou live in health? would thou be cheerful and merry? would
thou continue free from those disturbances, which might give thee cause to
lament? would thou abound in riches? and lead a contented life without
melancholy? Take then this rule of me; Make thy daily account A good lesson
for those that desire, to live well and happily.
with God, confess thy self unto him every day, as if that very day thou were
to dye.

Let Justice be observed by thee in that manner, as it is defined and set down
unto thee, giving to every man that which is his due: Eat of the sweat of thine
own brows, and not of the labors of other men; and to this end, store thou
up such riches, as are well and truly gotten; so shall thou live contentedly,
so shall thou be happy, and every thing shall prosper and thrive with thee, and
all shall go well with thee and thine.

In good sooth I am half afraid, that this consideration of mine has led
me on a little too far, where-into I have so far thrust in my foot, that I
had need of some help to pull it out. I have launched out too much into the
deep, and ingulphed my self before I was aware. I have almost lost my self
in this business, in dilating upon this point, and should run out much more
at random, if I should go about to tell you, why, and how, some of these
things, are thus and thus carried, whether out of private interest, or
affection, or passion, etc. But I will be silent, all shall be hush with me;
for I will not (in these tongue-controlling days) that the Law take hold upon
me. Secreta mea mihi: My secret I will keep to my self; I will lock it up
close in mine own bosom: besides, good and discreet silence is counted a holy
thing: Though in that which I have spoken, I acknowledge my excess, and
confess I have (with the Cobbler) gone beyond my Last, this being a point of
doctrine, fitter to be discussed by a Why Preachers refuse to reprove sin,
and to cry out against it?
Preacher, then a Picaro. These barkings will require better mouthed Dogs.
Let them stretch out their throats, and yawle alowd, that they may discover the
thieves. But alas, it may happily, or rather unhappily be, that they have
their mouths stopped with a crust, which makes them to hold their peace.

CHAP. IV.
Guzman de Alfarache delivers a learned and witty Discourse, conceived by
himself, against the Uanity of Honor: touching by the way upon the Vices of
Servants, of Shopkeepers, of Notaries, of Proctors, of Judges, of Artificers,
of Apothecaries, of Physicians, and of Lawyers.

I Have made a long and a tedious digression, and am well witting thereof to my
self. But I would not have thee make it a matter of wonder; for the necessity
that enforced me thereunto, was very great. And if two or more hurts meet in
one and the selfsame body, it is good discretion to succor the more
important, not being unmindful in the mean while of the lesser. So does it
often occur in War, and in all other things whatsoever. I assure thee by
the faith of an honest man, that I am not able to tell thee, which of the two
were the greater, either that which I did let alone, or that which I took in
hand, considering how much both of them imported, and of what consequence they
were. But let us redeem the Pawn that stands engaged, and return again to
our former matter, following the pursuit of that Discourse, of whose footing,
we have found the pricks already.

It was my hap one day to bear in my basket, (which I brought from the
Shambles) a quarter of Mutton, for a certain Hosier, or Gentleman Tailor. I
had by chance at that time about me, certain old Coplas, son cartas que venden
por las call^, y en las placas los cicgos.
Coplas, or Ballads, which (in a kind of broken tune) still as I read this or
the other line, I fell a singing, as I went along. My good Master having (as it
should seem) listened unto me, looked back on the sudden, and smiling, said;
How now (my tottered Rascal) a pox take you for a ragga-muffin, can you read,
you Rogue? Yes marry can I, Sir, (quoth I) I thank God, I can read reasonable
well, but my writing is better then my reading. Say thou me so, Boy? And with
that he entreated me, that I would teach him to write his name, or to make some
mark, that might serve for a subscription, or vnder-signing (he cared not A
Tailor would feign learn to write his name, o^ to make his firma or mark. And
the reason why?
which) for either would serve his turn. I pray Sir (said I) what good can
this do you? What can you benefit your self, by having learned to make a bare
mark, and no more? Me thinks you should have no great use for that alone,
unless you could write too. Yes marry have I, Sir (quoth he,) for I have much
work goes through these hands, of such and such great men, I make all the
clothes their children wear (and there by the way, he reckons me up a
bead-roll of these and these Lords) and therefore I would very feign, (if I
knew how) learn to write my Name, or to make my Mark, that (if occasion were
offered) I might not be taken for an Ass, and say (like a fool as I am) when
I am called to subscribe, Indeed, Sir, you must pardon me, I cannot write. And
so this business broke off as abruptly, as it began. And I making a large
Soliloquium, and meditation to my self, went on a good while with the same
after this manner.

Here (Guzman) thou shall see, what a kind of thing Honor is, seeing it
Honor, what kind of thing it is?
is conferred on such as these: It is, the son of Nothing; the Child that
knows neither father, nor mother; the Earth's offspring, being raised out of
the dust thereof; it is a frail Vessel, full of cracks, of flawes, and of
holes, incapable of containing any thing in it, that is of any moment or worth*
Favor has endeavored to mend this broken Bucket, and to stop the Leakes
thereof with clouts and with rags; and putting thereunto the rope of private
interest, now they draw up water with it, and it seems to be very
beneficial H^, compared to base persons.
and profitable unto them. It is one of Peter the Tailors sons, whose father,
howsoever he got it, were it well, or were it ill, made a shift to leave him
something to live upon. Or like unto that other, who by stealing from others,
got wherewithal to give, and wherewith to bribe, and suborne. These are the
men that are honored now adays, they speak high language, and utter arrogant
words, and press into all your great Assemblies, and principal meetings, as
if they were the only men, and none but they. These now take the upper hand,
sit down first, and take place of all men, whom heretofore you might have
ranked amongst your Muletters, or scarce so good men as they.

Behold, how many good men have with-drawne themselves from the Court, and live
a private and retired life at home? How many habits of St. Iago, Calatraua, and
Alcantara, sown with white thread? How many of the ancient Nobility of Zayn
Caluo, and Nunno Rasura, trodden under feet? The more rich, the more honor.


Tell me I pray, who is that that gives honor unto some, and takes it from
other some? Marry, it is more or less wealth. O what a brave Canon is this, to
qualify a man? what an excellent Rector, what a learned Schoolmaster? How
discreetly do they graduate a man, what a good examination do they take,
before they prefer any! Tell me once more I pray: What difference is there in
their Obligation, between him that comes fairly (as thou said before) by
an Office; and him that buys an Office, whose money only (without any other
merit) has inthroned him in the Sancta Sanctorum of the world? Whence comes it
to pass, that the man that is discreet, noble, virtuous, well descended, of a
sound and sober judgment, long practice, and more experience, a true Master of
his Art, should (by being deprived of his due preferment,) remain poor and
needy, shut up in a corner, excluded from business, afflicted, and
peradventure enforced to derogate from his own worth, and to do that which is
not agreeable to his disposition, that he may avoid the incurring of a worse
inconheuience? Thou have put too hard a task upon me, considering that slender
satisfaction, that I am able to give thee: But I shall tell thee, according to
my talent, and as the poorness of my understanding shall give me leave.

When I consider thereon, as a thing properly appertaining unto God Gods
secrets concealed from man.
(whose judgments are inscrutable, and hidden both from men and Angels) I
shall not inter-meddle, or strain my self any further therein, then the
shortness of my apprehension shall be able to reach unto. Which is; That he very
well knows, how to proportion his gifts, and to give unto every one so much
as is needful for him, for his salvation. And therefore when a man shall fail
of such or such an Office, or miss such or such a preferment, God saw it was
not so fitting for him, for causes best known unto himself, or for that he
fore-knew that it would be a means to work his condemnation, whom he is
willing to save, because he has predestined him to a better place.

And this is as much as can be said concerning him, who does not obtain that,
which he deserves. But for that Favorite, or person of Power with his Prince,
that shall either be a block in this man's way, or strippe him of the Office
that he worthily holds, who is not a Judge of the inward intentions, nor of
the hearts of men, neither is able to examine them; but must go upon trust,
and make his judgment by external and outward things, (which he can only see
and know) does oftentimes tread awry, and pervert and wrest things to an ill
sense: If it may be lawful for us to speak in a rusticall phrase; applying
the language of heaven, to that here on earth, I say, that upon the margent of
this great man's Account, God does (as we use here to do, when we will mark a
thing the better, and look more narrowly into it) shut one of his eyes, to
make his sight the surer, when he minds to hit the mark he aims at. I say
then: I will demand of these men, what cause they had to do this wrong, knowing
that my threatenings are out against them? O ye Judges of the earth, because ye
have judged unrighteously, I have prepared for you a hard and insufferable
punishment: I will reside in the Synagogue of the gods, and I will judge them.
O, what a grief is it, how many thousands of pitties, that these men (knowing
this to be true) will adventure to come before that upright and true Judge,
when the Accusation is certain, which is brought in to condemn them; and the
restitution now wanting, which they ought to make; without the which, their
sin cannot be forgiven them; and yet would not, when time served, take order
to make amendment for so foul a fault*

True it is, that peradventure there were not some wanting, that would whisper
them in the ear, and say; Sir, you may do this very well, and not sin, it
is not a thing that ought to trouble your conscience, you did well, (which is
no more then every wise man would do, were he in your place) in bestowing this
Office, on that kinsman, that acquaintance, that friend, or servant of yours,
which are nearest unto you. But (to speak the truth) thou could not do it;
for thou did remove it from it is right place, and put it into that, which was
unfit, and improper for it. Look over thy Cards a little better, think well
on this business, and then thou will tell me (my friend) that it was an error
in thee, and that thou could not do it; And because thou could not do^ it,
thou did sin; And because thou did sin, it was not well done. Do not
listen to the words of fools, nor of flatterers, in a thing that concerns
thee so much as this does: it were better for thee that thou would gird up
thy loins, and look unto that which may do thee hurt, and seek in time to
prevent it, lest the remedy come too late. For there are some Confessors, that
will give large Absolutions, who are like unto Taylours, who will tell thee,
that the garment which they have made for thee, fits thee very well; but thou
know better then they, whether it wring thee or no, whether it be too
straight, and uneasy for thee, and how it sits to thy body. And God does
permit, because thou did not seek after one (whilst thou wast living, and
in place of authority) that should tell thee the truth; at the time of thy
death, when thou art in thy last agony and anguish of soul, thou shall not
meet with that true friend, that shall then tell it thee, but rather sooth thee
up to thy condemnation. Look about with thine eyes, open wide thine ears, and
suffer not these busy Bees of Satan, to put honey into them, nor there to
swarm and in-hiue themselves. For these their sweet words will but lead thee
on in the high and ready way to damnation.

But to return again unto these kind of men, in respect of God, I doubt not
of their punishment; And in regard of man, I must plainly tell thee, that they
open the door to murmuration, and give occasion to the people, to speak
thereof in public, not sticking to utter (as I said before) those ends which I
thought should have been kept secret: taking pity and compassion of so many
merits, so ill rewarded; and of so dis-proportionable an Exchange as this, in
seeing the evil, by evil means, to be in highest esteem: and the good, by
reason of their goodness, to be excluded, and shut out of all. But I can
assure you, that God has numbered all the hairs of their head, and will not
suffer one of them to fall to the ground. Though men therefore may chance to
fail them, yet let them comfort themselves with this, that they have a good
God to friend, that will never forsake them. This is the World, and thus things
go.

I therefore will neither have Empire, nor Dignity; I will not have Honor, I
will not so much as once look upon it. Keep thy self as thou art, (Guzman:)
continue (my honest friend) the same man still. Let others (a Gods name) be the
Council of the Commonwealth, the Oracles of the State; let them never think
upon thee; Enter not into that place, whence thou can not get out, when thou
would: Do not put thy self into that danger, which may bring a continual
fear with it; Desire not to have too much, lest it chance to be taken from
thee; nor too little, lest thou be driven to beg; Do not pretend any thing by
way of flattery: Do not entangle thy self in many businesses, lest they
should disquiet thee: Seek to be the Vsufructuarie, and free inioyer of thy
life, that by using of it well, thou may live safe in thy estate. Why
should thou keep a stir, and trouble thy self for that, which to morrow
is to be no more, and when it is at the most, is of no iong continuance? What
do thou, or any man else know, is become of the Mayor-Domo to King Don
Pelayo, or of the Chamberlain to Conde Fernan Goncales? They had honor, and
they held it, but neither of them, nor that, is any memory remaining. So shall
thou the next day be forgotten, as if thou had never been at all. Why then
is there so much greediness, so much thirst, and so much coile; one for his
belly, (for to so great a Vanity are w^ now grown, that to eat and waste
much, is held no small reputation) another for his back, and a third for
honor?

No, no, these things are not for thee, and if thou offer to trouble thy
thoughts with them, thou shall not live to be an old man, or else thou shall be
old before thy time. Leave, leave off, I say, the swelling pride of these huge
Giants, and thrust them up against the Walls; let them stand there, as
Bugbeares to fright children, as being good for nothing else.

Cloth thy self in the winter, with that which may keep thee Warm; and in
the Summer, with that which may cover thee, not going too slouenly, nor too
pompously* rather decently then richly; Eat no more then may suffice nature,
preferring moderation before excess, for whatsoever is more then necessary, is
merely superfluous. For by it, neither the rich man lives, nor the poor man
dies. But the diversity and abundance of meats, is rather a disease then
otherwise, breeding viscous and slimy humors, whence arise grievous
sicknesses, and mortal Apoplexies.

Twice, thrice, nay four times happy art thou, who risest in the morning
Liberty, how pleasant a thing it is.
when thou will, and at what hour thy self lists, without once thinking of
serving, or being served by any body; for although it be a trouble to have a
Master, it is also a trouble to have a servant, as you shall here by and by. At
noone, feed freely, dinesecurely, run not upon the score with thy Cook, nor
be indebted to thy A Cater, that makes provision for victuals.
Dispensero, send not for thy Coals from the Merchants Sellar, where they
gather In Spai^ they sell their coals by the pound.
wet and moisture, in stead where of they will bring thee in dust and stones,
wherewith thou will be coozened; for there are more deceits in the world, then
thou or any man else knows, save God alone. Seek not to excel in bravery,
affect not too much neatnes; fear not every spot that may fall upon thy
clothes, be not in love with rich Imbroderies; be not too careful to keep,
nor too fearful to lose. Be not envious nor suspicious; Let no occasion move
thee to lie; Do not purchase preferment by undermining of others, nor work
not another man's Ruin, to work thy self into favor. Think it fitter for
thee to go alone, then accompanied; a quick, then a slow pace: rather
laughing then weeping; eating then dancing; without being noted by any. That is
the best Tavern to thee, where thou meetst with the best Wine: And that the
best Cooks shop, where thou lightest on the best morsel: In the Market place,
thou may make choice of the best seat, and so thou may the like at all
public Feasts. In the Winter, get thee into the Sun, in the Summer into the
shade. Thou may cover thy Board according to thine own mind: thou may
make thy Bed, according to thine own liking; without paying one penny either
for the making or standing of it: And may choose, whether any man shall see
thee, disquiet thee, or contradict thee. Keep thy self aloof from
Law-businesses: live a stranger to Suits and Actions: free thy self from false
Witnesses, for fear they should part thy goods amongst them, and become
masters of all that thou have. Let no man be able to ask thee a penny; keep
thy self safe from Decrees; Beware how, and whom you trust, and upon what
terms: but above all, (which will be no small glory unto thee) take heed, how
thou becom'st a surety for any man. Give no cause to have any executions come
out against thee; nor thou to do the like against others: Shun all
contentions and debates, and all manner of suites in Law. Last of all, rest
thou satisfied and contented, so that nothing may oppress thee, nor break thy
sleep, that thou may rise betimes in the morning to think upon those things
that may turn to thy good, by reforming what is amiss.

All men can not do all that they would; yet our good God is not forgetful of
the poor, having opened a way unto him, whereby he may live contented; The
poor man may, (...) himself well, live happily.
not giving him more cold, then his body is able to bear, suting his
co^stitution, according to his clothes; so that he may pass in this world, as
well as the rich, if he will but order and govern himself aright. But this
life is not made alike for all men: And undoubtedly, the first inuenter must be
a most famous Philosopher; for so happy a reposednesse, is to be supposed to
have it is beginning from some singular wit. And to speak truly, that which is
not so, costeth much trouble. And those that do not so pass through this
life, are the men that suffer, and pay for all:

Walking through this world with many disturbances, contentions, and
molestations; flattering, idolatrizing, carrying things away with a strong
hand, plotting of tricks, violently haling by the hair, that, which neither
ought to be suffered, nor is fit to be effected, or any way in the world to be
borne withal; shutting their eyes all this while against that, which it
concerns them to see; but are very sharpe-sighted in looking to their profit,
nothing shall pass by them then: They are Linxes, and Eagle-ey'd, when their
prey is before them, though it were better for them in these things, to be as
blind as the Beetle, or the Mole: For then they begin to lay their Nets, to
pitch their Hayes, fall a setting of Lime-twigges, watching how to put
themselves forward, by making of Pit-fals, wherein to to entrap men, thinking
to raise themselves, by the fall of others. For they doubt not of their own
coming forward, if they can but once come to thrust others back. Vanity of
Vanities, and nothing but Vanity.

O what a grievous thing is it, that a man should suffer such a number of
calamities, and for no other end only, but to uphold his frail and
unfortunate What a troublesome thing Hon^ i^?
honor from falling? And he that thinks he has surest possession of it,
lives but with so much the greater care to repair and maintain it. I returned
again and again to consider thereon, never ceasing, nor never enough
satisfied with the repeating of this saying: Happy, thrice happy thou, who have
wrapped Honor in a Coffin of Lead, and with strong cords, tying heavy stones
thereunto, have buried it in the Sea, whence it may never rise up any more, nor
appear unto the world.

I likewise began to think with my self, what a hurtful thing in a Family,
Bad servants, what a ba^ they are to a house.
is a villainous, an ungrateful, a coozening, and a lying servant: whereof now
a-dayes, the world is too full. And if we shall briefly decipher forth unto
you such a manner of servant, you shall find him to be a Fool; a Slouen; a
careless Companion; idle, lazy; a bag, filled with nothing but malice, and
roguery; a Funnell, to power in all manner of discord, and dissension; full of
prattle, upon every slight occasion; and dumb, in those things, that are of
any moment; ignorant, in speaking; and impudent, in grumbling.

Shall I character forth unto you a Maid-seruant, or a Nurse, that will serve
The wickedness of (...), and their (...).
for any thing? You shall have her sluttish, theeuish; with a Brother, a
Parent, or a Kinsman, ever and anon asking for her, troubling thy house with
daily visits; for, and with whom, she returns so many nights, every week, by
retayle; dividing that time amongst them in parcels, which she should lay out
in the gross in thy service; devoted only to the love and service of her
Sweetheart: earnestly desiring to see her self made Mistress of a Mantle:
she will look for good maintenance, and be her wages never so good, that
proportion will not serve the turn, but as she sees occasion, she will still
be grating more and more upon thee: And you must over and besides, allow her
her wine into the bargain, because forsooth her stomach is weak, and cannot
digest her meat without it. If we will but look out into the street, which
way so ever we turn our eye, we see every thing want somewhat in the
finenesse of it is Loy and true touch, all is false, and without law, nothing
that is perfect, neither in weight, nor in measure.

And that this is true, look into your Shambles, your Hucksters, and other
Falsehood in selling of wares.
shops of retayle in the Marketplace; and then you will tell me what a deal
of coozenage they use in the venting of their wares, and with what gainefull
cunning they utter their commodities. Besides, to what desperation does a
false, or corrupted Notary drive a man unto? Against whom, even truth it
Against Notaries, Scriueners, etc.
self has not the power to prevail. For the Stem only of his Quill, and
the very nib of his Pen, is more dangerous against whom it is bent, then a
strong-steeled Lance, or a Canon of Brass, with all his batteries.

What think you of alying Attorney? a wrangling Lawyer? Both men of an evil
conscience, full of tricks and of quillets, skillful in deceiving, cunning
Against Attourneys and Lawiers.
in plotting, and above all, wonderful lovers of delays, making it their
maine study to put off and prolong suites, that they may lick their own
fingers, and fill their hungry bellies, at other men's cost.

What say you, to an obstinate and headstrong Judge? one of those ignorant
Against Judges.
wilful ones, who will not stick perhaps to say of himself; I understand my
self well enough; I know what I speak; nor will I be taught what to do.
When indeed, he neither understands, nor knows, nor does any thing that is
fit, nor is well understood by others. At the first, he seemed mild and
gentle (before he was warm in his Office) like a Bull amidst a Heard of
Cowes; but when he came forth, he appeared fierce, and full of rage, as if he
had been stuck with darts, and his blood drawn from him. He wore a garment,
which for the shaping of it into fashion, setting the pieces handsomely
together, and to make it fit for wearing, had need of more then a thousand
Scedules, and as many Passe-ports, as also the thread of Theseus; for it is a
Labyrinth to enter into. O with what hunger is he affected! he thinks he
shall never be full enough. So that I must say, nothing escaped his hand, were
it little or great; the bare fell, or the whole Fleece. I found he offended in
all: In this by an I; in that, by a No: In some things; by doing, in some
things by not doing: Offending, not only in matters of Omission, but in sins
of Commission. Who, like the Lioness, can with loud roarings put life into
these little Whelps, (these dead truths) to the end, that by taking breath,
some remedy might be had?

Let us run through all occupations; Look I pray into your Tailor, with whom
it is now grown to a custom, that you must pay something to the Against
Tailors
setting up of their The Spanish word is Pendon. And so it may signify
something given to the Corporation. Against, Masons, Smithes, Carpen^, etc.
Sign, else your work shall never be made an end of; or if it be, it shall be
spoiled in the making, or they will filch so much of your stuff from you, as
shall lessen you Coat, and enlarge their Vailes.

Your, Mason, your Smith, your Carpenter, and all other Tradesmen whatsoever,
none excepted, do all steal, all lie, all coozen: none of them deals truly,
no not one. And which is worst of all, they take a glory therein, and think
themselves, in so doing, to be jolly wise fellows, and Masters of their craft;
holding those that deal more honestly (if there be any such) to be simple men,
and poor seely fools, that want wit.

Let us look a little back, and see, if we shall not find an Apothecarie in
a Against Apothecaries.
blind corner, who because he will not be said to say I have not such a thing,
or so, nor discredit his shop; will not stick to give you contrary Syrrops,
counterfeit Oils, falsify'd Waters; you shall not find one Drugge that is of
true and perfect goodness, or any Compound made according unto the rules of Art;
they mingle, baptize, and make confections (according to their own liking) of
differing qualities, and diverse effects, thinking (in their poor discretion)
that there is but little difference betwixt the one and the other, though it
be contrary to all truth and reason. And thus do they kill many a man, making
of their Boxes, and their Vyals, Dags and Pistols; and of their Pills, Pellets;
wherewith (as with so many Bullets) they lay us dead on the ground.

But you will say, Master Doctor ouer-sets him, and that there is not an
ingredient, Against Doctors of Physic.
but carries his eye, and direction with it, and therefore the danger is so
much the less.

True: But if you do not fee him well, he forgoes the cure; and if you do fee
him well, he prolongs it: And so by this means, some, nay, many times, his
sick Patient mis-carries, and is sent untimely to his grave.

And it is a thing worthy the noting, that Laws being the Daughters of Reason,
if you put a Case to a Lawyer, or ask his opinion, he studies it, and will
not resolve you, till he have well and truly considered thereon, because it is
a matter of goods, or of Land, which may concern a man's making, or marring.

But your Physician, no sooner comes in to visit you, but presently by the
touch of your Pulse, as soon as ever his finger has felt it, he instantly
knows your disease, though it be utterly unknown unto him, and removed as
far from his understanding, as earth, from heaven. And then, (that he may
not betray this his ignorance) he forthwith prescribes, and applies such
remedies unto you, as are more truly means to bring you to your last home,
then to restore you to health. Shall it not be fit (if that Aphorism of
theirs be true) that life is short, the Art long, experience deceitful, and
the judgment hard and difficult, to go on by little and little, as it were by
degrees, till they be thoroughly entered thereinto, and become Masters of that
which they would willingly cure, by studying that which they ought to do
therein? To treat of this, would ask a long discourse. All goes topsie-turuy;
all Kim, Kam; all, is tricks and devices; all Riddles and unknown Mysteries;
you shall not find man, with man; we all live in ambush, lying in wait one for
another, as the Cat, for the Mouse, or the Spider for the Fly; who roming
carelessely up and down, suffers her self to be taken by a slender thread,
whilst that venomous vermin, seazing on her head, holds her fast, never
leaving her, till she has killed her with her poison.

CHAPTER V.
How Guzman de Alfarache lighted on a Cooks service, and with fair Sentences,
and good Lessons, shows, what he should be that serves. He blames gaming,
and Gamsters. He declares a pretty theft performed by him; he relates the
Vices of Despensero's, Cooks, Butlers* and other the like Officers. Of Lords,
abused by their servants. Of Kings, and their miserable condition. Of the
vanity of Inferiors, contesting with their Superiors. He condemns those
Masters, that ill entreat their servants: And how they ought to carry
themselves toward them.

I Found my self free from all these things, as subject to none of them,
except infirmity, and sickness. In regard whereof, I had a determination, to
have put my self into an Hospital. I inioyed a free and flourishing kind of
liberty* praised by the wise, desired of many, and so much applauded and
Liberty, a great jewel.
re-applauded by the Poets. To whose true valuation, all the gold and riches of
the earth, are not to be compared, as things of to poor and mean a price. I
had it once, but had not the wit to keep it. For it being my course of life
(as a thing whereunto I was accustomed) to play the Porter, and carry burdens,
and being now as well trusted, Guzman, (...) Porter, or Basket^carer.
as I was known, all my care was* to come acquainted with some one false Cater
or other (Gods curse and mine go with him) that was the Purser, Disbu^ser,
Distributer or Steward, or by what other style or Title, in that kind you
shall call him. This Despensero, or Cater (as you please) had a good confidence
in me, trusted me very far, and would often send me away alone by my self,
to carry those things home to his house, which he had bought in the Market.
This my continued Conversation and daily commercement with him, did (which it
should not have done) procure his good liking, and love to wards me; Insomuch,
that he removed me from that Office, and preferred me to be Scullion of the
Kitchen, which was as much as my ambition could then reach unto.

He would oftentimes tell me, (and one day amongst the rest, and I remember
it was in the morning; he made me along Oration, flourished over with a great
many of fair Promises, so that by climing from one round to another, I began
to conceive with my self, that I should come at last to be a A Ruler or
Governor of a City, or Town.
Corregidor at least.) That if I would apply my self to that Office, and take
pains therein, behauing my self well and honestly, when I was grown fit and
perfect, he would be a means to place me in Court, and put me into the Kings
service; where when I had served so many years in the Kitchen, I should be
well rewarded, and might afterward iiue richly of my self, and be mine own
man.

O how quickly did this vain blast puff up my empty Pate; This giddywinde
mill of mine was set a work, and turned quite round with the breath of his
words. The adventure I saw was small, and the gain might be great.

Well, he brought me to the Cook my master (we being well known to each
other.) When I came thither, (as if it had been the first time that we had
seen one another) he spoke to me in a proud commanding manner. How now (Sennor
few-clothes) what wind drove you hither? What make you here, goodman
Shag-rag,) you Cauallero de Illese as, is a certain Town near unto Toledo.
King Don Alonso. Anno Domini. 1176. made a Donation thereof to the Church of
Toledo. But it is now reuerted again to the Crown. Illescas is an Arabicke
word, and signifies, lascivious and dishonest love. Cauallero de Illescas, is a
word used in scorn. Couarruuias.
Illescas? Have you any business here? or do you come to abide with me? Sure
I was ill advised; for when I saw he began in so high a key, I was about to
show him my back and to leave him to himself, and his ^ie; (for Summer was
now fully in*) I started, and stood as one astonished, not knowing what answer to
make him, but when I saw there was no remedy, I replide; yes Sir. Come your
ways then (quoth he) in with me; And if thou do thy duty (said he) and
shall deserve well at my Guzman goes to s^ a Cook. The duty of a servant.
Guzman his readiness (...) serving his Master.
hands, thou shall not lose thy labor.

I told him, I was very well assured, that in serving his Worship, I might
gain by the bargain, but lose nothing, because I had nothing to lose. Then he
asked me; Do you know (sirrah) what you are to do? All that (I mildly
replide) that you shall be pleased to command me; or my self either know, or
am able to perform. For he that sets himself to serve, must not refuse (when
need is) to do any thing, but that which more properly belongs to the duty of
his place, he ought cheerfully to undergo it; and to apply himself as well
to the one as the other.

He seemed to like well both of my speech and understanding; and I hoping to be
well rewarded, flew in like a Hawke for the prey. At my first coming, I
behaved my self very respectfully toward him* and served him as punctually as
I could; and he again made much of me, and used me as kindly as heart could
wish. But I did not only seek to please my Master (who was a married man) and
his wife my Mistress, even in the meanest services, serving them in all things
else besides, both in Town and Country, at home and abroad; taking upon me
the Office both of Man-seruant and Maid-seruant, (save only that I had never a
Gown to put on, nor a Mantle to cover me withal, to wait upon my Mistress
when she went abroad;) But for all other services of the house, as sweeping,
rubbing, scowring, setting the Pot over the fire, dressing of meat, making of
Beds, laying the Estrado, is a kind of half pace, covered with Turkey
Carpets, and furnished with fair long cushions, whereon your great Ladies and
Gentlewomen sit, when they receive any Visits. But now adays, your ordinary
women in Spain (...) grown into this fashion, taking more state upon them,
then s^les with their conditions.
Estrado in order, smoothing and plaining it, that not a wrinckle was to be
seen, and other the like services were my ordinary exercise; (And for that I
was the only man, all this was committed to my charge:) But I labored besides
to give good contentment to all the rest of my Masters servants. So that my
heels were as nimble to run upon the least boys errand in the house, as the
Stewards, the Pages, as the Mayor-Domos; for him that rubbed the Horses heels,
as for him that was Usher of the Hall. One would have me to buy such and such
necessaries for him; another, that I would brush, and make clean his clothes;
This man, that I would get his band washed and starcht for him; that, that I
would carry some The Spanish word is, Racion, ^rata portio; a set allowance. A
silent ^gue, and a ^rue (...), did never hurt any servant.
provision home to his wife; A third, to his Wench. And all this I did without
grumbling, or muttring, or any the least unwillingness in the world. I was
never any Tale-carrier nor sower of sedition; nor did I ever discover any
secret, or report again what I had heard, though it were not delivered under
the seal of Silence unto me, or that the relators had laid their finger on my
mouth. For I was not so ill bred, but that I knew very well, what, and when it
was lawful for me to speak, and when to hold my peace. He therefore,
(whosoever he be) that serves, must have an especial care to observe these two
things; Wherein if he fail, he will quickly ruin himself, by drawing all
men's ill will upon him, and making himself the most hated man in the world.
Whereas nothing does more recommend a man, then a fair carriage, and a
faithful heart. When I was chidden, I never replide: and made it my study, to
give them as little cause as I could, to find fault with me. I would not
willingly have any man's displeasure; And all my care was, to do what I was
commanded. And when there was need of my service, or that my helping hand might
do any good, I was seldom or never wanting; I was Jack at a pinch, I was
here, and there, and every where. And albeit these diligences of mine cost me a
great deal of labor and painestaking, yet I lost nothing by it; for the good
commendations that they gave me, and the kind words that they spoke of me
behind my back, and the hopes that I had to be well rewarded, when time
should serve, seemed to me a sufficient payment* and I was well contented
therewith. The good usage o^ the Master (...) a (...) the (...).


Good usage, is a great heartening to him that serves: It is the spur which
pricks on the Will, and makes it go forward; it is the finger, that beckens
our affections, it is the Lure, that calls our desires, it is a Chariot,
wherein our forces (like strong Iades) draw on without weariness, and tugg,
stoutly through thick and thin, it is good serving of some men, and they
deserve to have service done them Gratis; And there are some men again, that a
man would not serve for any money. But of all others, I disclaim that Master
as unworthy to be waighted on, that will neither give his servant good wages,
nor good words. Kind usage will make a man work out his heart, but high
language and poor payment, will kill any spirit living, and make a servant
grow neglectfull, if not weary of his Masters service.

Then might I affirm, that leaving my roguish kind of life, this Picardia The
commendation of a r^guish life.
of mine, (as a Queen, whose name I am not worthy to take in my mouth, and
whereunto any other politic course of life is not to be compared) all the
bravery and gallantrie of the curious method of living happily, and passing
well away the time, which the world solemnizeth so much, must yield, and give
place thereunto. But this, (though accompanied with much care) was exceeding
good, good in the highest degree, for such a one (I mean) as my self, who had
been daintily bred up in the midst of delights. So that me thought, I was in a
manner reduced and brought back again to my old bias, and natural course of
life, as far as it concernd the Bucolicks: for my The morsels I did cate.
Bocados were of another kind of quality and relish, then those of the
Bodegon, or a Pie-corner Tripe-wiues shop; they were otherwise dressed, otherwise
seasoned. And in this, those of St. Gil, The principal victualing places in
Madrid, and what poor kind of things they ^e.
Santo Domingo, Puerta del Sol, Placa Mayor, and Call de Toledo, must pardon
me, and hold me excused; howbeit I cannot deny, but that their Liuer-slices,
and their rashers on the coals, ran still in my head, and were hard things for
me to forget.

I did nothing, were it never so small a thing, never so little, for the which
I had not something. All did give me one thing or other; one a Quaedam moneta
Hispanica, valoris 9. Marauedis, sic dicta, ab Tarja; (...). scuti
similitudine^, quam habet. A piece of three halfe-pence. Gaming, a heartfull
thing.
Tarja, which is a matter of penny halfe-pennie, another a Royal, a third a
Doublet, a fourth an old Iacket to cover this poor flesh of mine: I did not
goeso like a tattred Rogue as I did before; my meals were sure and certain;
and though I had not had any other thing to sustain my self withal, I might
have lived very well upon the skimmings of the pot, and upon the trial of my
taste, by essaying whether my boild meats were sod enough, and so likewise for
my roste, reserving still mine own allowance whole and entire, I had no need
to touch upon that that I made profit of. This good did me much hurt, as also
did my Gaming, which I had learned in my looser days; For look whatsoever I
got by means of my Place, for that I had no houses to repair, nor rents to
buy in, I played it all away. So that I may very well say, My good did me hurt.
For, see how much increase it brings to the good, (because they know how to
turn it to their best benefit;) so it works as much hurt in the bad, for
(when they fall once a losing what they have got) they lose a great deal more
with it, it being with them, as it is with your venomous beasts; who draw
poison from that, from which your Bees suck honey.

Goodness is like unto your sweet Waters, which if they be kept in clean
Goodness, what it is like unto.
Vessels, grow still the better, but in bad, are straightway corrupted, and
quite spoiled. I was a learned Doctor in that Science, but yet I consumed my
Estate in following that Trade. Within a few days, I grew a refined Gamester,
and could play well with my hands too, I had learned to filch and steal
finely, which was the worse Occupation of the two. Gaming, is a terrible vice;
All manner of ^ces are in a Ga^ester.
And as all Rivers have recourse unto the Sea; So is there not that vice, which
is not to be found in a Gamester. He never does well, and always thinks ill.
He never tells truth, but still lies; He has no man to friend; He keeps no
good quarter with his Kindred; He esteems not his credit, but overthrows the
honor of his house; He leads a lewd life; He desires the death of his
Parents; He swears without cause; He blasphemes upon every little loss. He
neither fears God, nor regards his own soul. If he leese his money, he loses
all shame to get it again, and so he may have it, he cares not with what
infamy; He lives gaming, and he dies gaming. In stead of a holy Taper, he holds
a pack of Cards in his hand, as one that is resolved to lose soul, life, and
all that he has at one dealing. I had very good experience hereof from others,
but I speak not that, which was told me by others, but what my self saw with
mine own eyes.

When my Vailes would not serve my turn, (that I might not want wherewithal
to game) I would cast mine eyes, like burning Torches, about the house, where,
and out of what I might make my provision. For those things, that belonged to
the Kitchen, I could make purchase there in the turning of a hand, but ever had
a care to do it so handsomely, and to carry it so cleanely, that they might
not have the least suspicion of me in the world. Many things which I stole, I
hid in the selfsame room, where I found them, with purpose, (if they should
chance to suspect me) to pull them out in public, gaining thereby credit to
my self for aftertimes, upon the like occasion* And in case the suspicion
fell upon another, I presently took hold upon that advantage; and putting it
from my self, transferred it on him. Once I remember, A (...) the^ (...)
^uzman.
I lighted on a happy encounter, which was this:

My Master on a time brought certain friends of his home to his house,
good-fellowes, sworn brothers to Bacchus, Pylots for Guadalcana, (...) (...)
de la (...) a R^uer of recreation.
Guadalcana, and Coca, (...) a (...) so called, (...)* ^rmen are went to make
the ^sh drunk, and to (...) up their bell^es upon the water, as if they were
dead.
Coca, and he would needs for sooth in kindness bestow a Beuer upon them, all
of them played well upon the Keys of this Organ; the Iacks went up lively, but
my Master he tickled it notably, he was an excellent Musician upon a jar of
Wine: he was a brave bottle-banger, a singular tosse-pot. He took me out of
one of the cup-boords of his Ambry (which were ever stored with cold meats) a
delicate piece of Bacon finely inter-larded, or (to speak more properly)
inter-laced with fat and lean, which looked as fresh and as ruddy, as the
blood of a Lamb, that is newly killed. The game growing now hot, and the Vyes
seen on all sides, they were all thirty A ^yenta co^-Rey, is the Spanish word,
which is a ga^e a^ Cards co^ amongst them. It is good ^ing at (...), for ^are
of being out. (...). A d^ken (...).
apiece in Kings, merry, rich, and contented: And with this new Shooing-horne
to draw down their drink, they fell a-fresh to their former play, drinking
Healths Helter Skelter, till at last (and my Mistress had her share too, who did
mince and gyg it in this round, with as much metal, and as nimbly, as the best
dancer of them all) they grew so fine and so mellow, that you might have stripped
them (like Rabbets) out of their Cases, and left them stark naked as ever they
were borne, and yet they never have known who had done them this harm. Their
Pieces were ouercharged, the powder strong, the charge too great; so that when
the fire took them, the smoke and fume thereof flew up to the highest part of
all the chimney, wherewith the whole house was so shaken, that some fell down
f^at, others re^ed to and fro; some tript both in their tongue and feet; other
were full of their gamboll-tricks, each man having his several Posture.

My Master and my Mistress (as one of the neighbors told me) scrambled (as
well as they could) to bed* leaving all the doors of the house open, the Table
vn-taken away, and the silver Gobblet, wherein they drunk their Healths,
tumbled down on the ground, all which made much for the benefit of the
Inventory.

I was by chance at that time in my Masters Kitchen, scowring of the Panns and
the ^pits, pyling up the wood, laying it handsomely together, and doing other
things belonging to my office. When that task was done, and I had made an end
of all my work, I got me to my lodging, and as I past along, I found all out
of order every thing out of his proper place, all the doors open; the Cup that
was fallen down on the floor, I fortunately stumbled on; it silently seeming
to entreat me, that I would do it the courtesy to take it up. I stooped down
unto it, to do it that friendly office, looking in the mean while round about
me, to see whether any man's eye were upon me, to spy what I was a doing; but
when I saw the coast was clear, that there was not any body living
there-abouts, so that no man could detect me, I put it up, and softly stole
away. But I had scarce gone four steps from the place, when my heart began to
beat a false alarm.

Then (...) began to think with my self, whether I had heard any noise
stirring either within or without the house, for I could not be too secure, and
it did much concern me, to have a care to keep my skin whole, and not to
endanger the losing of much, for the gaining of a little, and so in the end get
a whipping by the bargain. I got me in, I called twice or thrice upon this,
then that man, but not a word of answer that I had from any of them.

I went to my Masters bedchamber, where I found him and his Wife in that case,
that they seemed to be dead, and sure they were little better, for they were
deeply buried in Wine.

The snores and snorts that came from them, and other the like puffings and
blowings, which they breathed forth, made me to imagine, that I had been newly
entered into some famous drinking-schoole. I had a great mind to have bound them
with some whip-cord by the feet to the bed-post, and to have played the knave
with them in that manner, to have made a little sport with them. But I did not
like so well of that jest, a greater business was now in hand, and I thought
it the better jest of the two, to content my self with that silver piece of
Plate: Whereupon, I made safe work with that. And having now secured this
theft, away went I back again to the Kitchen, where I found work enough to
do till it was night, about which time my Master came thither, terribly pained
in his belly, and his temples. And finding there but one only firebrand lying
on the Harth, he would needs cudgel my coat therewith, scolding and railing at
me, telling me that I wasted too much wood, and that I would never leave, till
I had fired his house. That night, was not a night of profit; it was worth
nothing unto me; yet I supplied (as well as I could) what was wanting, and
covering my Masters defect, supper was made ready, and orderly served in,
which being ended, and all things done that should be done, we went to bed. But
I found my Mistress in an ill taking, her countenance sad and heavy; her eyes
cast down to the ground, and full of tears, her heart swollen with grief, all
was out of tune with her, and not so much as one word, that came from her, till
my Master was gone to bed. And then I made bold to ask her, what was the
matter that she was so melancholy. She answered, O my Guzmanico* (son of my
soul) a great evil, a great misfortune has befalne me, wretched woman that I
am, cursed was that hour, wherein I was borne, and in an unlucky time did my
mother bring me forth By this time I knew where her shoo did wring her; My
pocket was her Pothecaries shop. There lay the rest^ratiue: And my good will
had been the best Physician, she could have gotten for her grief. But all her
pitiful complaints, and whatsoever else might work compassion, being all put
together, could not move me awhit. For I have heard say; Let a woman weep
never so much, though she should seem to weep her heart out, there is no more
pity to be taken of her, then to see a goose go bare-foote. All her
lamentations, her wringing of her hands, and other her demonstrations of her
sorrow, could not stir up pity in me, or take hold on the least hair of a
fellow-kinde of feeling.

But feigning my self to be very sensible of her affliction, and that it
grieved me much to see her so surprised with grief, I began to comfort her,
and to persuade her (all that I could) that her impatience might not force such
words from her, as I heard her but now utter, requesting her, that she would
lay open the wound, and tell me what she ayld, and make me a sharer ^n this
her misery; promising (in all that little, that I was able to do) to do as
much for her, as I would for mine own Mother. O son (quoth she) your Master
(in an ill hour) brought hither certain of his friends to make merry this
afternoon, and amongst other things, my silver Gobblet is wanting, and I know
not in the world what to do. What will thy Master say, or do, when he shall
know it? O he will kill me (son of my bowels, mine own dear child) he will
kill me, that is the least he can do unto me. And what I pray can he do more,
said I with my self? Well, I put on a mourning-face, look sad, showing how
much I was displeased with this roguish dealing, and how much it did vex me
for her sake. And then calling my wits together, I told her, that there was no
other way in the world to salve this sore, but that she should be stirring very
early in the morning, and get her to the Goldsmiths, and buy another like unto
it, and then tell her Husband, that because the silver cup was old, and stained
with many spots, she had caused it to be new burnish't over, and made as bright
as it was the first day it was bought.

And by this means, this cloud, that threatens such a foul storm, will
quickly be ouer-blowne, and all be fair weather again with you.

I offered her withal, that if she wanted money, she should make shift to take
it up upon credit, she should have my allowance and my Vailes, till all was
paid, if she did not find means before of her own to discharge the debt.
She did with a great deal of thankfulness entertain what I had spoken, as
well for my good counsels, as the speedy remedy. But it seemed unto her, that
it would be very unfitting for her to go from home, and that all alone, and
so early in the morning, fearing lest her Husband might chance to know it, who
was very jealous of her, and would think, she had gone a gadding to some
worser purpose. Whereupon, she entreated me of all Loves, even for Gods sake,
that I would go my self to see and I could get such another as that was; and
as for the money, she had enough of her own store to pay for it. This was e'ne
as I would have it, it hit as pat as a pudding to a Friars mouth, I could not
have wished it to have fallen out better; for I had already begun to devise and
cast with my self, to whom, or how I might sell it, and what chapman I might
best find out to buy it of me; for if they should come to scanne my person,
they might easily be induced to believe, that I had stolen it.

But this business falling out so luckily, and all things sorting so well with
me, I went amongst the Goldsmiths, and spoke to one of them, that he would
make clean this plate, take out the stains, and beat out the dents, for it
had taken some knocks in the fall; I agreed with him for two Royals, for which
price he finished his work, and made it look as fresh and as new, as if it
had been newly bought out of the shop; I took my cup, and carried it home
with me to my Mistress, telling her, that I had met with this piece at the
puertade A place so called (...) Madrid.
Guadaxara, and that it amounted in weight to seven and fifty Royals, and for
the fashion he would not abate a farthing of eight Royals.

All this seemed to her, as if it had been but one poor Blanke, considering
the great desire which she had to be freed from that trouble wherein she was.
She told me out the money upon a table, so that I sold her her own again, as
if it had not been the same, or that I had been the man that had stolen it
from her. Wherewith she remained contented, and I satisfied. But lightly come,
lightly gone: Two incounters carried it clean away from me.

These petty thefts of wit, I reckned as things of nothing, and occasion taught
me the way: These were natural unto me. But those of permission, and of
greater moment, I took great care in the managing of them, when need did
require: it was a common thing with me, to come near to the Butchers
chopping-blocke, where the portions allotted to every man for their allowance,
were cut out and divided. I did diligently observe that which passed, I Your
Catr^rs, your Cooks, and your Butlers, a company of coo^ening knaves.
learned the trick of the finger, the bounding of the balance, and all the
tricks of weighing* and many would say, I weighed passing well, yet so for mine
own advantage, that every man's part should daily come short two ounces in
weight.

The Despensero, he would answer for himself, that the flesh did shrink and
dry away, and though he received full weight, and the Scales true, yet there
could not choose but be some loss therein, by cutting it out afterward into
so many several pieces for Commons, which might very well take up a sixth part.
Your Despensero, your Cook, your Butler, your Purueyour, and most of all your
Officers, they do all of them filch and steal, and stick not to say, it is
their Fees, and that it belongs of right unto them, and this they so openly and
impudently maintain, as if they had the Kings Letters The Spanish word is
Esecutoria. i. el Instrumento y auto de lo determinado en juizio, por tres
Sententias. Couarruuias. Ver. Esec.
Patents to show for it.

There was never yet any Kitchen-boy so foolish or so unlucky, but that he
would make a shift to meet with the giblets of your Geese, your Hens, and your
Capons, with the hocks of a gammon of Bacon, your flaps, Kidneys, and fat of
the shoulders and loins of Mutton, your Pigs-pettitoes, your Caluesfeet,
Liuars, Gisards, Sweet-breads, Sauces, Spices, Snow, Wine, Sugar, Oil, Honey,
Candles, Coals, and Wood, not sparing the very Ashes, nor any thing else, (were
it Vinegar, Mustard, Annis-seede, Carrowaies,) from that which was most
necessary, even to those of smallest moment, which are daily spent in a great
man's house.

When I came thither first, I confess, there was no man would trust me
farther then he saw me, they had no great confidence of me; but by little and
little, I got into credit by degrees, first pleasing this man, then contenting
that man, and in fine, being willing to serve them all, in all that I was able:
for he must have a care to please all, that will have all men to pleasure him.
To gain friends, is a putting forth of money to Interest, and the sowing of He
must do, that will receive a pleasure. Friends and ^oes, how to be kept, or
avoided.
seed in a fruitful soil. A man ought to venture his life, for the keeping of
a friend, and the spending of his wealth, for the vn-procuring of an enemy.
For such a one is a Sentinel, that sees with a hundred eyes; he is like a
Dragon, that stands upon the Tower of his malice, to look into our actions
from afar, and to watch us a mischief, if we do amiss. It imports much,
not to have an enemy, and he that has, let him carry himself so toward
him, as though he were by and by ready to become his friend.

Would thou know who this is? Behold his name, and thou shall find How a man
should behave himself toward his enemy.
him to be all one with the Devil, our mortal enemy, and both of them, to be
one, and the selfsame thing. Do thou sow good works, and thou shall reap
the fruit of them. For the first (whosoever he were) that did a benefit,
wrought chains therewith to imprison noble spirits, and to bind their hearts
unto him in the bonds of love. In those things, wherein I might put my self
forward, I was never slothful; I did never give way to any just complaints to
come against me; nor was I ever given to faction, or to the raising of
calumnies and evil reports upon any; I did abhor all colors of this nature,
and above all, your scandalous and offensive persons, whom we Scandalous
persons, what they are like unto?
properly compare unto Sponges, who what they suck in one place, have it wrung
from them in another, if they do not drop it out of themselves, which is too
usual with them. Such men as these, see thou trust them not, shun their
fellowship, abhor their company, though thou were sure to get by them. For in
the end, thou shall sit down with loss, and shame enough.

A private house cannot suffer a greater calamity; nor a Commonwealth a more
contagious pestilence, then these make-bates, these sowers of discord, these
Court-chamblets, that are sprinkled over with holy water, whose gloss of words
makes a very fair show, but under that print (which is quickly gone) lies the
devil, and his foul deeds.

It was euer-more my chief study, to have peace with all men, because it is
the daughter of Humility; And the humble minded man, that loves Peace, the
daughter of Humility.
peace, loves, and is beloved of the Author thereof, which is God: if ill
company had not done me harm, I had begun well, and gone on better; I had had
wherewith-all to eat, to drink, to laugh, and to be merry, and might have
passed this carreere of my life with a great deal of content. Many times (when
I had ended my business) I would take a nap in the sweetness of that Sun,
which showed it self after dinner, and sometimes I made my sleeps by
Moone-shine, remaining in the view of that fair light until the morning.

But when there was nothing to be done at home, your Lackies and Pages of the
Court, being a company of Crack-ropes and notable Wags, would make The Pages
waggery with Guzman.
me free of the Drying Pan, fright me with Snakes, hang on my back, and weigh
me down, crying, More sackes to the Mill; If by chance they found me asleep,
then would they clap a Fly made of Wax upon the instep of my shoo, and
letting it burn there, till shoo and skin were both scorched, and when I
began to stir and stretch, then would their knavery break forth, and cry,
Fire, fire, fire. Other-while they would roll up a Card, or a piece of Paper,
Tunnel-wise, and then setting it a fire, (blowing out the flame) they would put
it directly under my nose, till the pillars of smoke that ascended to my
nostrils, had not only awaked me, but almost choakt me. I remember they used me
so once in this manner, that I knew not in the world where I was,
whethersleeping, waking, standing or sitting; I was eene mad, I had lost my
wits amongst them; and if I had not been held fast, I had fallen against one of
the corner stones of the house, and dashed out my brains in a thousand pieces:
yet I took all patiently, never opened my mouth against them, pocketting these
and many other the like wrongs, which I passed over.

All which I did, that by correcting my self, I might conserve my self:
choosing rather to kill my choler, then choler should kill me. Que el que
todo lo quiere Vengar, presto quiere acc. bar. He that will revenge all
wrongs, Proverb.
shall sooner end himself, then them. Larga se deueder a mucho, si no se
quiere viuir poco. The man, that would live long, must not be too short. This
cuttednesse, has cut off many a man's life before his time. But by slighting of
injuries, and letting them quietly go by, he that does them, grows in the end
both weary, and ashamed; Whereas if thou should risent them, and take them
to heart, they would never leave persecuting thee, but be vexing thee still
more and more. For mine own part, if I should have complained of these Wags,
or but made any stir in the business, I am sure they would have made an
Anatomy of me. I (poor Scullion) must have turned Skellidon; There had been
no other way with me. Sometimes, to make trial of me, they would lay baits
for me, putting money in some such place, where I could not choose but find
it; and then would they watch me, to see, whether I were light-fingerd or no,
and had, the art of taking up, and were in the number of those that still take
up, and never lay down? But because I knew their meaning, and had found out
the trick, that they would feign put upon me; I Proverb.
said with my self, It will not serve your turn, A otro perro, con esse
huesso; I am too crafty a curre, to be taken with this bone; you must throw it
out to some other dog, you shall do no good with it on me: you have mist
your mark (my Masters) you have leapt a little too short. you shall not go
beyond me, nor shall you make your selves merry with my miseries, nor make
merchandise of my credit, nor furnish your Almoneda, is an open sale at an
Out-^ne. Guzmans craft to pr^serue his credit.
Almoneda with my infamies. Therefore, it should rest there for me; till he
that had laid it there, should come himself and fetch it away. Still having an
eye, that another should not take it thence, lest afterward it might be said,
I was the man that did it.

Otherwhiles I would take it up my self, and come and bring it to my Master
and give it him; having always a great care to keep my wounds clean, and
like a good Fencer, to come fairly off, without the least Vennie or touch in
the world: For to give another man a cut in the leg, or a slash on the arm,
and to receive a home-thrust, and full Stocada in his own bosom, shows
himself to be but a fool in his Science. I filcht and stole whatsoever came
in my way, but still carried it so cunningly, that no man could have cause to
suspect me.

For those things that appertained to my charge, I was wonderful prompt
Guzmans diligence in doing his Office.
and diligent, albeit my Master had been careless in willing me to do this,
or that; And when there was any work to be done, I never stood looking, when
my Master would bid me go about it; I would save him that labor. I was the
foremost of all my fellows, when Birds were brought in, to fall to plucking of
their feathers, to scowre the Spits, to make clean the Vessel, to sweep the
house, to make, and blow the fire, without saying to another, Do it you. For I
did consider with my self; that seeing I was not to take my pleasure; nor to
stand like a Loyterer, with my thumbes under my girdle; one was as much trouble
to me as the other; And me thought, it was a fine kind of deceiving of the
time; to do that by fair means, which I must otherwise have done perforce.
And this made me indifferent (so as I were a doing) whether it were this work,
or that work, all was one to me, since first or last, it must be done by one
of us.

I did evermore do my uttermost endeavor, as far as my ability and
knowledge would lead me, reserving always the Decorum due to my Office. I was
ever in Action; I had scarce made an end of pulling my Birds, but I presently
run me to the Mortar, and fall a pounding of Sawces, some for my Boyld
meats, some for my Roast; all my Iron Vtensels about the Kitchen, as Spits,
Andiornes, Tongs, Fire-shouell, Pot-hookes, and the like, I kept so neat and so
clear, that they looked like so many Sword-blades, whereon the Cuttlers hand
had set a delicate Glass; my Pots and my Pans, why you might have wiped them
with a Cloak of Velvet; my Skimmers, my Ladles, and my flesh-Hookes, were
(like Barbers Looking-glasses) curiously kept in their Cases, and hung up upon
several Nails, as all things else that were of use, had their peculiar places
appointed for them, that they might be ready still at hand, when need should
serve, without being driven to seek for one thing in one corner, and another
in another, bearing still in my mind, how and where I had plast them.

In a word, every thing had it is deputed place, with much diligence, and very
good order. At my spare hours, when I had nothing to do (which were likely in
the Evening,) for then I was usually most at leisure; the Officers of the house
would give me their The Spanish word is Percances. i. Quicquid acquiritur a
seruis praeter Salarium. Dict: a perquirendo. Your Officers in great houses
challenge their Fees, as a Tribute due unto them. How the Cooks lick their
own fingers.
Vailes, that I might go abroad, and sell them for them. I went with them to
the Gate that belongs to the Shambles, which was our set place for that
business, whither came such to buy, as had need thereof; Sometimes that which
I brought, was good; sometimes so so; and at other times, stinking and stark
naught. And all did arise out of that, which they call Prouechos y Derechos,
Fees, and Duties, which is two, out of every ten: a great deal better payment
I am sure, then that of the Almoxarifasgo, comes of Almozarife; i. Exactor
portoriorum. He that takes up all the Kings rents upon all merchandise, either
imported, or exported. It is an Arabicke word, and signifies an Officer, that
recouers all Rights and Duties, belonging to the King, be it upon Customs,
Tenths, or payment of Rents: Father Guadix says, this name by corruption, is
borrowed from Al-Muxiuph, that is to say, a Teller, a Changer, a Banker, a
Renter. Diego de Vrrea, That in it is Arabicke termination, it is tear^ed
Muxerifun, of the Verb Xerefe, which signifies to see, to discover. And so
Almoxarife may be taken for a Seer or Discouerer. And the reason of it is, for
that he sees and discouers all the Merchandise that passes to and fro, to
recover what is due to the King, and to (...) the other pass free. This in
ancient time, was a general name to all Treas^rers, till the days of King
Alonso II. Who disc^rded it, because it was Mo^ish, and changed the Title into
Tesorero general. (...). Lord high Treasurer. (...).
Almoxarifasgo of Seuilla; Seldom or never were wanting unto us the Menudillos
or entrails of your Birds, the mammocks of Veale, Partridges and Hens, which
were spoiled or lost in the spitting or the roasting, or had clung in the
boiling to the Pots side, or fallen in sunder by being ouer-sod; in the
stripping and uncasing of Rabbets and Conies, and the Lard bestowed upon them,
being bordered about, and imbroydered as it were with Bacon, like unto one of
your Gabardines of Sayago, scarce leaving so much white as the breadth of my
nail, through which their larding-Needles had not past. There were some other
commodities, which being kept too long, before they came to be sold, began to
stink; these they had a trick to disguise in that handsome manner, that they
should seem to be fresh and sweet. Every one did set forth his own ware, as
well as he could. I sold likewise Neats-tongues, Hogs-cheeks, powdered pessels
of Porke, English Pasties of Venison, and pieces of Bacon, three fingers thick
of fat. Behold, what undue duties, what unprofitable profits, and what hurtful
and vngaineful gains these were; things able to undo a Noble man, to make him
waste his Wealth, morgage his Lands, and sell his Vassals.

I pity ye (poor Lords, ye Gentlemen that keep good Houses) who either can
not, or know not, (or to speak truly) will not consume this Locust, this
Caterpiller, by destroying so harmfull a moth. And thrice unhappy they, who for
ostentations sake, will offer to throw the Bar, with those that are able to
out-fling them, and strive in a bravery to ouer-doe their strength, which may
cause a spraine, if not a Rupture in their Estates.

The The Spanish word is, Ganapan, quasi ganar el pan. Acquirere panem and
victum sudore faciej. The condition of of a King, what it is, in comparison of
other men.
Porter, as well as the Tradesman; the Tradesman, as the Merchant; the
Merchant, as the Gentleman; the Gentleman, as the Knight; the Knight, as a
Grande; and the Grande, as a King; all desire to be in-throaned, and to
outstrip one another, by living above their compass, and spending beyond
their means. But in troth, the Office of a King, that is no good Place, there
is no sport in it, no mirth no iollity. For a King neither sleeps so soundly,
nor rests so quietly as the poor Porter does; neither does he eat his meat
with that merry heart and free from all care, as does the Tradesman. The care
of one Crown afflicts him more, then that of many does the Merchant. He is
troubled more in making provision for his Armies, then a Gentleman in preparing
his Arms: Nor is there any Knight or Titulado so much impawned, or so deeply
in debt, but that his King is much more: Nor any Grande so great, but that the
troubles and griefs which attend a King, are far greater. He must keep
watch and ward, when others securely sleep. His eyes (like your shops on
worky-dayes) must be still open, that those of his Subjects may be shut up, and
keep Holy Day. And therefore the Egyptians, when they would Hieroglyffe a
King, and by some mystical Ciphers, express his vigilance; A vigilant King,
how depainted by the Egyptians.
they did put a Scepter in his hand, with an eye on the top of it. He travels
hard, when all others take their ease and laugh; for he is both Coach, and
Coachman. He sighs, and groans, when others, sport, and play; yet few are
they, that take pity of him, or are sensible of his sorrows, unless it be
for The wretched estate of a King.
their own private interest. Whereas indeed, only for his own sake, and for
that general care that he has of all, he ought of all, to be both loved,
feared, and respected.

Few inform him of the truth, for fear of drawing hatred upon themselves:
Few, if he be in an error, will seek to put him out of it, and they know well
enough, why, and wherefore they let him alone, and suffer him to go on in it;
and so do we too: Only forsooth to put themselves forward, and that they may
come to mount and soar the higher, and the sooner, though it be with waxen
wings, and must in the end, like Icarus, come tumbling down, and fall into the
Sea, where they, and their fortunes, are to sink for ever, never to be seen
more.

But what do I talk of these transcendencies? I divine nothing. They are
things out of my element, and therefore I will let them alone. It is men's
foolishness, and their want of judgment and discretion (as I told you before)
that leads them thus along (deceived with these vanities) to their destruction
The miserable condition of your great Lords and Gentlemen.
and of all other, most miserable are your great Lords, and other Noble
Gentlemen, who spending where they need not, fall into need themselves. For
even small and slight expenses, used often and too abundantly, consume the
substance, their feathers begin to fail them, they fall away by one and by
one; here lose a principal, there a Sarcell, and so in the rest: so that
(having never a sound feather left, neither in wing, or train, wherewith to
maintain their flight:) they are called Pelones, or Pelados, peeled Gentlemen,
that have had their Plumes plucked. Whereupon they are forced to retire
themselves home into the Country, to live upon some poor Farm or other, where
they must spend their time in breeding of Cattle, as Pigs, Hens, and Chickens,
and the like, reckoning the Eggs that are daily laid, making account thereof,
as of his chiefest living.

Hence therefore I set down this as a ruled Case; That if a rich man will
Profitable lessons both for rich and poor.
govern himself, he shall never be poor. And if a poor man will be
thriuing, he shall quickly be rich. Both of them applying themselves in all
things, according to the time, and as they see occasion. For it is not always
fit for a Gentleman to save; nor for a poor man to spend. There are
entertainments to be had, but such as are rather to be had for intertainment
then undoing.

Upon occasion, every man ought to show himself, like himself, according to
the means that God has given him. For to this end has he bestowed these his
blessings upon him. But not that all men should walk cheek by ioule, foot by
foot, side by side one with another, as if they were all fellows, and no
difference of Estates, or Persons.

If a Noble man shall be a great spender, let a meaner Gentleman hold his hand,
and let him not be-foole himself, to think, that he can do as much with
three, as the other with thirty He does not consider that these are abortiue
births; and things that are out of their natural course: whereby he becomes a
byword, and laughing stock among the people: and his wealth being wasted,
turns beggar, and mewes himself up in a corner, and dares not be seen. That
man does not understand, (who is not of good ability) that he does ill; to
seem to be a Cock, before he be out of the shell, and to stretch out his
throat, as if he would ouer-crow all the world. If he be a Raven, and can but
croke at the best, why will he offer to sing and put forth his voice? Or why,
when some Flatterer shall tell him that he has an excellent air, and sings
exceeding sweetly: does he not perceive that he only commends him, to make him
(as it is in the Fable) let fall his Cheese, and then laugh at him when he has
done? The selfsame Lesson I read to all, that every man would learn to know
himself: let him try the temper of his Steel, and let him not go about to
fyle iron with a fyle of wood, lest he find it lost labor. And when he
hears a man murmr at another, let him shut the door, lest another may
murmr at him.

It is fit, that we should all sleep upon on foot (as the Crane does) when
Good (...) M^jer of a (...)
our wealth, (which is the life of this world) lies upon it: casting about (now
that all is gone) how we may do, that we may not be driven to steal. For to
let things run to waste, is not liberality, but looseness. And with that
(a) The Spa s^ ^ man of his (...) gre^ that Prou^e* Tre^ al Mohino.
which thy Catrer, thy Cook, and thy Despensero, shall steal from thee, and
never thank thee; (for these are your only three (b) Cheaters,) thou may
reward half a doozen of thy other Servants.

But I speak no more of their theft, then others waste; for they will all
steal, all filch (never a barrel better Herring) look what is under their
charge, they will be sure to nimme somewhat out of it. One a little, and
another a little: and many a little makes a mickle. So that what with a little,
and what with a mickle, it mounts to so much in the end, and makes such a deep
hole in thy main estate, that thou art much may med by it, if not wholly
swallowed up, and utterly sunk.

And here I must not stick to tell the Masters themselves, That a great part
of this fault is theirs; for that Servants wages (usually) are too short, and
ill paid. For, if they be served by men, that are in necessity, and
constrained by want, they shall find few of them faithful. Thou will not
stick sometimes in a humor, to play away at one rest, all thy whole years
Revenues. This is naught, give it over. Pay thy servants well, use them with
courtesy, and speak kindly unto them; for the rewarding and recompencing of
services, makes the Master to be esteemed, and respected, according to his
worth and quality, and incourageth the poor servant, (by requiting him for
his pains,) to serve him the better, and with the more alacrity. There are
some Masters, that will not bestow a Royal on the best servant they have,
thinking it enough, that they have only their bare wages, and that in giving
them that and their diet, they are very well paid.

No (my Masters) this may not serve your turn, it stand's not with reason to
Reasons, in savor of ser^. (...).
do no more; for this is but their due, and deserves but little, or no thanks
at all. But by giving that, which is not their due, thou bindest them to do
more then their due, and winnest them to serve thee with the greater love.
Whereas, if thou (being a Master) shall not enlarge thy hand, and be better
unto him, then the bare bargain that is driven between ye, it is no great
marvel, if thy servant hold back, and step not a foot farther then those
bounds, whereunto his Covenant binds him:

As it happened to a cowardly Gentleman, who (presuming too much on his A Tale of
a miserly Gentleman.
wealth, and the greatness of his means) fell at odds with another Gentleman
that was very valiant; and finding himself far inferior unto him, both in
strength and in courage, was willing to intertaine a proper young fellow, of
good metal, and approved Valor, to wait upon his person.

Now it happened, that this Enemy setting one day upon him, this his servant drew
in his defense, and behau'd himself so well, that he made his Adversary
retire with dishonor, and held him play so long, till his Master was quite out
of danger.

In this fray, the Young man lost his Cloak, and the scabberd of his Sword.
When all was past, and this fray (where of I told you) fully ended, my honest
Seruing-man gets him home, but his unthankful Master did neither make good
this his loss, nor return him any requital in the world. It was this
Gentleman's hap afterward, to meet with his Master again, and having a good
Cudgel in his hand, he affronted him, and gave him the Bastanado upon the
former quarrel: his servant all the while stood still, and was content to be a
looker on, while the other did beat him. His Master cryde out unto him, that he
should come in and help him. Your Worship (quoth his man) did agree with me to
pay me my wages monthly, and I did covenant with you, to wait upon you for it.

And for ought I know, neither of us both are bound to any more. So that if
thou mindest that they should strain themselves for thee, and do those things,
that may advance thy service; with that which thou so dissolutely losest, and
vainly and idly throwest away, gain their good-wils, and thou shall gain
this thereby, that they will not rob thee of thy wealth; that they defend thy
Person, illustrate thy Fame, and desire ^y life. O how often have I seen them
carry away, and carried away my self, whole tartes of Manjar Alba, qu^dam
es^a, Hispanis in vsu. A meat made of the breast of an Hen, Milk, Sugar, Rice,
bea^en, and all mixed together. One of the dai^tiest d shes they have in
Spain. This Manjar Blanco, was anciently eat^n in Princes Courts, and Noble
men's Houses, but now pub^kely sold i^ the open Market.
Blanco, Pigs, Pigeons, Stock-Doues, Cheeses of a hundred sundry sorts, and
other infinite things to fell, which are too tedious to relate, and I fear me,
both time, and memory would fail me, if I should go about to recou^ them
unto thee! Only I will tell thee, that these disorders, being a general
disease, whereof all of them were sick, infected me also, and made me become
as bad as the best of them. I lived amongst a company of Wolves, and I learned
of them to howl, and devour Lambs, as they did. I was a reasonable good
Scholar for my time albeit in a different kind of learning, but at last, I
lost all fear: I had learned now to swim without Bladders; I was slush
enough now to forsake the nest; all did game and swear, all did steal and ()
lurch, and I did, as I saw others do before me. From small beginnings, (a)
The Span^sh word is Sisar. Now Sisar, is to take out of that which is bought,
or spent, some small part: As out of a ^ixt part, one. And therefore it ought
to be rather S^isar, then Sisar, of the Hebrew word Sisah, Sextare, or to take
out a sixth part.
great matters arise.

I began (as I told you before) to play a little, to lurch a little, and to
steal a little; But at length, I began to enlarge my strides like little
children, when they have been taught awhile to go alone. I was now perfect in
my pace, and had the trick to make one in the hundred. I no more held it ill
(to such pass was my innocence come) but as a thing lawful, and to be
permitted, I bought there with some few necessaries, that I stood in need of;
the rest I threw away at play; for in my gaming. I always made choice of those
games that were the most virtuous, either in Dice, The Spa^sh word^, are
Bueltos, y Ca^eta: Games much used amongst the Spaniards.
or Cards, such as were the nimblest to ridd a man of his money, that I might
make an end of it quickly, and get me home to execute mine Office.

I once remember, that contesting about a Chance with other young Lads about my
pitch, we were so loud, in one of the Courts of the house where we played, that
with the no^se thereof, you would have thought, the whole house would have
fallen down about our cares. Our Master spoke to the Usher of the Hall, that he
would go see what the matter was; who found us together by the ears, which
made the fault the greater. And (exceeding his Commission) he basted our
shoulders with Cudgell-deaw, making the dust fly out of our Coats, till he
had beaten our bodies all black and blue; The marks whereof appeared
afterward, when we came to put off our Shirts; which likewise occasioned the
loss of my credit amongst them; For, from that time forward, they had an eye
still over me; and looked a little more narrowly into my water. And this was it,
that gave the first beginning to my utter undoing, as by and by I shall more
plainly deliver unto you.

CHAPTER VI.
Guzman de Alfarache prosecutes that which past betwixt him and his Master,
till being dismissed, he departed from him: And takes occasion hereupon, to
^ondemne Idleness and evil Company, and those inueterated vices in rich men.
He recount^th the spoils, and Trophies of Cooks; and tells a merry Story,
that past between himself, and the Cooks wife, his Mistr^sse.

THat man is much to be commended, who knows to gain by his labors: But much
more ought he to be esteemed, who by his virtue knows how to keep that which
he has gotten. I did strive all I could to please every body, albeit the ill
custom of my former lewd life, did now and then lead me awry; so that
whatsoever I did, was like forced earth, that fell in short time to it is old
level, and being all but counterfeite stuff, were but Ap^h imitations,
contrary to mine own nature, and that bent, whereunto I had been used. For
that Glory that is falsely gotten, indureth but a while, it is not permanent,
but quickly passes away; I was like unto a drop of Oil, that falls upon a
garment, which Si fresca no para^e, breuemente se des^ubre Proverb.
(...); If it be not presently perceived, and taken off in time, discouers it
self, and goes increasing. Now, they would no longer trust me. One would call
me, Ceda^illo nueuo, the new little Sieve, or the youth of three days standing;
For as your new married Wives, that buy a little Sieve, to strain their Wine,
or any other liquor, for some few days, are very careful of it, hang it up
upon a Nail, or some wooden Pin, but anon after think no more of it, and let
it lie tumbling on the ground; so is it with your new servants: you shall have
them at the first very diligent and careful, and like new Broomes, sweep all
clean, but after a while they grow negligent and lazy, and are weary of well
doing. Another would c^ll me La Gata de Uenus, one of Uenus Cats; A crafty
knave from the Cradle. But they were all deceived; For I was naturally good,
and in mine own disposition, I neither had read nor knew so much; but I
depraved this good nature of mine, and did ill dispose of it. Vice and want
altered this my good inclination, and made me otherwise then I would have been.
And what knavery I had in me, I learnt it of the Officers there, and other the
servants of the house. And these are they that I must thank; for they were the
only men that brought me to it; I was but coorse Sugar, till they refined me.

There are some happy thieves, that come to be old men before they die; others
are so unlucky, that for the very first robbery, that ever they committed,
have been taken in the manner, and presently hanged, without any more ado.
That which in others was but a venial, was in me, a mortal sin. And it was
fit it should be so, because I did degenerate from what I was, by doing that
which I ought not to have done. I did undo my self by ill company; Ill
company, i^ the Author of all mischief.
which is Vices Ladder, Virtues Hangman; the Wine that makes drunk; the Smoke
that choaketh; the Sorceresse that bewitcheth; Marches Sunshine, a deaf Adder,
and an intising Syrene.

When I first began to serve, I applied my self to my work, and sought to
please; but afterward, my ill-acquaintance (bad friends as they were) did
sweetly undo me. Idleness, was a great help thereunto, if not the sole cause
of all my hurt. For, as unto him that is well occupied, no Virtue is wanting;
Idleness, what kind of thing it is. What evil effects it brings forth.
so unto him that is idle, there is no Vice, which is not his Companion.
Idleness is the high way to destruction; it is that spacious field, that opens
to perdition; it is that Plough, wherewith bad thoughts are sown; It is the
seed of Tares, cast into the ground; it is that Woman-weeder that plucks up
goodness by the roots; It is that Sickle, that cuts down all our good works;
It is that Flaile, which thresheth all honor out of us. It is that Cart, which
comes laden home with mischief; and it is that Ba^ne, wherein all the Vices
in the world are mowed, and stored up. Mine eye was not set upon my He that
will not do ill, must look well into himself.
self, but on others; and look what I saw them do, that (me thought) was
likewise law full for me: Not considering, that because they were in places of
credit, (that were able to bear them out) and being old-beaten soldiers in all
manner of theeueries, it might become them well enough to do as they did; for
by this means, they were to make themselu^s a Fortune, and to this end only
do they seek to serve good Masters. I was willing to be one of the number,
and would feign rank my self amongst them, by doing as they did, being no way
their equal, but a poor Picaro, a ragg-taild Rogue, out both of clothes and
credit.

But if excuses may prevail, and that I may say something for my self; When I
saw that every man walked so freely this way, without check or control; it
seemed to me to be the land of The Span^sh phrase is, Te^a de Xauxa.
Permission; and that I might pass up and down there as well as they: Being
persuaded, (as I told you before) that it was a work of Virtue, a very good
deed, and very justifiable, how be it afterward I was beaten from that error:
My thought though was good, but my understanding was amiss: For the Grace and
favor of this Bull, did in especial words grant the use and exercise thereof
to the elder brothers, that are free of the Incorporation of the Rich and
Potent; to those that are Favorites to the Proud, to the Arrogant, to
Flatterers, to those that The Brot^erhood of the Rich, what it is. And the
evils that it (...).
are never without Crocodils tears; to Scorpions, which bite not with the
mouth, but sting with the tail; to smooth-tongu'd Parasites, who with sweet
words cherish the body, but with sour works destroy the soul. These were the
men that might do any thing, all was well done that they did; but in such as
my self, it was falsehood and roguerie, I was in an error, and together with
this my error, I became so dissolute, and lived so disorderly, that my disease
even a far off might easily be discerned: how be it all was not worth a
straw, as being things not to be reckoned of, or scarce worthy the talking of.
It is a common saying; Que el postrero, que Sabe las desgracias, es el Marido.
That the good man, is the last that knows, what things are amiss Proverb.
at home.

Of all these my mad prankes, and cross fortunes that did befall me, scarce
one of a thousand came to my Masters ears; Either because being willing (as I
was) to please them, and to get their good will, they would not have my Master
to conceive hardly of me, and so put me away; Or else, because (though now and
then they would chide me, and tell me mine own) seeing all the World was
alike, and that it was every man's Case as well as mine; they did not much
wonder at it. But for some negligences of mine, and other things that were too
transparent; my Master grew some what angry with me, and spu^'d hard to
overtake me. It so fell out, that he was one day sent for to prepare a Feast
for a certain Prince, that was a stranger, newly come to Court, and carried me
along with him, that I might transplant the Onion; that is, take up all the
leauings, Relics, Vailes, Profits, or Fees, (as the custom is) belonging to
his Office.

We were no sooner come into the Kitchen, but all our provision was brought in
unto us. My Master fell presently to work; and very nimbly; and with a great
deal of dexterity began to chop this, to divide that, and The fashion of your
Cooks, when they are sent for to work.
break that other thing asunder, putting somethings apart by themselves,
others (especially if they were all of a sort) he heaped up all together,
taking the like order in all the rest of those things that appertained unto him
(as a lawful tax and due tribute, payable to his place) lest he might, (being
busied about many other things) forget his own right, and confusedly intermixe
one thing with another; it being meet and just, to give unto Caesar, that which
is Caesar's, and that every man should take possession of his own, and quietly
enjoy what of right belonged unto him.

Now, about the shutting in of the Evening, when it began to be dark, my
Master willed me to bring the Sackes. I brought them, and fell to filling;
which (being well practiced therein) I packt up every thing that was there,
very handsomely, and very speedily. And clapping them on my shoulder at such a
time, and in such a manner, that I might not be seen, he made me make four
returns, in which iournying to and fro, I could hardly fetch my breath, so
heavily was I laden. All* and every one of them seemed to me, to be like unto
Noah's Arc. And I do not know, whether in it there were so many individual
and several Species, or whether God did afterward create them? Now* when I
had made an end of this business, he willed me to make a fire, hang over the
Kettles, see the water seethe, pull Foul, scald the Chickens, sindge the
Capons, scorch the Partridge; in which and the like I bestowed a great part of
that night. My Masters Cake (good man) did not bake half currantly, the byas
did not run the right way, he was shrewdly out of tune, and much disquieted
in his mind; it still running in his head, that his Wife was all alone; and
that she could not either well order such a deal of wealth as he had sent her
in; or that happily some unexpected storm might befall him in his absence.

Hereupon, whilst his thoughts were thus troubled, he calls me unto him, and
says unto me; Guzmanillo, I prithee hie thee home, and have a care to that
which thou carriedst hence, see that all be safe, nothing lost, open thin^ What
are the Trophies of Cooks, whereof they make their Triumph.
eyes, and look about thee. Tell thy Mistress that I stay here; have a care
to the house, and as soon as it is day, hasten again unto me. I did so: I
deliver my message to my Mistress. I call for Pinn's, and Pack-thread; I
plaste them up above in a Gallery, where they hung in a fresh and open ay^e.
There did I ^yle upon strings the Trophies of that Victory. It was a glorious
and goodly sight to see the several plumage, and diuers-coloured feathers of
Capons, Partridges, Turtles, Hens, Peacocks, Thrushes, Veldefares, Pigeons,
Quails, Chickens, Doves, and Geese. And taking forth from amidst all these the
Conies heads, they looked as if they had come peeping out of their berries. I
hung up in another part of the Gallery Gammons of Bacon, joints of Veale, Red
Dear, wild Bore, Mutton, Neats-tongues, Pigs, and Kids.

Thus all the Gallery was hung round with this kind of Tapistry, upon very
good Nails and strong Pins, that I had put up for that purpose. So that I
assure thee by the faith of an honest man, according to that fair show that it
made there, I had brought home two parts of five: nor was this Conquest yet
fully ended; for there were yet wanting those seven These seven sons of (...)
were brau^ ^rriours, and conquered all where they came. And their name is (...)
sed by way ^f Proverb, when something is wanting yet to be (...).
Infantes de Lara, to make the feast complete. All the rest was very well
fitted, and I very weary, for had wrought very hard, though little notice was
taken of it, and my requital less.

My Mistress lodged in a lower room, who like an idle Drone, left all the
^urthen on my shoulders, and got her to bed. It seemed she had supt upon salt
meat^s, for she had her When a ^an has drun^e (...), it is a (...) phrase in
Spa^ne: Cargo Del^ntero, He (...) charged has forep^ce.
forehead full charged, which was no new thing with her. I, when I had made an
end of my work, did the like, and went to bed. But the weather was so hot,
that for a good while I lay scratching, and tossing to and fro, till at last,
(though somewhat, I confess, against my will) I let loose the reins, that I
might go softly onward on my way to sleep. In the end I fell a^galloping,
that I might the quicklier come to my iourneis end, and take my rest. And
lapping my self in my Blanket, which God knows was a sorry one, (for in that
Country, they do not use to allow Sheets, nor any more save an old
Straw-bed, to such poor boys as my self) I was very careful to rise
betimes, according as my Master had commanded me. When behold, (God bless me)
about three of the Clock in the morning, it being then the time between the
two Lights, when it was neither night nor day, I heard b^rieath in the Court a
cruel skirmish amongst the Cats, which were making of a banquet upon a piece
of Poor John, a dry kind of Fish, which they had drawn out by chance through
the Tyles of one of our neighbors houses.

And for that they are naturally of an ill condition, (nor shall you ever know,
Cats and old Folks alike.
when they are contented, no more then ye shall, when old men are well pleased)
you shall never see them eat their meat quietly, and without noise, but still
purring and growling, though they have never so much. Whether it were, that
their Fish was good, and so liked it too well; or whether it were ouer-salted,
and so made them angry, or what a Devil the matter was, that they differed
about, I know not: but sure I am, that with the noise of this their War, they
did awake me, and made me to listen after them, saying with my self, Sure the
Devil is in it, his hand is in this business, if the quarrel that was risen
amongst these honest Cats, should fall upon the true Sobre la capa dei justo.
Si dize; quando ^aga ^l, que no (...) culpa. Couarru^ia. verb. justo.
man's Cloak, and make him smart for it, that is not in fault: and should
quarrel now at this hour, in so unseasonable a time, about the partition of
my goods, and then my bones to pay for the meat that they should eat; making
my Master thereby to mis-doubt my care, and so breed a difference between us.

I lay in my bed, as naked as ever I was when I first came from my Mothers
womb: I did not think, that any body should have seen me; I started up in a
trice; and as if the I^ is (...) s^ll i^ Spain to have the Moors come in upon
their coasts, and carry away many Captives.
Moors had been come to have carried away all my kindred Captives, and this
diligence of mine would have served to set them free. I hye me with all the
haste I can, and come running down the stayres amain, that I might be there
in time, and might prevent that mischief, which is wont to grow, when succors
are too slow.

In a business of that importance, I thought all delays were dangerous. The
ridiculous ^est that past between Guzman and his Mistress.
My Mistress as she was gone to bed before me, so she had got up before me.
Which she might the better do, because she had nothing to trouble her head,
and had taken four sound sleeps, was lapt up warm like the Silke-worme, so
that she had no more to do, but to rub her eyes, and arise. She heard this
stir as well as I, and thought perhaps with herself (as very well she
might) that I was fast asleep, and did not hear the noise. She, though she
went to bed in her Smock, yet as her fashion was, she would put it off
before she slept, and lie all night starke-naked; and so was she now, having
not so much upon her to cover her nakedness, as the inheritance of her Grannam
Eve, neither Smock, nor any other covering in the world.

And thus stark naked as ever she was borne, forgetting through her haste; to
clap any thing upon her body, she came running down like one out of her wits,
with a light in her hand, to save her goods. Her thought, and mine, iumpt both
alike; the broyle equal; the diligence, in cau^ propria, in a business that
^id nearly concern us both; and the noise on either side but little, for we
^oth came thither bare-foote.

Now (if it will please you to behold us) we both of us meet in the Gallery,
she stricken with wonder, to see me there; and I almost frighted out of my
wits, in looking on her: She suspected that I was some Phantasma, some
Hob-goblin, or wandering Ghost, and letting the light fall out of her hand for
fear, she gave withal a great schriche. And I that was affrighted as much
with so strange and foul an Apparition, and seeing her to make toward me
with a Candle in her hand, I gave a greater schriche then she, thinking it had
been the soul of the Steward of our House, who died but some two days
before, and that he was come thither to level his Accounts with my Master.
She shrik't out so loud on the one side, that the neighbors might hear her all
over the street* and mine were so shrill, that they might almost have bin heard
all over the Town. She fled as fast as she could drive to her Chamber, as if
the Devil had been at the tail of her; I strove to make as much haste to
mine; the Cats they began to fly, and as glad as we to be gone. But to see the
ill luck of it, upon the very first stayre as I was going up, I stumbled upon
the Cat of the house, and treading upon her in the dark, she scratcht me by
the legs with her nails: then did I verily think with my self, that some
Ghost or other followed me at the heels, and was come to carry me away; and
that he was now catching at my soul, and ready to tear it out of my body:
wherewith being scarred, I fell, and brake my shinnes against the stayres,
having grated off the skin even almost to the bone, nor did my nosescape
free, that was broken as well as the rest. Neither of us two could understand,
or certainly suspect, who the other should be, all did succeed so in an
instant, and were both called out, at the sound of one and the same Bell; till
that I having fallen on the ground and she having hid herself between her
sheets, we began to know one another by the lamentation and mourning that we
made. With this fright that she had taken (if the freshness of the morning did
not occasion it) my Mistress retentiue faculty had shrewdly failed her, and
the lock of her belly being loose, and the bolts of her breech none of the
fastest, her Posterne door flew wide open, and before she could recover her
Chamber, ^irted the excrements of her intrailes, part in the Portal, and part
in the open Court; that White-pot of hers, being stuck full of Cherry-stones,
which it should seem she had swallowed down whole. I was a good while, ere I
could make all clean, I swept it, and washed it, and did all that I could to
make all handsome again; for the keeping clean of the house did properly
belong to my charge, as a thing wholly committed to my care.

Then did I begin to know that the Ordure and filthy savor of such accidental
Stools as these, do stink more, and worse by far, then those that are
natural and ordinary with us. But the cause and reason hereof, I leave it to
the Philosophers to seek it out: It suffices, that it cost me a great deal
of labor, to the detriment of my smelling faculty, and the great annoyance of
my Nose: and this I dare be bold to make good unto you out of mine own
experience.

My Mistress was much ashamed of this foul accident, and I more: for albeit
I did write man, yet I was but a young Lad to speak of, and a mere child in
the knowledge of these things; I was as modest, as any Maid of them all, and as
tender-stomak't; and had I been more man then I was, I should have been
ashamed for her shame, and have blushed, if not for mine own, yet for her sake.
It did grieve me very much, that I had seen her in this manner, as I have told
you; for as I live, I would not willingly for all the world have lighted upon
such an uncouth casualty as this was: But (do all that I could) she could
never be persuaded, but it was my knavery, and my roguery, and that I did it of
purpose; nor all the oaths that I used unto her, could make her to alter her
mind, reduce her to reason, make her capable how and by what means this
happened, or give her any the least assurance of my innocence.

From that day forward, I utterly lost her good will; and I knew so much
afterward by a neighbor of hers; whom she acquainted with all that had
happened. For that which did trouble her most, and did even vex her to the
heart, was, not for my finding of her naked, and vn-array'd; but because she
had beray'd her self. As for all the rest she did not care a pin; for most
women desire nothing more, especially those that have a good opinion of
themselves, have consulted with the cleerenesse of their skins, and are privy
to their own perfections.

When I saw that nothing would serve the turn, and that neither persuasions,
nor protestations would persuade with her; I took it for an ill sign, and
began to think with my self, that some false witness or other would be
raised up against me, to cast me out of doors, putting her Husband into an
evil opinion of me, as if this (poor innocent soul as I was) had been
merely my fault. Never did she look straight upon me afterward, nor ever
exchanged word with me, good or bad.

When it was broad day, back went I to my Mill again, as I was commanded*
that I might fall there afresh to my drudgery. But when I came to my Master,
not a word of what had past. I was Mum-budget, and durst not open my lips to
him (for my life) in that business. He asked me whether all those things were
safe at home? and whether I had set them handsomely in order? I told him, all
was well, and well ordered. He employed me in some things. And I can assure
you, that my Master and his Companions, and I and mine, such as were helpers,
and wrought there for him, had more ado^, to gather together, and hide what he
had stolen, then we had in the dressing and seasoning of all the rest of our
meats. And how was it possible, that it should be otherwise, where there was
no order taken, no agreement made, no account to be called unto? What did not
we call for without control; what was not given us without grudging; what
did we not receive with a great deal of glory; how little was spent, and how
much was stolen? Sugar was demanded for our Tarts; and for our Tarts, Sugar.
So as we had for every thing twice or thrice over. These kind of banquets, we
termed Jubilees; because the waters were troubled, and there were store of
Fish to be taken. The poison was thrown in, and they began to float.

This made me to think, seeing (as the common phrase is) that this Pan demi
compadre ^l ducl^ ageno.
was my Gossips bread, but at other folks cost; that my fore-teeth were no
less able then other men's, to gain this Indulgence. For I likewise had a
Soul in my body, as well as the best of them; I wanted not a jot of any thing*
that should make me a man; My Armor was not without it is Riuets, to buckle all
close. And if I had a mind to the Crumbs that were fallen under the Table, (yet
so, as not to seek, to make my self equal to my fellows, or to enter into
comparison with them) it might (me thought) be lawful for me, to make some
profit of other men's liberality, and though I were no Gamester, yet I might
receive Barato, is that many, which at play a man takes out of his heap, when
^e winnes, and gives it to this or that s^ander by, that he may wish him good
luck. Giving less, or more, as their hand is good, or their game great or
small. Prou.
Barato, as a stander by. I waxed weary with pulling Foul, blanching of
Almonds, and the kernels of Pine-apples, with providing of scalding waters, and
other things: I had then on at that time, an old Shi^t, and a Doublet that was
all torn.

Amongst other things that came to my Masters share, was a Pannier of Eggs; I
made thither, and took out a good company of them, some few of them I clapped
in my bosom, betwixt my body and my shirt, the rest I thrust into my Pockets,
and the linings of my Breeches. Now you see, I laid my hand upon that which
wrought my woe. But (to speak the truth) I did not do this so much for mine
own private interest, but that I might say another day (if I list) that I kissed
the Bride; and that it might not be said, that she came forth a Maid: Or that
it should be tit in my teeth; that I had been at the Court, and not seen the
King. The crafty Rogue my Master had found me out; and that he might sanctify
himself by my sin, and justify his honesty by my theft, the Mayor-Domo
being present, and other principal servants of the house, when I was about to
go forth to put this poor purchase of mine in some safe place out of sight,
he fell upon me like a Lion, and laying hold on my Collar, he began to play Rex
with me, taking me to Coramnobis, haling Guzman s^eales Eggs, and is taken in
the ^ner.
me by the hair of the head, and treading me under his feet.

You may very well imagine, how well conditioned this Merchandise was like to
come home, being with his beating of me, he had broke them all to pieces,
making both the Whites and the Yolks, thus batterd both together to drop out
at my knees. I could not but say to my self; Sure, some Poulterers Planet does
pursue me, and my Choler had almost moved me to speak it out aloud. But o
(thou notorious thief) how can thou have thy house hanged with that, which
thou stol'st, and I carried away, and yet keep such a coile, and make such a
deal of do, for half a doozen paltrie eggs that thou foundst about me? Do
thou not see, that thou wrongest thy self, in wronging of me? But I thought it
my best course, to hold my peace. For, in injuries, the best remedy is to
neglect them. It did grieve me so much the more, that my Master should use me
thus hardly; had it been done by a stranger, or so I could better have borne
it. But I must be contented with my hard fortune; I saw I was to suffer, and
therefore I past it over without any alteration of countenance, or replying
otherwise unto him, then by lifting up mine eyes unto heaven, which were brimme
full of tears, and ready to run over.

Now the heat and fury of the Feast was past, and we were going home; but as
we were upon the way, my Master said unto me, What I shall now tell thee
(Guzmanillo) hearken unto it, and weigh it well, it is worth the noting; That
beating which I bestowed on thee to day, did concern me more then F^ire words
and large promises, pacific anger.
thou art aware: I know I had no reason to use thee as I did; but to morrow, I
will give thee a new pair of shoes, which shall be better worth to thee, then
thy eggs would have been. This was welcome news, and pleased me very well;
for those I then wore were old, and all to fitters. But I shrewdly suspect,
that my Mistress, after we were come home, had made her complaint unto him,
and spoken some ill language of me; for from that time that we entered in
adoores, my Master did ever after cast such a sour look upon me, as if he had
been newly tasting of Wine-vineger, so sharp a countenance did he set upon
me; so that now we hear no more words of our new shoes, they are forgot, and
I must be content to go without them. When I saw he looked awry upon me, and
that I found his favor to be with-drawne from me; I sought to remove all
rubs, and to give him all the content I could, serving him with more care then
ever; without committing any the least offense, or being wanting in any thing
that belonged to the businesses of the Kitchen; I was not faulty in an hair,
because he should have no just cause against me.

Upon a Festival day, (as our fashion was) we had made certain Pies and
Pasties, some of one sort, some of another; whereof there was some (though not
very much) of the Paste left; And the Monday following, was the Running of the
Bulls. In the dust-Basket, amongst other refuse-things out of the sweepings of
the house, it was my hap to meet with the shanke-bone of a Guzman tries his wit
to get some money.
Heyfer, which was in a manner whole; I had need of a few of Blankes to make
merry with, and presently (a toy taking me in the head) in the turning of a
hand, I had lapt up my Shanker in the Paste that remained; which (as I had
handled the matter) was to the outward show a goodly fair Conie, that you
could not distinguish the one from the other. Away went I with it to the wonted
place, where I used to vent my other things, with a purpose to coozen some
stranger with it; But because I was in haste, and could not stay long, I might
not wait to make choice of my Merchant. There comes me to buy it of me a goodly
grave Gentleman-usher, (his head and beard as white as Milk) to do him a
pleasure, I was willing he should have it. We agreed upon the price, and he was
to give me for it three Royals and a half. Me thought I saw the heavens
opened, in having made so quick a market. But the more was my haste, the
greater was his fleame.

He puts me first under his arm a Reportorie or little Register book, about
the bigness of an Almanacke, which he had in his hand; Then he hangs me at his
Girdle, his Gloves and his hand-Kercher; with a great deal of deliberation;
After that, he takes me a case out of his pocket, wherein were his Spectacles:
he pulls them forth, wipes them, and puts them on, wherein he spert two long
hours. Then he went distilling out of a little leather Purse, one Quarte after
another, and putting them in his hand, every half Quarte, seemed to be a
Quartile, giving every one of them half a doozen turns at the least, holding
them against the Sun. I had scarce received my money of him, when lo, my
Master was at my back, who missing me at home, came forth to seek me. And
having thus found me napping, he took me fast by the arm, and when he had me
sure, he said unto me, What Pawn (my Guzman taken in a fault by his Master.
youth) have you redeemed here? My Gentleman-usher was present at all this
passage: the Devil (I think) kept him there all this while, for the
disclosing or this my secret.

I saw my self now in the suds, and knew not which way to get out; (I could
not quote my Author, nor yield any good reason for what I had done; so that it
stood with me, as with prohibited books, or merchandise forbidden to be sold:
and punishing me for my fault, he afterward dives me into my pocket; and when
he had fisht out the money, he cries; Let go you rogue; Let go, I say: Are
you the man, that so many have commended unto me? Are you that dead Fly, that
would do no hurt? Are you that faithful servant for sooth, whom I trusted
with my goods, and all that I had? Have I kept thee in my house? given thee of
my bread? cherisht, and made so much of thee, and all for this? I will no more
be troubled with such a rogue as thou art. See thou come no more in my house,
and come not, I advise thee, near Guzman thrust out of his Masters service.
my door; for he that will be false in a little, will (if occasion be offered)
be false in greater matters.

And so giving me a cuffe on the ear, and a kick on the breech, both at one
instant, in the presence of my Merchant, (whose dull fleame, (the worse luck
mine) would not dismiss him thence) he had almost laid me flat on the ground.
I was so ashamed, that I knew not what answer to make him; though I had stuff
enough in store for him; But not holding it fit so to do, because he had been
my Master. I hung down my head, held my peace, and went my ways. For it is a
greater glory to avoid injuries by silence; ^hen to overcome them by replying.

CHAP. VII.
How Guzman de Alfarache, being put from the Cook his Master, turns Picaro,
and proves a notable cunning Rogue. How he having a great desire to see Italy,
occasion was offered unto him to effect his purpose, by the help of a theft,
done upon a Grocer, and how he went sheere away with it, and left Madrid.

IN all chances whatsoever that may befall us in this world, Mas vale Saber,
que aver; it is better to be wise, then to Wisd^e b^tter then Riches.
be rich; For though Fortune should play the Rebel, yet Knowledge never
forsakes a man. Wealth may be wasted, but Knowledge increases; and of more
worth is that little, which a wise man knows; then all that which a rich man
inioyeth. There is no man (I think) makes any question that Wisdom excels
Fortune; though both of them put forward, and hasten to one and the same end;
which is, to adorn and set forth men, and to raise them to honor.

Diverse Philosophers, did diversely paint forth Fortune, because in all things
Fortune, how decyphred by the Philosophers?
she is her self so diverse. Every one did draw her forth in that form, as
he found it did accord with himself, or as he did consider it in another. If
she be good, she is the Step-dame to all Virtue; if bad, the Mother to all
Vice. And him, whom she most favors, she reserueth for most misery: her
courtesies ever ending in disgraces. She is brittle, unstable, restless,
Tanquam Figura sphaerica in corpore plano; like a Sphericall Figure, in a
plain body. That, which she gives to day, she takes away to morrow: she is the
flowing of the Sea, tossing and tumbling us to and fro, till she leave us at
last upon dry land, on Deaths shore, from which she never returns to recover
us; And while we live, inioyning us (like Players to con over our parts, and to
learn daily new toys and devices, to present them upon the stage of this
World. Every various accident does disorder her, and steal Wisdoms praise
from her. But Wisdom does quickly repair that which she ruineth: And
redresseth those things, which she despaireth of; she is a most rich open
Mine, from whence, they that will, may exhaust great treasure, like unto the
waters of a huge Riu^r, which can never be drawn dry. She honors a good
fortune, and helps a bad. She is silver in the poor, gold in the rich, and a
precious stone in a Prince. In the perilous passages, and in the troublesome
chances of Fortune, the wise man treads safely, and walks securely; but the
Fool stumbles and falls, though the way be never fo plain.

There is no trouble so great on the land; no tempest so terrible on the Sea;
no storm so violent in the air, that is able to withstand Wisdom, so that
every man ought to desire to live to be wise; and desire to be wise, that he
What man should do, to live happily.
may live happily; Her riches are perpetual, permanent, constant, and
certain. But thou will ask me; Whither away, Guzman, so laden with Knowledge?
What think thou to do with it? To what end do thou commend it with such
large eloquence? Why do thou so earnestly indeare it unto us? What do thou
mean by it? Whether does it tend? Since you ask me, I will tell you. All this
speech has reference to my Basket, which was the Knowledge that I did study,
for to get meat to my mouth, which is a good point of Wisdom: For, Quien a
Oficio, a beneficio, He that has a good Office, has a good Living. And he
that has no other means to live in this world, and to pass over the
necessities of this life, shall for me be esteemed as much in these days, as
Demosthenes was in those, for his eloquence, and Ulysses for his wit.

My natural disposition was good; I was descended both by Father and Mother
Guzman complains of his misfortunes.
of a Noble and Honorable Stock. This I could neither hide, nor lose. And
therefore I could not choose but show of what house I came, by suffering
injuries with patience, the only trial of valiant minds. And as badde men, by
good things, become worse; so good men, by bad things, are made better;
especially, if they know how to make true use of the things of this world.

Who would have thought, that so good service as I had done, should have
received so bad a reward? And that upon so light an occasion, and when I did
least expect, I should be thrust out of all? But in answer hereof, thou vvilt
happily say unto me; Such is the world now a-dayes, that for the same very
action, for the which at this present, a man is accounted a good servant, an
able Minister well seen in his Office, and to have behaved himself therein as
he ought, shall again at another time, for doing the very same thing, be
neglected, ill thought of, disgraced, and undone. And all to this end, that
either herein we may see the worlds incertainty, and what errors it does
daily run into; or else be brought to confess, That God, to those, whom he
has predestined to salvation, after sinning, sends repentance. O would to
God, that I might be so happy, as to receive only a corporal punishment here
upon earth.

My Master was now bent against me, his Wife had set him on, and he thereby so
incensed, and so apt to take hold of any occasion, that every the least
shutting of the eye, or but the wagging of a Straw, would have been matter
enough of exception against me; and though I should have served him never so
well, never so truly, and labored (as if my life had layne upon it) not to
give him any the least cause of dislike, yet all would not serve the turn, he
was minded to put me from him, and I must be packing; faulty, or not faulty,
all was one. Now I am thrown out into the street, persecuted, and put away:
What shall I do? Whither shall I go? Or what will become of me? Seeing I am
thrust out of doors for a Thief; who will now intertaine me in his service?
Who admit me into his house? Then did I begin to think of my former troubles;
and how well I bore them out, by bearing of a Basket. I was wont to be a
Bunnolero, a maker of Fritters, Bunnes, and Cracknels, and was now feign to
follow mine old trade afresh. It did not repent me, that I had bin in-vred to
troubles; for from them I received my relief; and it is good sometimes to take
them patiently, and willingly, to the end that they that are driven to
necessity, may the better endure them, and not sink under the burden of them,
as many do, because they have not been formerly used unto them.

And because they can never fail us in this life, but do still wait upon us,
it is fit that we should be taught how to entertain them, that we may be the
better able to bear them when they come. Besides, they make a man submit
himself to those things, wherein afterward he finds a great deal of good.
There is no affliction so bitter, from which (if thou will) thou may not in
the end suck some sweet juice; nor no pleasure so sweet, whereof thou may not
fear some bitter end, save only in that of virtue. If when I was so well
accommodated to mine own content, I had not before endured some storms of
Adversity, never in that fair weather of my Scullion-ship, should I have
known how to Sail in my putting forth from the Kitchen, but have shown my
self a raw Mariner, and fresh-water-Pylot, nor have found things so ready at
hand, where-withall to help my self in time of need.

What would then have become of me? Do thou not see how troubled, how
afflicted I should have been? and what hard shifts I should (poor wretch)
have been put to, when my Office was taken from me, not knowing which way to
turn my self, what course to take, nor where to put my head? All that I got I
either played it away, or unjustly stole it. I had bought me neither goods nor
land with it, neither house, nor clothes, nor any thing wherewithal to cover
me. All was spent and gone; As it came, so it went; in at one door, and out at
another; what I gained, that I lost; what I served for, that I waste: And as
the Proverb is; I had frutos Frutos, por pension: Quando del beneficio que vno
tiene, da todos los frutos al pensionario, aviendole Sennalado la congrua.
Conarruuias. verb. Fruto.
por pension, my fruits allotted me. Of evils, whereof the least is the best,
for all these misfortunes that befell me, my main stock was still remaining
with me, to wit, my lost shame. For what should a poor man do with shame?
Bashfulnesse brings in no benefit. And the less shame I had, the less did
those errors grieve me, which I committed. I was now well known to all the
Town, and I had money in my purse to buy me a Basket; but before I would
resolve to saddle it to my back, I did night and day visit my Masters friends
and acquaintance, to see if any of them would have pity of me, and take me
into their service. For I had learned now a little skill, and would have been
glad to have bettered my knowledge, that I might know how to live another day.
Some of them did relieve me a little, intertaining me with a piece of bread, or
so.

But it seemed, they had heard such things of me, that they quickly dismissed
me, having no mind in the world to receive me into their service. Might
ouercomes Right: And where force prevails, there the Law goes to (b) Donde
la-Fuerca oprime, La Ley se quiebra.
vvracke.

With these diligences that I used, I had performed my duty, and complyde with
that, whereunto I was bound, that I might not accuse my self hereafter, of
returning to my former course of life, out of mere idleness, and for the
avoiding of labor, and that I might not work and take pains for my living.
But I assure thee, that I loved it then, as one that had experience what Vice
was; and knew very well, that by so much one man is more man then another, by
how much the more he labors in some honest course of life. As the contrary may
be said of him that is idle. But a man can do no more then he can do; I did
my endeavor. Nor do I know how it comes to pass, that we desiring to be good,
yet we never come to be so; and though we propose it daily and hourly unto our
selves, yet we do not put it in execution We still desire to be good, but
never are good. And the reason why?
in many years; nay, not in all our lifetime are we able to reach unto it.
And the reason is, because, we either will not, or we do not think upon any
thing but the present. I began to bear my burdens, I did eat what was
needful, (for I never made my belly, my God) and a man ought not to eat more,
then what may suffice for the preserving of life. The excess whereof is
brutishness. For it is the Beast that gluts himself to grow fat.

By this my orderly diet, and moderate feeding, my mind was not dulled, my
body was not weakened, I did nourish no ill humors, I did breed no diseases,
Orderly diet, a wholesome thing.
I had my health, I was sound and lusty, and never wanted money to play.

In my drinking, I was very temperate, never using it but when I must needs,
and then too very sparingly; seeking to proportion my self to what was
necessary; and to moderate my self in some measurable manner, as well, for
that Moderate drinking, healthful. The contrary, hurtful.
it was a thing natural unto me, and agreeable to my disposition; as also for
that drunkenness, did (me thought) very ill become my Companions: Who
depriving themselves of the sense and reason of men, fall sick and ill: their
heads turn to aching; their tongues, to hoarsenesse; their breathes, to
shortness, if not to noisomeness; their eyes, to a swollen settlednesse, and
dullness of Porters, and Basket-bearers, are for the most part, a base and
brutish kind of people.
look; their legs, to making of Congees and Honors; their feet, to tripping
of it this way, and that way, with counter-paces, now backward, then forward,
as the Morris-bels in their brains should devise them their tune. But (which
exceeds all other mischiefs) this inhumane and sottish Vice makes them a
May Game to children, a laughing stock to men, and a scorn to all the world.
Such as these are Rogues, and for such, let them go, for they are no better
then Rogues. And I do not wonder at it. For all baseness whatsoever is
engraven on their foreheads, and is made just fit to their measure, as being
the off-scumme and refuse of men.

But for men of worth, and such as stand upon their credit, as great and noble
A (...) for Noble men, and Gentle^.
Persons, and Gentlemen of quality, who ought to abstain from these
disorders; let them take heed, how they give any such scandal, to vvrong their
Reputation.

But for a Churchman to disorder himself, nay, but to go a haires-breadth
The like for Churchmen.
awry in this kind: for such a one (I say) it is not only a disorder, but he
comes within the compass of being noted for a scandalous person, and a wronger
of his profession, which cannot but resound much to his reproach. Let them
themselves be their own Judges, and speak what they think of it, when they
see themselves thus ouer-taken. Do they not, for to maintain their
absurdities, seek to excuse themselves by idle and foolish reasons, and make,
I know not what vn-ioynted sequels, by which after one error granted, they
run into a thousand: and yet persuade themselves, that they, and none but
they, are in the right? It is a sham^ to treat of it; infamy to use it; villainy
to cloak it, and a thing unworthy men, not to hate, and abhor it.

We had in the Place near unto Santa Cruz, our proper Mansion, bought, The
Marketplace, the Rogues burse.
and repaired at other men's cost. There were all the meetings and the Feasts. I
was up with the Sun, I diligently waited on those Shops, and attended often
on the Bakers; and if I wanted imploiment there, I got me into the Shables, to
see what good I could do there. I made my harvest in the morning, to serve me
all the whole day after. The Parishioners there-abouts, that had no servants of
their own for these businesses, would hyre me to carry home their provision
for them. Which I did faithfully, and diligently, without wronging them the
least hair of my head. No man of my place had more credit amongst them, or was
better trusted then my self. So that my Companions vvanted work, whilst I
had enough for my self, and some other goodfellow my friend, whom I would make
choice of to help me; who would be sure to follow me close at the elbow. Then
we were but a few of us, and we went up and down from place to place: but now
there are very many, the number is much increased, and all of them have their
hands full, and glad is he that can catch them up first. And I can assure you,
that there is not any Estate, that has more enlarged it self, then that of
the Picaro's; for all your Rogues apply themselves to the bearing of Baskets,
and carrying of Burdens, they count it a very good Trade, and these Rogues
grow proud of it. And to this pass does misfortune bring a man, that his
Infamy, he makes his glory; his Baseness, he counts his Honor; and earnest,
he turns to jest.

It so fell out, that there were certain Companies of Soldiers to be raised,
and Captains appointed for the conducting of them. Now, when any such thing
happens, it is presently spread abroad over all the Town, every corner of the
street is full of it, and every private house is made a Council of State.

Nor does that of your Picaro's sleep in the mean while; every Porter, and
(...), and Car-men, and the like base Rogues will not ^icke to talk of
State^sses.
Basket-bearer will have a hand in the Government of the Commonwealth as well
as other men; they will fall into discourse of the business, vent their
opinions, and conclude, what things ought be done, how carried, and who
fittest for the managing of these great affairs. Nor do not thou think, that
because they are base in their quality and condition, that therefore they are
the farther off from the Truth, or their intelligence the less certain. If
thou do, thou art much deceived; for it is rather the quite contrary with
them. For it oftentimes so comes to pass, that they know the essential
points of things, and participate of the secrets of State; and there is a great
deal of reason for it. For, in regard of the understanding, some there are,
nay, very many of them, who if they would apply it well, and accommodate it,
as others do, making the like use of it, have it strong and good. Besides,
sithence that they go all day long from one place to another, through diverse
streets, and into sundry houses, and being that they be so many, and so
scattered and divided over all the Town; of many, they hear many things; and
though it be usually said amongst us; Quantas Cabecas tantos pareceres.
Quot capita, tot sensus. So many men, so many minds. And though happily one,
or say a hundred, should shoot wide of the mark, and discharge the follies of
their idle brains; yet doubtless, there are others again, that discourse
wisely, and will come very near unto, if not hit the Pin.

Now we (having raked together all the news of the whole Town) when we are
met together, and are sitting at our supper, every man opens his store, and
tells what has past in Court, some relating one thing, and some another.
Besides, there is not that Victualing-house or Tavern, but whatsoever has
been talked of there, is brought to our ears. For there likewise are held
your open Courts, and public Assemblies, where all questions and doubts are
winowed and sifted to the full, nothing escapes their search and inquiry;
There they limit the Turks power, reform Councels, and tax your Ministers of
State.

In a word, there all things are made known, there all things are treated of,
and they are the Law-giuers, that prescribe rules to all; for they speak all
out of Bacchus his own mouth, having Ceres for their Ascendent, conuersing In
Vino ve^itas.
with a full belly, and a free heart, and if the Wine Si el Vino es nueuo,
hierue la tinaja.
be new, the Vessel will run over, it must needs work, and can no longer
hold. With that then, which we have learned from others, we come afterward to
sit and determine of every particular passage, every man according to his
several opinion, setting down his several censure. One while we resolve,
that these Companies are to march toward Italy; and that went for good, and
past the more current amongst us, because their Banners were advanced toward
Mancha, and were now far entered into that Country, passing from Almodouar
and Argamafilla, along the skirts of the Kingdom of Toledo, till they had got
to Alcala do Henares, and Guadalajara, compassing all the way as they went, the
Mediterranean Sea.

Me thought, this was a very good occasion for me to take hold on, for the
Guzman, desirous to pass out of Spain into Itahe.
executing of my former desires, which with earnest longings did mightily
spur me on to undergo this Voyage, that I might know mine own blood, and
whence I was descended, how I was allied, and of what quality my Parents and
Kindred were. But I was so tottered and torn, and so utterly unprovided of all
things for this my intended journey, that the bridle of Reason made me stop
upon my course, and held me back from going farther forward, it seeming unto
me (upon better deliberation) a thing impossible to be effected. But
notwithstanding, my mind ran still on nothing else.

This was still in my head, and I could not beat it out. In the day time it
was my study; and in the night I dreamed still on that, and nothing but that.
And if that Roman Proverb takes place (Si quieres ser Papa, estampalo en la
testa) if thou mindest to be Pope, thou must have him writ in thy Pr^.
forehead: it was truly verified in me. For, as I was beating my brains about
this business, tossing them a thousand times to and fro, full of this
solicitous care* I sat me down on the one side of the Place, near unto one
of the Shops, where my self, and this my other Associate were wont to make
our Rendeuo^s; And leaning my cheek (in a melancholy manner) upon my hand,
being fully resolved to go, though it were but in the place of a stragler, to
wait upon the Soldiers, and to carry their luggage for them, thinking this
would be place good enough for me, if I could not light on a better.

Whilst I was devising this with my self, on the sudden I heard a voice,
which said; Guzman, Guzmanillo? I looked about, and turned my face toward the
place, from whence the voice came. And I perceived at last, it was a Grocer,
that stood under the walking place underset with Pillars, that called me unto
him, near adjoining to the Butcher-row. I held up my hand, and made a sign
unto him, that I would hasten thither. I got me up, and came to see, what he
would with me. He spoke unto me, and bid me open my Basket. I did so. That no
sooner done, but he throws me into it, about some two thousand five hundred
Royals in Silver and Gold, and in some few Quartes. I asked him; To what
Brasier I should carry this Copper? Copper, you rogue? Come, up, and away with
it, for I must go pay it to a Merchant a Guzman resolves to ^cale a sum of
money, and puts it in execution.
stranger, that has sold me some Wares at my shop.

He said one thing, and I thought another: which was, to show him a trick at
the next turning. And believe me, the joyful news of a desired birth, did
never come more welcome to the ears of a loving Father: Nor the Mariner beaten
by tempest, did with more joy discover on the sudden the Harbor, that he
sought to put into: Nor any rendered Town, to that famous Captain that
besieged it, gave so much content, nor had so sweet a sound with it, or
afforded so pleasing an Accent; as I conceived then in my soul, hearing that
sweet and melodious voice of my Grocer, when he said, The Spanish word is
Capacha: a Capacitate.
Open thy Basket. Me thought it was a brave word, they were letters of Gold
engraven in my heart, leaving it full of joy, but much more when they had
qualified themselves, by actually putting me into a quiet and peaceable
possession of that, which I was persuaded would be my best remedy.

Upon this luckie encounter, I began already to dispose of this money, and to
change my course of life. I laded my shoulders with it, faining; that it did
weigh very heavy, but my heaviness was the more, that there was no more of it.
My honest Grocer, he (good man) goes before, and I follow after, but with a
wondrous desire to meet with some throng, or press of people in some street or
other, or to slip aside into some house, where I might effect my purpose.
Fortune (as good luck was) had, in the very nicke, fitted me with one, just
according to the measure of my desire. For if I would have wished for an
opportunity, I could not have desired a fairer. For as I was entering into the
principal Gate, I got me away some three streets from thence by a blind
Posterne door, and fetching boords from one corner to another, with somewhat a
quick, but not discomposed pace, that I might the better avoid all suspicion.
I went away gallantly, winding this way, and turning that way, till I had got
to A chief Gate so called.
Puerta la Rega, where I eased my self of my load, and made down to the
River. From thence I crossed over to A house of pleasure belonging to the King of
Spain, not far from Madrid.
Casa del Ca^po, and being helped by the night, I walked (through a little
thicket of Alder trees, Poplars, and other well-growne bushes of thorn) a
League farther: in the thickest part whereof I cast Ankor, and had now pitched
my Standard, that I might with mature counsel think upon things to come, and
what fruit and benefit I might make of my late purchase. For it is not enough
to begin well, nor to go on well, but to end well. For to little use serve
good beginnings, and better proceedings, unless they be crowned with
prosperous endings. What good would this theft have done me, if I had been
taken with it, but to lose that, and with it, perhaps my ears, if not to have
been The Spanish p^se is, aver comprado un cabo de anno. i. La memoria y
sufragios, que se hazen por el difunto, cumplido el anno que murio. That is,
the (...) and suffrages, which are made for the de^, the year being fully
(...) after his (...). Couarruuias. Verb. C^o.
hanged for my labor, if I had been of years? There I entered into
consultation with my self, what I were best to do: I made trial where the
water was deepest, and there where the bushes were thickest, I made a deep
hole; and wrapping the money in the linings of my breeches and my doublet, I
put it in, covering it over very handsomely with sand and stones; setting up a
mark, that I might not forget the place where I had hid it, hankering
there-abouts, that I might ever and anon have an eye upon it, for the space of
almost fifteen days: And all because I would not trouble my self hereafter
in seeking for it some two foot nearer or farther off, which would have been
as bad as death unto me, if I should not have happened to light upon it, as soon
as ever I had thrust in my hand. And the rather, for that some nights I went
from thence to the neighboring places there-abouts, to get me some victuals
for three or four days, returning presently back again to my old haunt,
keeping my self close, after the Sun once began to peep forth, in that Wood
adjoining to the Pardo is a house of pleasure, seated in a Wood, belonging to
the King of Spain, near to Madrid. It comes from the word Pardes, Par adisus,
id est, hortus domesticus arboribus consitus, Pomarium. And amongst other
significations, it is taken for a Park. Genebrard upon the Cantic. says,
Pards vocabulum est Persicum, quod in omnes fere linguas manauit pro horto
pretioso and delicioso omnium arborum genere consito. Couarruuias. Verb. Pardo.
Pardo.

Hither, in this manner as you see, had I with-drawne my self, till the Hue
and Cry were past and gone, which undoubtedly was made after me. Now by this
time, they had lost my footing, and I conceiving with my self, that the Coast
was now clear, and that I might safely pass, that I might remove my Tent, and
march forward, I made me up a little fardle of the old linings that were left
of my Ierkin, wherein I had closely lapt up this my heart-blood. So that I had
nothing now left me, save the old linings of my Breeches, a poor ragged
Doublet, and a Shirt all torn and full of holes, but all as white and clean
as a curd, for I had lately washed them. So that I was apparelled all in white,
being wonderful well fitted for to make up one in a The Spanish phrase, is
Danca de espadas. A dance much used in the Kingdom of Toledo; they dance it in
their shirts, and Breec^es of Linen, and night. Caps on their heads, and
bright Swords; it is full of changes, and one amongst the rest, which they call
Degollada; proque cercan el cuello del que los quia con las espadas, y quando
parece que se la van a cortar por todos parts, se les escurre de enter ellas.
(...) sieve, (...). Couarru.
Morris-dance. I got me two delicate fine walking Cudgels, which I had cut my
self, and pill'd off the Rind, and made as smooth and neat as could be
devised. On the one, I hung the precious bundle, which I bare at my back; the
other I made a Truncheon of it, to carry in my hand. I was now fat and full
fed, and began to grow weary of being any longer a Conie in that Warren,
fearing lest one of the Keepers, or some other Ferreter, should find me there
in the Berrie, and pull me out as a suspicious person; To prevent that, I began
to take my journey by night, when it was dark, going out of the rode-way,
taking cross, paths, by-places, and untrodden tracks, passing through La Sagra
de Toledo, a certain Territory belonging to that kingdom, till I came two
leagues beyond it, to a little place that stood in a bottom called Acuqueica,;
whither I had reached betimes in the morning. There I rested my self under the
shadow of certain Quince-trees, where I meant to spend that day. Where e're I
was aware, I found hard by me a pretty young stripling, much about my pitch.
He seemed to be some Citizens son, who out of some vn-aduised consideration
as mine was, had forsaken his Parents to travel abroad, and go see the world;
He carried his Fardle at his back, and being but a young nouice, bred up
daintily, and newly taken from his mothers teat, the Milk yet hanging on his
lips, was weary of his burden, and himself seemed heavy, in having so
heavy a load: sure, he had no great mind to return home again to his
friends; and as little, that they should find him out. He walked as I did, in
the day through Groves and thickets, and in the night along the highway,
seeking covert, where to shrowde himself. Which the rather I ghes^e to be so,
for that, from our arrinall there, until it were night, that we were to
depart, he did not budge a foot from the place where I was. When we were to go
our ways, taking up his Fardle very heavily, he let it fall again to the
ground, saying, Gods curse go with thee, a little thing would make me to
leave thee here behind me.

Now, I must tell you by the way, that we had had some talk together before,
and exchanged (as occasion offered) good store of words, taking account one of
another of our Voyages, and what, and whence we were; He did not deal truly
with me, and I would not confess my self to him; For by mine own lies, I
knew those that he told me. And so we were both paid in our own coin. All
that I could suck from him, was; that he acquainted me with his wants.

Now finding the coniuncture good, and the distaste great, which he had taken
at that heavy burden which he bore at his back; but much more, that his purse
was so light, I began to conjecture with my self, that it might happily be a
suit of clothes: Whereupon, I asked him, what luggage was that he carried,
which did give him so much trouble, and made him so weary? He^ told me it was a
suit of apparel. This suited well with my desires; the induction (me thought)
was good. Thereupon, I proceeded farther, and told him; Sir, I could give you
reasonable good counsel, if you would be willing to accept of it. He
entreated me to give it him, and that finding it to be such, he should be very
thankful unto me for it.

My advice then unto him, was; That since he went laden with that, which as yet
he had no great need of, nor would it much import him, if he had, that he
should rid himself of it, and have recourse to that, which might be more
necessary for him. Here you carry a wardrop, or what else so ever it be, about
you; I would wish to sell it, and put it in your purse; for besides that it
will weigh less, you shall make your profit of the money you shall receive for
it.

The young Youth discreetiy replyde, (for your Toledanos have passing good
wits:) This advice of yours I like well, and would follow it; but I hold it
impertinent for the present. And Consejo, sin remedio, es cuerpo sin alma.
Counsel, without a cure, is a body, without a Soul. What does it import me to
sell Prou^b.
it, if I want a Chapman to buy it? I have no occasion to go into any Town,
either to truck for it, or to sell it, and no body will buy it of me, that
does not know me.

Then I demanded of him; what pieces they were that he had in his pack? He
told, they were certain clothes for change, when he was minded to ^hift those
others that he had on his back. I asked him of the color, and whether it had
been much worn? He answered me, that it was a mingled color, and
reasonable good. This pleased me better and better, I could not dislike of it:
Thereupon, I offered him present payment, if the clothes did fit me.

The Youth began to look sadly upon me, as one that had been struck into a
muze, and fell to eye me from top to toe; for all that I had on my back, was
not worth so much thread as would serve to bind up a farthing-worth of Saffron,
it was not worth one poor small Comin-seed, and yet I should have the face to
offer him money for his clothes.

This imagination was mine own; and it may be, it entered into his conceit,
that I was a little young thief, and that I would put some trick or other
upon him. For he stood in suspense, consulting with himself, whether he were
best to show them unto me, or no? For he knew not how to trust me. And my
fashion was then such, that he could not hope, nor surmize, that any good
thing should come from me. So much difference is there between good and bad
clothes, that it gives either a good or a badde presumption of a man's person,
according to that old Adage; Qual te hallo, tal te juzgo. As I find you, so I
take you. For where knowledge does not inform, there the habit does qualify.
But this Proverb is often checked: Que debaxo ^e mala capa, (...) ^uer buen
v^dor. Under a threadbare cloak, lies many times much learning. And beggarly
bottles oftentimes hold rich Wines. I did presently Prou.
apprehend his thought, as if I had been within him; And that I might reduce
him to a better opinion of me, and alter his conceit, I said unto him; My
pretty little Youth, I would have you know, that I am as good a man as your
self, and every way as well borne, though I have forborne till now to give you
account what I am; but because thou may lay aside all fears and iealousies,
I am now minded thou shall have it. My native soil is Burgos; there was I
borne, and thence did I set forth, (as thou do now,) reasonable well
acoutred. I have already done that, which I now advise thee unto: I sold my
clothes, as having then no need of them, and with that money which I had for
them, together with that which I brought from home, I will buy me other, when I
shall come, where I have occasion to use them. And by being careful in looking
well to my money, (hiding it in some secret place about me,) and by traveling
upon the way in these tottered rags, (which I now have on) I secure my life,
and pass freely to and fro.

For no man will set upon him that is poor. He lives safely, and dwells A
poor man li^es secure from harm.
in places vn-peopled, and dis-inhabited, without any fear at all of thieves
that should come to rob him, or murderers to assault him on the way, and take
his life from him. If therefore you have any mind to it, sell me what you
have no need of, and doubt not my payment, for I am well able to do it. I am
near to Toledo, whither I am bound; I would gladly go in a little handsomer,
and not in this base and vile habit that I have now about me. The Youth undid
his Fardle, takes me out a Cloak, a pair of Breeches, a Cassocke, two Shirts,
and a pair of Silk Stockins, all as fit for me, as if they had been made of
purpose for me.

I agreed with him for a hundred Royals, nor were they worth any more; for
although the clothes were well used, and little worn, yet the cloth was none
of the finest. I ripped open the one side of my bundle, and took out thence as
many Q^rtes as served the turn; which gave him no small trouble, when he
perceived the baseness of the money; for though it went against his stomach to
bear any more burdens, yet he could by no means excuse it. But he comforted
himself with this, that it was lighter then the other, and more use full upon
all occasions. The bargain ended, we shook hands, and parted. He went to
seek his fortune, I know not whither. And I that night, though late, entered
Toledo.

CHAPTER VIII.
How Guzman de Alfarache, clothing himself like a Gallant in Toledo, makes
love to certain Gentle-women: He tells how things past with them, and how
there, and in Malagon they scorned him; He discourses of youthful iollity,
and of the craft and subtil^y of your Spanish women; which may serve for an
Instruction, and warning to all young men.

IT is a common saying; Q^ aunque vistan a la mona de seda, mona se queda. An
Ape, though he be cladde in gold, will Prou.
be an Ape still. And this is so infallibly true, that it admits no
exception. A man may easily alter his Habit, but hardly change his evil
conditions. He may intertaine and deceive folks with his clothes, though he
himself be stark naked, and stripped of all goodness. I will presently turn
Gallant, and as soon return again to my old trade; be a Gentleman to day to
morrow a Porter. For, he that knows not how to live by the sweat of his
b^owes, must quickly fall into poverty, as you shall see in the sequel of this
Story.

The first thing that I did the next morning, was the altring of my Doublet, my
Shoes, and my Hat; I took off that Taffata, that was on the Cape of my Guzman
comes to Toledo, and puts himself into handsome apparel
Cloak, and put on other of another color; I clapped new buttons upon my
Ca^sock; I took off the sleeves that were of Cloth, and in their stead set to
others, that were of Silk: so that with a little cost, I had quite altered the
fashion of those clothes I had lately bought; fearing lest for my sinnes-sake,
or by some other misfortune, I might be taken in some trap, and so come to pay
both for this, and the last years reckning. For if (by chance) this young
Youths friends should send after him, and make inquiry for him, and should hap
to light upon me, and find his clothes on my back, they would presently
suspect, that I had killed him to get his clothes, and so demand their lost
child of me, and drive me to give them an account, what was become of him.

When I had fitted my self to my mind, I walked up and down the City some
two days together, making inquiry, where, or in what place were any Companies
of Soldiers, that were to go upon service, but could not of any hear any
certain news. Thus I went beating the air, as one that was idle, and had
nothing else to do.

And as I past by Socodouer is the great Marketplace in Toledo. Compounded of
Saca, that is a place; and dequeuir, which signifies, great; which put
together, makes Sacadqueuir, and by corruption Socodouer. Diego de Vrrea says,
it comes from Sacud de va^r. A word compounded of Scicun, which is, a place;
and of the Verb Saca, which is to draw* and from deuair, which signifies all
kind of sou^efooted Beasts for burden. So that Socodouer, is as it were a
place, where beasts are broug^t laden with ^ctuals, and other provision, to
sell in the open Market. Couarrunias.
Socodouer, (which I crossed but seldom, and that with fear: and if I went out
of my lodging, it was against my will, and that late, not sleeping three nights
in one place, lest, if any man should chance to know me, I might be apprehended
and carried to prison:) it was my hap to see a Gentleman, mounted on a Mule, to
cross the way, going (as it should seem) to the Court, so handsomely clad,
and so well suited, that I did envy his gallantry. His breeches were of Murry
Velvet, cut with somewhat a long, but delicate fine cut, drawn out upon Cloth
of Silver: His doublet of Cloth of Gold, upon which he had a Buffe Ierkin, laid
on with a costly Milane-Lace, some three fingers broad. He had a brave Hat,
answerable to the rest, imbroidered about the brimmes, and well set forth with
it is Feather, and was not a little graced by the Hat-band, which was set
thick with Gold-Buttons, inammeled with black.

This Gentleman rode A man is said to be en Cuerpo, when he goes without a
cloak, being in his bare Hose and D^. Guzmans vain and idl^ humor.
en cuerpo, in his Hose and Doublet. But in his Port-Manteau he had a Cloak,
which (if I be not deceived) was of Rash, or else of fine Cloth, oflike color
to his Hose, rounded about, with a broad Parchment Gold Lace, suitable to that
of his Ierkin. These good clothes of his set an edge on my appetite. And
seeing I had not got my money by Thrashing, but came by it so easily, it began
to laugh and tighie in my purse, it geered and it fleered, and (like a little
young Devil) went gingle, gingle, gingle.

When I saw my purse was set upon this merry pin, I could hold no longer for my
heart, but brake presently with him, and told him in good earnest, If you have
a mind to dance, I shall not stick to pype unto you: And if you will not
lead on merrily of your own accord, I shall be as loath to keep you any
longer company. And therefore I would wish you to accomplish this my desire,
satisfying me herein, and that quickly, without any farther delay.

Heerevpon I went forthwith to a Merchants shop, bought all things fitting,
called a Tailor unto me, and caused him to cut out my clothes, who made such
good haste, that he was (as the phrase is) ni oydo, ni visto; neither heard,
nor seen. It was finished in a trice, before any words were made of it, or
any eye had seen it. For in three days, he brought it me home, and put it on
my back; being just the same with the other, and as like, as like could be,
all save the Buffe Ierkin, which because I could not meet with a good one
according to my mind, I made me one of Murrey Satin, trimmed with trensi^s of
Gold. My Garters were of Straw-colour, fringed about with Gold Lace, and purled
with Spangles. So that now I did scarce know my self; I was grown so fine on
the sudden; all was in very good order, and my self not a little proud of it.

Now I had no more to do, but to set a good face on the matter: and to say the
truth, for a good face; when I was a Boy, there were few that had a better. For
I was very vvell-fauour'd, my eye quick, and my countenance throughout very
pleasing. When I saw what a gallant Soldier I was grown, I did proudly iet it
about the streets of Toledo, in a very good Equipage, as if I had been the
son of some principal Man of note. I likewise entertained to attend on my
person, a pretty handsome Page, and well clad; and I fell into acquaintance
with one that was well skilled in the fashions of that Country, and spoke
excellent language.

I conceited then with my self (seeing my self thus inthronized, and so well
accoutred) that my Father was alive again, and that I was restored to those
prosperous times, wherein I was borne: I thought my self the happiest man in
the world, and took such delight in my gay clothes, that a nights I was loath
to put them off, and a days, I left no street untrodden, to the end that all
might see me; though I would not, that any should know me. I got me up betimes
one Sunday morning, put on a proud and stately gate, and in all this my
gallantrie stepped me with a jolly presence into the Cathedral Church, for to
hear Mass, though (let me whisper it in your ear) I went thither more (I
fear me) for ostentation, then devotion; not so much to hear, as to be seen.
I walked round about the Church some three or four times at least; I visited
the Chapels, (which were most resorted unto) till at last I came between the
two Quires, where I staid: There I saw many Ladies and Gentlewomen, and a great
many of Gallants. But I did strut and The Spaniard has naturally a proud kind
of gate.
set forth my self, as if I had been the only Cock of the game, and all the
rest Crauens; none of their combs nor feathers were so goodly (me thought) as
mine own. I did put them down all for a brave suit of clothes. And like a
bonny-Shepheard, made show of all the whole fleece, as one that was very
willing, that they should take a general survey both of my person, and
Apparel, not debarring their eyes of those lesser objects, as my girdle,
garters, and shoo-ties, which were all del Tudesco, curious and delicate work,
right Flanders.

I stretched forth my neck, bore out my breast, stood stiff upon my legs,
advancing one while this, and then that other foot; carrying my self in that
vain and idle fashion, that every one at last had found me out, and observing
the strangeness of my looks my Mimick gestures, and often change of Postures,
they began to jest and scoff at my folly. But as long as they looked upon me, I
never looked into that; nor did I so much as once perceive, that my faults were
the strings whereon their laughter played. But I rather thought with my self,
that they did admire my curiosity, and my gallantrie.

And this is all, that offers it self to be spoken of concerning the men. But
a pretty accident happened unto me amongst the women, not unworthy such fools
as my self; and this it was: Two amongst the rest were present there at that
time, one of the which (being borne in that City, and of extraordinary
beauty) fixed her eyes upon my person, (or to speak more truly) upon my
purse; persuading her self, that I that had such good clothes, could not
choose but have good store of money. But for the present, I took no notice of
that, nor did I care to cast an eye toward her, because I had swallowed the
others bait, that sat on the other side. Who having made (as children use to
do) some signs unto her with my finger, smild upon me, and cast a kind of
Guzman caught with a look, and a smile.
sly look toward me. I thought that was enough, and that the goal was
already gotten. I perseuered in my ignorance, and she in her cunning carriage,
till that going out of the Church, she went home to her house, and I after her,
walking leisurely along. I ventured upon her, and falling into discourse with
her, vented some of my fooleries: But she, (as if she had been made of stone)
answered me not a word, nor risented nothing that I said unto her: yet for all
this she did not stick now and then to turn her head aside toward me, and to
discover her face unto me, which was the fire, that did burn me alive. At last
we come to a street, near unto the Solana, Corredor de Sol. Solarium. Verb:
Solana. Couan ^uias
Solana of St. Cyprian, where she dwelt. And as she entered into her house, it
seemed (stooping to go in) that she made me a kind of reverence and courtsie
with her head; and me thought hereies laughed as it were upon me, and her
countenance showed it self very cheerful. With this (for this time) I left
her, and returned back to my lodging the same way I came. But I had not gone
many steps, but it was my hap to spy a young Wench that had taken up her
standing at the corner of the street, who had wrapped her self up so close in
her Mantle, that you could scarce perceive the eyes of her. This Wench had
dogged me, and putting The cunning of your Spanis^ women.
only forth those her two lesser fingers of her fair hand, with them and her
head, she called and beckned me unto her. I came unto her, to know what she
would be pleased to command me. Who made a long discourse unto me, telling me
that she was servant to such a married Gentlewoman, a woman of very good
fashion, and principal quality, to whom I was much obliged, and could not out
of nobleness, but think my self much bound unto her, for the extraordinary
love which she bare unto me.

And therefore, as well in regard of this her good affection toward my self,
as also in respect of her own condition, (being so great and so worthy) and
the strength of her Alliance and Kindred, which were men of no mean power and
estimation in those parts; that I would be pleased to acquaint her where I
lodged, because she had some earnest business to treat with me, and must needs
speak with me, for it did much concern her so to do. I was so taken with
this, that I had much ado (as they say) to keep my self from leaping out of
mine own skin; nor would I have changed this good fortune of mine, with the
best that ever befell Alexander the Great: Soothing and flattering my self
with this vain conceit, that all the Ladies and Gentlewomen in the Town were
fallen in love with me, and now began to strive who should enjoy me first.

To this her message, I returned a very grave and demure answer, with a
grateful acknowledgement of this her offered (though undeserved) favor, which
when she shall be pleased to make me worthy thereof, I shall think my self
not only the most graced, but the most fortunate, and happiest man in the
world. In this conversation, by little and little, we draw near to my Lodging.
She took notice of it, and leave being taken each of other, I get me in to
dinner, for it was more then time.

Now, for that I knew not what this Gentlewoman was, and had never seen her
heretofore (to my knowledge) my longing was not so great to look after her, as
was my desire to see this other. I thought every hour a thousand year, till I
might come to see her again; Time (me thought) was too slow of wing, his
Glass did not run fast enough, his Sith did not sweep away the loytring
hours half so speedily, as I could have wished. Yet at last I hie me to the
street where she dwelt, bestowing there more turns, and circling more rounds
about her house, then a Mill-horse, or a Mule that draws in an Anoria, is an
engine that goes with wheels, to draw water out of a Well. Some would have it
to come from Anno, a year. For as the Sun passing through the twelve Signs,
causes the year, and brings it abo^t anew: So that Wheel, when it is down
at the l^est, comes about abo^t. Some say it is compounded ded of am, circum;
and haurio, taking up the water as it turns about. Others, of (...), sursum
and (...), fluo, because it causes the water below, to come up. Others from
the w^rd Annuere, To incline. Others, from (...) Reftauro, restituo, renouo.
Because when they are empty, they come to be filled afresh. Others of the
word, (...), Haustoria, which signifies Anoria, quasi Antloria. Of the Verb
Antlo, antlas. Diego de Vrrea says, it is an Arabicke word, of the Verb
Neuare, to go round, making a noise, as Anoria does. Padre Guadix, that it is
called Noria, from Naaura, which is as much as a wheel^g, or turning about.
Couarru.
Anoria; yet at last, when it grew somewhat late, and the day shut up, she came
forth (as by stealth) to talk with me from her window. Then did we enter
discourse, and exchanged many words; at last she told me, that I must needs
that night come and sup with her. I commanded my servant to provide me a good
fat Capon, a brace of Partridge, a baked Conie, a bottle of the Wine Vino del
Santo, a rich kinds of ^ine, as famous about Toledo; as that of Ayon Na^tueil
in France.
del Santo, and as good bread as could be got for money, fruits and other the
like things for the latter course, and that he should make haste, and bring
them away with him.

Afcer that the night was well in, thinking it was now high time, I went to the
place appointed, where I was kindly received, and entertained with all the
kindness and courtesy that could be devised. It was now a fit hour for
supper, and therefore entreated her, that she would command the Table to be
covered. But she finding out fresh matter to work upon, and spending the time
in new entertainements, spunne out the thread still longer and longer, adding
one delay to another; I maruail'd a God what she meant by it; I knew not in the
world what to make of it.

At last, whilst I was musing upon it, she puts me into a Labyrinth, beginning
to tell me that she was a Virgin, her descent Noble, her condition and
quality, of those of the best rank, and that she had a brother, an unruly
young fellow, ill governed, and worse-condition'd, subject to swaggering, and
to quarrelling; a kind of roaring-Boy; one that never came within doors,
unless it were sometimes to his dinner or his supper, and all the rest both
day and night, he spent in play, and other youthful pleasures.

Whilst we were in this deep discourse, behold, one knocks aloud at the
door. She cries out, Ay me! what shall I do? I am undone, I am undone. So
much was she moved, so distractedly troubled with this feigned perturbation, so
good a face did she set upon this falsehood, and did dissemble this her passion
so handsomely, that she might have therewith deceived a wiser, and better
experienced man then my self. And though this Gentlewoman knew very well, both
the end and the means, whereby all this business was to be carried, yet did
she play her part so well, that she seemed to be mightily afflicted, as one
that knew not which way to turn her self. And as if then presently that
remedy had occurred unto her, (as a thing suddenly thought upon) she desired
me of all loves to put my self for a while into a Tinaja, a large wide Vessel
of earth, as big as a Tun. Antonius draws it is Etymology from Tinea. Alio
nomine, Dolium. In Spain they usually fill them with water, with Oil; with
Wine, or the like.
Tinaja, that had no water in it, yet was it not without some droppings, and a
kind of sliminesse hanging about the sides of it, and that none of the
cleanest. This earthen Vessel stood in the outward Court under the Porch. I
got in as well as I could, as willing to do what she would have me; she claps
a Lid over it, and when she had lo done, she returns to her Estrado, she was
scarce set, but her brother comes in; who seeing such a great smoke in the
house, said unto her; Why how now sister, what mean you by this? are you
turned Gallant, and think to out-braue me with this smoke? it is marvel you
do not let the rain drip in to drive me hence. What have we to supper? so
much smoke must promise much good cheer. It is not I trow, a great deal of
fire (as they say) and a little roast.

And as he went thus talking along, he entered into the Kitchen; where he had no
sooner seen our provision, but he gets him out again, saying; Here Is brave
doings indeed; it is news to see this, Sister. Which of us two, I pray, is to
be married this night? How came this hither into the house, and when? What
curious banquet is this, or who the guests that are invited unto it? Is this
the confidence I have had of you? Is this the honor which I maintain? and
this the reputation, that you give to your Fathers house, and to me your
unfortunate brother? I must know the truth of this business, or else it is
like to be a black night. She excused her self unto him, but how or which
way, I cannot tell you; for partly through fear, and partly because the T^naja
was covered, I could not well either hear or understand more then the noise
which her words sent forth. And in this chollericke humor of his, being much
offended with her, he willed her to sit down at board. And when they had supt,
he in his own person went down with a Candle, and fell to searching of the
house, and had made fast the door, that opened out into the street: And they
two entering together into their private chambers, remained there within, and I
without in the Tinaja. All this while I was very attentive to whatsoever was
said or done, and earnestly betook my self to my devotions, insomuch, that
there was not any one prayer that I had learned all my lifetime, that I did
not tun over and over, that God might blind his eyes, and that he might not
see where I was.

And finding my self out of danger, lifting up the cover, I thrust out my head
a little to see whether my Mistress were coming, or that I could hear her
either cough, or spet, whether any Cat were stirring about the house, or any
thing else whatsoever. Every thing that moved, my mind still gave me that it
should be she. But seeing that she staid so long away, and that the house was
wonderful quiet, I leapt out of the belly of my Tinaja, like another Jonas out
of the Whales, though not so clean as I could wish.

But it was my good hap, that for fear of such mischances, which are wont to
happen, especially to young men, I had reserved my better clothes for the day,
making use a nights of that old Suit, which I had bought before, so that the
care I took was not great, and it did so much the less grieve me. I ranged
round about the house, and went from lodging to lodging, till I came at last to
her Chamber, where I began with my finger to scratch the door, like a dog;
and did the like upon the floor, and all that she might hear me: but this
deaf Adder, was of that evil condition, that she had stopped her ears.

In this kind of language the night wore away, and the day began to appear:
which when I perceived, enraged, afflicted, desperate, and ready to freeze for
cold, opening the street door, and pulling it after me, I went forth (like a
fool as I was) cursing and blaspheming, The Spanish (...), Echando mantas, y
no de lano. Casting abroad C^rless, but not of Wool: i. vs^ hayry and ^sh ^ds,
(...) mild ^d (...) words, like wool.
fretting and fuming, and making crosses on the wall, with a purpose never to
come there any more.

Musing upon my misfortunes, I drew near to mine own lodging, finding not
far from thence a Cooks shop open, where I filled my belly with Pyes, such
as are eaten by such Picaros and Rogues, as my self, which were to me more
sauoury, then any other. And with them, that rage, and wrathful choler
descended down into my stomach, which stuck before in my throat, and was
ready to choke me. My lodging was near at hand, I called to my servant, who
(waiting there for me) opened the door; I came in, put off my clothes, and
got me to bed. But the remembrance of the wrong that I had received, would not
suffer me to sleep, nor to take any rest. One while I condemned my self,
another while my Mistress, and by fits would lay the blame upon mine own ill
fortune.

And while I was debating these things with my self, it being now broad day,
behold, one knockes at my Chamber door, and it was the Maid that had dogged me
the day before, and her Mistress with her, who was no sooner come in, but she
sets her self down in a Chair, close by my bedside, and her This is an
ordinary fashion in Spain.
servant that waited on her, sat upon the ground near unto the door. The
Gentlewoman asked me along Story of my life; Who I was? what my business? and
how long I stayed in Town? But the Devil a word of truth, that she could get
from my mouth. All that I told her, were arrant lies; for I was made of nothing
else. And thinking to deceive her, she caught me in the trap. I went satisfying
of her demands, but fell short (I know not how) in that part of mine account,
which concerned me most. For, whereas I should have said, That I was to reside
there some certain months. I told her that I past as a Traveler, and was
shortly to be gone. She, that she might not lose the advantage of the Dice, and
to show what a poor gamester I was, in seeking after such tr^sitorie sport,
that was to last so little awhile, (but a cast, and away) made sure account, if
I would but set out her hand lively, to put a trick upon me. And thereupon,
she presently began to pitch the Hay, wherewith she meant ^o catch the Conie.

Thus resolved, she carelessely, (or rather with a great, deal of careless
care) w^nt discovering her bravery in her clothes, which was neat and
delicate, with rich abillir^ts of Gold, withother things under her gown, which
was of Naples Grogram, choyser Silk all Italy was not able to afford.

And taking out certain Beads of Coral out of her pocket, she made show of
playing with them in her hand, tossing them to and fro; and within a little
while after, she feigned that she mist a Relicke, which was fastened thereunto.
She seemed to be much afflicted for the loss of it, saying, tha^ it was her
husbands. And therewithal she suddenly rose up, as if it did import her to go
back again presently to her own house, that she might lose no time for the
finding of it again, if by chance she had there let it fall. And albeit I
promised to give her such another, and persuaded her all that I could, and made
her large offers, I could not win her to stay any longer.

Away she went, yet passing her word unto me, that she would come again to
visit me, and send her Maid back again unto me, as soon as she came home,
to advise me, if she had found her lost Jewel. It made me very melancholy,
and grieved me much, that she should in this fashion go away from me, for that
(as I told you before) she was marvelous beautiful, exceeding gallant, and
wonderful discreet. I had a great mind to sleep, and settled my self to
take some rest, but I could not continue it for above two hours. I had too
many cares in my head to take any case, and therefore I arose, that I might
think the better of them, when I was up.

By that time I had made my self ready, dinner came in; and while I was yet
sitting at the table, her Maid entered the room. Who (being a witty Wench as
she was) intertain'd me till dinner was ended. And then she told me, that she
was once more come back again to see, whether her Mistress, playing there with
her Rosario in her hand, had by chance let fall that piece? We were all down
upon our knees, to see if we could have the good luck to find it; but it
could not be found, because it was never lost.

When we had given over looking, I complemented with her, and told her, that I
did not grieve so much for the worth of the thing it self, as for her sake,
whose it was.

Then did she figure forth unto me the bigness, the proportion, and the true
fashion of it, obliging me with good words, to buy her such another;
promising, that her Mistress should not fail to be with me the next day
following betimes, making some fair excuse (the better to color the
business,) to go on Pilgrimage to our Ladies Shrine, or some other the like
Visit.

Upon this I went along with her to the Gold-smithes, and bought her a dainty
fine little golden book, curiously wrought, which her Maid had made Many l^e
Man. ^hes are ^de (...) Spain, under these holy pretenses.
choice of; and it may be she had her direction from her Mistress, as having
had her sight of this pretty toy but lately before. Howsoever I am sure they
went clean away with it, for (...) could never after see either Mistress, or
Maid.

Now was it about three in the afternoon, and I had not yet digested the bread
that lay in my stomach; I was ready to dye out of a longing desire that I had
to know the occasion, and to search out the true reason of the last nights
passage, and whether it were a matter of earnest, or a trick put upon me? And
so putting this affront out of mind, as if there had never been a^y such
matter, I returned to former walk: Where I found my Mistress looking very
heavily on the matter, her countenance was s^d and mela^ly; and making show, as
if she had stayed there for me, she bec^ed unto me with her hand to come unto
her, putting her fore ^riger upon her mouth, and casting her eye behind he^,
(as if she were as^ayd left some body should watch her,) she drew near unto
the door, and v^spered s^tly v^o (...), that I should go gently on a sore to
the great Church, and so I did. She takes her Mantle, and hastens after me,
meeting both, as it were ^t one instant (...) the two Quires; and she passing
quite through them, went dire^y out of the Church, into the Call de la They
have an old Tale in Spain; That the men, to keep their wives from gadding
abroad, did persuade them to use Chapines, that they might seem as tall and
handsome as the men, and they made them of a very heavy kind of wood. They
made use of this invention of their Husbands, but made them at first hollow
within, and afterward of Cork, to lighten the load, and that they might be
able to walk more nimbly. Couarruuias verb. Chapin.
Chapineria, the street where all your women's Chapines are sold; and smiling
upon me, and intising me unto her, with a lovely cast of her eye, she seemed
to wish me to follow her. I made after her; she entered into a Merchants shop,
in the Alcana: A known street in Toledo, where all your Mercers dwell. Of the
Hebrew word Chana, to buy. Guadix says it is an Arabic word, of alquina,
which signifies Gain. Couarruuias.
Alcana, and I with her. There she gave me satisfaction, vowing with a thousand
oaths, that it was no fault of hers, and that she had no hand in that
business. She filled my head with this wind: I believed her well-composed
lies, she promised this next night to make me amends; and though she were sure
to lose her life, she would not spare it, to give me content. She made me so
pliable, that she might now work me like Wax. She bought some things, which
came to about some hundred and fifty Royals; and when she was to pay for it,
she said unto the Mercer; What shall I pay you weekly till this debt be out?
He answered, Mistress, see Ware, see Money. I do not use to part with my Wares
at this price, nor do I sell upon trust. If you deliver me my money, you may
carry away what you have bought; if not, I must entreat you to pardon me.

Then I told him, Sir, This Gentlewoman is disposed to jest with you, for she
has money sufficient to satisfy for a greater matter then this. I am her
Purse-bearer, and the Steward of her house. So taking some Crowns out of my
pocket, for to show my greatness the more, I freed my self from baseness,
and her from her debt: Apprehending then at that instant, that this was but a
stratagem of hers, to be paid beforehand, and that she might not be mocked
withal, as it often befalls many women; nor did I repent me of what I had
done; it seeming unto me, that by my fair proceeding, I had bound her unto me.
Nor would I have given my two imploiments of that one day, in the pursuit of
these two Dames, for all the wealth of Mexico, and Peru. So I asked her, whether
she would keep true touch with me or no? And whether I might take sure hold of
her promise? And at what hour I should come? She assured me that I might, and
for the hour, she would not fail me at ten in the night. She went home to
her house, and I to intertaine the time abroad; Thinking with my self, that I
had seized on two preyes at one flight, and took two Troutes at one stroke.

At the hour appointed, I put on my old disguise, and got me to the Mill
again. I gave the sign agreed upon between us, which was, to strike certain
strokes, with a stone underneath her window. But it was all one, as if I had
bestowed those blows upon the Bridge of Alcantara: A Bridge so called in
Toledo. In the year 1258. a great part of it was carried away with a Flood;
but the year following, it was repaired and new built.
Alcantara.

I conceived with my self, that the hour was not yet come, or that it was
little more then ten of the clock, which made me dance attendance a little
longer. And so hour after hour, I stayed waiting there, till it was twelve of
the night, now and then making the wonted signs.

But what should a man spend his time in talking to Saint Iuan de los Reyes,
being it is a Statua of Stone? It was but lost labor, a wearying out of my
self in vain, and a mere mockery. For he, whom she termed her brother, was
her Gallant, and her Sweet-hart: and did maintain themselves by these kind of
cheating tricks, and consorted both together in all that they did.

They were of Cordoua, is a Noble and famous City in Andaluzia.
Cordoua, proper in their persons, and well accommodated; and amongst other
young Thrushes, that they had brought into the Net, was a young Scriuener, but
newly married, who being whetted on by this Gentlewoman, and tolled on by such
trains as she had cunningly laid for him, had given her certain Jewels; and
as she dealt with me, so did she lead him along with delays, making him to
wait upon her pleasure, putting him to fine after fine to purchase his desire.
But when he found all was coozenage and Roguery, he resolved to be revenged on
her.

That night I was quite tired out with a tedious expectation, (as you have
already heard.) And when I was about to go my way, ^o, I might discern a
great troop of people making toward me, and supposing it to be the Justice,
I got me a little aside. At last I perceived, that they knocked at that door; I
returned back, drawing nearer and nearer, a little and a little, to see what
all this company did seek for. And one of the Alguazils (telling them within
who they were) caused the door to be opened. When they were all gone in, I
got me to the door, that I might the better understand how all things passed.
The Alguazil searched all the house over and over, but could not find that he
came for. I was about to call unto them, to look into the Tinaja, and to have
betook me to my heels when I had done. But the Scriuener presently took that
task upon him, and saved me a labor, and had a care that no corner should be
left unsearched.

But, as these things cannot be carried so close, but that they will soon be
brought to light, if they be well followed, one by chance lighted upon a single
hand Cuffe that lay upon the ground, which at the time of the hiding of her
brothers clothes, was let fall and left behind out of haste; and because this
was a business undertaken for a friend, and every one was willing to do his
best, one of the Alguazils said, This Cuffe must have a Master, who ever it be.

The Gentlewoman would feign have salu'd up this matter: but having pricked the
Hare, these Hounds began to take a little more pains, and to hunt with more
metal, in hope to have their game. And one of the Alguazils, seeing a great
Coffer there, which (as he thought) might very well contain a man, commanded
it to be opened: where they found my Gallant. Whereupon, they were both willed
to put on their clothes, and to make themselves ready; which done, they were
both for company carried to prison together. I was both contented therewith
and ashamed. Contented, that it was my good hap not to be found there; and
ashamed that she had gulled me, and made a fool of me. All the remainder of
that night, I could not sleep one wink, for, thinking partly on this, and
partly on that other Gentlewoman, upon whom, I thought to make my self whole,
I did conceit with my self, that she was a woman of another kind of
quality, and of a differing fashion from the former.

All that day I staid waiting for her, but she did not so much as send me any
message by her maid, nor did I know where she lived, nor what she was. You
see here how well I imploi'd my pains, and my Purse upon these two, and
whether it had not been better for me to have laid out my money in the buying
of some fifty young Lambs of a year old. I was now grown desperate, and
for my greater comfort amidst these my troubles, at night when I came to my
lodging, I met with an Alguazil there, a stranger, making inquiry for I know
not what person. Now by this time you may imagine, in what poor case I took
my self to be, and how the world was like to go with me. I willed my
servant to tell him, that if he had any thing to say to me, he should be sure
to find me there the next morning.

In the meane-while I walked out by the Gate A gate so called in Toledo,
because the entrance thereinto, is hard and difficult, it is an Arabicke word,
and signifies a thorny place, and full of bushes. Couarru.
del Cambron, where musing, and walking, I continued almost till it was day,
framing Discourses to my self, what, or whom it should be, that this Alguazill
sought for. But when the morning was come, I thought it a safe hour to go
home, with purpose to change both my apparel and my Lodging.

But by this time, my care was secured; for I was not he that he looked for, as
I afterward understood. I went forth to the Place of Socodouer, where I heard
two Mules cried for to go for Almagro, a principal Town belonging to the
Order de Calatraua. Padre Guadix would have it come from Alma-agua, and of
agro. Because those waters there-abouts have a sour taste, though they be
wholesome. Others from the color of the soil, which is red. Vide Couarru.
Verb. Almagre.
Almagro; I was slower in the hearing, then the agreeing for them, or in my
departing from Toledo. For every thing there me thought smelt of Broom, and
the soles of old shoes. That night I reached to A Town in the Kingdom of
Toledo, entitled with a Condeship. Tierra vmbrosa. Guzman leaves Toledo.
Orgaz the next to Malagon. But being not able, out of the fear I had taken
those nights before, to take any rest, I came thither so drowzy, and so sleepy,
that I was not able to hold up my head: But another new occasion did awaken me,
and made me to rowze up my spirits; which was; That as soon as I was entered
into my Lodging, there came to take charge of my clothes, and such other things
as I brought in with me, a young Wench, seeming to be something more then a
servant, and yet somewhat less then a daughter; She had a good face of her
own, a hansome feature, a pleasant behavior, and had both wit and tongue at
will. Which sort of creatures, (to draw both custom and credit to such kind
of houses) your honest Inne-holders will be sure to lay wait for, and seldom
or never shall you see them unprovided of such pretty Commodities to welcome,
and cheer up their Guests. I talked to her, and she answered me; I could not
spur her that question, whereunto she did not kick me an answer. One
discourse drew on another, and we continued our conversation so far forth, A
pleasant jest, that past betw^t Guzman and a pretty Wench at the Inn in
Malagon.
that she consented unto me, and had peremptorily given me her promise, that
she would come and pass away the time with me, when her Master and Mistress
were gone to bed and asleep. She covered the board; I gave her the brawne of
the Capon. I drank a Health to her, and she did pledge me; I would have held
her fast by the arm; she flies off; I seeking to catch hold of her, and she to
get away from me: reaching at her, I fell down upon the one side to the ground.
The Chair was of Wood, and had some turned pieces in it rib-wise, it took me
just athwart the midst of my body; whereby I received a shrewd blow. And it was
a fair gift of God, that it was not far worse; for if the Dagger that I had
at my back, had by chance fallen out of the sheathe, and pitched with the
Pommell on the ground, and the point have been upward, and had lighted
between one of those bars or ribbs in the Chair, a thousand pound to a
penny, but that I had been slain outright in the place; and so there being
an end of me, my Creditours had been paid. When I was up, and all was well, I
put the question again unto her, whether I should depend upon her coming? She
told me I should see, whether she meant to fail me or no? Uttering some other
idle foolish speeches, and so went her ways.

You have heard already how ill I past those nights before; which made me now
so heauy-headed, that it was impossible, that I should any longer bear up, and
abstain from sleeping. But I was desirous to rise betimes, whether I slept or
no. And therefore I willed my servants, that they should get them straw and
Barley, so much as our Mules were to be allowed the next morning, and that they
should bring it, and put it in the chamber where I lay. Which being done,
having set it near unto the door, they pulled it after them, and leaving it
unshut, they went to bed. And albeit sleep would feign have seized upon me, yet
my desire kept me waking; but not being able to hold out any longer, I was
forced to yield my self under the arrest of Morpheus his Mace, in whose silken
bands I was fast, though softly bound.

About midnight a little she-Asse had slipped her halter in the Stable, and got
loose (if she were not left loose before, as I verily persuade my self it was
mine Hosts, and went about the house to seek her Prouant;) This Ass came to
my lodging, and having smelt out the Barley, the little fool thrust in her
head, thinking to have met with a good mouth-full, and in pressing to come
where the Prouender was in the Sieue, she wagged, and wagg'd, this way, and
that way, and striving to get in, the door began to creake, I that was
mindful of the business, a little thing would suffice to revive my
remembrance: And now I was fully persuaded, that I had the Bulls sure enough in
the Place, and that they could by no means get from me. And because I was all
this while very sleepie, and scarce half awake, I imagined with my self, that
she could not find the way to the bed, whereupon I raised my self, and
sitting up in my bed, I called her unto me. When the Ass heard my voice, she
was afraid; and stood still, save only that she did put one of her fore-feet in
the frail wherein the straw was. I thinking that it was the Wench, and that
she had stumbled by chance upon it, leapt out of my bed, and said unto her,
Come hither, my Love, come to bed, give me thy hand. And because she should
reach me, I stretched out my body at large unto her, and lifting up my leg, I
hit her with my knee on the snout; with that she lifted up her head, and smote
me such a blow with hers on the noddle, that she almost set me on my breech; so
much was I astonished therewith. And when she had done, she fled away from me, as
fast as her legs would give her leave. For if she had staid, I should have
had much ado (considering the pain I was in) to have forborne to thrust my
Dagger up to the hilts in her guts.

I bled mainly, both at mouth and nose; and cursing Love, and all his cunning
tricks to the pit of hell; I knew, that all this happened deservedly unto me;
because, being a wild simple Ladde as I was, I was so easy of belief. But I
quickly made fast my door, and got me to bed.

CHAP. IX.
How Guzman de Alfarache lists himself for a Soldier. He tells, whence that
ill phrase grew. En Malagon, en cada casa un ladron; y en lo del Alcalde, hijo
y padre. In Malagon, every house a thief; And in that of the Alcalde two: The
father and the son. How in a short time, through ill government, all Guzmans
money is gone; How to his grief he is forced to serve a Captain. Some lessons
are given to young men. To these are added the faults of bad Ministers in
matters of war-fare.

AS if Love had not been a desire of Immortality, bred in an idle mind;
without any beginning of Reason, without any subjection to Law, which is
entertained by the Will; but with it, cannot not be put off; easy in it is
entrance to the heart, but hard to be thrust out again; I began to swear,
that I would never more follow his colors, nor be of his Company. But I was
asleep when I made this protestation, and knew not what I said. My sleepiness
was so great then at that time, that all my pain could not keep me waking.

Which drowzinesse of mine was the cause, that I could not rise so early as I
thought, but kept my bed till nine of the clock that morning. At which hour
comes me in this my ^iddle-faddle of the Inn, to give me satisfaction, vowing
and swearing unto me, that she lay within her Master and Mistress, and that they
had shut her up, and kept the key themselves, that she could by no means get
forth: Though for mine own part, I did verily believe, that she did purposely
play the Wag with me, and had never any such meaning, but did lie in all that
she said. Whereupon I told her; O friend Lucia, your love has done me a great
deal of hurt: it began in the Chair, and ended in the saddle. I shall look
hereafter a little better to your water. Take me with that fault again, and I
will give you leave to hang me. Go about your business, go, I have no more
to say to you. Make haste, and bring in breakfast, for I will presently be
gone. So she roasted us out of hand a brace of Partridge, served in with a slice
or two of Bacon, which served both for our breake-fast, and our dinner, because
the day was far spent, and our journey but short.

Well, I was now upon going, my Mules were ready, and staid for my coming. The
The Spanish word, is Mo^na. To wit, a Mule that is begotten of an Horse, and a
she Ass, commonly with a black Muzzle, a sw^ling nostrill, and having ^sh
trick^.
Mule that I rode on, was an ill-condition'd Jade, and somewhat skittish. When
I was ready to put foot in the stirrup, I got me up upon a bench, thinking
from thence to get with the greater ease into my Saddle; but by her going
back, she seemed to tell me, that I should not do it so easily as I thought;
or else her meaning was, that I should quickly get me thence, or else she
would set me going with a witness. And because she could not speak my
language, that she might make me understand her by signs, ierking out her
hinder legs, she flings me out her heels, and doubling her fyles, with two
kicks, that she made at me, she threw me a good ways from her: But she did me
no harm, for I recovered my self by and by, and got up upon my legs. After
this, I was a little more wary, and took better heed. And with a-loud voice I
began to cry out: There is not any female (I think) in this Inn, even to
the very Mules, which has not her iadish tricks.

Well, I was seated in my Saddle, and my Mule was quiet, and being upon the
way, (seeing what misfortunes I had suffered) I acquainted my servants what
had happened unto me, with the Ass that came into my Chamber. They laughed
exceedingly, as if they would have burst their hearts, and the more, at my
weak and childish understanding, that I would give credit to a Wench in an
Inn, who are never good, but at their first coming, and ever after prove
arrant Iades, that a man can not tell how to trust to them.

We had now gone two long Leagues, and the Boy that went a-foote by us to look
unto our Mules, would needs drink. I called, Bring hither the The Spanish word
is, Bota: Quasi imbuta, of the Latin word, imbuo, de in and Bibo. It is made
of a Goats-skinne, the mouth of it being Horn, with a stopple to it, and the
sules strongly sown and Rozend within, that it may not leake. Your Travelers
on the way never go without one, by reason the country is so hot, which
causes much thirst.
Bottle, give me the Bottle: but no Bottle appears; for we had left it
behind us. Peradventure mine Hostess (said the Boy) has seized upon it, and
laid it aside in waggery, because we might ride the lighter, or be paid for her
care in keeping it safe for us.

Nay (quoth my Page) I rather believe, that they amongst them have stolen it
from us, for to add more fame to this town, that they may not lose that good
name they have gotten.

Then was I very desirous to know, how this bad report came first to be
raised, and whence it grew. And because they that use to carry Merchandise from
place to place, and travel often on the way, and now and then hear diverse men
discourse of such things as these; I thought with my self, I were best to ask
the reason of it of our Footman, imagining he (if any man) could best inform
us of it.

Thereupon I called unto him, and said; Friend Andres; Since thou have been a
piece of a Scholar, a Wane-man, and now a Moco de Mulas, one that Lackey'st
along with Mules, and look unto them, I prithee tell me (if happily thou
have heard of it) how this Town came to have this ill name, and wherefore it
is commonly said as a byword, or by way of a Proverb in every man's mouth: En
Malagon, cn cada c^sa, ay un ladron: y^n la del Alcalde, hijo, y padre. Every
house in Malagon has a thief of his own: And in A Spanish Proverb.
that of the Alcalde, there are twain; the father, and the Son, both knaves
in grain.

The Muleter made answer, saying, Sir, your Worship asks me of a thing, which
I have been told of diverse times, and that diverse ways, every one following
his own opinion: Which if I should recount them all unto you, the way too is
short and the Story too long, and the desire that I have to drink, beyond them
both. For I am so dry, that I am scarce able to speak a word. But be it as it
may be, I will do my best to satisfy your longing. Laying that therefore
aside, which has no color nor shadow of truth, and conforming my self
according to the opinion of some, of whom I have heard it; upon whose
judgment, I ground mine, as more agreeable unto reason: For in that, for which
we have no natural reason, nor by tradition left unto us in writing, when time
shall have buried these things, a good and a sound judgment must be the Law,
which we must obey, and whereunto we ought to conform our selves. And so
this had it is beginning, (which is now long since, time out of mind) in this
manner, as I shall now deliver unto you.

In the year of our Lord, 1236. King Don Fernando, sur-named the Holy, The
story concerning the occasion of this proverb, En Malagon etc.
reigning in Castilla, and Leon, who gained Seuill, the second year after the
death of King Don Alfonso his father, stayed one day at dinner in Benauente, is
a town in the Kingdom of Leon. There is a Land of that name.
Benauente, where he received news, that the Christians had entered the City
of Cordoua; and had made themselves Masters of the Towers and Castles belonging
to the Suburbs, which they call Axarquia, the suburbs adjoining to Cordoua.
Padre Guadix says, it is so called, because it stands toward the East which
is termed in the Arab^ck tongue, Xarquia
Axarquia, together with that gate and the wall. And for that the Moors were
many, and the Christians few, they were driven to great necessities for want of
succor.

The like advice was dispatched by Post, to Don Aluar Perez de Castro, who was
in Martos, a samous town in Andaluzia, anciently called, Tucci, and Augusta
Gemella. Couarruuias.
Martos, and to Don Ordonno Aluarez, principal Gentlemen of Castile, men of
great power and strength, and to many other persons, to give them their best
aid and assistance. Every one of these, that had notice of it, presently
raised Forces, and hasted thither with all the speed they could; the King
likewise marched forward on his way, without any delay, or protraction at all;
albeit, that this news was brought unto him, on the 28. of January, and that
the season was very bad, and painful to travel, by reason of the great
Snowes, and the extreme coldness of the weather. But nothing could hinder him
from this his design, for he hasted away to their succor, leaving order that
the rest of his Army should follow him, carrying no more along with him to
attend his person, then a hundred Gentlemen of good quality.

The King had likewise given order to all Cities, Towns, and other places,
that were able to afford aid, to send their Soldiers to those Frontiers and
Borders, whither he himself was to go: Great store of rain fell, the Rivers
and other Foords, by which they were to pass, were so mightily risen, that his
men were not able to go forward.

There met together at that time in Malagon a great multitude of Soldiers sent
from diverse and sundry parts, being in number so many, that though that place
were very well peopled, and of great receipt, being one of the best Towns in
all that quarter; yet in every house there was lodged one Soldier at the
least; and in some, two, or three.

The Alcalde did lodge one of the Captains of a Company, and a son of his,
that he brought along with him, and was his Alferez, is he to whom the Captain
recommends his Ensign, that he may gather his Company together, and bring them
all to their rendeuous. The Captain should carry the Ancient. But by reason of
his diverse employments, he substitutes one in his place, whom they call
Alferez, who is subordinate unto him and stirs notwithout his direction. And
all that are under that Ensine are to sollow (...) Colors. And therefore they
have this variety of names, a^ Signiferos, Vexiliferos, Primipila^ios, duces,
etc. Couarruuias page 44.
Alferez. Their provision grew short, the ways bad, there was no coming to
Market; so that for want of relief, every one suffered necessity, every one
was put to his shifts, and not a man amongst them, but sought to maintain and
preserve his life by filching and stealing, robbing here and there; whence, or
from whom it made no matter all was one to them: Life was sweet: Let others
hang and starve; so as they had where-withall, all was well.

A conceited Clown of that very Place, a shrewd witty fellow for a plain
Husbandman, departed thence, to go to Toledo: And meeting in Orgaz with a
brave troop of Gentlemen, they demanded of him, whence he was? He answered;
Of Malagon. They further asked him, What Is the news there? He told them;
Gentlemen, all the news in Malagon, is; In every house, a thief; and in the
Alcaldes, two; the son, and the father.

And this was the true Original of that false report, which men put upon that
Town, as not knowing any other certain ground, whence this brute should be
raised; and is now, in these our times, a notorious wrong done unto them, as
being a fault whereof they are not guilty, and yet are most unjustly charged
therewith. For in all this way, that we have come and gone, or vvhither so ever
else it shall be your hap to travel, I doubt me, you will hardly find either
better intertainment (I mean for Innes) or more civil and better behau'd
people (taking every man according to his condition and breeding,) then are in
this town. Yet, Sir, withal, I could likewise tell you, of many notable
thefts, and very famous ones, that have been committed in Malagon.

Whilst we were thus discoursing on the way to pass away the time, and make
our journey seem the easier, I lighted on a Traveler, of whom I learned, That
in Almagro, I should meet with a Company of Soldiers. Whereof having thoroughly
informed my self, and well assured of their being there, I was vvonderfull
glad of it; for this was the only thing that I did desire, and seek after
for to cast off all care, and to give a farewell to all my former troubles.

In my coming into the Town, I was no sooner entered, but I might perceive in
the High Street a Banner, hanging out at a Window; I past along by it, Guzman
comes to Almagro.
and went to lodge at one of the Innes there in the Marketplace, where I supt
betimes, and got me quickly to bed, that I might recover some of my lost
sleeps, and repair the wrongs of so many ill-passed nights, as I had lately
endured.

Mine Host, and those his Guests that he had in the house, seeing me come in so
well accommodated, and so well waited on, made inquiry of my servants, who I
was. And they, (as not knowing any thing, but what they heard from my self)
told them; That my name was Don Iuan de Guzman: Guzman takes on him a feigned
name.
Son to a principal Gentleman of the house of Toral. On the morning very
early, my Page brought me my clothes; I put them on, setting my self forth in
all my brauest gallantry, and after that I had been abroad and heard Mass, I
went to visit the Captain, telling him, that I was come in search of him, to
tender my service unto him. He received me with a great deal of courtesy, and
with a cheerful look; which was no more then my respect unto him might
challenge; besides, the good fashion, that I came to him in, and the moneys,
which I brought along with me in my purse, (which were little less then a
thousand Royals) might merit some respect, for the rest of the birds were
flowne, and like Noah's Crow, were never to Guzman entertained by the Captain
for a Soldier, and in what he did exercise himself.
return again; they were spent and gone in gay clothes, in courting of
Wenches, and in good-fellowship upon the way. He admitted me into his own
Squadron, made me sit and ear with him at his own Table, using me evermore
with much love and kindness.

In requital whereof, I began to Regalar: Is to afford a man all the delights
and dainties that are to be had for love, or money. The word is derived a
Rege: That is, so much that a King can not desire more. Guzman posseth not for
a Soldier, as being under age.
Regalar him, and to serve him; presenting him still with one thing or other,
enlarging my hand like a Prince, as if I had for every A Spanish Proverb.
Tuesday a new pair of ears; or were sure to meet (wheresoever I came) with
another Grocer, another River, and another Grove of Trees, wherein to hide my
self. So fast did I spend my money without fear or wit, threw it away with
so prodigal a hand, taking ames-Ace against seven, and deux-Ace, against
eleven; I did so often visit the Drum-head, that at last, getting little, and
losing much, I was almost quite blown up.

In these kind of intertainments did I consume my self, and my time, till we
were to march away: And for to fill up the Company, we were all of us put
into a Church, whence we came forth one by one, and when they came to call me,
the Play Master looked upon me, in whose eye I seemed somewhat too young,
insomuch that he durst not inroll me amongst the rest, according to the
instructions that were given him. Whereat I grew exceeding angry, and was so
inflamed with choler, that I had much ado to contain my self, but was ready
to break forth into passion, and to have lasht out into some liberty of
language, whereof afterward I might have repented my self; because it might
have forced me to utter that, which would not have well beseemed me, nor
indeed had been lawful for me to vent, considering the time, and place.

O what good clothes can do! I knew the time, when men would kick Good
clothes put a man i^ heart.
me, and cuffe me about the cares, and could be content to hang my head in my
bosom, hold my peace, and take all patiently. But now I made reckning, as if
all heaven had layne at the stake, of that which to speak of, was not worth a
straw, waxing mad with anger. Then I began to know by Anger, and it is evil
effects
mine own experience that no Wine can make a man so drunk, as the first fit
of anger. And it much more blinds the understanding, not leaving it any the
least light of reason. And if that heat should not presently pass away, I know
not what fierceness or brutishness may be compared to this fury of ours. I
did quickly quench this flame, and my Hat being come again to his color, and
my choler pacified, I said unto him, Sir, you that are Play Master, my years
(I confess) are few, but my courage as great as any man's. It is the heart that
commands, and this arm knows how to brandish a blade, there is blood and
marrow enough in it, for to undertake great matters.

He answered me very gravely and wisely, It may be so, Sir, and I do verily
believe it, and with much more willingness, then your self can speak it: but
the Order that I have given me in charge is thus and thus, wherein if I should
exceed my Commission, my Purse must soundly pay for it. No body shall smart for
it, but my self. I knew not what to reply to so fair an Answer, though the
blood that boiled in my breast, and the color that showed it self in my
cheeks, could not so easily be alaid, till my choler were a little better
settled. My captain was very sensible of this affront of mine, and took it as
tenderly as if the case had been his own.

For being quitted of my place, he was persuaded I should then presently
forsake his Company. And taking part with me against the Play Master, he was
somewhat round with him, insomuch, that neither of them having the patience to
bear one with another, they grew to high words, and much ado there was.

This storm was laid the Sea had done roaring, their strife was ended, and the
Company was fully made up. The Captain came to visit me at my lodging; telling
me in brave and gallant terms, how much this grief of mine did t^ouble him,
and how sorry he was for my heaviness; and with honorable both words and
promises, he gave me that good satisfaction, that I rested very well contented.
Such force has Eloquence, that as horses suffer Eloquence prevails much.
themselves to be ruled with good Bridles and bitts; so the fierce rage, and
chollericke humors of men, are bridled and governed by mannerly reasons, and
are brought to wind and turn their headstrong wills, changing their violent
resolutions, being easily reduced in the end to a settled pace, and are well
content to go forward fair and softly on their way.

Whereupon, albeit I was resolved to leave him, yet notwithstanding his words
were so powerful with me, that he stopped me in my course, and suddenly took me
up, when I was in the heat and height of my Carreere. We continued in this
kind of conversation a pretty while, and a great deal of good talk we had
together; And if it be not dangerous to speak the truth, (for fear of being
called in question) we did murmr and mutine at the small reckning, and slight
acknowledgement of Soldiers, and men of true A dipressum against bad Mini^s,
touching Martial men.
worth and valor, and the base esteem that was made of military discipline
and profession of Arms; then did we rail at the slight remuneration of
Services, and with how little truth some Ministers did inform the State
thereof, for their own proper ends: How things are quite out of order, and
utterly miscarrie, because businesses are not well carried, and are not in a
course, that should direct them to a good end, every man tending his particular
profit, preferring private, before public good.

And though such a one know, that another man, with a very good zeal and love
to his Country, does govern his Army well, and lead them on bravely, he
wrests all h^s good services to the worst sense, and seeks to overthrow his
well-deserued reputation, laying Nets to entrap him, that he may be the only
Commander, joining with his enemies, and falling cross with his friends, that
he may bring the dance before his own door, and raise himself by the others
ruin, proposing to himself, by this preposterous dealing, to put himself
into a better fortune.

And to effect this his unruly desire, he will seek out a thousand fetches,
and as many winding Pipes will he lay before hand, to bring the water to his
own Conduict. He would make himself like unto the highest, and place his
throne in the North, and suffer no man to sit by him, or to be his equal. Such
men as these exercise their voice only in the service of the King, not sticking
to cry out, This and this will make much for his Majesty's service; but their
works, and their actions, are directed to their own good. Like unto that
day-labourer, who lifts up his arms to heaven, but strikes his Mattocke into
the ground. These make wars at their pleasure, break Leagues when they list,
failing in their Obligation, ruining the Commonwealth, robbing men of their
Estates, and in the end damning their own souls.

How many errors have been committed? How many brave Commanders lost? how many
Armies utterly overthrown? the fault whereof is laid upon him, that does least
deserve the blame. And the sole cause of this is, because these men will
forsooth have it so, that this ill shall make for their good. For if things
should succeed well, why then it should go ill with them.

This is the common course now adays, and this makes The Spanish phrase is, Se
pone de lodo. Now Poner lo de lodo, e^, estragar, O errar el negocio.
all out of joint, and causes such confusion in the world. Will you see (Sir)
to what poor pass our ill fortune has brought us, that those brave clothes,
gallant Feathers, and glorious colors; things that put life and spirit into a
Soldiers heart, to make him venture courageously upon all difficulties, to hew
out his way with his Sword, and to undertake any brave and noble enterprise, in
seeing us thus adorned, we are disgraced in Spain, our Habit scorned, and our
selves flouted at? Thinking for sooth that we must walk the streets in black,
like a company of Soliciters, or like some Seruitour, or poor Scholar, that
waits upon another, and has not a Gown to his back to hide his pitiful
rags, or to cover our totterd clothes, (as your Students use to do) with
black footcloathes, that the old rotten Saddle underneath may not be seen.

Now are we quite down the wind, and never so much as now; For those that
should most honor us, do least favor us. The only bare name of a Spaniard,
which heretofore did affright the enemy, and with the reputation of that one
word, made the whole world to tremble; now (for our sinnes-sake) the glory of
that is in a manner lost and gone. And we are so fallen off from what we were,
that we are not able to do that now with our swords, which before we might
have carried with our words. Yet such as we have been, we are, and shall be
still. It is God, that must make us to acknowledge these our errors, and that
must work amendment in those that are the cause thereof; going (in that course
wherein now they run) against their King, against the Laws of the Land,
against their Country, and against themselves.

I need not (Sennor Don Iuan) to produce any other witness, then the present
times, for the truth of what I have spoken, and to prove unto you, that the
maine cause of all your great mischiefs in a State, is a Favorites inwardnesse
with his King, suffering no man to Priuar, or to be able to do any thing but
himself, led on with the greediness of his own private gain. From this his
ill-imployd Greatness, grows hatred; from hatred, envy; from envy,
dissension; and from dissension, evil order: from whence you may infer those
other inconveniences, that may follow thereupon. Let it not trouble you, Sir,
that we are now to march hence. In Italy, you shall find another kind of
world; and here I pass my word unto you, that I will make you an Ancient.
Which albeit, it be a meaner place, then your merits may challenge, yet it may
serve as a step to advance you higher. I gave him many thanks for this his
friendly offer. We took our leaves, he was very desirous to go home alone, I
earnestly entreated him, that I might wait upon him to his Lodging but he
would by no means consent thereunto. The next day following the Company
marched away without any stay, till they came near unto the Seacoast; (the
Captain spending liberally upon my Purse.) We staid waiting there for the
coming of the Galleys, but three months were almost spent before we could
have any news of them. In which time, and that which was already past, my
Purse had spit his venom, and my rents began to fail me. My continuance at
play, did likewise put a helping hand to my speedier dispatch; so that I was
now quite out of Cash, and all my money was gone; not all in one day, but all,
at all these several times. I was (as your old prattling Gossips use to say)
reduced back again to my former state, and might walk (as I did before) with
a white Cudgel under mine arm. How much did I then risent my former follies?
How angry was I Guzmans money is all ge^, and now begins to lamentins folly.
Good Instructions for young men.
grown with my self? What amendment did I propose unto my self, now that I
had not so much as one single penny left me in my Purse? How many shifts did I
use to conserve my self, when I did not know against what tree to lean? Who
forced me to fall in love without discretion? Who made me turn Gallant,
without moderation? Who taught me to spend without government? To what end was
I so free in my play, so frank in my Lodging? and so prodigal with my
Captain? Quanto se halla trasero, quien ensilla muy delantero? Spanish Proverb.
How often is he cast behind, that is first in the Saddle? What a shame is it
for a man to follow his delights? What a baseness, to be captiuated by his
pleasures? I was ready to run besides my self, and was almost out of my
little wits, that when I had put my self in so good a Predicament, I could not
hold me there, and keep my self well, while it was well with me.

Now, in regard as well of my youth, as these my youthful vanities, I was no
more esteemed, or respected of any. The friends that I had in my prosperity,
the free table that I kept with the Captain, the Alferez place, and the
ensign, that he told me he would bestow upon me, it seemed, that they were all
strooken with a sudden lightening, which had burnt and consumed them. They past
as an arrow, that makes his quick-feathered-flight through the air; like a
Thunderbolt, that strikes to death, before it be discerned; or to the
twinkling of the eye, which opens and shuts in an instant.

When my moneys fell short, all fell-away from me: as long as I had that, I
had them; That gone, they shook hands with me, and bid me farewell. Thus by
little and little, piece after piece, all my ornaments were taken off, and
poor Don Iuan de Guzman was degraded. I was like that Obispillo de San Proverb.
Nicholas, that pretty little Bishop St. Nicholas, respected only for his
Holyday; and so I, while I had money in my Purse, and no longer.

Those that heretofore did me honor, did visit me, did entertain me, came to
feast and banquet with me, the heart strings of my Purse being broken, they
forsook me, as being no man of this world; Not a man that would talk with me,
or conderse with me. And not only so, but they would not so much as vouchsafe
to look upon me, or once suffer me to come in their company. The perfume that
did once smell sweet, does now stink in their noses. They that knew not before
how to be unkind, do now take all things in snuff. And I that honored them,
am requited by them with dishonor, and all because I am become poor. And as
if poverty had been a great and heinous offense, I was consigned over to the
Secular power. My dealing and conversation was wholly now with the straggling
Boys about the Camp, such as carried Wallets and Knap-sacks for the Soldiers,
and on this had I now set up my rest. And it is good Justice, Que quien tal
haze, que assi ^o Proverb.
pague. As a man Brewes, so let him bake.

CHAPTER X.
Guzman de Alfarache declares the misfortunes, and the wants of one that is
decayed in his fortunes: And how he followed a Captain, till he came into
Italy; Exercising himself in all kind of thefts great and small; for the
relief and help of his Master.

HOw bitter was it unto me to begin; how troublesome to go on; how grievous
to endure this new dis-aduenture? Misfortunes, are burdens that are hard to be
borne.
But I had been well acquainted heretofore with these kind of misfortunes,
and had learned them long since to my great cost. And because these things were
not new unto me, I presently fell to my work, and lively bestir'd my self
about my business. And I can assure you, it is a great happiness for a man to
suit himself to all occasions, and to know how to turn his hand to all kind
of labor, not relying on these transitory goods of the world, which like
Buckets in a Well, are now full, and then empty; and no sooner up, but they are
down again.

But this one thing was my chief comfort, That in the time of my Prosperity,
I gained credit against the day of Adversity. And I did not count it my least
riches, seeing I was to become poor, that I had left a stamp and impression
in all men's minds, that I was of a noble and free disposition, by those my
former actions, which were able to speak themselves, though my self should
be silent.

My Captain made some reckoning of me acknowledging the courtesies, that I had
used toward him, and was more vvilling, then able to help me. For (poor man)
he had scarce enough to serve his own turn. But he conseru'd me at least in
that buen punto and good esteem, which he had at his first knowledge of me,
anon after that we were acquainted, bearing a kind of respect to the house
whereof I came, and to those my supposed Parents.

I was enforced to stripp my self; and laying aside all my gallantry, I began
to cloth my self again in a meaner and poorer fashion, and to put on that
rich (though vn-regarded) Roabe of Humility, which I did not think on in my
bravery, and scorned (as a thing of naught) when I was flush, and full of
money:

Considering with my self that Vanity and Necessity could not well suit
together. And that one Chair was not able to hold them both. For the rich man,
if he brave it, he is to be borne withal, for he has where-withall. But that
a poor man should be so vain, is to be but like the Cameleon; who, whatsoever
he draws and sucks into him, is but air, without substance. And The rich man
that is vain, and the poor man that is proud, both condemned. Guzman sets
himself to serve (...) Captain.
therefore, as the rich man that is vain, ought to be abhorred; So the poor
man that is proud, is not to be endured: It is insupportable in the one, and
scandalous in the other.

I saw, that I was not able to live of my self, and therefore got to serve my
Captain, making him now my Master, who but a little before was my Companion.
And I waited on him with that care, as I did on the Cook. Howbeit, he
commanded me with a kind of respect, as considering who I was and that my
excesses, my childishness, and ill-gouerned Youth, had brought me to this low
ebb, that I was driven to serve him. And he did thus far assure himself
of me, that I would not do any thing unworthy a Gentleman, and vn-beseeming
my birth and Parentage for any interest in the world. What a man should do,
that would rise by his service.


He held me to be as faithful, and as secret, as I was patient. He made me
Treasurer of all his secrets; for which affiance I always showed my self
thankful unto him. He manifested his necessities, and made known his wants
unto me, and what he had spent in his pretensions; besides, the prolixe time,
and the excessive travel and pains, whereby he at last obtained them; as by
entreating, bribing, flattering, serving, attending, crouching, creeping,
making of legs, bowing the head to the ground, with cap in hand, and a quick
and nimble pace, trotting up and down the streets from morning to night;
early, and late, without intermission.

I remember he told me, That going out of the Palace with the Kings Favorite,
A trick of a proud Courtier.
because he put on his Hat, whilst he was entering into his Coach, he looked
upon him, as if he would have eaten him; and shortly after, gave him to
understand as much, by delaying his dispatch, making him dance attendance at
Court many a fair day, till he thought he had sufficiently punished both his
Purse, and his Patience. It shall ever be in my Letany, Good Lord deliver us,
when Power and Malice meet.

It is a miserable thing, and much to be pitied, that such an Idol as one of
these, should affect particular adoration; not considering, that he is but a
man, a representant, a poor kind of Comedian, that acts his part upon the
Stage of this World, and comes forth with this or that Office, thus and thus
attended, or at least resembling such a person, and that when the play is done,
(which can not be long) he must presently enter into the Tyring-house of the
grave, and be turned to dust and ashes, as one of the sons of the Earth,
which is the common Mother of us all.

Behold (brother) and see the Interlude of our life is ended; our disguizes
laid aside; and thou art as I; I, as thou; and all of us as one another. Some
do so strut and stretch out their bodies, and are swollen so big with the
puffing wind of pride, as if they were able to swallow the whole Sea into
their belly. They sport, and play, and follow their pleasures, as if their
aboade on earth, were to be eternal. They set themselves aloft, and in-throane
themselves on high, as if they would get them out of Deaths reach, and that it
should not be in his power to tumble them down. Blessed be God, that there is
a God. And blessed be his mercy, that he has provided one equal day of
Justice for us all.

I did much grieve at my Captains poverty, because I did not know how to
remedy it. And by how much the more is the want and necessity of Want in a
great person, is a thing that moves much compassion.
him that is Noble, by so much the more does the poor man pity it, then the
rich. He had some Jewels left, which he might sell, if need were, but those
were things to do him honor; and being that he was upon his departure, ready
to imbarke himself, where he should have occasion to use them, it went against
the very heart of him, to mar much, to mend a little.

Now, while these Galleys were so slow in coming, we were feign in the mean
while to go from one town to another, to quarter our selves with the best
conueniency we could. By that confession, which my Master had made unto me, I
understood his mind, and the end wherefore he did it.

I told him, Sir, I know by good experience, both good and bad fortune;
prosperity, and adversity, and wot well what they are.

In my younger years I have traveled far and near, and have seen somewhat
of the world. I shall to the uttermost of my power express that loyalty and
faithfulness which I owe unto my Master, and to the Stock whereof I come.

Take you, Sir, no care, assuring your self, that I will hazard my life in
your service, and will so order the business (till better times shall befriend
us) that for the present, you shall pass over the trouble you now are in, with
a great deal more ease. Thus did I take a task upon me, that was far
greater then my strength or wit could promise.

From that time forward, I did in this Office that I had undertaken, perform
things of admiration, and such as were beyond belief.

In every place, where we were to lodge our Soldiers, I had gotten a doozen
The Span^sh word, is Bol^ta. i. Scedula, quae ^abatur (...) in belio, v^
proper^nt ad hospitium. Dicitur autem Buleta, quasi Bula peque^na; a (...)
Bulet^ Et ^rat Scriptura breuis mandato^a, qualis est bulla (...). ^uzmans
cunning, wh^ he served the Captain.
Billets, whereof the least affoorded no less then twelve Royals, and some
did contribute fifty. My entrance was free into all those houses, where nothing
was safe from my hands, no not so much as the water that was in their Wels.

I never suffered my Master to be without a Hen, a Chicken, a Capon, or a
Pidgeon, both at dinner and supper, and a whole Gammon of Bacon every Sunday
boiled in Wine. Never did I reserve any thing for my self of all these booties
that I made. But look whatsoever I got, I put it all into his hands.

If by chance the Master of the house should take me napping, if it were of
small value, it was passed over as a thing of nothing, and accounted only a
waggish trick; but if it were of any moment, my punishment was, to be brought
by my Master before him that had complained of me, and causing my hands to be
bound, with the thin sole of a shoo he would give me my payment; which
being of a hollow kind of grain, it sounded loud, but did smart but little;
the noise was more then the pain. Sometimes I should have the luck to get me
Sureties, that should pass their word for me, that I should not do so any
more, and then I was pardoned. But though they should chance to fail me, the
chastisement was not rigorous, it did not raise any Wheal^s or Blisters, nor
left any mark of the stripes upon my body. And because I knew, they were
given me more for fashion sake, then any ill will; and rather to satisfy
others, then to hurt me, before ever the blow came near me, I would cry out,
as if I had been ki^; and set out such a throat, as if I would hauerent the
very walls of the house asunder.

Thus did my Master and I give good satisfaction; he* by complying with his
obligation; and I by supplying of his necessities: By killing first his hunger,
and afterward by g^uing life to his Honor.

I would so^times get me out into the Highways, and seyze upon all so^ts of
(...); then would I seem to show them the favor of the School, in s^lling
them their own again; in-dearing to the owners of them, that it cost me thus
and thus much out of mine own purse, to get these their goods to be returned
unto them, so that I had both money, and thanks for my pains.

Those commodities which we lighted on in the Villages where we lay, those
that were able, might chance to see them again, and redeem them for their
money; but those that had not where-withall, their goods were invisible, not a
ragge to be seen^; they that had taken them from them, were (...) and gone, and
no more news to be heard of them. At the Musters, when the Muster-master was
to see if the Company were full, I would thrust in amongst the Soldiers five
or six young fellows of the Town, well appointed, and made them to pass.
Sometimes I would so handle the matter, that putting one single man into the
Church, up above in the Charnell house that is made for dead men's bones, five
times one after another, I received five paye^ And for him, that was to come
last, I would clap a plaster upon his nose, that he might not be known. And
every several time, I did change his clothes, because my knavery should not
be found out, and my trick discovered.

With these Gigs, and other the like gulleries, mine own person was as good as
four men's pays. My Master lou^d me as his life for these good services that I
did him, but he was a great spender; and therefore both this, and all besides
that I could do for him, was all too little.

When we were come to The chi^e C^ in Catalu^na, founded 230. y^res before the
(...) of C^st. It was first called Barzino; of a great ^age that builded (...),
^f w^ descended the great A^lcar. I resently upon that, (...). And now
Barcelona. The ^omanes afterward called it Fauentia: But came in time to
recover it is old name. Vid. A^r. Hort. V^rb. Barcino. and Ant. Augustine.
Dialogo. 70. de nummis antiquis. Guzman comes to Barcelona.
Barc^lona, and ready to imbarke our selves in the Galleys, I found my Master
much troubled, as being in a great straight, for that he had received no pay
from the King, and how to procure moneys, he knew no way in the world; nor
could mine that I brought him in, stea^ him to any purpose. I saw he was
melancholy, sad, and heavy; I knew straight what disease he was sick of, as
being the Phisician, that had often cured him thereof heretofore. I offered him
to apply a sudden remedy for this sore. He had with him diverse Jewels, I knew
not well what my self, and amongst the rest an Agnus Dei, Is Christ our
Red^emer called a Lamb; not proprietate, sed similitudine. As in many places,
he is called a Vine, a Rock, a Door, a Shepbeard, a Lion, etc. ^t in regard
of his meekness, vnspottednesse, chastity, innocence and obedience; as also,
for that he was sacrificed up to his heavenly Father, for the sins of
mankind, with a great deal of propriety, he is called the Lamb. And the
Roman Church, in the Sacrifice of the Mass, before the holy Communion was
instituted, did say or sing this Prayer: Agnus Dei, qui tollis peccata mundi,
etc. And John Baptist did sign it with this name. Ecce Agnus Dei, etc. Agnus
Dei, is likewise a holy re^cke, which the Pope blesses, and consecrates the
first year of his Papacy, and so afterward from seven years to s^ years.
It belonget^ to the Sexton and the Chaplain to order and dispose the Wax,
where-into they put Los cirios Pascuales the year before. And with great
curiosity, neatness, and reverence, and in different Moldes, they take forth
these Agnos, of different bigness, and diverse Figures; both on the one and the
other side, they have the Lamb, whence this re^cke takes (...) name. And being
presented to his Holiness, he blesses them in the Chapel, and consecrates
them with great Ceremony, (...) them into Vessels of Holy Water, which he has
blessed, pouring upon them Balm, and the Crisme, or holy Oil, saying many
Prayers over them. It is said, that Pope V^ban the fifth; sent an Agnus Dei to
the Emperor of Greece, with certain (...) Verses, wherein he declares the
excellency of this holy Relicke; as that, it is good against tempest, Fire,
Lightning, Thunder, and Pestilence; and against the assaults of the Devil, and
therefore ought to ^ee had in great reverence; Vide Couar^as. Verb. Agnus Dei:
Agnus Dei of gold, a very rich one: it grieved him to part with it. But I told
him; Sir, if you dare to trust me, put this Agnus Dei into my hands, and I will
promise you to return it again unto you within these two days much improued,
and make it better worth unto you, then now it is. He was glad to hear me say
so; and iestingly said unto me; What trick have you now in store Guzmanillo?
Have thou lighted peradventure (as thou wast wont) upon some new roguish plot,
some feate villainy or other, and can come finely off with it? Now because he
knew, that he might trust his profit, with my sufficiency; his honor, with my
secrecy; and that his Jewel was sure enough, without farther questioning me,
what I would do with it; he gave it me, telling me withal, God grant thou
bring it me safe back again, and that thy wishes may take good success.

Lo, there it is, take it, and do what thou will with it. I took it of him,
put it in my bosom, lapt it up safe in a little Purse, knit it fast, and tied
it sure to one of the button-holes of my Doublet. With it I went directly to a
A fine trick, put by Guzman upon a Goldsmiths in Barcelona, that was a great
(...).
Goldsmiths shop; One that was a richman, and a great Usurer; I made a large
relation unto him of my person, and how and by what means I came to this
Company, and what a deal of money I had spent in a short time, reserving
(when I should see my self in some need) a very rich Jewel, for the
supplying of my wants: And that if he would buy it of me, he should have it
reasonable cheap, so as he did not offer me too little, and too much
vnderualew the worth of it. But withal, I advised him, that he should first
inform himself of my person, and my quality, who and whence I was; and in
knowing of it, (without rendering any reason why he was so inquisitiue, taking
that for a sufficient satisfaction to himself) he should walk forth and meet
me at the Seaside, for there I would stay for him, and there he should find
me all alone, wishing him to make as much haste as he could.

This man, who had a great mind to this Piece, and was greedy of gain,
informed himself of me from the Captain, the Officers, and some other of the
Soldiers; receiving so much satisfaction, as was sufficient to content him. For
they did all of them witness one and the same thing; That I was the son of a
principal Cauallero, rich, and nobly descended, and that being desirous to see
Italy, I came to their Company with a couple of servants attending on me, well
clad, and with good store of Crowns in my Purse; that I had spent it all (as
young men use to do) which was the cause, that I was now in that poor case,
as himself might well see.

All this made as well for me, as my self could wish it; it fell out pat, as I
would have it. My honest Usurer told me what they said, that he was very well
satisfied therewith, and that he might safely deal with me for any thing that
I should sell him. He desired my Jewel of me, that he might look upon it, and
that he would give me as much for it, as it was worth. I told him, that we
would go aside by our selves into some secret place, and there he should have
a sight of it.

We went a pretty ways off, and when I had found out a fit place to my mind,
I put my hand in my bosom, and took out my Agnus Dei, of whose price I was
well informed, as one that knew what it cost. The Goldsmiths liked it well, and
had a great desire to buy it. For, besides that the gold-worke was very well
wrought and curiously enameled, it had diverse stones in it of great value. I
demanded of him for it two hundred Crowns, which was little less then the
price that was paid for it, when it was first bought. He began to turn and
wind it this way and that way, holding it one while upward, another downward,
to see which way it showed it self best, and gave the brightest luster.

He found a hundred faults in it (only to bring down the price) offering me a
thousand Royals at the first word. I was resolved, that he should not have it
under a hundred and fifty Crowns, and it was as well vvorth that, as one
Royal; and under that I would not part with it. And here upon the By, let
this serve by way of advice to him that is to sell, that he must never descend
so low as the price for which he means to sell it, but that he should drive
his bargain so, that the buyer may rise to his price; looking still, when he
shall come higher and higher, and so by standing off, get as much for it as you
can. We give and take; I offer, and he bids; At last, my cunning Merchant comes
up to a hundred and twenty Crowns; I thought with my self I should never
draw him higher, and that it was enough (if not too much) for that which I
pretended; and for so much I sold it him. He was loath to leave me, till he had
paid me; and would feign have had me to have gone with him: but I told him,
Honest sir, God bless your life, and send you well to do; if I should go
hence alone with you, I am afraid, le^t that money would be taken from me,
which I purpose to keep till I come to Italy, to furnish me with clothes,
that I may come in some good fashion, when I make my self known there to my
Kinsmen, and friends.

And if some Soldier or other should hap to see me go with you, they would
presently suspect, that it is rather to sell, then buy any thing of you. And if
they shall perceive, that I have any store of Copper or silver money about me
(being but a Boy as I am) they will take it from me, and I shall have no
remedy against them. And therefore God be your good speed, go your ways, I
will stay for you here till you come, bring your gold with you, so many
Crowns, as we have agreed upon, and you shall have the ^ewell away with you,
and God send you as good luck with it, as I shall wish you.

He well approved my reason, and hasted home (like a young Colt in his full
gallop) for to fetch them. I had given notice to a Companion of mine, (a
confident servant of my Masters) that he should stay there waiting for me; And
that when I had given him such a sign* he should as secretly as he could
haste in unto me. He lay close in ambush; The Goldsmith by this time is come,
he counts me out my Crowns in the Palm of my hand: I had the Jewel in my
purse, I sought to untie it: but because the knots were knit so fast, I could
not so easily do it. My Usuring Merchant had hanging at his girdle a pair of
knives in an old greasy sheathe; I desired him, that he would lend me one of
them. He (not knowing why I borrowed it) pulls me out his knife, and gives it
me. I cut the string asunder, leaving the knot fast knit to my Doublet, as it
was before, and I gave it into his hand together with the Agnus Dei. The man
began to marvel; and as^t me why I did so, and wherefore I had put it there?
I told him, that because I had never a Box, nor no Paper to lap it up in, I
had done as I did, and that the matter was not great, for the Purse was old and
little worth, and I had no great need of it: and as for those Crowns that I
had of him, I should make a shift to ^ew them up in some one ragge or other
about my clothes, where no body should come at them.

He took the Jewel of me, just in the same manner as I had given it him, and
after that he had put it in his bosom, we took our leave, and he went his
way. I gave the sign to my Companion: he comes; I give him the Crowns, and
advised him, that he should hie him home with them, and give them to my Master,
and tell him, that I would be with him by and by.

That done, I made after my Goldsmith, and though by reason of his large
strides, he had the advantage of me, and got ground upon me, yet I ran after
him, till the occasion I expected, did fairly offer it self unto me. And so
watching my time, when he was iumpe even with a Company of Soldiers, that were
standing together, I took fast hold of him with both my hands, crying out, A
thief, a thief, help, honest Soldiers, for Gods sake come in and help me,
for this Rogue has robbed me, hold him fast if you love me, let him not go,
take (and you be good men) o take, take quickly the Jewel from him, for my
Master will kill me, if I come home without it, and this Villain has
violently taken it from me.

I was well known to all the Soldiers, and as soon as they heard me, and saw
the pitiful moan that I made, they believed I said truth. Hereupon they laid
hold on the man, to know what the matter was. And because he that complains
first, the Justice commonly goes on his side; and that whining and crying out
of wrongs received, many times overcome the right, more by clamor, then any
good claim that they can make; I cried out more and more, and kept such a
stir and such a noise, that I would not suffer him to speak, and if he did,
then I was so loud again and so clamorous, that they could not hear him;
putting this trick The Spanish phrase, is haziendole el juego Manna. That is,
when one goes deferring the conclusion of a business, because he knows it
will go against him, for that his cause is not good. Couarruuias. Verb. Manna.
upon him in the playing of my game. I did implore their help with great
exclamations, with my hands linked one within another, and lifted up to heaven,
and with my knees, creeping and crawling on the ground, crying out unto them;
As ye be Gentlemen, good my Masters, take pity and compassion of me; for the
Captain my Master will surely kill me. This tribulation of mine did much
trouble them, it did grieve them to see me in this pitiful plight.

At last, they began to ask me what the matter was? and how, and wherein I had
been wronged? Nor was I herein vvanting to play my part; now I had the hand of
him, I would be sure to hold it; gracing my lie with all the credit I could,
that I might leave the less room for his truth to enter. For, man's Hearing,
contracting Matrimony on the sudden, upon the first word that is given, will
hardly be divorced from it, but let it alone, and live and stick thereunto
during life, be it for better or worse. So that all the rest that come after,
are but as Concubines, that come now and then to the Hearing, but have no
settled abode there: They may perhaps, like gadding Girls, touch at this ear,
and that ear, and the the other, (as at so many doors, or other folks houses,)
but there is no dwelling for them, they must pack and be gone.

Having this string to my bow, (setting a good face on the matter) I up, and
told them; This morning, my Master left his Agnus Dei at his bedshead upon his
pillow; he willed me to keep it, and to look safe unto it; I took it, and
first put it in my Purse, and then in my bosom, (thinking I had made all sure
enough) but meeting with this good man (you here see) by the Seaside, I pulled
it forth to show it him; And because he was a Goldsmiths, I asked him, what it
might be worth? He told me, that the body of the Jewel was but Coppe^
double-gilt, and that the Stones were counterfeit, no better then Glass. Yet
asked me withal, whether I would sell it? I told him no; it was my Masters. He
demanded then of me, if my Master would sell it? My answer was; Sir, I know
not: you were best ask him, for he can best tell you. After this, he
proceeded farther in talk with me, asking me, who I was, whence I came, and
whither I would; And so held me on in such idle discourse, till we were both
alone, but of sight of any; and drawing a knife out of that sheath of his that
hangs there at his girdle, he willed me to make no words, for if I did but
offer to squeake, though never so little, or but wagge a foot from that place,
there was no way but one with me, he would presently cut my throat. I stood
shaking and quiuering, while he was taking the jewel out of my bosom, and
because he could not readily vnty the knots, I had knit them so fast, he made
no more ado, but cut the string asunder, and so went away with it. And I
think he has it still about him; search him, I beseech you (good honest
Soldiers) for Gods sake search him.

The Soldiers seeing that the purse was cut indeed, turned toward my
Goldsmith, and looked somewhat strangely upon him, who was struck therewith so
dead, that he had not a word to say for himself. They took the Agnus Dei out
of his bosom, which he had carried away in the purse; as I had before informed
them, so did they just find it about him.

Then did he begin to fall a cursing and swearing, vowing by no small oaths,
that I had sold it unto him, and that I with mine own hand, with that very
knife, cut the purse my self, and afterward delivered it unto him, and that I
had of him for it a hundred and fifty Crowns in very good gold. But for all
his swearing and staring, they would never a whit the sooner believe him;
Thinking in good discretion, that it was not likely, that he would venture to
buy any such piece of me, for he might very well think that it was stolen
Ware. Besides (which made much for me) they had searched me all over, from top
to toe, but could not find one penny of money about me.

Making this to serve as a strong proof against him, they used him very
homely, both in words and deeds. And whatsoever he said unto them to justify
himself, it was all one, he had been as good to have held his tongue, for
after that, they would neither believe, nor hear him. They had forcibly taken
the jewel from him; He complains thereof unto the Justice; I was brought
before him; There I opened the case anew, (as before you have heard) not
failing so much as one syllable in the relating of that, which I had formerly
delivered.

The Witnesses were sworn, and justified what they had both seen and heard.
And in the end, the business was brought so about, that it was concluded, the
Goldsmith should be severely punished. But upon entreaty, he had a brotherly
correction, and so sent packing. And as for me, I had my Jewel given me in
open Court, with charge to carry it home to my Master. I went with it to his
lodging, and there in the presence of all his people, I delivered it unto him.

There are many that love treason; but few that like the Traitor. Well Amo
proditiorem, proditorem odi.
may an ill man, by working ill, please that ill man that sets him a-worke, for
the working of his ends. But when the deed is done, it can not be, but that in
the breast of that man, there is so much mischief imprinted, and such known
Characters of Villainy written in the forehead of him, that none of those that
employ him, will trust him, either any farther or longer, then they have use of
him to bring their purposes to pass. What I had done did nothing displease my
Master. At that time he liked it well, yet it troubled him somewhat, and he
could not well tell what to think of it. These tricks of mine did him good
service, (and that he knew well enough) but he was afraid both of them, and me.

With these kind of Cordials, I kept my Master in heart, till he came to
Genoa; where, (having dis-imbarkt) and having now but little need of my
service, he shifted me off. Your Traitors, and other such like wicked
Villains, are like unto Vipers, or your Scorpions; which when you have taken
the substance of that from them, which you seek for, you take them, and throw
them upon the dunghill. Only they are nourished by all sorts of men
(especially your Great-ones) who make exceeding much of them, all the while
they use them as instruments of their pretended ends; but those once effected,
they bid you fare well, they will have no more to do with you, unless it be
to undo you, as you have others; and so let you go, for such a one as you
are; caring rather to use, then to keep a Knave.

Some few days after our arrival, my Master called me aside, and said unto
me; Youth, you are now in Italy, your service will be of little use to me; and
your Rogueries may do me much wrong: Here is somewhat for you to help you
on your journey, dispatch quickly, and be gone, for you have free liberty to
go whither you will. He gave me some moneys of small value, and some few
Spanish Royals; all was a matter of nothing, scarce worth God a mercy; and with
this poor pittance, I took my leave of him and left him. I walked along with
my head in my bosom, musing in the street as I went, on the great force of
Virtue, which did never leave any man vn-rewarded; whereas Vice did never
suffer any man to escape without punishment, and shame.

I would feign have spoken then unto my Master, and have told him, that he
might be pleased to remember, that I had relieved him in his wants, supplyde
his necessities, taken a great deal of pains in his service, to my great cost
and hinderance. But I thought with my self, that he would twit me in the teeth
with those things, and lay them to my charge, and that therefore he was the
willinger to rid himself of me, as of a rotten member, good for nothing, but
to infect all the rest. And so I rested from that. Now seeing in what disgrace
I was, and hoping to find out my kindred there, I made the less reckning of
it. So I went daily up and down the City, seeking by that means to learn
the language, which as yet I neither understood, nor knew, out of the desire
that I had to know, and to be known.

THE ROGVE, OR, THE FIRST PART OF THE LIFE OF GVZMAN DE ALFARACHE. The third
Book.
Wherein, he treats of his beggarly course of life, and what therein happened
unto him, whilst he was in Italy.
CHAP. I.
Guzman discourses of Poverty, and of the wrongs and outrages, which a poor
man indureth; As also of Riches, and of the honors that are done unto the
Rich: As likewise of the naughtiness of this present world: And how not
finding his Kindred, which he sought for in Genoa, he went to Rome; and of a
jest that was put upon him, before he left that City.

WIth Flatterers, no rich man is a fool; nor no Poor man wise. For they still
wear Spectacles The nature of (...).
of the largest sight; by reason whereof, things represent them selves far
greater then indeed they are. It may truly be called, Wealths-Moth, and
Truths-Worme. Flattery resideth most with the Poor, being the greatest enemy
that he has: For that Poverty, which is not the Daughter of the Spirit, is
but the Mother of shame and reproach; it is a dis-reputation, that drownes all
the other good parts that are in man; it is a Disposition to all kind of
evil; it is man's most Foe; it is a Leprosy, full of anguish; it is a way that
leads unto Hell; it is a Sea, wherein our Patience is overwhelmed, our honor
is consumed, our lives are ended, and our souls utterly lost and cast away for
ever.

The Poor man is a kind of money, that is not current; the subject of every
The Poor man's Epith^, and his wretched condition.
idle Huswiues chat; the off-scumme of the people; the dust of the street,
first trampled under foot, and then thrown on the dunghill; In conclusion,
the Poor man is the Rich man's Ass. He dineth with the last, fares of the
worst, and pays dearest: His Sixpence will not go so far, as a Rich man's
threepence; His opinion is Ignorance; His discretion foolishness; His
suffrage, scorn; His Stock upon the Common; abused by many, and abhorred of
all. If he come in Company, he is not heard; If any chance to meet him, they
seek to shun him; If he advise (though never so wisely) they grudge and
murmr at him; If he work Miracles, they say, he is a Witch; If virtuous,
that he goes about to deceive; His venial sin, is a blasphemy; His
thought, is made treason; His cause, be it never so just, it is not regarded;
and to have his wrongs righted, he must appeal to that other life. All men
crush him; no man favors him; There is no man, that will relieve his wants;
No man that will comfort him in his miseries; nor no man, that will bear him
Company, when he is all alone, and oppressed with grief. None help him, all
hinder him; none give him, all take from him; he is Debtour to none, and yet
must make payment to all. O the unfortunate and poor condition of him that is
poor, to whom even the very hours are sold, which the Clock strikes, and
paies Custom for the Sunshine in August!

And as your rotten and refuse-flesh, comes to be meat for dogs; so, as an
unprofitable piece of flesh, the discreet poor man comes to be eaten up and
devoured by a company of ignorant Chuffes. But it is quite otherwise with The
rich man's Epit^ices, and his condition.
the rich: How smooth does the Wool go on their side? What a fresh gale of
wind is still in the poope of them? In how calm a Sea do they sail? What
fair weather, free from the least cloud of care? And what carelessness in
those storms, which other men suffer? Their Granaries are full of corn; their
The Spanish (...), Cub^. (...) v^o (...) de ^las de Ma^ra del gad^, que se
cinne conar^ y cercos y communemente se (...) las cub^s, part echa^ en ellas el
V^no. Couarruuia^.
Butts of Wine; their iarres of Oil; their Chests of money. In the Summer, he
keeps himself from the heats; And in the Winter he clothes himself warm to
defend him from the cold. Of all men he is well received. His fantastical
tricks, are gentleman-like carriage; His foolish speeches, are wise sentences;
If he be malicious and has a pestilent pate to plot mischief, then is he said
to be subtle, and to have a shrewd head of his own; If he be prodigal, they
style him liberal; if covetous, a wary wise fellow; if given to (...), he is
a witty Gentleman; if foole-hardie, of a brave daring spirit; if ^udent and
full of ribaldrie, he is a merry man, and a fine Companion; if (...) in his
taunts, and given to detraction, an admirable Courtier; if incorrigible, all
m^tall* if scoffing, pleasant-witted; if babbling and full of prate, they
term him sociable; if vicious, affable; if a Tyrant, a powerful man; if
obstinate* constant; if blasphemous and full of oaths, a very valiant fellow;
if dull grave and fit to make a Counselor. His errors the earth covers;
all are afraid of him; none dare offend him; Every man's ear is t^d to his
tongue seeking by their attention to please his palate; and not a word that
comes from him, but is entertained by them with as much solemnity, as if an
Oracle had spoken unto them. He will not be said nay, but will have what he
list, making himself both Party, Judge, and Witness. When he will
countenance a lie, his power makes it to pass for a truth, and, as if it were
so indeed, it is so received. How is he accompanied, how visited, how feasted,
how magnified of all men?

In a word, Poverty is the poor man's portion, and riches, that of the rich.
And therefore, where good blood boyleth, and the Pulse of honor beats strongly
want is held a greater loss then life; death is not so hurtful, nor seems
half so terrible unto him, as Necessity. For money warmeth the blood, and
makes it quick and active: Whereas he that is without it, is but a dead body A
man without money, is a body without lif^.
that walks up and down like a ghost amongst the living. A man cannot without
it do any thing in it is opportune and fit time, he cannot execute his desires,
nor accomplish any thing, whereunto he has a liking.

This is the course of the world, it has always kept this tracke, it is no
new thing, but even from the beginning, to see The Spanish phrase, is, Que de
atras le viene al garbanco el pico. Which is rendered as I have here set it
down. Vide Couarruuias. Verb: Garbanco.
men of base birth, and meaner parts, to wax proud and arrogant. There is no
help nor remedy for it; So we found it, and so we shall leave it; we must not
look for a better time, nor think that it was otherwise heretofore. All
whatsoever, either has bin, is, or shall be, is still one and the selfsame
thing. Our first Father was credulous and light of belief; our first mother a
Liar, and false of her word; The first son that was borne into the world, a
thief and a Fratricide, one that killed his own and only brother.

What is there now, that was not heretofore? Or what can we hope for in that
which is to come? If what is past seems better unto us, it consists only in
this, that we are more sensible of the ill that is present; and call to
remembrance those good things of old, which being so far off, are quite
absented from us: yet when our troubles are once ouer-passed, we are so glad,
when we find our selves to be well rid of them, as if they had never been. So
your Meadows beheld from a far, are very pleasant to the eye, and delightful
to look upon, but when thou drawest nearer unto them, thou do not find so
much as one hands breadth of ground, where thou may conveniently sit thee
down, all that thou see, being nothing else but bogs, pits, and stones. We
see the one, but never think on the other: it is as common, as ancient in the
world, for every man to love prosperity, to follow after riches, to seek for
fullness, to procure preferment, to pursue plenty, and to hazard our lives to
get where withal to live, and to grow into money (which is the mother of
abundance;) For where that is wanting, the father toward the son, the son
toward the father, brother toward brother, and I my self, even toward my
self, break my faith and my word, and abhor mine own self.

This lesson, time has taught me, out of the discipline of his experimontall
discourses, having punished me with an infinite number of miseries and
afflictions.

I plainly now perceive, that if (when I arrived at Genoa,) I had considered
what I was, and but looked well into my self, I would not have ventured so
far as I did. And if I had had but the wit to have reserved that occasion to
some better fortune, I should not happily have been ruined and undone by it,
as you shall hear here-after.

As soon then as I had left the Captain my Master, having made of all my
tottered rags and other old clouts, a kind of Scar-crow (for they would scarce
serve for any other use) to fray away birds from the Fig Trees, I would needs
boast my self to be descended of the The e^ymologie of this word Godo, or
Gothe is diverse: and comes of Gathia, a Province so called Got, also signifies
a Father, which is a phrase properly belonging unto God. If from bence we
derive the name of Goths, they must be men of esteem, as Heroes, or good men.
Goet, is as much as Good, from Got; qua voce Deum vocamus, quia bonum a Deo
descendit, and ad Deum deducit. It is not a^isse to think that Godo in it is
Language, signifies Good. Some would have it come of the Hebrew word Goi, which
is by interpretation, Gens, or Natio. But fetch it whence you will, I am sure
of this, that the Goths were Lords of innumerable Provinces, and particularly
of Spain, where they ruled a long time, till the unfortunate reign of Don
Rodrigo, and of the Relics of those, which had retired themselves into the
Mountains, the Nobility of Spain began anew to lift up their heads, which
conti^th to this day; and is still in such estimation amongst them, that when
they will set forth the presumption of some vainegl^us fellow, they will ask
him, Si deciende de la casta de los Godos. Whether he be ^ineally descended of
the race of the Goths.
Goths, an ancient Gentleman, and nearly allied to most of the Nobility of
that City, giving out, that I was such a one, and come of such a house; and
making farther inquiry of my Fathers ancient Family, and his great Alliance
in that City, it caused such distastefulnes, and such a loathing in them
toward me, that they did hate me to the death. And it is to be supposed, that
if they could have done it without any prejudice to themselves, they would have
given it me; And thou also would have done the like, if such a guest should
have come within thy doors. But they manifested their good meaning by those
actions, which they used toward me. There was not that man to whom I made my
self known, that did not relieve me with a box on the ear, a flirt on the
lips, a kick on the breech; and he that did least hurt or disgrace me, did not
stick to spit in my face, vpbraiding me with the name of Villain, Rogue,
Couarruu. The Spanish word is, Marrano. i. Porcus vn^s anni. Et Iudaeus
recenter conuer^s ad Christianismum, cum Hispanis, vocat^r Marrano. A notable
pleasant trick put upon Guzman, by a Genoes.
Moore, and the like. Art thou a Genoues? Thou art the son of some vile lewd
woman, no better can be conceived of thee. And as if my father had been terra
filius, a son of the earth, a mis-begotten Bastard, or as if he had been dead
some two hundred years ago, I could not find so much as a foot-step of any
friend or kinsman of his. Nor could I discover any thing, till one came unto
me, and greeting me with a Serpents tail, like a crafty old Scabbe; (O that
accursed old Villain, that son of a Whore; O how did he coozen me!) clozing
fairly with me, up and told me:

I have heard much talk (my Boy) of your Father, and I can bring you
acquainted with those that shall render you a large relation of your Parents,
and those none of the meanest; but (if I be not deceived) even the best, and
noblest in all the City.

And because I suppose you have supt already, come and take a bed with me at my
house, (for now the time is fit for nothing else) and to morrow morning we will
walk a turn or two about the Town, and I shall bring you to those (as I told
you) that knew him very well, and had long conuersed with him. The good
presence that he carried, the gravity wherewith he uttered his words, his good
proportion of body, his decent attire, his bald-head, his white Beard, which
reached almost down to his Girdle, and the Staff which he bare in his hand,
represented (me thought) unto me another Saint Paul. I trusted my self with
him, I followed him to his house, with a great deal more desire to sup, then
to sleep: for that day I had made but a bad dinner, as well for that I had
been chafte and angered; as also that it must have been at mine own cost,
which made me to quake, as often as I did but think upon spending but a farthing.

But because that which the rich give us, is but little, and what we call for,
must cost us money, we eat but little bread, and that (God knows) stale, and
hard; though to us, that are almost hunger-staru'd, it seems a great deal,
and soft enough. Besides, I was now grown a pinch-belly, and a very miser to
my self.

I went along, but with feeble legs, ready to faint for hunger, after that I
saw what an Host I was like to have, and how (like a Cordouese) he told me by
way of prevention, that I had already supt: And had it not bin out of the fear
that I had to lose so fair an opportunity, I would not have gone with him,
until I had first visited some tippling house. But the hope of that good which
seemed to weight for me, made me too leave the Bird that I had in my hand, for
to follow the Ox, which fled too fast from me, for me to catch him. As soon
as we were come into his house, a servant came to take off his Cloak; he
willed him to let it alone; and they twain having talked together a while in
their own language, he sent him forth: So that now being left all alone to our
selves, we walked many a turn, and sometimes talked of one thing, sometimes of
another. At last, he drew nearer unto me, asking me diverse questions concerning
Spain; and amongst the rest, more particularly of my Mother, as how she was
left, what was her Estate, how many brothers she had, and in what street she
lived? I gave him a full account of all, as wisely, and as advisedly as I could
for my life.

In this discourse I intertain'd my self the better part of an hour, until
such time as his servant was returned. I know not what was his arrand, nor what
message he brought him back; but my old Fox turned about unto me, and said
unto me; So, it is well, enough for this bout, it is time for you to take your
rest, get you to bed, and to morrow we shall see one another again, and then
we shall enlarge our minds more freely to each other. Then he calls, O la
Antonio, Maria, do you hear there? Come away, and conduct this Gentleman to
his lodging. I went along with him from lodging to lodging, through this room,
and that room, I know not whither my self; it was a great large house,
wrought with many goodly fair Pillars, whose pauement was all of Alabaster,
hewne foure-square.

At last we cross through a Court, and enter into a lodging, that stood at the
one end thereof, which was very well furnished, and fairly hung with Hangings
of sundry sorts of colors, like unto your Arambal: is a Moorish word: and is a
(...) sort of Hangings.
Arambales, but that they seemed to be somewhat better then they. The
Beds-head leaned against the wall, and close adjoining thereunto stood a little
low Stool. And as if he would have me to make my self unready, the servant
that was appointed to attend me, offered his service to pull off my clothes.
But they were such, and so ragged, that my self knew not very well how to put
them either off, or on, unless I took a great deal of care, disposing of one
piece after another, for there was not any one part that was whole, or put in
it is proper place, so that it was impossible to discern or know, which was the
Ierkin, or the Breeches, when you saw them laid abroad, and stretched out upon
the ground. So that I having undone some few knots, with the which I had
fastened them together for want of points, I let them slide off from me at the
beds feet. And thus soul and slouenly as I was, and so lousy, as no man could
well be worse, I crept me in between the sheets. The Bed was soft and good,
the sheets clean and sweet. And when I was laid, I began to think with my
self, sure, this good old man is my kinsman, that he uses me thus kindly, but
will not make himself known unto me, till to morrow morning. It is a good
beginning, it cannot be, but that he will give me new Clothes, and deal
kindly with me, since being in that poor and miserable estate as I was, he had
given me such good entertainment. Questionless it is so, and now will some
fair fortune befall me. I was but young, I did not diue to the bottom of his
drift, I only looked upon the Superficies, I went no farther then the outward
appearance. For, if I had had either wit or experience, I might have considered
with my self, that great offers, have great ends, and that he that is full of
courtesy, is full of craft. A grande offerta, grande pensamiento.
For such kindnesses as these, are not done for nothing, there is some mystery
more in it, then a man is aware of. And always observe this for a Maxim, or
general rule, That when a man shall offer the courtesies of an extraordinary
nature, and such as heretofore he has not been accustomed to do, either he
means to put a trick upon thee, or else he stands in need of thee. The
Servant, when he had me to bed, went forth of the Chamber, leaving a candle
burning by me, I spoke unto him, wishing him to put it out. He told me, I must
hold him excused, and that he would not do so, for in the night time, there
fly up and down in that Country (almost in every corner) certain Bats, or
Reare-Mise of an extraordinary bigness to those in other places, which are
very offensive, and do much hurt, and that the only remedy against them, is to
have a light standing by ones bed side, for they can by no means endure it,
but seek to avoid it by flying away from it into some blind corner or other.

He likewise told me, that this their Country was full of Hob-gobblins, and
Robin-good-fellowes, which were all great enemies to the light, but in your
dark lodgings, they did now and then play their parts, and do many a shrewd
turn. All which I did believe with the greatest simplicity in the world.

This said, he went his ways; and he was no sooner gone, but I presently got
me up, and made fast the door, not that I was afraid of robbing (for I had
nothing to lose) but out of a suspicion and jealousy that I had, that some one
mischance or other might befall me; being young, vnfriended, unknown, and in a
strange place, where I never was before.

Having (as I thought) made all sure, I returned back again to my bed, fell
presently asleep, inioying (to my great content) a sweet and quiet rest; for
the Pillowes, the Your Spanish Colchones, are like our finer sort of English
Matresses; quilted with Wool, or Flax; for in your (...) Countries they use
no feather-beds.
Colchones, the Couerlets, and the Sheets did drink a Health unto me, and I
(with a very good will) did soundly pledge them.

The better part of the night was now ouer-past, the beam of mid-nights
balance began to decline, and leaned a little toward the break of day,
whilst I, being in a dead sleep, was wakened on the sudden with a confused
noise of four parts: Devils they seemed to be by their shape, their habit,
their black curled hair, and by those fearful ugly vizards, which they had
upon their faces.

Having walked their Stations a while about the Chamber, they came at last unto
the bed, wherein I lay, putting me in such a fright, that I lost my senses for
a time, and without any word speaking, off they pluck the Couerlets from me,
anon after the Sheets. I wondered what a Gods name would become of me; I fell
as fast as I could for my life, to crossing and blessing of my self; I ran
over my prayers, I called a thousand times upon the name of I^svs; but they
were Daemonij baptizati, Christen Devils, and therefore drew still nearer and
nearer unto me; They had put upon the Colchone, under the nether sheet, a
Blanket; every one took hold of his corner, and haled me forth into the middle
of the room. I was much amazed, and extremely troubled, when I saw that my
prayers could not prevail; insomuch, that I did neither dare; and if I durst,
yet I was not able to open my mouth, nor to speak so much as one word* if I
might have all the world for my labor.

The room was high-roofed, and fitted for their purpose; where, when they had
me out amongst them, they began to blanket me, and to toss me up in the air,
as they use to do dogs at Shroue-tide, till growing so weary, that they
could hold out no longer, they left winnowing of me (being sufficiently fanned
already) and laid me down there again, where they found me; and leaving me
for dead, they covered me with the clothes, and went out that way they came
in, having first put out the light. I was so dis-ioynted, and so broken as it
were in pieces, and so beside my self, that when it was day, I did not know,
whether I were in heaven, or here upon earth: God, who was pleased to preserve
me, knew for what end he did it.

It was now about eight of the Morning, and I was vvilling to rise, for that I
found my self reasonably able to get up. Me thought, I did not smell so sweet
as I should, my body cleaving to the Sheets, no clay could be more clammy, nor
any plaster cling closer.

This put me in mind of my old Masters Wife, the Cook. And although there are
no perturbations, without some one disorder or other, yet this did much
afflict me. But now the Crow could be no blacker, then were his vvings: And
therefore I rubbed over all my body with the cleanest places, that I could meet
vvithall in the sheets; which when, I had done, I began to buckle my
harneys unto me, and fall a knitting of my old knots, to my older clothes. And
the longer I was in making of me ready, the more I did consider with my
self, what a Devil that should be, that had befalne me this last night: And
if when I rose up, I had not found my limm's almost shaken in pieces, my bones
bruized, and in a manner out of joint, I should verily have thought, that it
had been but a dream. I looked round about the room, but could by no means
find which way they should come in. By the door it was impossible, for I
had shut that sure with mine own hands, and found it (...) locked, as I left
it.

Then I began to cast with my self, whether they might not be those
Hobgobblins, and Robin-good-fellowes, which the Yong-man told me of
ouernight. But that (me thought) could not be; for if it were so, then had he
done very ill, that he did not advise me beforehand, that there were some of
these same mad merry sprites, that delighted as much in light, as other more
melancholy Devils did in darkness.

Whilst I was musing on this business, and devising with my self, how or
which way they could get in; I lifted up the Hangings, to see, if behind them
I could espy any little outlet; at last I lighted on an open window, which did
butt out upon the Court, through which we crossed. Then I presently said with my
self; This way were the Bulls brought in, my hurt came in at this Window; And
albeit every rib in my body, and all my bones throughout, did rattle in my
skin, making such a noise for all the world as your Chesse-men do, when you
shake them together in the bag, yet I did dissemble it all that I could (in
regard of that slouenly part, which I had played against my will) till I should
see my self quite clear of the house: I threw up the bed as handsomely as I
could, covering all as close as might be, that if any should come in, they
might not smell out my fault, and find out the feebleness of my retentiue
faculties, and so the same Devils be brought in again, and torment me anew.

The servant, that brought me thither, came to me toward nine of the clock,
and told me, that his Master expected me in the Church, and that I must go
thither unto him; And because I would not willingly have his man stay behind
in the chamber, that I might get the start of him, I entreated him that he
would do me the kindness to bring me to the door, because I was unacquainted
with the house, and knew not the way out. So he brought me forth into the
street, and returned back again.

When I saw I was come off clear from him, as if I had been borne with wings
at my feet, and my body had been sound and whole, I took Tomar las calcas de
Villa diego. Vale huyr mas que de passo, This Proverb is in Celestine, but
it is original unknown: But it should seem Villa Diego was driven to his
shifts, and not having time to put on his breeches, was forced to fly away
with them in his hand. Couarr. verb. Calcas. Guzman, leaves Genoa, and goes for
Rome.
Villa diego his Breeches, and tript away so nimbly, that he that had run
Post, should hardly have overtaken me. He runs fast that flies: Fear adds
wings and strength; thought was not swifter then my flight. I bought something
by the way to satisfy hunger, and for to gain time, I eat as I went, and
made no stay, till I was out of the City. Where in a Tavern I called for a
Cup of Wine, wherewith I refresht my self, that I might walk the stronger
toward Rome, whither I had directed my journey, thinking all the way as I went
upon that gross scorn, whereby they sought to banish me out of Genoa, to the
end that my poverty might not disgrace them; but I did not remain their
Debtor, nor had they any great cause to brag thereof in the end, as you shall
see in the second part.

CHAPTER II.
Guzman discourses of the unhappiness, greatness, and commendation of
Necessity and Want; And how after he was gone from Genoa, he fell a begging.
And how keeping Company with other poor beggars, he was instructed by them,
of their Statutes, and Laws.

IFled so fast out of Genoa, that if Lots wife had but done that, which I did,
she had never been turned into a Pillar of Salt. I never offered to look
back, my Anger spurd me on, and put me up to the height of my speed; for when
choler once Anger and it is effects.
begins to boil, we hardly feel the wounds that are given us, though they be
never so mortal, never so deadly. Besides, by how much the more a man
re-bringeth as it were himself, to himself, and looks home into his own
bosom, by so much the more he comes nearer to the recognition and knowledge
of his hurt.

I escaped from the overthrow given at Ronces valles, is a Monastery, built by
King Don Sancho de Nauarra, which he endowed with great Rents; it is a Covent
of Can^s Regular, who bear in their breasts an Azure Cross, having the form
of a shepherds Crook, or Crosier staff. Here was a great battle fought.
The said King lies buried in this Monastery, his body being brought from
Tudela, where he died.
Ronces valles, como perro Vexigas, are certain Blisters, which rise upon the
flesh, through heat, or some other accident, and commonly grow on the feet of
men or beasts, with over much travail. Couarruuias. Bexiga.
con bexiga; like a Dog, that claps his tail between his legs, and through
too much haste to be gone as far as his feet will carry him, grows
sur-bated, and stiff in his joints. There was not one firm ligament in all
the whole Fabric of my body. But I did not much feel it, till I came to rest
my self; When I drew near to a little Village some ten miles off from Genoa,
where I sat me down, not knowing whither to go, being bruised in my body,
naked of clothes, without money in my Purse, and black and blue all over, as
if I had been beaten with a Cudgel.

Necessity and it is effects.
O Necessity; how do thou abate man's courage? How do thou take off his
Metal? How do thou dis-hearten his body? And howbeit it be true, that thou
do sharpen the wit, and refine the understanding, yet thou destroyest the
faculties thereof, by diminishing and taking off so much from the senses, that
they are ready to be flaw'd and cracked in pieces through too much sufferance,
and that intolerable patience, whereunto they be put.

There are two sorts of Two sorts of Necessity.
Necessity; The one shameless and impudent, which (like an unmannerly guest)
comes of it self, without being called. The other, which being invited,
strains a little curtsie, but comes upon entreaty at the first bidding. That
which unrequested, Necessity, that inuites it self, and the misery thereof.
bids it self, God deliver us from it; And this is that, of which I treat.
This is like a powerful guest in a poor man's house, who out of his greatness
brings a thousand followers along with him; it is that man of War, wherein a
multitude of mischiefs, (like so many Pirates) stand ready armed, waiting to
do hurt. It is the framer and plotter of all kind of trecheries and
villainies; hard to be endured, and worse to be corrected. It is that Lucerna
Nauis Praetoriae, that Lantern in the Admirals Ship, which all couzenages and
deceits attend and follow; it is the sport of Boys and children; a foolish
dance, a ridiculous Comedy, the sad and direful Tragedy of honor and of
virtue. It is fierce, foul, fantastic, furious, fastidious, faint, facile,
feeble, false: only she fails of being a Franciscan. And it is a wonder, if
she afford any other fruit but infamy.

That other, which we bid and inuit, Necessity, that comes not before she
be invited; and the greatness thereof.
and comes not but when she is called, is Lady-like, liberal, rich, frank,
powerful, affable, generous, sociable, gracious, acceptable, and welcome to
all. She leaves us a full and plentiful house, feeds us at her costs, and
defraies all recknings; she is a firm defense, an inexpugnable Tower, true
riches indeed, and good, without hurt; That Necessity, not necessited, and the
commendation thereof.
Necessity (I say) which necessitates it self, but is not necessitated, is
the place of perpetual rest, the house of God, and the way to heaven. It
lifts up men's minds, it adds strength unto their bodies, it does innoble
their fame, it cheereth their hearts, it magnifieth their Actions, and makes
their names immortal.

Let renowned Cortes, her truest Lover, sing forth her praises. Her legs and
feet are of Diamonds, her body of Saphires, and her countenance of Carbuncles,
it shines, it cheereth, and it quickneth, it is full of pleasure, luster, and
life. But that other neighbor of hers, looks like a filthy old sluttish
Laundresse, where you shall see nothing but a heap of Spittle rags, full of
mattered stuff, and the soiles of vlcerous sores, which no eye is able to
endure, it is so loathsome to look upon, and therefore (with a great deal of
reason) abhorred of all. Behold and view me well, for I am one of those, with
whom Necessity fell in love, she never left following me, but kept me company
at bed and at board, living in deadly sin, by being bound to seek out means
to maintain her. And to this end, she made me study the ^iuion, (...) a (...)
fellow that will not worke^, but go from Town to Town, from house to house,
to beg a piece of bread, and a Dish of drink. It is a French word, Bribeur,
Mendicus. Briber Mendicare. Couarruuias.
Bri^iatick Art. This was the course I ran, I was to day in one place, and to
morrow in another, begging an alms of all that I met with.

It is fit, that we should give every man his due. And therefore I must
confess unto thee, that there is much charity used in Italy, and indeed so
much, Italy, a charitable Country.
that this new Trade, that I had betaken my self unto, made me loath to leave
it, I found so much sweetness in it. For in a few days I grew flush, and able
to make wing to maintain my flight; So that from Genoa, whence I came, till I
saw Rome, where I stayed, I performed all that Voyage, without spending so much
as one farthing. The money that was given, I kept that whole and entire, and
for victuals, I had ever sufficient, and more then would serve my turn. I was
yet but a Nouice, and therefore threw that away many times to the dogs, which
afterward, when I had more judgment, I fold for money, which brought me in no
small gains.

I had a great mind (as soon as I came thither) to put my self into new
clothes, that I might be somewhat again like my self; but this counsel of
mine (me thought) was not so good; and therefore repenting my self of it, I
said thus with my self; Friend Guzman; take heed, lest this other do not
proue-like that of Toledo. And if being well clad, thou should not chance to
meet with a Master, how will thou have bread to put in thy mouth? Content thy
self, and continue still as thou art; For, if being well apparelled, thou
shall beg an alms, they will give thee nothing; Keep that which thou have,
and leave off the^e thy vain and idle humors.

This deliberation took place: and having now set up my rest, I knit another
knot upon my Purse-strings, and then I spoke unto my money, and said, Here rest
you quiet, for I know not what need I may have of your help. I began then in
these my old rags, that were not good enough to make waste Paper, hanging
those totterd streamers as handsomely as I could about me, (which seemed like
so many little pieces of rauell'd Flannell, so full they were of Iiggs and
iaggs) to beg for my living.

Having recourse still at noone to those places, where there was either bread,
or porrage to be had; and sometimes it would so fall out, that I should get as
much at once, as might very well serve three more besides my self. I visited
your Cardinals, your Ambassadors, your Princes, your Bishops, and other great
men's houses, not ouer-skipping any one of them. I was directed unto them by
another young Youth of that Country, he was my Guide, who was well skilled in
that craft, and was the first Tutor that ever read any Lectures unto me in this
kind. He taught me the first grounds and Principles of this learned Science,
and the different Species and forms of begging, how this man was to be sought
unto, how that; what phrase of language to be used toward such a sort of
people, and what a differing fashion to those of another kind. For we must not
have all one tone, for all sorts of persons, but must vary our note, alter our
strain, and apply our selves to that style, which we shall think will take
best, and most move and affect the party, whose devotion we crave.

Men do not care for curious words and choice phrases, they love not the
smoothness of flattery, and as little can they abide to be beaten about the
ears with loud exclamations; that which they like best, is an honest plain
kind of begging, Por amor de Dios; Good Sir, for Gods sake, bestow one poor
penny upon me.

Your women, they are wonderfully devoted to the Virgin Mary, to our Lady del
Rosario, and the like; with these you may be a little more liberal of your
Language, beseeching God, that he will direct all their Actions to his holy
service, that he would deliver them from all deadly sin, from the accusation
of false Witnesses, from the power of Traitors, and the malice of evil tongues.

This being well pronounced, and repeated over and over; with a great deal of
vehemence of words, and a strong and earnest delivery, makes their purses
presently fly open, and happy is she who can first supply thee with an Alms.
He taught me how to work the rich to compassion, how to move the poorer sort
to pity, and how to oblige the religious devout man, that he should not be
able to get from me, before he had given me an Alms. He instructed me so well
in such a company of fine cunning tricks in this kind, that I got a great
deal in a little time.

There was not that man, but I did know, even from the very Pope, to him
Cono^ia desde el Papa, hasta el que estaua sin capa. Proverb.
that had never a Cloak: that is, from the highest to the lowest. I did run
over all the streets of Rome, and that I might not be too troublesome by
begging too often in one place, or of one person, I did divide the whole City
into certain quarters, every vvorking-day vvalking my several Station; but on
Sundays and Holy Days, I was wholly for your Churches, I never mist, but
punctually kept my hours, and there I made good purchase. But that which I
made most profit of, were the pieces of bread, that were given me: These I
sold, and they yielded me many a fair penny. Part whereof those poor men did
buy, which did not go up and down a begging, but The Spanish word is, Tenian
la bola en cl embogue.
were fair for it, being (as they say) the next door to it, who out of their
poverty, were feign to trade with me, because I could afford them a good
bargain.

And some I sold to poor Country-folkes, such as make a living of feeding
Pigs, and fatting of Poultry. But those that were my best pay-masters, were
your Qui coquit and facit turrones Turron. Copta Crustulum. A Biscuit made with
Honey, Almonds, small Nuts, Wa^uts, Kernels of Pine-Apples, etc.
Turroneros, for to make their Alaxur or Alfaxor is a Moorish word; And is a
kind of Conserve, made of Honey, Spices, and crummes of bread. Couarr. verb.
Alaxu.
Alfaxor, as they call it in Castile. I did help my self besides, with some
old hous-hold rags, who, for that they saw I was young, and naked, did in
pity bestow them upon me, which were something vvorth to me, though to them
they were things of nothing.

Afterward, I fell in company with some other of more ancient standing in that
faculty (for they had their distinction of degrees, and prioritie of forms, as
in Schools) for the better increasing of my knowledge, and that from them I
might learn how to govern my self wisely and discreetly. These Rogues had
been admitted into the Livery long ago, and had borne Office of Renters and
Wardens, men that had held preeminence amongst them, and deserved to be Masters
of their company. With these I went to some known Doles; there being some men
that did daily (out of mere devotion) distribute alms every morning to the
poor in their particular houses. Going once to receive this Dole in the French
Ambassadors house, I might hear other poor Beggars, that were behind me,
begin to murmr, saying; This Spanish unhappy Boy, which beggeth here now in
Rome, is newly come, and a mere stranger in this place, he is not acquainted
with this course of life, and for want of knowledge, (by that which I have
observed in him) he is likely to beat down the market, and if some order be
not quickly taken with him, he will undo us all. For having once filled his
belly, in the most places where he comes, if they give him any victuals, he
refuses to take them, and tells them (God be thanked) he has dined well enough
already. He will quite overthrow the Art of begging, by giving the world by
this means to understand, that we poor Rogues have more given us, then we can
well tell what to do withal. So that if he run this course a little longer,
he will hurt us, and do himself no good.

Another of their Comrags, that was there with them, Tush (quoth he) hold ye
your peace, let me alone with this Lad, I will take him to task, and ye shall
see how I will work him. I will instruct him how to understand himself, and
how he may not easily be understood by others. Leauc him (I say) to me. With
that, speaking softly unto me, he called me unto him, and we went out alone by
our selves from all the rest of the Company. He was an excellent Proficient,
and a very ready and dextrous man in all that appertained to that Art.

The first thing that he did (as if he had been the Protopobre, or Prince of
Beggars) was, to examine my life, asking me, Whence I was? What was my name?
When, and to what end I was come thither? Then did he deliver unto me the
great obligation, that Beggars had to keep a decorum in all their actions, to
hold correspondence one with another, and to link in love together like sworn
The Spanish word is Hermano de mesta. A certain jurisdiction belonging to
Heards-men and Shepherds. The Etymology thereof is not so easy; but I will
deliver what I think, remitting my self to others better opinion. It is
termed Mesta, quasi mixta. By reason of the concurrency and mixture of diverse
Herds and Flocks one amongst another. And because they make restitution of
those that are thus inter-mingled one with another, which are known by some
Marks branded with hot irons. Or it is said to be Mesta, of amista, because of
the great conformity and friendship between these kind of people, who are
very obseruant of their Laws. This the Idiome of Aragon does confirm, who
name that, which the Spaniards call Mesta, Ligallo, which is as much as Liga,
and Liga, is a confederation, or friendship.
brothers, and that I should inform my self of certain curiosities, and
secrets, and some Principles, which I did not as yet know. For in very truth,
that which I learned of my Youth aforementioned, and of other poor Rogues of
less talent, and far inferior both in knowledge and experience, were all
triuiall things, and of no esteem, in comparison of those precepts, which I
received from this Grand-Master of his faculty. He gave me certain Rules,
which I shall never forget as long as I live.

Amongst the which, one was, that I should unfold three or four leaves of my
stomach, and open the book to a plain vomit, yet to be so well read therein,
that it should not appear to the world, that it proceeded from any surfeit, or
that I had ouer-charged my stomach. He taught me a trick how to turn up my
stomach in some by-corner, which wrought two good effects.

First, it moved the people to compassion, thinking that I was sick: Secondly,
though afterward I should swallow down two Platters of vvarme pottage, there
would be room enough still for more. And so by this means the infamy and
misery that the poor endured, would the bettter be published and spread abroad.
I knew how many bits I was to eat, and how I was to look upon the bread that
they gave me, how to kiss it, and how often, and what kind of countenance to
cast upon it: What fashion of behavior I was to use, and how to carry my self
upon all occasions, differing the form, according to the diversity of men's
dispositions. I knew the true tone of my voice, when I was to rise, and when
to fall with it. I knew the set hours wherein I was to repair to such or such
a place; In what houses, I might enter in even to the bedside, and in what, I
might not press no farther then the door. I knew whom I might be bold to
importune, and be earnest withal in my craving; and whom again I ought not to
solicit or speak unto above once. In conclusion, he gave me in writing all
the Statute-Lawes, and Orders, ordained by that free Commonwealth of beggars,
instructing me in the observation of them, for the avoiding of scandal, and
the better informing of my understanding And these are they that follow.

The Laws and Ordinances, that are inuiolably to be observed amongst Beggars.

FOrasmuch as all Nations have their proper method of Begging, and are
distinguished and known by their sound, and by a differing form from all
others; as are your Almanes by their singing, and going in troops; your
Frenchmen, by their praying; your Flemmings, by their making of legs, and
their low and frequent Congies; your Gypsies, by their importuning; your
Portugals, by their weeping; your Italians, by their long Circumlocutions; and
your Spaniards, by their big looks, and high language, as if they would
swagger a man out of an Alms whether he will or no; whereby they make
themselves hateful to their own hurt, being held no better then vain
babblers, and a kind of insufferable proud Rogues; these therefore we more
especially will and command, that they reform this disorder, bear themselves
ciuilly, that they do not curse, nor blaspheme, (as too commonly they use to
do) but that they keep good order, according to our Statutes and Ordinances
in that case provided.

Item, we will and command; That none of our brother Rogues, or beggar
vvhat-soeuer, either wounded, or lame of any of these Nations, whence, or
whatsoever, shall join and unite himself with those of another Country, and
that not any person or persons of all, or any one particular, shall make any
Covenant, Compact, or Alliance, with any blind men, that go saying their
prayers, from door to door, nor with any Mounty-bankes, Musicians, nor Poets,
nor with Slaves set at liberty, though our Lady her self should have released
and set them free from the power and tyranny of the Turks, nor with old
Soldiers, which being tottered and torn, have forsaken their colors, and
fled from their Captains; nor with Mariners, that with one storm are
dis-heartened, and have no more mind to go to Sea. For howbeit all and every
one of them do suit and agree well together in all kind of cheating, and
roguish tricks, and would make excellent beggars, yet the Art it self of
Begging, and the language are much differing. And therefore we will and command
every one of th^se to keep his own quarter, and strictly to observe such
Orders as are set down and ordained in that case.

Item, We will and command, that the poor of every Nation, especially in their
own Countries, have certain Tauernes, and known victualling houses, where
shall ordinarily preside and govern, three or four of the more ancient
amongst them, having Staves in their hands, as Ensigns of their precedencie,
and authority: Whom we depute, to treat in those places of all such Accidents
and other things that shall happen there, or shall otherwise be brought to
their knowledge. That they shall sit in Council, and give their opinion
thereupon. And when they have so done, they may afterward play at Fox mine
Host, or some other drinking The Spanish word is Rentilla: The Italian,
Gattacieca. It is some Tosse-pols game, wherein your Ale-Knights, and idle
Rogues sit over their Cups, and censure and deride all estates.
Game, at Cards or Dice for their recreation, and to wash away care. They may
sit over the Cup, and tell old Stories: they may recount the famous Acts, done
either by themselves, or others, as also of their Ancestors, and boast of those
wars, wherein they have served, and what-soeuer else they shall think fit
for intertainment.

Item, We will and command; That every Beggar carry a good Bat or Cudgel in
his hand, and those that are able, to put a good Pike at the end of it, that
they may be armed and provided against all casualties, that may befall either
their Purse, or their Persons. Which they are to do upon penalty of their own
hurt.

Item, That no Beggar may, or do wear any new garment, or but half worn
out, save such as is rent and threadbare, and full of patches, by reason of the
ill example that may grow thereby, and the general hurt that may come of it.
Always provided, that if any such Coat or Cloak be given by way of Alms,
that then it shall be lawful for him to wear it that day only wherein it
was given him, without any farther limitation of license, but the next day
following to put it off, and never wear it more, but forthwith to alter the
property, upon pain of our general displeasure, and his own particular
hinderance.

Item, We will and command, That in the taking of their places, and their
seats, they do all and every one of them observe, antiquitatem possessionis,
and non personae the antiquity of possession, and not of the person;
preferring the ancienter in standing, before the elder in years. And that no
man shall dare of presume, to vfurpe or defraud one another in this kind.

Item, We will and command, That two sick, or two lame persons may join and
go together, and call Brothers, but with this condition, that they beg by
turns, and strain their voices as high as they can reach; the one still
beginning where the other leaves, observing equal time, and tune, every one
keeping his one side of the street; and not using any artificial phrases, or
affected form of speeches let each of them express, as significantly as he
can, his particular grief; and let them afterward part and share the gains
between them, upon pain of our Worships displeasure.

Item, we will and command, That no Beggar carry from the knife upwards, any
arms, either offensive or defensive. That he wear no Gloves, Pantofles,
Spectacles, his hose trussed or his stockings gartered, upon pain of
forfeiting of all his temporalties.

Item, it is farther enacted, That they may wear a foul filthy clowt knit
about their heads in stead of a Kerchieffe.

They may also bear about them a pair of Sizars, a knife, an Awle, Needle and
thread, a Thimble, a wooden Dish, a The Spanish word, is Calabaca: wherein
Pilgrims and beggars carry their beuerage.
Gourd, a little Hand-basket, a Scrip, a Wallet. Be it always provided, that
they bear no Sack at their back, no basket of burden, no Alforjas, is a
Wallet deuid e into two parts, that it may the more easily be borne upon a man's
beast. It is an Arabicke word, to wit, Ahfodja, of the Verb Ahfad, which
signifies to keep: because in it Travelers keep their provision.
Alforjas or Knap-sacke, which Travelers use to put their provision in, when
they are to go some great journey, nor any such like kind of things as these
be. But it shall be only lawful for them to walk with two Crutches, and a
sore leg, with a long and deep tent in it.

Item, We will and command, That all beggars bear two purses about them; one
littleone, and another of a bigger size, besides certain private pockets for
closer conueyance, that may safely endure a search; and that they put the alms
that is given them into their Hat. And We further will and command, that they
neither may make, nor do make any Pouch or Budget, in Coat, Cloak, Frocke,
Gabardine, Cassocke, or Mandillion, upon forfeiture, it being once espied and
found out, they may chance to lose it, and stand registered ever after for
fools upon record.

Item, We will and command, that no man discover the secrets and mysteries of
our Trade, nor diuulge and publish them abroad, save only to those that are
Professors of the said Art. And he that shall invent or find out any new
trick or cunning device for the common good, shall be bound to manifest the
same to the incorporation of beggars; to the end, that it may be understood and
known of all, for as much as such good things as these, are to be accounted as
common, there being no prohibition to the contrary; and more especially, not
to be concealed from those that are our Countrymen, and naturals of the same
Kingdom. But for the better encouraging of others, and that notice may be
taken of our good government; We give privilege, and plenary power to the
first inuentor and Author thereof, that for the space of one whole and complete
year, he make his best benefit of the first impression, not suffering or
permitting any, without his especial and particular License, to use or
exercise the same, upon pain of our heavy displeasure.

Item, We will and command, That all beggars shall manifest and make known to
one another, all those houses, where any alms are to be had, especially those,
where there is any Gaming, as also such places, where your Gallants use to
meet, and court their Mistresses; for that is a certain rent, and seldom
fails.

Item, We will and command, That no beggar breed any hunting Hounds,
Greyhounds, or bloud-Hounds, nor may in his own house have any more then one
little Mungril-curre; for the which we give free liberty and license, and
that he lead him along with him either ty'de in a string, or otherwise fastened
to his girdle.

Item, We will and command, That none shall carry a dog about with him, making
him to dance and leap through a Hoope: nor shall it be lawful for him to have
or hold any place to beg at the door of any Church, any station, or Iubilee,
only he shall have free leave to beg as he passes along by the street, upon
pain of being counted contumacious and rebellious to our Laws and Ordinances.

Item, We will and command, That no beggar presume to come to the Butchers
shambles, or to the Fish-market, to buy either fish or flesh, save in case of
extreme necessity, and license of the Phisician; nor that he sing, play upon
any Instrument, leap, or dance, by reason of the scandal that may arise by so
doing.

Item, We license and permit, that such beggars as are so disposed, may rent
certain children, to the number of four (but not above) their ages being
first examined; and if two of them be taken for twins, borne of one womb, at
one and the selfsame time, it shall not be thought amiss of, in case that
the elder of the two be not above five year old. And if it be a woman that
goes about with these children, she shall bear one of them sucking at her
breast; and if a man, he shall carry one of them in his arms, and lead the
other along by the hand, and not otherwise.

Item, We will and command, That those Beggars that have any children, they
make setting dogs of them, to lie watching close at your Churches, and have
still an eye upon those that come in and out, for whom it shall be lawful to
beg an alms for their poor father or mother, that lie very sick and keep
their beds, and have nothing to help themselves withal, having four or five
small children, that are ready to starve for want of food. Always provided,
that it be so taken and understood, that this Patent extends not to any that is
above six years of age; for if they shall once exceed and pass those years,
then are they to shift for themselves, and like birds that are flush, to
forsake the nest, and like Hounds that are ready to be entered, nose out their
own living, and go abroad, and bring home their prey at usual and ordinary
hours.

Item, We will and command, That no beggar give consent, or suffer his children
to serve, to be bound Prentice to any Trade, or to wait upon any man, whom he
shall acknowledge for his Master. For their gains will be little, and their
labor much: And therein they shall greatly offend, by not following the steps
of their forefathers, and running a course quite contrary to that good way,
wherein they have been borne and bred.

Item, We will and command, That by seven of the morning in the Winter, and at
five in the Summer, no beggar be in his bed, or keep his lodging, but by
break of day, as soon as the Sun shall be ready to peep forth, or some
half hour before they go abroad to gather honey for their hiue. And
likewise, that some half an hour before the shutting in of the Evening, he by
all means, and at all times retire himself, and get him home; save only in
some cases reserved, and that with our especial leave and license.

Item, We permit and give leave, that they may break their fast in the
morning, ^ating a morsel of some thing or other, if they have labored for
their living, and gotten any thing the same morning, and not otherwise. For
therein they lose time (which is a precious thing) and spend upon the stock,
by diminishing the principal. But with condition, that he wash and cleanse his
mouth, that the sent thereof be not perceived; As likewise, that he pass not
up and down the streets, or by any man's house, playing with a cloue of
Garlic in his hand, a sliced Onion, or that his breath smell of Wine; upon
pain of being held incapable and unfit to beg.

Item, We will and command, that no man dare to play the Impostor, or commit
any gross villainy, as to steal household stuff, or help to convey it away,
or exchange it for other, or to vntyle houses, or strip children of their
clothes, or to commit any the like base action, upon pain of being excluded
from our brotherhood, and put out of our incorporation, and to be remitted over
to the secular power.

Item, Our will and pleasure is, that every beggar, when he shall be of full
age; that is, (three years after twelve, being fully complete and ended)
having legally and worthily labored in that course of life, and attained to
the true art of this our free and noble Profession, he be held, taken, known,
and understood (be it any such manner of person or persons) to have fulfilled
the Law, and complied with the Statute: notwithstanding, that two other years
to gain experience, and to learn how to drive the Xauega is the Span^sh word,
which is a Fishers net at Sea, wherewith by little and little, they go drawing
and haling the fish to the shore, where certain Picaros and Rogues are still
waiting for to pull and tugge at the c^rdes of the net, whom they call Los de
la Xauega. It is an Arabic word, which in it is own termination is said to be
Xibquetum, of the Verb Xebque, which signifies, to entrap, or bring into the
Net.
fish into the net, have always to this very day and present hour, been
thought very necessary and expedient; and ever after to be held as a Graduate,
that has performed his exercise, and taken Degree amongst us. And having thus
professed himself, and made proof of his learning and manners, we farther will
and command, that he have, hold, and enjoy all the Liberties, Privileges, and
exemptions granted by us under our great Seal; but with this condition, that
he neither may, nor at any time do forsake our service, and that he show his
obedience unto us, by observing our Laws and Statutes, and by submitting
himself to our Censure, in case he shall offend against them.

CHAPTER III.
How Guzman de Alfarache, was not only reprehended by a learned Rogue, and
Doctor in his faculty; but likewise how he learned of him some new Orders and
Capitulations, concerning this his roguish kind of life, and that which happened
unto him in this his upright course; And of many Precepts and lessons,
delivered unto him upon this point by a Cordouese, an old cunning Crossebiter.

BEsides these Ordinances, they had many other which they duly kept and
observed, not worthy at this time to be spoken of, which were prescribed and
compiled by the advice and counsel of the famousest Rogues in Italy, every one
(in his time) setting down such Laws, as then seemed most convenient. So that
it might be said of them, that they were another new Recopilation, or gathering
together of those of Castile. These were much illustrated in those days by
one, whose proper name was Alberto, whose surname Mizer Morcon: Whom in Rome,
we had made choice of Mizer Morcon, General and Superintendent over the
beggars.
for our General; Who, for his stature, shape, proportion of body, his
fashion, conversation, and commendable carriage, deserved to have the Imperial
Crown set upon his head. For he far surpassed all his Predecessors, who
were no way to be compared unto him, so far did he outstrip all them that had
gone before him. He might deservedly be styled the Prince of Roguerie, and the
Arch-begger of Christendom. He would devour you at one meal, all the tripes
and intrailes of two good sheep, together with the puddings that were made of
them, besides the Trotters, a whole Cowes Vdder, ten pound of bread, vnboulted
and vnsifted, between the beginning and end of dinner, allowing himself
thereunto in drink, two Every Acumbre, we divide into four measures, which we
call in Spain, quartillos. An Acumbre, may be said also to be a great ^ig
Jar, or Pitcher fill^d with wine.
Acumbres of Wine. And albeit he himself alone got more alms in one day then
any six of those ordinary beggars, which gained most; yet had he never any
overplus left, nor did sell any of those scraps, that were given him, nor did
receive any money, which he did not presently drink out. And he did go so
far beyond us, and was every way so much our superior, that we must of force
(as Vassals to his good or bad fortune) succor and relieve him all that we
could. I never saw him buttond, nor covered from the girdle upward, never to
wear any girdle, nor so much as half a hose or shoe upon foot or leg; His
head was evermore bare, his beard close shaven, and his skin all over his
body did shine and glister, as if it had been anointed and basted with Bacon.
This Vpright-man did ordain, that every poor body should carry about with him
a wooden dish in the crown of his hat, or some other convenient place, and
the dried rind of a Pumpion, wherein to put his Wine, clapping it in some
close place, where it might not be seen.

That no beggar should carry any jar or pot about him, wherein to drink
Orders, set down by Morcon, King of Beggars.
his water. But when he came to drink, he should sup it out of a Caldron, a
Kettle, a great earthen Pan, some broad Tub, or huge Vatte, or the like, and
then too, to thrust in his head like a beast, and not in any other manner.

That he, that should not drink a sound draught after his Sallet, should be
made incapable to drink afterward, as long as that supper, or dinner lasted,
and to rise up a thirst.

That no begging Rogue should buy, or eat any Comfits, Conserues, or the like
sweet things.

That every one should eat either Salt, or Pepper with his meat, unless it
have been therewith seasoned before. In that case, the doing, or not doing of
it, shall be left to his own liberty.

That your poor Rogues shall be bound to sleep upon the ground in their
clothes, without Pillow or Bolster, lying upon their backs, with their faces
up to heaven.

That having gotten enough to spend that day he goes a begging, he shall
trouble himself no farther, nor beg any more for that day, but give way to
others to gleane, where he left off.

This our Mizer Morcon, when he did eat, would lie lazing all along upon the
ground, and would sleep both Winter and Summer, without any covering of Sheet,
Blanket, or any thing else that might keep him warm.

Ten months of the year, he never went out of Tauernes, and victualling
houses; We had (as you have heard) our Laws and Orders amongst us, all which I
committed to memory, and was perfect in them, but did observe no more of them,
save such as appertained to good government, and of these I was every way as
religious, and obseruant, as if my salvation had depended upon the true keeping
of them. I made it my chief happiness, and placed a kind of felicity
therein, that my Actions might credit my Profession, and become absolute in my
calling. For things, that are once imitated and begun by us, when we have taken
them in hand, are not easily to be forgotten, nor to be given over, till they
be fully finished, and ended. For it is a note of small prudence, to enter upon
many things, and to end none of them.

I did not put my hand to any thing, that ever I took it away, till I saw my
labor ended, and had fully effected what I had undertaken. But because as yet
I was but green fruit, and not come to my full ripeness, whereby I wanted
much of my true relish, I failed much in the practicke part of my profession,
and fell short daily in such casualties as did usually offer themselves unto
me, and in many of them I did much err.

Upon a Feast Day, about the beginning of In Italy in that (...) it is (...) at
that time of day.
September, toward on^ of the clock in the afternoon, I went forth into the
City in that great heat, and such a scorching Sun, that I am not able to
express it, persuading my self, that whosoever should hear me beg at that
time of day, would verily think, that I was wondrous hungry, and taking pity
of me, would relieve me with some thing or other.

I would needs (merely out of curiosity, and no other end else in the world)
see what I could get at these unseasonable hours. I walked my Stations through
Guzman rec^s the tricks used by Begg^rs: And a (...) that was put vp^ (...).
some streets, and visited many houses, but could get nothing from them, save
evil words, giving me foul language, and many a bitter curse, asking me in a
Devils name what I made there? And so roming about from house to house, I came
at last to one, where I knocked at the door with my Staff, but no body would
answer me. I knocked the second time, and the third, but all was one. Then I
enlarged my voice, and began in the highest key I could reach, to set out my
throat, and to beg as loud as I could for my life. For the house was very
great, and stood far within, and therefore supposed they could hardly hear
me, unless I strained my note a little higher. Whilst I was thus balling at
the door, a roguish Boy of the Kitchen, who (as it should seem) was scouring
of Dishes, came just to the same window, under which I directly stood, and
threw down upon me a great bucket of scalding water; and when he saw it had
fairly lighted upon me, he leisurely vtters: Aqua va, quardaos debaxo. Ware
water, look to your selves there below. With that I began to cry out, that all
the street did ring of me, grievously complaining, that I was killed by some
of that house, and that it was impossible I should live. True it is, that I was
scalded, but not in that cruel manner as I made my crimination.

With this vociferation of mine, and the lamentable exclamation that I made,
the people flockt about me, and every one spoke what he thought: One said, it
was ill done; another, that it was mine own fault; and that, though myself
had no mind to sleep, yet I ought in good manners to suffer others to take
their rest.

There were some others, that did comfort me the best they could, and of those
that were somewhat more tenderhearted then the rest, I made a shift to pick
up some money amongst them, and with the help of that, I went first where I
might dry my self, and afterward got me home to take my rest; muttering to my
self, as I went along, Who (with a pocks) made me so curious, as to go about
to remove the River out of his bed? When shall I be able to contain my self?
When shall I learn to content my self with that, which shall be fit and
necessary for me, without incroaching upon that, which is not convenient for
me? What Devil did deceive me, and dr^w me out of that ordinary tracke,
which I was wont to tread, by making me to be more forward then the rest of my
fellows? I drew near at last to mine own lodging, and there hard by dwelt an
old poor man, about some threescore and ten years of age; who was borne of
beggarly Parents, that had borne Office in our Incorporation, and had left this
trade of begging unto him by inheritance, wherewith he made a shift to live,
and to pass his life away here upon earth.

He was of Cordoua, there was he borne: Which I the rather tell you, that A
B^gger that was a Cordouese, teaches Guzman many lessons concerning the Art of
begging.
you may know that he was died in his wool, a notable Rogue in grain, whom
his Mother brought to Rome sucking at her breast, in the year of Iubilee.

When he saw me pass by in that miserable pickle, looking for all the world
like a dish-clout, all wet, all to be-moyl'd, foul and full of grease, and all
to be spatter'd with the refuse leaves of Coleworts, and the ouer-sodden empty
H^sks of Pease, wherewith my garments were imbroidered all over; he asked me
what had happened unto me? I acquainted him with the whole success of the
business. He was ready to burst himself with laughing, and having made
himself merry a while at my misfortune, composing his countenance, with a
settled kind of gravity, in the end he said thus unto me:

I fear me (my friend Guzman) that you will prove another Benitillo, you are
such a Hot-spurre, and your young blood boyles so fast within you, that you
would feign come to be a Master, before you have attained to be a Scholar.
Do thou not now perceive, that thou have done ill, in exceeding thy
Commission, and in breaking those customs, that are ordered and ordained by
the Company? Yet, because thou art my Countryman, and a young Lad (and (...)
apt to err) I will teach and instruct thee, what thou ought to do, and how
to behave thy self. Sit thee down by me, and hearken well to that which I
shall say unto thee.

And first of all, I would have thee to consider, That you must not go a
begging in the Summer time presently after dinner, when most men are disposed
to Sestear, i. reposar ala Sombra en la hora de Sexta. Que es la del medio di^.
Y^r Spaniards* generally (...) after dinner all the Summer time.
Sestear, and to lie down and take a Nap, in some place of shade, or some
cool room; and less at Noble men's houses, then those of your Tradesmen, and
Citizens. The hour is im-proper, and unfit, and all of them then either do,
or at least are desirous to take their rest. And it would be as strange, as
troublesome unto them, that any should then offer to wake them; And
importunities, at that time of all other, are most irksome, and unpleasing
unto them.

Next, I would have thee take this Rule of me, (and it is a true one) That when
you have called or knocked at one door twice, either there is nobody within,
or they will not be within, because they are not willing to answer. When thou
perceiu'st that, get thee gone, and stay there no longer; for thou may well
lose thy time, but thou shall get no money.

Never offer to draw a Latch, or to thrust open a door that is put to, nor to
enter within the house. For it happens sometime in the opening of a door, that
(without the knowledge of those of the house, not once dreaming of any such
accident) a dog may suddenly rush fiercely forth upon thee, and carry away
half a Buttocke at a bit. Nor do I know how these scuruy Curs should come to
know us, so well as they do, but I am sure we are hated by them, and they will
never let us pass by them, without barking, or biting. And if the Dog should
be missing, some desperate roguish Boy or other will not fail to fall upon
thee, telling thee that, which thou would be loath to hear. And it is well if
thou escape him so.

When thou beggest for an Alms, thou must not laugh, nor change thy note, but
so tune thy voice, that it may carry the show of one that is sick, though thou
have health enough for thy self, and some to spare for thy neighbors; having
a special care, that your face keep an even correspondence with your eyes;
your mouth it is equal and just compass, and your head bending toward your
bosom.

Rub thy face a mornings, when thou risest, with a cloth that is rather
dankish, then dung-wet, that when thou go abroad, thou may seem neither
fair, nor foul. And on thy clothes, clap many patches, though they be never
so hole; and let them be of diverse colors. For it much imports, that a poor
man's clothes should be rather patch't, then neat and cleanely; yet so, that
they be not so slouenly, as to cause loathsomenesse.

It will sometimes so fall out, that coming to a man to beg an Alms, he
will take off his Glove, and put his hand into his pocket, whereof thou will be
glad, and laugh to thy self, thinking that he has a purpose to bestow an
Alms upon thee, when as in the end thou shall see him only pull out his
Handkerchiefe to blow his Nose. But for all this, thou must not be angry, nor
seem to grumble at the matter, for it may be some other may be by him, which
will give thee somewhat, though he do not. Whereas, if he shall perceive thy
proud and sullen carriage, he will give thee nothing.

Where, thou shall find thy self well used, see thou repair thither daily:
For as Devotion shall abound, so shall thy Stock increase. But see, that thou
never depart from his door, till thou have prayed for his friends that are
deceased, and to entreat of God, that he will be pleased to bless and prosper
him in all his Actions.

Answer evil language, with mild words, and to rough speech, apply soft
terms; For thou art a Spaniard, and for our pride (being ill beloved) we are
abhorred of all, wheresoever we come; And he that will draw money out of
another man's purse, must rather beg, then brawle; crave, then curse; Prou. La
bezerra mansa, mama de madre agena, y dela suya.
pray, then blaspheme. For a gentle Calfe sucks milk from a strange teat, as
well as from his damm's.

When they shall not give thee an Alms, answer with devotion, God be
thanked: God bless your Worship, and grant much health, peace, and content to
this house, for the great good, and mercy, that you daily do, and show unto
the poor. This trick got me a great deal of money; for answering them so
gently and ^o mildly, holding up my hands, and lifting up my eyes unto heaven,
they would call me back again, and give me of that they had.

Besides all this, he taught me how to faigne my self a Leaper, to make wounds
in my flesh, to raise a swelling in my leg, to benumme an arm, to set a
counterfeit color on the face, to alter the whole body, and other curious
principles of his Art; to the end that some might not twit us in the teeth, and
vpbraidingly say unto us; that our limbs were sound, and our selves strong and
healthy, that we should work for our living, and that it were no charity, to
relieve such lusty stout young Rogues. He did me many friendly Offices, he had
many curious secrets of nature, whereof he made good use; Nor did he hide any
thing from me; for he found me very capable, and apt to receive whatsoever he
should put into me; And then he began to say unto me, You see my foot is
already in the stirrup to go unto my grave, and I would willingly leave a
Chaplain behind me to pray unto God for me. And it fell out true as he said;
for within a short time after he died.

We did some of us meet many times together, to repeat our parts, and to make
show, what manner of exclamations would best become us, and make most for our
profit; These we studied by night, inuenting diverse methodes and forms of
benediction. There was a poor man that got his living only by making these
forms for us, and did sell them unto us, at the rate of so many Comedies or
Tragedies. And all was little enough, and no more then needed, to move mons
minds, and to stir them up to compassion.

On festival days we would be up betimes, where the Pardons and Indulgences
were stirring, that we might provide us some good place in the Church; for it
was no small benefit unto him, that could get near unto the Font where the
Holy Water was, or to that little Chapel, whither they were to make their
station.

We would now and then go a Progress, and run over all the Country, not
leaving out a Village, nor so much as a Cottage bordering there-abouts, which
we did not go unto; Whence, we came very well furnished: For they would give us
Bacon, Cheese, Bread, and Eggs in great abundance, besides clothes to cover
our nakedness, pitying very much our poor and miserable condition.

We would many times beg a draught of Wine for Gods sake, complaining much
of the pain and weakness of our stomach. As much as you will, would they
say, if you have any thing wherein to put it.

We always carried a little Jar with us, under color of drinking water in
it, which held somewhat less then half an Acumbre; They would evermore fill
it brim-full, before they gave it us; But we were no sooner gone from that
door, but we did presently empty it into a Bota, quasi imbuta, of the Latin
Verb, Imbuo. It is in brief, a Bottle or Boracha made of Let^r, to carry Wine
in.
Bota, which one of our This word is margented before
Company carried behind him at his girdle, which would well hold some four
Acumbres. And I remember it was once our hap to fill it full in one street
alone, so that we were enforced to go home, and power it forth into a little
earthen vessel (which they call a Tinajuela) and then came back again to get
more.

We usually went shod, but as good have been unshod, our heads covered, but as
good have gone bare; So that we had shoes, and no shoes; hats, and no hats;
For our shoes were sandal-fashion, old enough, and torn enough, and our hats
were suitable unto them; the one would scarce hang on our feet, the other scarce
sit on our heads.

We seldom wore any shirt at all. For, when (according to our accustomed
humility) we should crave an alms at such a door, they would ordinarily say,
Pardon me (my friend;) I have not for you. God help you. I will give you
something at another time. Then we begin anew, and cry; An old pair of shoes,
or an old hat (good Master) for this poor soul, that has never a shoot to
his foot to bear him out of the dirt, nor never a hat to defend his head from
the Sun and the rain; Gods holy name be praised. The Lord bless your
Worship; and deliver your good Worship from such a deal of The fashions of
Beggars in begging an alms.
misery and wretchedness, as we poor creatures endure. God multiply his
blessings upon you, and free you and yours, and all that you have, from the
power of Traitors and Villains; Christ Jesus guard your Worship, and give you
health both of body and soul, which is the greatest wealth of all, and the
truest riches.

If after this he shall reply: Indeed (brother) I have not for you, I can not
pleasure you at this time, excuse me.

Then, upon the neck of that comes another replicant, and he lays about him,
beseeching him to bestow upon him some old shirt, though never so ragged and
torn, for to cover the ^esh, and to cure the wounds of this poor miserable
man, and that he shall find it again in heaven, and that God will one day
cover him again with the clothing of his mercy, and put upon him a newer and
a whiter stole of innocence and righteousness, that shall never wear out. I
beg it of you for Jesus Christ his sake, he knows my wants, and that I am
not able to work and labor for my living. The Lord help me; And the Lord
reward you. And praised be that pure vnspottednesse of ou^ blessed Lady the
Virgin Mary.

Now tell me, what heart is there in the world, though of Jasper, and what
bowels, though as tough as Iron, and as hard as steel, which will not be made
malleable with this hammer, and melt into compassion with the heat and warmth
of so many good words?

Few houses did escape us, without some one purchase or other. And never a
pair of shoes could be so bad, no hat so vile, and no shirt so old, that was
given us, but yield us more then a piece of three pence. To us it was much, but
to him that parted with it, of no profit, and less reckning. It was to us a
mine in the I conce^e (...), Serro de Potosi, to be some hill or mountain in
the West Indies, being a principal Mine among the rest, that yielded great
store of treasure.
Scrro de Potosi: We had Morchants and Brokers for every one of these things,
who would lay us down money for them on the board, perfumed and washed over
with the water The Spanish word which is, Aqua de los Angeles, is so called by
the Spaniards, because it is of an extraordinary sweetness, distilled out of
diverse different flowers, and Aromaticall drugges.
of Angels.

We had upon the way certain little Asses, whereon we did ride by turns, when
any store of rain f^ll, that we might the better pass over the Rivers, when
the waters were risen. And if we did light by chance upon any person, that
seemed to bear the face of authority, we began to call upon him a far off,
many a large step before we came at him to the end that he might have leisure
enough to pull out his Purse, and take forth an alms; for if we should stay
our begging till we did just encounter each other, many would forbear to give
us, lest they might be hindered in their journey, and so we should go without
it. And taking this course, we did seldom miss.

Other-whiles, when we saw fit occasion and time for it, upon discovery of
some company of people that came trooping together, we would prepare our
selves to put on a counterfeit lamenesse, to fall a halting, and betake us to
our Crutches: we would change our looks, alter our countenances, take one
another up upon our backs, writhe our mouths, turn the lids and balls of our
eyes up to heaven, some feigning themselves dumb, other-some crippled, and
blind, making show that we could not go but upon Stilts, when as indeed we
were as nimble and light-footed as the Bucke. We would clap our feet in a trice
in certain Swathes, that hung at our necks for that purpose, and carry our
arms in a string, so that with these counterfeit tricks, and the help of good
language, desiring God to send them well on their journey, and that he would
preserve their limbs, and bless their eyesight, and bring them safe to their
iournies end, did always bring us in money. And these we did call our
Adventures, because these good fortunes befell us abroad in strange Countries,
in places that were desert and unpeopled, and because commonly it succeeded
well with us. But otherwise, we did go no farther then what was precisely set
down unto us, and was held to be necessary for the performance of our
Progress.

We had one excellent gift above all the rest, That there was not any Feast,
where we were not present, getting us some one good place or other; nor any
Banquet: whereof we had not a part; Our noses were so good, that we could
smell such things some ten streets off.

We had no house at all, yet every house was ours; For either a Cardinals, an
Ambassadors, or some Noble-mans Porch or other did never fail us; And if all,
or any of these did fail us, the Church Porches were free, and no body could
there put us out. So that having no propriety in any thing, we did not
withstanding possess every thing.

There were some likewise, that had old ruinous Castles, decayed buildings, and
other poor lodgings not worth any thing, where we did make our Rendevous: For
all were not permitted to be Adventurers, nor all allowed The Spanish word is
Puchero: An earthen Pot, or Pipkin, wherein they boil las Puches. Now Puches,
is a kind of dressing and seething of meal and Oil together. Which in
ancient time, was much used before the invention of baking bread was found out.
Latin, Pultes. Couarruuias. Verb Puches, y Puchero.
Pipkins to boil their meat in; But I (who was but a young strippling) look
where I was ouer-night, I would be sure to be there again the next day; So
that albeit I had many times bad lodging, yet my youth bore it out, and it
seemed to me as good as the best.

CHAP. IIII.
Guzman de Alfarache discourses of the Charity, that we are to use toward
our neighbor; He recounteth what befell him with a Gentleman: And of the free
life, and great liberty which a Beggar inioyes.

ONe true sign, and assured token of our predestination, is the A good mark
of Predestmation.
Pity and Compassion which we have of our neighbor. For, to have a
fellow-feeling of another man's misery, (as if the case were our own) is a
deed of Charity, which covers Charity, of what force it is.
a multitude of sins; and where there is love, there is God; and he evermore
plentifully dwells in those hearts by his holy Spirit, where Charity and
mercy abounds. All things, with it, have life and being; without it, dye, and
come to nothing. For, neither the gift of Prophecy, nor the understanding of
Mysteries, nor the knowledge of God, no nor Faith it self, without charity,
is any thing at all, but is all as nothing. To love my neighbor, as I love my
self, is of all other, the richest and the greatest Sacrifice; because it is
offered up in To love our neighbor, is a great Sacrifice.
the Temple of the everliving God. And the merit is as great (through the
mercy of our Savior Jesus Christ) to be truly sensible of our brothers misery
and undoing; as is the pleasure that we take, that our selves should be saved.

Charity is the end of the Commandments, it is the only mark, whereat The
charitable man is favored of God.
the precepts of the Law do shoot. And he that shall be charitable, shall
find the Lord merciful unto him in the day of his trial. And because without
God, we are not able to merit any thing of our selves, and for that Charity is
the gift of God, it is very fit and necessary, that we should beg it at his
hands with tears, and do works worthy the obtaining of it, moystning with
those precious drops, the great drought that we suffer in our souls, and
mollifying there with the hardness of our hearts, that they may bring forth
the fruits of good Works, which are the effects of a true and lively faith.
For, the humble and contrite spirit shall never be forsaken, but God will
rather still succor and supply him with his grace, bestowing his best favors
upon him, and enriching him with many notable and known benefits.

And albeit Riches (being so near a neighbor as it is unto Pride) be an
occasion of Vice, weakening, and infeebling those our other Virtues, though it
be dangerous to it is Owner; though it be a tyrannizing Lord, and a traiterous
Slave; yet notwithstanding it is of the nature of Sugar, which has this
condition Riches, compared to Sugar.
and property belonging unto it, that (if it be sweet and good, and has not
lost his favor) with warm things, it warmeth and gives heat, and with cold
things, it cools and refreshes. To the rich, it serves as an Instrument and
means (by the helping hand of Charity) to buy eternal blessedness. And that
man shall be charitable, and truly rich, who making the poor man rich, shall
make himself, of a rich man, poor. For thereby, he shall make the world to
know, that he is a true Disciple of his Savior Jesus Christ.

I stood one day in the outward Court of a Cardinals house, hard by the Porch,
closely wrapped and muffled up in a great Russet Cloak, just of the same What
manner of Cloak Guzman had?
color as it came from the Sheep back, without any other Dye in the world:
which was so full of Patches, one clapped upon another, which I had sown so of
purpose, that (where it had least) it was no less then of three threads, so
that you could not at all, or very hardly discern the ground of it is own true
color. It was as hard and as stiff as any board, and for all weathers, far
better then your fastest Felt, or your closest-wrought Rugge, or any other
frized cloth in the world; for it was wondrous warm, and no air, water, nor
cold would pass through it, and I was about to say (please it you to excuse the
excess of the phrase) that no arrow was able to pierce it.

Whilst I was thus waiting, there comes me in a Cauallero to visit the
Cardinal, seeming both by his Person, and his Attendants, to be a Gentleman
of principal rank and quality. Who, when he saw me standing there in this
manner, thought verily with himself, that I was sick of an Ague, and that I
had then my cold fit upon me: when as indeed the cause that I looked so
pitiful was, that I had layen there in the Porch the night before; and
because it was winter time, and that the air was fresh, and the wind blew
cold, I was willing to keep me where I was, till the day had advanced it self
a little more forward.

He looked earnestly upon me, and after he had well viewed me, he stood still,
A Gentleman sees Guzman, he looks upon him, pi^es ^im, gives him an alms, and
praises God.
and beckned me unto him. I sneak't out my head, when I came near unto him,
and being amazed on the sudden, and much astonished, to see a man of his worth
approach so near unto ^ee, my countenance did come and go, and began
strangely to change and alter it self, not knowing why, or wherefore, or what
should be the cause of this sudden alteration.

He (good Gentleman) thought that I did shake and tremble, and kindly said
unto me; Put on thy Hat, my Boy, put on, I say, and cover thy head; God comfort
thee, and send thee well: And with that putting his hand into his pocket, he
took out all that he had, which was a matter of some thirteen Royals and a
half, and gave them me. I took them, and was so ravished therewith, that I
was almost beside my self, as well in regard of the liberalnesse of the Alms,
as to see how he went away from me, lifting up his eyes unto heaven.

And, I verily believe, that he said to himself, as he went along; Let (O
Lord) the Angels bless thee, and all those Courtiers, that wait on thee in thy
A worthy consideration.
heavenly Kingdom; Let all the spirits of heaven praise and magnify thy holy
name, for men do not know how to honor thee, they are rude and ignorant
creatures. O Lord, how much am I bound vnt thee! that I being made of no
better metal then this poor man, and perhaps borne of no better blood then
he, should sleep and take my rest in my soft bed whilst he is forced to lie
on the hard ground; should go thus well clad as I do, whilst he remains
naked, and comfortless; should be thus rich, as I am, and he so poor; that I
should be sound, and he sick; I admitted, and he despised: And whereas thou
might (by exchanging only of our places) have bestowed all that upon him,
which thou have conferred on me; Yet (O Lord) thou have been pleased to deal
otherwise with me; and thou thy self best know why, and wherefore. Save me
(sweet Jesus) by that precious blood, which thou sheddest for my sins. For
this shall be my true riches, to lay fast hold upon thee: for having thee, I
have all things; and not having thee, I have nothing. I say, that this
Gentleman knew very well how to employ those Talents, which God had put into
his hands; not considering so much to whom he gave, as for whose sake he gave.
Looking well upon me, and looking well into himself, weighing my wretched, and
his happy condition, he gave me all that he had, with a frank hand, and a free
heart; the one being as full of bounty, as the other of compassion.

Such good souls as these, did (in the exercising of their Charity) gain
heaven by our hands, and we (wicked Villains) have lost it by theirs; since,
through To beg without need, may get us money, but lose (...) heaven.
the greedy desire that we have to receive, being still craving and begging
when we have no need, we rob those thereof that are in true want, suffering
this Vice of ours to usurp upon another Office. We went still full gorged,
greater gluttons and drunkards the world did not afford; our sides were ready
to crack with gurmandizing, and our brains to burst with bowzing; your
Senators of Rome could not live more merrily then we did, for we were as tall
trencher-men, and as good Epicures as the best of them. And albeit we are not
so much respected, nor live not in that repute and esteem as they do; yet our
manner of life has a great deal more ease in it, and I am sure, a great deal
less trouble.

And we have besides two such Privileges, as none of them all, no not the best
man in Rome has the like. The one is a kind of liberty that we have The
great privileges belonging unto Beggars.
in begging, yet nevertheless do not loose our liberty, which is not so with
your better sort of men. For misery has no greater misery with it, then when a
man is forced to be beholding to such or such a friend to succor and relieve
his wants, though this help should come from the free hand of his own
natural brother. For he buys at a dear rate, that receives this kindness;
and far more dearly does he sell, who gives to him that is of a thankful
nature. And if on this point of begging, I might boldly speak my opinion, it
is the worstmis fortune, that can befall a poor man's life, when he once comes
to be driven to beg out of mere necessity. For although it be freely given,
yet the very craving thereof does cost him much. Moreover, I shall tell thee what
is the cause, that begging does so much vex a man, and why it goes so much
against his stomach, which is; That man being a perfect reasonable Why it
grieves a man's heart to beg.
creature, like unto God himself (as himself says) for when he was to make
man (the most blessed Trinity assisting at that Creation) God said; Let us make
Man after our own Image and likeness. (And I could also tell thee, how this
is to be understood, but it is not proper for this time and place.) Well, Man
was made, and coming forth into the world, we are all of us naturally inclined
Man, whereunto he is inclined.
to deifie our selves, seeking as much as in us lies, to come near unto God;
nay, (if it were possible) to be gods. And with this thirst, we still grow
dryer and dryer; and with this hunger, wax weaker and weaker.

We see, that God created all things: we would feign do the like. And seeing
we can not do it, as his divine Majesty did, of nothing, we would do it of
something, as far forth as our ability has power to stretch, seeking to
conserve indiuidua Specierum, the indiuiduals of every Species, or several
kinds upon earth. The bruit beasts in the Fields; the Fishes, in the Waters;
the Plants, in the Earth: And so every thing in it is nature, that is in the
world. He beheld those works, which he had made with his own hands, and they
seemed to him very good, as proceeding from those blessed and powerful hands
of his. He took delight in looking upon them, for they were made to his mind.
This passes current at this day, as it is set down in the letter. And we
likewise are desirous to do, or at least to counterfeit the like; striving to
imitate him all that we may.

How well do I like that Bird, that I have bred up in mine own house? That
Lamb, which has been reared in mine own Farm? That Tree, Every man loves
his own.
which has been planted in mine own Orchard? That Flower, which has sprung
up in mine own Garden? What comfort do I take in looking upon them? how does
it joy me, to see them to thrive and prosper? Insomuch, that what my self have
not bred, made, or planted with mine own hands, although it be otherwise very
good in it self, I will not stick to pluck it up by the roots, and cast it away
from me, and never grieve thereat, it shall never trouble me: whereas that, which
is the work of mine own hands; the dear child of my industry; the fruit of my
labors, though it be not so good as the other; yet because it is my own
handiwork, I like it, and I love it. From my neighbors or my friends Tree, I
will not only take away the Flower, and the fruit, but I will not so much as
leave a leaf, or a sprigge thereupon, and if I have a mind thereunto, I will
not greatly care to cut it down to the ground. But if it be mine own, and
that I have planted it with mine own hands, it would grieve my very soul, if
I should find but a Pism^re, or a Caterpiller upon it, to do it any hurt, or
to see a Bird but to p^cke at it; and all because it is mine. In a word, we do
all of us love our own works. And so, in wishing well unto them, I am like to
him that made me, and have it from him by inheritance.

The like is true in all other actions. It is very proper in God to give; and
Gods great^esse, and man's baseness.
very improper, to crave. Unless, when he requires something of us for our
own good. For that which he asks of us, it is not for himself, neither has
he any need thereof; for he is Remedium totius necessitatis: The only relieuer
of all o^r wants, and the only satisfier of the hungry. He has much, and
therefore is able to give much; and nothing can be wanting unto him. He does
communicate and impart unto all according to their several necessities,
easilier then thou can take water out of the Sea, and with a far larger
hand; so great an in equality is there betwixt thy misery, and his mercy.

We would likewise be like to him in this: He made me according to his own
likeness, and I ought accordingly to be like unto him; even as the thing
instamp^d ought to be like unto the Stamp. How mad, how eager, how desirous
and how foolishly are we all bent upon giving? The Covetous, the saving ^n the
Rich, the Usurer, the Beggar, all do keep and hoord up for to give. But the
most of these men understand least (as I told you before) when they are to
give, for they do not give, till they be dead. If thou ask these men, why
they mass up money, and why in their lifetime they bury it under ground, and
to what end they do it? Some will answer thee, that they lay it up for their
heirs; others, for their souls; others, that they may leave something behind
them, and all of them sure that they carry none of it away with them Thou see
then, how they are willing to give and how out of its due time and season; like
an untimely birth, which comes not to perfection. But in the end, this is our
end, this our desire.

How God like does a man find himself, when with a generous mind To ^aue
w^ewith to (...), (...) a great (...) to a man.
he has wherewith to give, and does give? How sweet and pleasing is his hand
unto him; how cheer^full his countenance; how quiet his heart; how contented
his Soul? His gray hairs are removed; his blood is refreshed; his life is
enlarged. And (questionles) so much the more, by how much he knows, that he
has ability to do it, and is not afraid that he shall ever want. If we be
willing therefore to do that, which he did; (for so did he with us) let us
take as much pleasure to give, as it would grieve us at the heart to ask.

And those, toward whom Gods hand has been so frank and liberal. A r^ble
spirit cannot beg.
and having made them (which likewise is another particular gift of his) of a
noble mind, if they find themselves oppressed with want, and deprived of
these their worldly goods, they will rather endure any misery whatsoever, then
beg of another to relieve their wretched estates.

These are the men, of whom there is great pity to be had, and these the What
kind of alms is nobly bestowd.
whole world ought to relieve with a full hand. For by this it is known, who
does them friendship, and shows them any kindness, when seeing them in
necessity, they succor them, before they crave their help. For, if they
should be put to that push, and be driven to sue unto them, they will neither
give, nor lend them. It is a debt which they pay them, and yet put it forth to
Usury with advantage. This is a friend indeed, which succors his friend in
time of need: And this I call succor, The Spanish phrase, Esse ^amo socorro,
con el que corro. A poor beggar, to whom he may be compared.
when I concur and run along with him. It becomes me to give, but beseemes
not him to ask. I am to run equal fortunes with him. I must keep an even
pace with him, neither be too far behind him, nor too much before him.

If I have entertained thee too long in this subject, and have not given thee
satisfaction, pardon my ignorance, and accept my good will. So that the
liberty of craving, is permitted only to the poor; And in this we are equal
with Kings and Princes, whose particular privilege it is, to demand
Subsedies, and Ayde-money, which is no baseness in them, howsoever it may be
in others. But the difference is, that Kings crave of the Commons, for the
Common good, and for to supply their necessary occasions; But the poor, for
themselves only, out of an evil custom, which they have gotten.

That other Privilege, which I told you of, is that of the five Senses. Who is
he now adays in the world, that with larger license, and freer liberty does
The liberty of the five Senses, by whom most inioyed.
enjoy them, then the poor man, or with greater security, or more content?
Who does so thoroughly and so feelingly taste them as he? And because I have
named the word Taste, I will begin first with that.

There is not that pot, which we do not skimme; nor that meat, which we do
not prove; nor that banquet, wherein we have not a share. The Taste.
Whither did that poor man ever come, that the house that denied him to day,
did not give him to morrow? He runs through all men's houses, he begs of them
all, and he tastes of all: and he is best able to say, which house has the
best meat, and the best dressed.

For the Hearing; Who hears more then the poor man does? For being The
Hearing.
dis-interessed in all kind of things, none are jealous that he should hear
them; in the open streets, in private houses, in public Churches, in the
Marketplace, and in every place, every man treats freely of his business,
without any suspicion of him, though the matter be never so important. Sleeping
besides a nights, upon some bulk or stall in the streets, what music have
they bestowed upon them, which we hear not? What Loue-tricks are they privy
to, which we know not? Nothing is kept secret from such poor beggarly Rascals
as we be. And for public affairs, we have by a thousand parts better
intelligence, then all the world besides. For we hear that treated of in more
parts, then all men else besides put all together.

For your seeing likewise: how freely may we enjoy it, without being noted? nor
ask us the question why we gaze upon them, nor offer to hinder us from The
Seeing.
looking here, or looking there. How often have I accused and condemned my
self, when begging in the Church, mine eye has been wandering and rouing
about? and chuckt and hugged my self, with the delight and pleasure that I
have taken therein? Or to speak downright English, and to declare my self
more plainly, feeding mine eyes greedily on those Angelical faces of your
finest Ladies, whose Lovers did not dare to look upon them for fear of being
noted: all which was freely permitted unto us.

For matter of smelling; Who can smell better then we, who are called by the
name of Smell-Feasts? Besides, if any smell be so much the better, by The
Smelling.
how much it is the more profitable; to us, our own Amber, and our own Musk,
is better and truer then all the rest, which is a cloue of Garlic, which
ordinarily we never go without; as being a Preservative against all contagious
corruption whatsoever. And if we be desirous of any other odours, we then get
us to the corner of some one street or other, where these things are commonly
sold, and there we satisfy our sense of smelling with the sweet perfume of
Ierkins, and of Gloves, some ciuited, and some powdered, that are there laid out
for show, till the dust and powder of them come flying into our eyes, and our
nostrils.

Will you happily say, that the sense of Touching is wanting unto us? And The
Touching.
that never any good thing came yet to our hands? Lament your ignorance. What
such difference I pray, is there betwixt poverty and beauty? We poor
beggars touch and handle as good ware as the rich, and enjoy as pretty
Commo^ties; but all men do not understand this Mystery. There be some poor
men, which for all their beggerie and poverty, maintain such a handsome Doxy
as many a great rich man would be glad to enjoy with all his heart. And yet she
had rather have this poor man, that does truly pay her her Tribute, and is not
wanting unto her in his love, then a rich man, that shall defame, and misuse
her. And how often have some women given me an alms with their own hand (I
know not what others have done) but I out of my youth, would make bold to take
hold of hers with mine; and in a kind of devout acknowledgement, would never
let it go, till I had kissed it?

But these are but toys to speak of, and mere fooleries, but above all these
things the taste, the sight, smelling, hearing, and touching, the chiefest and
truest of all the five Senses, put them all together, was that of those ruddy
cheeks of your golden Ruddoc^s your Spanish Pistolets, your plum^ and fulfac't
Portuguse, and your cleere-skinn'd pieces of eight of Castile, which we kept
secret to our selves, and did privately enjoy in a plentiful manner; For to
have them, for to pay them away is not to enjoy them; To enjoy them, is To have
money, to pay it again away, is not the inioying of money.
to have them lying by us. having no other need of them, then to use them for
the clearing of the eye sight, and the comforting of our senses. Howbeit, some
stick not to say, (...), nuncase goza, hasta que se gasta. That he inioyes not
his money, that does not spend it. These we did carry about with us, sewing
them in some patches of our doublets near unto the heart, and as close to the
skin, as we could handsomely quilt them in, holding them to be restoratiue.
There was not anyone piece of a patch about us, were it never so soul and
never so vile, which was not worth a reasonable good suit of clothes. We were
all flush and f^ll of gold; For, having our diet gratis, and feeding on free
cost, the money which we got, we never spent. And as the Proverb is; Esse te
rizo v^o, que te hizo el pico; He made thee rich, who Proverb. Petit a petit
l'offeau faict son nid.
gave thee whereon to pick. And grano a grano, hincha la gallina el Papa.
Grain after grain, the Hen fills her craw. We grew many of us to increase our
Talent, till it came to a good round sum, where with many an honest man might
have lifted his feet from the ground, and not have stuck in the mire. Rest thy
self a while in this Inn; for in that our journey, which we are to make to
the Chapter following, you (...) all hear what happened in Florence to a poor
man that died there, of the same time and standing with my self. Wherein you
shall know, whether our Touching be not as good as other men's.

CHAPTER V.
Guzman de Alfarache discourses of the quality of men's Consciences, and
recounteth what happened in his time to a notable Rogue, and famous beggar in
Florence, who at his death made the great Duke his heir. He treats of the
ambitious man; And delivers in the end, how he was thrust out of Gaeta for his
counterfeiting.

IT is a very ordinary thing with your poorer sort of people, to become
Plotters and Contriuers, watching night and day, and beating their brains, to
seek out some poor means how to live, that they may not go a begging from
door to door, and still to lie (like Lazarus) at rich men's gates for relief,
and yet starve perhaps in the end for want of a morsel of bread. This every
where befalls poor folks. They (poor souls) are put to their shifts. And
albeit it be said; that in matter of cruelty, Italy bears the bell; and in
Italy, those more particularly that are in, and about Genoa; yet I am not of
belief, that the fault lies so much in The proudest, and hardest-harted people
in Italy, are your Genoueses.
the soil of that place, as in the necessity, and covetousness of the
people. I mean those, that are of the right stamp, your miserable and
hard-hearted Usurers, whom they that are the native Citizens, and natural
Inhabitants of those parts, call by way of Nickname, Moros blancos, white
Moors. Now they, to revenge themselves of them, and to return it The Spanish
phrase is, Echarles las cabras. Now, Echar las cabras, is; when many having
played together, who should win or lose, when they did rifle for any thing,
there should be two losers, and that they might not part or divide, but that
one should pay all, and the other escape scot-free, they return again to play.
And this they call Echar las cabras. Alluding to that which shepherds use to
do, when they make a merry-meeting, and have killed some Goats to make a
feast, who play who shall pay for all, laying the loss upon the two last.
Couarruuias. Verb Cabra. Conscience lost by whom, and how?
home upon them again, say, Que quien descubre la Alcauala is a Tribute, Tax,
Tole, or Subsedi^. The common people have a tale, That King Don Alonso the
Wise, holding a Parliament at Burgos, said unto the Procurators, Dadme gente,
delque v^la. And from thence comes Alcauala, A supply of moneys, which they
gave him.
alcauala, esse la paga. Let him pay the toll, that first invented it. For this
was not (say they) spoken of them, nor is it so to be understood; but of those
great Dealers and Negociators of Genoa, who carry their consciences in torn
pockets, that are ripped and vnsewed, whereby they quickly come to be lost, and
scarce one amongst them all, that has a good and a sound conscience. But one
said, that this was not so, but would needs fetch the water a little farther
off, that should drive this Mill; And therefore (said he) it was thus: That
when the Genoueses send forth their children to school, they carry their
consciences along with them, there at first they begin to play with them, then
to wrangle and fall out about them; some forgetting that ever they brought any
thither with them; and others (having lost them there at play) leave them
behind them, and never think on them after.

Now, when the school comes to be swept, and these Consciences be found
again, they give them to the Master, who carefully lays them up in a Chest,
and there locks them up close, that they may no more be lost. And he that
hereafter shall have need of one (if he can call to mind where he either left
it, or laid it aside) he were best go seek it out himself, to see if he can
light on the right one.

Now, because the Schoolmasters has the keeping of so many, and so mixed one
amongst another, that he does not know which is which, he gives him that which
comes first to hand, and so the party goes away with it, thinking verily that
it is his own Conscience, that he carries thus away with him, when as indeed
it is not his, but either his friends Conscience, or his kinsmans, or some one
or other of his acquaintance. And hence it comes to pass, that no man, bearing
his own Conscience in his own bosom, every man looks and pries into that of
another man's. And ever since that time, has this ill report run of them.

O Spain, Spain, my beloved Country, Faith's true keeper, God uphold thee
with his hand: And as thou have much of this in thee; so likewise, thou have
thy Schoolmasters too, that truck one conscience for another; and men, as
well as they, that having chopped consciences, go away well contented, presuming
all is right and straight, and that that which they have is their own.

How many forgetful of themselves, busy themselves in those things, which
Wholesome lessons for our Consciences.
appertain not unto them? How unadvisedly reprehend, solicit, and censure
another man's conscience? My friend, this ought not to be so; Look well into
thy self, withdraw this chopping and changing: First, thoroughly examine thine
own, do not seek for a mote in another man's eye, till thou have pulled the
beam out of thine own: and then thou will tell me another tale.

That which thou think is a discharge to thy conscience, is a mere jest, To
let other men's consciences alone, and to look into our own.
and an idle toy, and therein thou do but put a jest upon thy self. Do not
cloak thy sin (thou Usurer) saying; Such a one is a greater Usurer then I
am: Nor seek to excuse thy self, by saying; Such a man is a worse thief then
my self. Meddle not thou with another man's conscience; let that alone, and
look well into thine own. This is that which concerns thee; This is that
which imports thee most. Let every man put that away from him, that is not his
own; and wherewith he has nothing to do. Let him not meddle nor make with
it. Let him not settle his eyes upon other men's sins, but cast them aside off.
For it is neither the Idolatry of Solomon, nor the Sacrilege of Judas, that
shall excuse the like in thee: But every man shall bear his own burden, and
receive such punishment, as his own sin has deserved. Why do thou
incline, and lean unto that, which is not only ill, but also hurtful unto
thee? Why do thou not rather imitate that, which is good, and virtuous?
following the example of him that fasteth, confesses, communicates, repents
him of his sins, and performs many other actions of holiness, and of a
good and honest life? Is he peradventure more man then thou art? Thou
forbearest (like him that is sick) to take that, which should cure thy
sickness, and do thee good; and feedest on that, which impaireth thy health
and does thee hurt. I therefore assure thee, and give thee my honest word, that
it will make much for thy salvation, acordarte de ti, y oluidarte de mi, to
forget me, and to think on thy self.

Amongst those many Schools for little children, and those many
Schoolmasters, Seuill, of all other Cities, the richest for Consciences.
which have the keeping of Consciences, (howbeit, as I say, no City, Town, nor
Village escapes them in all the world) Seuill is the only place for my money;
and therein, those that imbarke themselves to pass the Seas. For, the most
part of them, as if their Consciences, were of that great burden and
extraordinary weight, that they were able to sink both the Ship and
themselves, do^ither leave their consciences at home in their own houses, or
with their Hosts, to keep them for them till their return. And if afterward
they chance to recover them again, (which in my opinion is a hard matter, for
that the Country is very spacious and large, where there is no such great
reckoning made of these things) it is well and good; if not, they do not
greatly care; or if they take them with them, and leave them there behind
them, as little, if not less. And for this reason, Conscience goes a begging
in that City, in regard of the great store and plenty of that commodity;
because those that left them there behind them, when they went away to the
Indies, or some other far place, did never return back again to fetch them.

I will not offer to walk in the Exchange, nor the Burse, nor have any thing
to do in the street of San Francisco, nor hazard a drowning in the Sea. Let
all traffic (for my part) be laid aside; Let there be no trade driven, no
commerce had, no buying nor selling, nor exchanging of commodities. For I fear
me, if I should once begin to be a dealer therein, I should never be able to
give it over. But let me hear make a full point, taking this only as but a
note by the way, and not think so much on what I say, as what I would have
said, and shall perhaps say hereafter when I see my time. And so I will proceed
to my promised Story.

There was a certain man, that was borne near unto Genoa, a person of The
Story of Pantalon, Casteleto, a Genouese, and poor Beggar in Florence.
great account, for his rare invention, and subtlenesse of wit. His name was
Pantalon Casteleto, a poor Beggar, who, for that he was married in Florence,
and his Wife had borne him a son, after that the Mother was delivered of this
child, the Father went plotting and devising, how he might leave him well to
live, without tying him to serve any man, or to bind him prentice to any trade
or occupation.

It is commonly spoken there amongst them by way of Proverb: Dichoso el hijo,
que tiene a su padre en el infierno. De male quae. sitis, vix gaudet tertius
haeres.
Happy is that son, whose father goes to Hell. Howbeit, I count him unhappy.
For it is not possible, that should thrive with him, which he left him, nor
that it should come to the inioying of a third Heir. This is my opinion. For,
to leave his child well provided for, he prouides ill for himself; and to make
him, marres himself. For he can not but run his souls hazard, who hunts
after ungodly gain.

And albeit he were married, and had the charge of a Wife, (but this is a
particular benefit, and a large Theme to treat of, that one Beggar should
marry with another, and be both of one profession) they had (God be thanked)
reasonable well wherewithal to live; they wanted nothing, that they had need
of, and sufficient store of wealth they had besides, to leave unto their heir,
in some competent measure, especially for one, that was of so mean a condition
as he was.

But this man would not put himself upon Fortune. But had entertained The
cruelty of a Father.
in his imagination, one of the greatest and most unnatural cruelties, that
the wit of man could devise. He maimes me this his poor innocent Infant, (as
many more of all Nations do in those parts:) where, when they beyong and
tender, they writhe their joints, and break their bones, making them as
pliable as Wax; then taking them in hand anew, molding them after this, or
that manner, as they have most mind unto, forming and fashioning of them (I
know not) into how many monstrous shapes, and ugly postures, only to move the
people to take the more pity and compassion of them.

With these abused Babes, whilst they are little, they get where-withall to
line in their old age; and afterward, thus maimed and mangled as you see, they
leave them a good patrimony. But this wicked Rogue, for his greater increase
of gain, would martyrize this poor tender Infant, with new kind of torments;
He did not put him to these cruel tortures all at once; but still as he grew
in years, so did he vary and change them, as men shift their Shirts, or change
their Bathes, one dry, and the other wet; till he had left him thus carved and
engraven, as I have painted him forth unto you.

Some natural gifts he had, that his father either did not, or could not
touch. So that notwithstanding this his unhappiness, he had a very happy wit,
and was a good Speaker, and his words became him very well. But that which he
had from his Father, which was his outward flesh, to begin first with his head,
he had writhed it in that sort, that it seemed to be set quite backwards, his
face falling on the one side upon his right shoulder. That both beneath, and
above the lids of his eyes, was all one ouer-growne lump of flesh: the
forehead and the eyebrows scorch't and burned with a thousand wrinkles: He
was crooke-back't, his whole body like a Bottom of Yarne, all one lump,
without any shape or fashion, of any one part, that might style him man: His
feet turned backwards, and perching up over his shoulders, being dis-ioynted,
and withered. The only sound parts that were about him, were his arms, and
his tongue. The one left him to talk, the other to take. He went, as if he had
been clapped into a Cage, being thrust into a little kind of wooden Chest, set
and made fast to a little Asses back, which he did rule and guide with his
hands; save that to get up or down, he was feign still to seek for some
help, which he did seldom or never miss of, having one or other ever at hand
for that purpose.

He was, (as I told you before) a pleasant conceited fellow, had a good wit of
his own, and many good things should you hear to come from him. Besides, he
went so tottered, so torn, and in that ragged and wretched manner, that all
Florence took pity of him, and as well for his pouerties sake, as for those
good parts that were in him, they gave him much Alms, wherewith he was well
relieved.

After this manner, he lived some seventy and two years, or much thereabouts,
at the end whereof he fell into a grievous sickness, whereof he certainly
knew, that he should dye.

Seeing himself at this point, and that he now stood upon the iumpe of his
Salvation, or Condemnation; being (as he was) very discreet, he began to
consider a little better of the matter, thinking with himself, that it was no
time now to jest, but rather to confess his sins, and to send for the Pa^son
of the Parish and to make his Will. Which as it was to be the last that ever he
was to make so was he careful to make it as strong and as good as the
strength of his wit could devise. He desired, that a known Confessor of his
might be sent for; one, that was a very learned man, and in very good esteem,
as well for the honesty of his life and conversation, as for his learning and
manners. With him he treated touching his sins, and fully imparted his mind
unto him. And when he had communicated what he thought fit unto him, he was
very desirous to have his Will made, but with the shortest, and most
compendious words, that possibly could be imagined. And the beginning being
drawn, (which belonged to the public Notary to do) what was fit on his part,
he briefly thus sets it down.

Inprimi^, I recommend my Soul unto God, who created it, and my body to the
earth, to be buried in mine own Parish. Pantalons last will and Testament. The
Duke made his sole heir^ and Executor.


Item, My Will is, that my Ass be sold; which money shall be bestowed upon my
burial. But the Pack-Saddle I bequeath unto the great Duke my Lord and Master,
to whom it rightly appertains, and properly belongs, whom I nominate to be my
sole Executor, and make my general and universal Heir.

This done after that he had settled and sealed this his last Will and
Testament of that his indisposition anon after he dyed. And because every man
Pantalon dy^.
held him to be a merry-conceited fellow, and one that was full of his witty
jests, they did all verily think, that he would make his death equal with his
life, and shut up his last breath with some odd jest or other for a farewell,
as it usually befalls such kind of giddy-headed fools, when they once take a
toy in the head, and are wedded to their humor.

But when the great Duke understood of this Will, (which was not long kept from
his knowledge) having formerly heard of the Testator, and that he was held to
be a wise and discreet man, he did from thence collect, that this The Duke
sends for (...) Legacy.
Clause was not without it is mystery. Whereupon he gave order that this
Legacy he had left him, should forthwith be brought unto the Palace, and when
he had it before him he comman led it to be ripped in sunder, piece after piece,
and still as they went along, they took forth diverse different sorts of coin;
and when they had sorted out these several kinds of moneys (which were all in
good gold) they amounted in the whole to three thousand and six hundred
Spanish Crowns, every Crown bearing the full value of four hundred
Marauedis. This poor man, whether he had consulted with his Confessor or no, I
know not; or advised with himself, which is not unlikely; It seemed he thought
with himself, that that was none of his, and that he had no other means to
make restitution, then to leave it to the natural Lord of that Signorie, who
had the charge of all the poor committed to his care, and with this he
conceived he had discharged his Conscience. The great Duke being so powerful
and so noble a minded Prince as he was, gave order to have this Will entered,
and to remain upon record to after-ages, and that the Legacy that he had
given him, should be employed for the good of his souls health; Wherein he
showed himself a worthy Executor, but a far more worthy Gentleman.

What say you now to the feeling of this poor Beggar? What think you of his
sense of Touching? Thine is far short of it, nor half so good and
delightful as this, though thou should enjoy the imbracements of another
Uenus. Of these two Privileges (before specified) we were the sole and only
Lords, for none besides us, did enjoy them so freely, as we did; together with
many other liberties and immunities which (if I list) I were able to relate
unto thee.

When I do but think upon those times, which I inioyed heretofore, and the
merry life that I then led, which is all now past and gone with me, (not that i
either long or look for any more such happy days or that I would call them to
mind, to make me forget my miseries,) or whether the recordation of them did
make those sorrows seem either greater or less, which I suffered in the
Galleys, I will not now dispute; but sure I am, that I take great delight in
the remembrance of them: As that having of our Table still provided for us; our
bed ready made to our hands; our Chamber without incombrance; our Scrip well
furnished; our goods about us; our stocks sure on foot, without fear of
thieves, or any dread of rain, without Aprill's care, or May's fearful
jealousy, which two are the husband-mans moth: Not troubling our heads with
new fashions, with the pomp of apparel, with ceremonious complements, and the
like froth of fooleries, scum'd out of foreign Countries: Living without the
prevention of flatteries, without the composing of Lies, scorning to get either
money, or to seek to grow into credit by such base insinuations.

How would we suffer that men might the better esteem of us? How visit
Artifices to win Opinion.
them, that they might not forget us? How attend them, for to bind them unto
us? What occasions would we not seek out, that we might come to speak with
them, and be seen by them? How early would we be stirring, to the end they
might think we were careful and sollicitous how to live? And evermore the
more early up, the colder and sharper the weather was. And every one of these
had it is pleasure and delight, for the ends for which they were done.

How often would my self fall a discoursing of other men's houses and their
gentilitie, only of purpose to set my own I edigree afoot, and to show that I
was a Gentleman well descended? How often would I discover another man's defect,
and find fault with it, and only to this end, that by taxing such a vice in
another, I might be thought to be free from the same my self? How often would
I hold conversation, only for ostentations sake, and no other end in the world?
How would I wheel about, and fetch in things a far off, only to vent my wit,
and to make my words to take place? To what good meetings did not I go? I was
the only Cock there that crow'd low dest; and when I went away from them, and
left their company, they would not censure me, as I would them, but let me
alone.

O these conuenticles of lewd Company, these meetings, where men's mouths fall
a murmuring and traducing of others! o how large a History would it require?
Who is able to express, how ill it beseemes a Gentleman, to be the Taylour
that must cut out such ill work? There is no Clergy man, whose The Spanish
word is Loba: that i^, Vestidura clerical, ^alar, que llega al suelo, cortada a
todo ruedo con golpes para sacar los bracos. Es vesti^ura honorifica. Este vso
se conserua en la Capilla real. Han le dado varias ^mologias, y ^ntre las
d^mas, vna, que por comer tanta tela, la llamaron, Loba. P^ro su ^timologia
trae Origin del nombre Gri^go (...) genero de vestidura, quae hominem ambit, vt
cortex, and tunica arbo^em. y puede ser Hebreo, del verbo labas, induere y as^i
Valdra, indumen^m. Couarruuias.
Surplice they will not cut; Nor honest woman, whose The Span sh word is, Saya,
which is that garment, which a wom^n wears from (...) downward. The (...) ed
condition of Pretenders. Guzman plays the (...) in Gaeta. (...).
Kirtle they will not make a hole in. They cloth the Saint and the sinner
after a large kind of fashion. But let it rest as it is; if we live, we shall
be served with the like sauce. By how straight a Rule, by how even a Line, and
by how just a Compass, must that Pretender carry himself, who is to sail
through the sea of this world, hoping for a fortune from another man's hand? If
it be good, how slowly does it come? if bad, how soon does it light upon us?
And the Scale can never be made so upright and even, but that there will be
something wanting of it is true weight. And the better a man deserves,
oftentimes he fares the worse. If a man have not a mind to do^-him good,
every Molehill is made a mountain, and every the least obliquitie, is observed
and noted in him. If he speak much, (though never so well,) he is too lavish
of his words; If little, he is too short and obscure, and knows not how to
express himself. If of high and dainty things indeed, he is too rash, and too
presumptuous; and vndertak^ to discuss those things, that are too deep for
his understanding. If of things of lesser consequence, and of a lower strain,
he is too shallow, and has no stuff in him. If he humble himself, he is
base; if stand upon his worth, he is proud: if he will fight and take no wrong,
he is ill governed, and a Royster; if pocket a wrong, and hold his hands, he
is a coward: if he have a bold look, he is impudent; if a modest countenance,
he is an hypocrite; if he laugh, he is condemned of leuitie; if grave, he is
counted a Saturnist: if affable, slightly regarded; if austere, mightily
abhorred: If just, cruel; if merciful, a silly sheep.

Now against all these and the like cauils (which are no small misfortunes) the
poor have a Passe-port, as being Lords of themselves, free from all taxes and
tallage. They are out of the Gunshot of their Competitors, they quietly enjoy
their life, without being troubled with Promooting Knaves to inform against
them; snipping Tailours to take them short; or snarling dogs to snap at their
good name.

Such was my happy condition, if Time and Fortune (consumers of all things on
earth, who suffer not things to continue in one and the selfsame estate) had
not tumbled me down from this height of my happiness; declaring by the color
of my countenance, and the Soundness of my limbs, that I was rich in health,
and not so maimed, nor so poor, as I made my self to be, by my pitiful
moanes and lam^ntations.

For, as I was sitting one day a b^gging of alms, in the City of Gaeta, hard
by the Church porch, whither (out of curiosity) I would needs go to see if
their charity and devotion did equal that of Rome? There I sat bare, made
show of my head unto them, (for I was but newly come thither, and had not as
yet fitted my self with necessaries) so that I was forced on the sudden to
^ake use of a kind of scur^, that I had clapped thereon; in the counter feiting
whereof, I was excellent cunning. The Governor of the Town coming to Church,
as he past along by me, casts his eye upon me, and gave me an alms. With this
trick, I past reasonable well for a while. But because, la Codicia, (...) sa^,
too much covetousness makes the bag to break; and I had not the wit to see
when I was well; I thought fit upon a Festival day to appear in public with
some new invention. I had my preparatiues ready, my provision at hand, I set
them before me, and then dressed me such a leg, that was very well worth more,
then a very good Vineyard. This was the farm that I meant then to live upon.

Well, away go I to Church with it; there I began to stretch my throat, and
to thunder out my voice, ever and anon lifting up the cloth with a tender
finger, to show unto them, what a grievous sore leg I had, wherein I was so
ready and so perfect, that I had need of no body to teach me my lesson. But
whether it were my ill luck, or mine own indiscretion, (for from ignorance
and foolishness, all your mischances for the most part proceed) I cannot tell
which to impu^e it to: But certain I am, I should not have sought to have eat
better bread then is made of Wheat, nor have gone a chopping of horses in so
small a Village. I might have kept me still to my scabbed head, and have past
well with it, (for it found me meat to put in my mouth) and not have gone
seeking after new tricks, and new inventions.

The Governor came that day unto the Church to hear Mass, and because he
knew me, he willed me to rise, saying unto me: Come along with me, and The
Governor of Gaeta cures Guzman of his sore leg, and how he did it.
I will bestow a shirt on thee to put on thy back. I did believe him, and went
along with him to his Lodging. If I had but known before how he would have
used me, he should not have reached me with the best Culuerine he had, nor have
made me to come within his clutches, with all his fair words, nor all the wit
in his head. But when he had me there, and saw I was safe for getting from him,
he looked me steadily in the face, and said unto me; Thy color being so fresh,
thy skin so clear, thy body so sound (for thou art fat plumpe, and fair,
thy complexion good, thy limbs strong, and the rest of thy skin smooth and
sleeke) how comes it to pass that this thy leg is as it is? Me thinks this
does not suit and hang well together with the rest.

I answered him, but with a troubled kind of delivery: Sir, I know not; it
has pleased God it should be so. Presently he knew thereupon upon what leg I
halted, he had found me out; whereupon I had an eye to the door, to see if I
could show him my heels, and get away from him. But I could not, for the door
was made fast. He wille^ a Surgeon to be sent for, that he should search my
wound, and see what I ayled. He came and looked, and looked upon it again and
again, and at last very leisurely and tenderly went to work with me, with a
soft and gentle hand, as never a Lady in the land could more handsomely have
gone about it. At the first it did somewhat puzzle him, for he knew not what to
make of it, but within a little while after he saw his error, and then he told
the Governor; Sir, this Youth has no more hurt in his leg, then I in mine
eye; and that you may perceive it is so, I will plainly demonstrate it unto
you. With that he began to vnswathe me, and taking off ragge after ragge, and
such slibber-slabbers as I had bedawbed it withal, he made my leg to appear
as whole as any fish, as indeed it was.

The Governor blessed himself, and stood amazed to see me in that manner, but
that which did astonish him most, was how I should have the aptitude and wit to
do such a thing as this. I was in a trance, and ready to swoune, not knowing
what either to say or do. And if my youth had not borne me out, none but God
could have freed me from exemplary punishment.

But this youth of mine did reserve me for greater chastisement. And in stead
of the shirt which he promised me, he sent for the Beadle of beggars, and
there (in his presence) willed him to give me a stripped Doublet, which I was to
wear under that torn one which I had to my back. Commanding me, that I
should presently pack out of the City, and come there no more. Which command,
though he had not laid it upon me, I should have been careful to see it
performed my self; for I would not have stayed there, if he would have made me
Lord of Gaeta. I got me away full of fear, trembling and quaking, shrinking up
my shoulders, looking ever and anon behind me, being jealous and suspicious,
that if they should chance to bethink themselves, that they had not given me
sufficient payment, they would make after me, and bring me to a stricter
account.

Hereupon I hastened away as fast as my legs would carry me, making no stay,
till I came into the Popes Territories: Calling my Rome still to mind, Rome
commended by Guzman.
and throwing a thousand blessings upon it; for there, they did not stick upon
trifles, nor did not busy themselves to examine colors, but let every man
(without more ado) make the best of his living. To conclude, Tierra larga: a
large Country for my money. Let me live (to choose) in a spacious Country,
where a man may have Sea-roome enough, and not be driven to run through
narrow Streights and Creekes, sailing still in the Channel, where there is few
fetching of boords, nor any danger of being cast away upon the Coast: Whereas,
in your narrow Seas, every little gust of wind, every small flawe, or least
tempest in the world, will cast you upon Quicksands, or throw you upon the
Rocks, till you be either swallowed up, or dashed in pieces.

CHAP. VI.
Guzman de Alfarache discourses of Alms: And being returned to Rome, he falls
afresh to his old Trade of begging. He feignes himself to have a sore l^gge.
A Cardinal taking compassion of him, takes order, to have him cured in his
own house, and to be laid in his own bed. He discouers the knavery of
Surgeons, having a bad conscience: And how being cured, he becomes the
Cardinals Page.

IT is a known and natural truth; That those that are young, are very
short-sighted in your choyser sort of things, which require gravity, and carry
any weight with them: Not for any defect of understanding, but for want of
Wisdom, which requires experience; and that experience, Time. As Wisdom,
gotten by Time.
your green fruit, that is not come to it is ripeness, has not any perfect
relish, but is tart, and sour; so a young man, before he come to his
maturitie, lacks his true taste, and fails in the speculation of things, and
comes short of the true knowledge of them. And therefore, it is no wonder if he
err; but 'twere rather a wonder, if he should not err. Notwithstanding, A
great wonder if youth should not ^rre.
he that has good natural parts, is commonly more capable of these
considerations, and readier to receive the impression of them.

This I know by my self; for many times, the greatness of my Spirit did
transport me far beyond that which sorted with my years; setting (as the
Eagle does with her young ones) my eyes fully fixed against the Sun of Truth;
considering with my self, that all my cunning tricks, and sundry manner of
deceiuings, was but a kind of coozening my self, by seeking to rob him, that
was truly poor and in need, maimed, and not able to work, to whom those
Alms did of right belong. For the poor man indeed never deceives, nor can he
so do, though it be his end so to do. For he that gives, regards A poor
man neither does, nor can deceive.
not to whom he gives; and he that beggeth, is that Quayle-pipe or whistle,
that calls those Birds unto him, whilst he sits securely on his perch. The
Beggar, with the Call and cry of his lamentations, receives the Alms, which
he conuerteth to his profit, taking God in his mouth, whereby he makes him the
debtor, binding him to repay it. On the one side I was glad, when they gave me
any thing; On the other side, I did quake and tremble, when I took account of
mine own life. For I assuredly knowing, that that was the way to my
condemnation, I was bound to make restitution, as did that Florentine. But What
kind of poor are bo^d to make (...).
when I did sometimes see and observe, that some powerful and rich men would
curiously put themselves to search in every corner of their purse, for to look
out a poor Blanke, a single-sol'd piece of money (God he knows) and had there
been a less coin, I think they would have been well enough contented with
it to give unto the poor, I could by no means endure it, my blood would rise
at it, and I was ready to lose all patience. And even now (me thinks) whilst
I am now speaking of it, my buttons swell; the coals of my choler; revive and
quicken afresh, and such a fury of rage assayleth me, and sets me on against
them, that I cannot contain my self, but must needs say something, though I
know what, nor where to begin.

Hear'st thou me (thou my rich friend) a^t thou not yet wearied out, or waxen
deaf, with so often hearing what has been said unto thee, (it having been An
admoni^on to the rich to be liberal in their A^s.
so often beaten in thine ears, and inculcated unto thee) that whatsoever thou
shall do for any poor body, that shall beg an Alms of thee for Gods sake,
thou do it for God himself, and he isty'de unto thee for the same, and
stands bound for the payment, by taking the debt upon him, and making that his
own, which is another man's? We that are poor, are like a Cipher in
Arithmeticke, which of it self is nothing, but with the addition of a figure
is something, and the number is still the more, the more Ciphers are set before
those figures. If thou will stand for ten, set a poor man by thee, and see how
many the more poor men thou shall relieve, and how many the more Almsdeeds
thou shall do, they are as so many figures, to make up a greater reckoning for
thee with God, when thou shall be called before him to make thine account.

What should thou stick upon the matter, and begin to debate and consider
with thy self, whether I get or not get, whether men give me, or give me not?
But do thou give me that which I ask thee, if thou have wherewithal and art
able to do it. And if not for Gods sake, which commands thee to do it, yet
out of that natural affection, which thou owe unto me. And do not flatter
thy self, or so much as offer to think, that the wealth which thou inioyest,
and the riches that God has given thee, is; That thou art better Wool then
we; but that thou art better carded. And he that made thee thus fine, and me
thus course; by giving to thee, and taking from me, may change hands, and may
bestow his blessings upon whom he please, and on such as he shall think
worthy thereof, and shall do more good with it; then thou do. Be not a
pryer into the poor, nor too strict an examinant: demurre not what thou shall
do for him, stand not a hinching and a crinching with him; for if thou look
well into thy self, thou will find Covetousness to be the cause of all this,
and that they are but mere excuses, because thou would not give him any
thing, and so shift him off from thee: I know it is so; and therefore let me
persuade thee (for thine own good) to enlarge thy mind, and that will make
thee to enlarge thine Alms. And for this end, as also that thou may see the
good effect of Alms, hear that, which Sofronius rrecounteth, cited by
Canisius, a very learned man.

A Widow-woman, having one only Daughter, being a very fair and beautiful
Damzell, Zenon the Emperor fell mightily in love with her, and The Emperor
Zenon, a great Almes-giuer.
was exceedingly inamoured of her; and by force (quite against her will, and
utterly with her dislike) he deflowred her; and with a strong and tyrannous
hand, kept her, and enjoyed her.

The Mother of this Maiden, finding her self much afflicted for this her so
much wronged and abused Daughter, bearing great devotion to a particular Image
of our Lady, as often as she presented her self there before it, she would
still recommend this her cause unto her, saying; O blessed Mary, O sweet
Virgin, I here upon my knees beg revenge and punishment for this force and
affront, which that Tyrant Zenon the Emperor has, and does still offer us. It
is said, that she heard a voice, which spoke thus unto her; Thou had The
effect of Almsdeeds.
been long ago e're this revenged on him, if the Almsdeeds of the Emperor
had not bound our hands.

Loose thou thy hands, that are too fast bound; stretch them out to t^ poor,
and help them therewith (as well as thou can) out of the misery, wherein
they lie. For it is thy duty so to do, it is required at thy hands; and it
much more concerns thee to give an Alms, then the other to receive it. God
did not so much make the rich man for the poor, as the poor man for the rich.
Not so much for his, as for thy good. And therefore do not thou stand off, and
intertaine thy self with saying, One man merits more then another; This
deserves somewhat, and this not. There is but one God, and they ask of thee
in his name; to him thou do give it. All is one, thou art to make no The
necessities of the poor cannot be truly known by us
difference. Thou can not understand, how much another man's necessity does
wring him, nor is it possible that thou should come to know it. It is the
outward man only, that thou can judge of. And thou thinking, that such a man
is sound and in health, it is not fit (as thou supposest) that thou should
give him an Alms.

Do not seek starting holes, to hide away thy Devotion; seek not excuses, to
put away the poor from thee; leave that to their Lord and Master, thou have no
Commission to examine them; it is not given thee in charge. There are other
Judges, to whom this scrutinie belongs. And if, looking upon me, thou will
let thy judgment slip, and say, that God has been too slack and negligent in
punishing of me; Consider, that the selfsame God has done the like by others.

Do not (O thou man of evil bowels, thou vnmercifull-minded man) do not thou,
I say, lie in wait to do mischief. The Ambush is discovered, and I see thy
meaning. I say then, that Charity, and distribution of Alms, has it is method
and order, as in other things. Nor do I say, that thou should not order thy
Charity; but I say, that thou should exercise thy Charity; That thou
should give freely, and not pinchingly; That thou should not make such a
deal of scrupulositie with thy self; whether he should have an Alms or not
have an Alms? whether he have need, or not need? Troubling thy self with
this, and with that, and I know not what. If thou will give it him, give it him
quickly; if thou can not, say thou can not, and there is an end. Yet let me
tell thee by the way; if a poor man beg of thee, then, even then, do thou
owe him an Alms, and it costs him dear too, as I told thee before.

And let me farther tell thee, That thy Office is only to give. Let the Rulers
and Magistrates, the Bishops and their Vicars, open that door to who are to
judge of the poor.
look into, it is their eyes that must see who is poor, and who not, and
accordingly appoint the punishment.

This is for men of Office; this, for men of authority; yet it is a cross unto
them; yet is it a trouble unto them. Nor were they made Governors, or Heads
over others, for to eat the best morsels, or to feed on the daintiest What
manner of man be ought to be, that is in authoritty.
dishes, but to take more pains and cares then other men. Not to laugh and
make themselves merry with their Fools and Iesters, but to lament and bewail
the wretched estate of the poor: Not for to sleep and snort, but to watch and
sigh, having continually (like unto the Dragon) the eyesight of the Spirit
clear. So that, it only appertains unto thee to give an Alms: And do not
think, that thou do then perform that dutey, when thou give that thou
can not well tell what to do withal, and have kept it so long in some
corner a moulding, that it is fitter to be thrown out upon the dunghill, then
any thing else. And as if the poor were that dunghill, thou give him thy
moldy and thy stinking meat; not so much out of Charity, or any devotion
thou have to give it to the poor, as because thou can not eat it thy self,
and would have thy house feign rid of it. But this, I tell thee, is the
sacrifice of Cain. That which thou will offer, must be of the best things that
thou have, as did that good and just man Abel, with a desire and will that it
were much better, wishing it may do him much good. Not, as though thou did
give by constraint and compulsion, nor yet for ostentation, having (like the
Pharisee) the trumpet to go before thee, to sound forth thy praise; but only
out of mere charity, that thou may reap thereby that fruit that is
promised thee, God accepting of thy sacrifice.

I was now a pretty ways off from Rome, whither I was bending my steps. Guzman
with much ^oy arriues at Rome.
But I no sooner came thither, but my tears trickled down my cheeks for joy.
I did wish in my heart, that mine arms had been so large, as that they might
have been able to have embraced those sacred Walls. The first step that I set
within those holy gates, I fell down on my face, and kissed that hallowed
ground. And because that Country, which a man knows, and where he has his
means, the same is to be accounted his Mother, I did much joy to see it. I
knew the City well, and was as well known in it. I began (as I had done
before) to seek some course to live, and to maintain this life of mine: I
falsely call it life, being it was my death, though it seemed unto me, to be my
proper Center.

O alas, how strangely are we wedded to our passions, and how strange does that
seem unto us, which does not answer thereunto, be it never so true, never so
certain! This seemed to me, to be my only happiness; holding (in comparison
thereof) every other thing as a misfortune. And though I did see all, yet I
inclined still to the worst, thinking still, that that was the best. Video
meliora, etc.


I was stirring one morning betimes, according as I had formerly been
accustomed, and trugg'd along with my sore leg, with which I sat me down to
beg at one of the Cardinals gates. And he coming forth for to go to Guzman
falls a b^gging a^w with his counterfeit sore leg.
the Palace, stayed to hear me, in how loud a voice and extrauagant a tune, I
besought his pity: not using those plainer notes of eight, but saying; Give
me somewhat (noble Christian; friend of Jesus Christ) take pit^e of this sore
afflicted sinner, maimed and pained in his members; Look upon these wretched
limbs: consider my unfortunate years, and take some compassion of this
miserable creature! O my most reverend Father, my most noble Lord, show some A
form of begging used by some beggars.
sense of sorrow, have some little feeling, I beseech your most illustrous
Lordship, of this poooe young wretched Youth, and power forth your fatherly
compassion upon such a pitiful piece of misery and wretchedness, as you see
here before you. I beg it at your noble and charitable hands, in that
glorious name of the blessed (though most painful) passion of our dear
Master and Redeemer Jesus Christ.

My Lord Cardinal (after that he had heard me with a great deal of attention)
was extremely moved therewith, and conceived an extraordinary pity toward me,
insomuch that I did not seem unto him to be a man, but The Cardinal takes
pity of Guzman. What effect his pity brings sorth.
that I represented unto him even God himself. Thereupon he forthwith gave
order to his servants, that they should take me up in their arms, and carry me
into the house, and that stripping me of those old and rotten rags, they
should lay me in his own bed, and in another chamber adjoining thereunto, they
should make his. All which was done in a moment.

O the great goodness of God! o the largeness of his noble condition! Gods
goodness.
They stripped me naked, for to cloth me; they would not let me beg, but were
ready to give me; and to make me likewise able to give unto others. God never
takes any thing away from us, but when he means to bestow greater blessings
upon us. When God will give thee any thing, he will first His readiness to
requite us.
ask something of thee. He comes weary about noone to the Fountain, sits him
down, asks thee a little water whereof the beasts of the field do drink.
Thou give it him: In exchange whereof, he gives thee the water of the Well of
Life, the drink of Angels, whereof he that drinks, shall never thirst any
more. This holy man made him his pattern, who sending presently for two
skillful Surgeons, and promising to see them well rewarded, committed my cure
to their charge, and that they should do their best to make me a sound man.
This care being taken, leaving me in the hands of these two Physicians, and
Surgeons, no ^ends to beggars.
hangmen, and in the power of my enemies, he gets him away to the Palace.

Although we used many, and sundry counterfeitings of sores, yet that which I
had then made me, was rubbed over with a certain Herb, which caused it to
look so ill and so vile, that whosoever had seen it, would have thought the
sore incurable, and that great remedies must be used, as to a thing that was
shrewdly festred, and grown to a Canker; yet if the use of this roguish Herb
be but left off for three whole days, nature it self, without any other
help, will reduce the flesh to that perfection and soundness, that it was in
before. To these two Surgeons, it seemed at the first sight a thing of much
moment. They threw off their Cloakes, they called for a Pan of coals, fresh
butter and other things; and when they had all that they would in a readiness,
they vnswathed me, and unbound the clouts that were about my leg, which they
performed very neatly and handsomely. That done, they asked me how long I had
had this sore, if I could guess whence it should come; if I did use to drink
Wine, what meats I did most usually feed on, and such other questions as
these. Which those that are skillful in that art, are wont to do on the like
occasions.

All these I answered with silence, lying all along as if I had been dead, for
I was not almost my self, nor was I indeed for a pretty while, seeing such a
Guzman would not answer to the questions that the Surgeons ^skt ^im.
deal of preparation to cut, to cauterize and the like; and in case I should
escape all this, I was at my wits end, to think that my malady would be
found out, and so my roguerie be discovered. That which I suffered in Gaeta,
seemed but a flea biting unto me. But now I lived in fear, that the Cardinal
would inflict some notable punishment upon me, for this cheating trick that I
had put upon him. I knew not how to help my self, nor what to do, nor whom
to make use of in this my extremity. For, neither in all the Letanie, nor in
Flos Sanctorum, could I find any Saint, that was a Defender and Protector of
Villanes, or that would seek to excuse me.

By this time they had viewd me again and again, a hundred and a hundred
times, and turned me to and fro, this way and that way, that I thought they
would never have made an end; when at last I brake forth and said; I am undone,
I am undone; yet there is some life left in me: I die if you ask me any more
questions, or if you med^le with me any more. Two hours of trouble have I
already endured under their hands, if they do not bury me now in (...),
(thought I) I will pass over the rest as well as I can. And say they should
agree to cut off my leg, the condition were better, and the gain more
certain* so as I did not die in the doing of it. But suppose also that this
should befall me, I should then be before handwith Death, and I shall not be
put to endure that brunt another time. What can I do more? (unfortunate man as
I am) I was borne into the world, here I must suffer, patience must be my best
comfort, shuffle the Cards therefore anew, and see whether we shall have any
better luck. For my rest is up, and the care is already taken.

While I was thus doubtful what would become of me, the covetousness S^ons of
(...) evil (...), what kind of men they be.
of these Surgeons, and their greediness of gain, opened the door to my
remedy. The one of them* (who was better experienced then the other) came to
know at last, that this sore was a counterfeit sore, and that by the signs and
Symptoms of it, it proceeded from the effects of that very selfsame Herb
which I had used. But this he kept close to himself, telling his fellow, This
flesh is cankered all over, and therefore it is necessary, that to hinder it
from spreading any farther, and that other new flesh may come up in its place,
to cut it all away to the quick, and then there was no doubt of the well
curing of it.

The other said unto him; This cure will ask a great deal of time; all this
filthy matter must be taken away, till we come to the very belly, as it were,
wherein the very pith and Core of it lies, before we can well tell what to say
to it. Howsoever, we have here a fair occasion offered to show our skill, and
to pick out something of it, for the better passing over of this hard year.
He that was the more expert man of the two, took the other by the hand, and
led him forth aside into a withdrawing room, that joined close to the chamber.
I, when I saw them thus go forth together (suspecting some secret
consultation) I stole me out of my bed after them, that I might listen to their
talk, and it was my hap at last to hear the one of them say to the other;
Master Doctor, I do think (be it spoken under correction) that your Worship
does not rightly and truly understand this young man's malady; for you shall
seldom meet with the like kind of cures, and there is scarce one of a
hundred, when they do meet with them, that does know them, o^ can tell what to
make of them, yet shall I acquaint you with what I know: we are Partners in
this business, and therefore I will hide nothing from you; but it is a great
secret, that I have to communicate unto you. What (for Gods sake) said the
other? I shall tell you, sir: and with that he said; This beggar The wicked
co^l of two Surgeons, about Guzmans, ^e leg.
is a notable dissembling Rogue, a subtle Villain; these sores that you see,
are feigned ware, counterfeit stuff. What shall we do in this case? Let me be
advised by you. If we leave him off thus* the bird will escape our hands, and
so we shall lose both the credit and profit of this Cure. If take upon us to
cure him, we have no cure to work upon, and then this Rascal will befoole us,
and laugh at our ignorance: and if we cannot one way or other come off fairly
to our best advantage, the be^ course will be (in my opinion) to acquaint the
Cardinal how the case stands, and what a count^feit Knave we have under our
hands.

No sir (said the other) I hold not that so fit. Let us hold the Bird fast,
while we have him: it is a less evil, that upon this young fellow (that is no
better then a Picaro, and an errant Rogue) we should gain us a ^ittle
reputation, and come off with some good opinion, then to let slip so fine and
so fair an occasion. Let us therefore take no notice of these his counterfeit
sores, but rather lay some Playsters thereunto, that may entertain and delay
the time: And if need be, we shall afterward apply some Corrosiues, that shall
eat into the sound flesh, in the cure whereof, we will spend some few days.
Nay then (quoth the other) the best way will be, Sir, (as I take it) to begin
first with fire, cauterizing that part which appears thus infected.

Now, which of these two remedies they should first begin withal, as also, how
they were to share the gains between them, a great quarrel there was, they
could not agree upon the point; for he that first found out the nature of my
sore, would have the greater share, or else he would acquaint the Cardinal
with the whole business.

When I saw upon what they stuck, and that it was a matter of little or no
moment, and that upon their difference, which was occasioned by my miserable
poverty, I might run the hazard of my utter ruin, I rusht in between
them, and throwing my self down at their feet, I said thus unto them,
Gentlemen; on your hands, and tongues, depends my life, or death: my remedy, or
my ruin. From my hurt no good can come to you; but from Guzman speaks to the
Surgeons. They a^e together to abuse the charity of this good P^clate.
my good, you may reap assured both profit, and credit.

I know you are not ignorant of the necessity and want which the poor suffer,
and of the hardness of rich men's hearts, insomuch, that to move them to the
more compassion and the easilier to get an Alms from them, we are enforced to
wound our flesh, with these kind of sores and martyrdomes, enduring much
trouble, and suffering much pain, yet neither these, nor greater miseries that
we abide, are of power to prevail with them. It were a great misfortune in
others to endure that out of necessity which we willingly suffer, for that
poor and miserable maintenance, which we draw from thence. I beseech you (for
Gods sake) to take pity on me, seeing that you are men that run through the
troublesome street of this world, and are made of flesh and blood, as well as
my self; and that, which has driven me to this hard exigent, may likewise
light upon your selves.

Do not (I beseech you) bewray me, work your will upon me, and wherein I may
serve and help you, I will not be wanting to do as you will have me, and in
all things to be so ruled by you, that you may gain much by this your cure.
You may be confident of me, and trust me as you would your own lives; for if
there were no other means to make me sure unto you, the fear of mine own
punishment is sufficient of it self, to bind me to be secret. Nor let not the
respect of gain restrain your kindness; for it is better to get, then to
lose. We are three of us, let us all play booty, and join together to coozen
the Cardinal; for he is rich, and something is better then nothing.

These entreaties, seasoned with a few tears, and uttered with that
earnestness as I delivered them unto them, were sufficient to make them
approve of my counsel; and so much the rather, for that they saw that I had
hit the nail right on the head. Wherewith they were so well pleased, that they
were ready for joy to take me up upon their shoulders, to carry me to my bed.
And so they and my self grew fully agreed to play every man his part as well
as we could.

Whilst this business was in debating, they were so long before they could
agree upon the matter, that I was scarce put into my bed, and the clothes
cast upon me; but that my Lord Cardinal was come to the Chamber door; who
when he was entered, one of the Surgeons said unto him: The Surgeons dissemble
th^s counterset ^ore with the Cardinal.


This young man's malady (may it please your Lordship) is a very grievous one,
and we must necessarily apply, great remedies thereunto. For the flesh is
festred and cankered in many places, and it has taken such deep root, that
it is impossible for the plasters that we are to apply to work any good
effect, without some long tract of time; but I am very confident, and dare be
bold to assure your Lordship, that (by the help of God) we shall make him as
sound a man, as ever he was in his life.

Then said the other, If this Youth had not thus luckily fallen into your
Lordships pitiful and charitable hands, within a few days, these his sores
would have been so putrified, and have so corrupted the wholebody, that all the
world could not have saved his life, but he must have perished, and died. But
we shall so stop this Canker, from spreading it self any farther, and use such
good means for his recovery, that I make no question but within six months;
if not sooner, his flesh shall come to be as whole and as fair as mine.

The good Cardinal (whom Charity had only moved hereunto) told them; Be it
in six, or in ten, let me have it thoroughly healed and cured as it ought to be
cured, and I shall take order that you be provided of all things necessary for
it, you shall want nothing. With this, he left them, and withdrew himself
into another room. This did put new life into me; and as if they had drawn my
heart out of the one side, and had thrust it in on the other into my body
again, so did I then feel my self. For even till that very instant, I did
not rest assured of these two traitorous Surgeons. I still feared, they would
have wheeled about another way, and have been the cause of my undoing. But by
that which I had heard them treat in my presence, I was somewhat cheered, and
began to be of good comfort.

But the custom ofSwearing, Gaming, and Begging, are things that are Swearing,
Gaming, and Begging, three things hard to be left.
hard to be left off. It could not choose but grieve me very much, that I was
hindered in my course, mewed up, debarred my liberty, and made unable to enjoy
those good and plentiful Alms, which I gained by begging. Which loss
notwithstanding did seem the less, in regard of that curious intertainment,
choice diet, and good lodging that I had, that man's desire could not have wished
it to have bin better. For I was waited on, like a Prince, and cured with that
care, as if I had been the Cardinal himself. And so had he given
commandment to the servants of his house; besides his daily coming in his
own proper person to visit me. And sometimes he would sit down and make some
stay with me, talking of such things, wherein he took pleasure to hear me.

At length, being healed of this infirmity, (when the Surgeons saw their
Guzman is fully cured. He is made one of the Cardinals Pages.
time,) they were dismissed, receiving a great deal of pay, for a little
pains. And I was commanded to be new clothed, and to be listed in the Roll of
the Pages; that as one of them, from that time forward, I might attend, and
wait upon his Lordship.

CHAPTER VII.
Guzman de Alfarache discourses, how all things have had their time of Empire.
He delivers strange things, touching Truth, and Lying. As being Page to the
Cardinal; he declares the Uertues, and the Vices, wherein your Pages
exercise themselves. He relates a pleasant Story of his stealing of some
Conserues; and how he was punished for it.

OF all things created, none can complain to have past without Al things
created have had their time of sway.
it is Empire. They have all of them had their day, and have taken their turn.
But because Time changes al things; these are past and gone; and those have
finished their course.

And first to begin with Poetry, it is apparent to all the Poetry.
world, how much that in it is time was celebrated.

Let ancient Rome report, in what reverence were your Orators held, that were
skilled in the Art of Rhetoric, and had the gift of Oratory.
speaking well and eloquently.

And let our Spain speak, what honor is now at this day given to those
Divinity.
sacred letters of holy Writ, so many years since, so well received by her;
And in what esteem stand both the Laws, Civil, and Canon. Law.


The fashion of Apparel, and wearing of clothes in Spain, cannot escape
amongst the rest; wherein we daily find new changes, and new alterations,
Apparel.
after which strange fashions all run as fast, as scatteringly, and as much
out of order as Goats do one after another; and as one Sheep leapes after
another; so do men and women leap into fashions. He is no body that is not
in the new fashion. And nothing now seems well, but what is in use;
notwithstanding that it has been already used, and that lately, and approved
for good: And that sottish ignorance of the common rout, and baser sort of
people, is come now to that pass, that they will all forsooth be alike; the
tall man as the short; the Quack-belly, as the Scranio; the fat, as the lean;
the sick, as the sound; the deformed, as the well-proportioned man, will have
(if not one and the selfsame measure) at least one and the selfsame
fashion; putting themselves into ugly and monstrous shapes, and into an
indecent and ill-becomming wear of clothes, and only because they will
follow the fashion, and be in the same cut as others be, as if one kind of
Syrrop, or Purge, were fit for all diseases.

The words likewise and phrases of our speech, have been corrupted by use,
Words and sp^
and those which once were fyled phrases, and pure language, are now accounted
rude and barbarous.

Meats also have their season, and their time; For that does not please us
Mea^s.
in the Winter, which we have a great desire unto in the Spring; nor that like
us in the Autumn, which we have a mind unto in the Summer.

Your buildings, and your Engines of War are daily renewed. Your Manual
Buildings. Warlike Engines.
works, and those that are wrought with the hand, have their turnings too; as
your Seats, your Chaires, your Benches, your Cupboords, Manual Arts.
your Cabinets, your Tables, your low Stools for women, your Lamps, your
Candle-sticks, and the like: Your sports, your games and your Dances, Music.
Dancing.
have also their changes. And even in Music, and in Songs, we find the like.

For some are much taken with the Zarauanda: a known Dance in Spain, very
wanton and lascivious. The women of Cadizmuented the Dance, and brought it to
Rome, whereof Martial ma^es ment^on in some places. Es^lly lib. 5. Epig. 79.
Nec de Gadibus improbis puellae Vibrabunt sine sine prurientes Lasciu^s docili
tremore lumbos. Truth banished.
Zarauanda; and others may come hereafter, that will utterly mislike it, and
make it grow out of date. Who have seen your Mules in former times, how much
Velvet they have drawn along with them in their Foot (...) Asses.
Foot-cloathes, may now in these behold how incapable they are of any such
courtesy, being not suffered to have any ornaments of Silk or Gold.

We are all witnesses, when the time was, that my little pretty Sardinian Ass,
was your women's only Regalo and delightful companion, when they performed
their Stations, or went upon their Visits. But they are now all for their
Pack-Sadelles. D^gs. Monkies. Pa^ats. The D^ and Spindle. Truth, how w^ch
r^cted in (...).
Sillas, and easy Chaires carried with hands, which heretofore were well
contented with good honest Pack-Saddles.

Let your Ladies now tell me, how ^ntiall a thing it is, and how much it
imports them, to have little foysting Hounds, Monkies, and Parrakitos, for to
intertaine the time; who in times past did spend those idler hours at the
Reele and Spin^le, and exercising their Needle in some curious, yet necessary
works: But these are fallen into disgrace, they are grown out of fashion,
their time is past and gone, they have their course, and are vanished with the
rest.

The like has happened unto Truth, that also has had its time: Insomuch that it
was anciently much more used then now: And so much, that it was a general
saying in those days, that it was resp^cted above all other Virtues; and he
that told any Lie, were it of more or less importance, received punishment
accordingly, even to the l^sse of life, by being publicly stoned to death.

But because we are quickly weary of well-doing, and what is ill, will never be
tired out; men growing worse and worse, so holy a Law could not keep it self
afoot amongst so many wicked persons. Whereupon, it came to pass, that a great
Plague and Pestilence coming amongst them, all those that were touched with it
(if they escaped with their life) remained with some offensive mark or other
on their persons: And as it befalls, that one generation pass^th, and another
comes in the place, one succeeding another; they that were borne sound and
whole, reproched those other with their faults and defects, wherewith they were
notably grieved to see themselves thus disgraced and took it very offensiuely
at their hands.

Whence it came to pass by little and little, that Truth began to be heard
with an unwilling ear. And because men were thus unwilling to hear it, A
short Story of Truth.
they grew at last to be unwilling to tell it. For by the first round, we come
unto the second, and by the second, by degrees to the top of all. And a little
spark sometimes s^ts a whole City on fire.

At last they grew so bold as to break this Statute, and not contented
therewith they banished Truth at last into perpetual Exile; and in her stead
Lying was entertained and seated in her throne.

Truth being thus condemned, she went from among them to perform the tenor of
her Sentence. She went all alone, Poor, and naked; as it usually happens unto
those that are sunk, and fallen from their fortunes; (for every man is valued
according to that that he has, or as his ability is; and those which formerly
have been our friends, in time of adversity turn tail, and become our
enemies.) And having gone some few days iourneyes from thence, standing on a
high Mountain, she might perceive, passing over the edge of a little Hill, a
great company coming along, and the nearer still they drew, the greater did
their number appear. In the midst of a Squadron, compassed about with an
Army, came Kings, Princes, Governors, Priests Lies Triumph.
of that profession, Men of command, and Rulers of those Provinces, every one
according to his quality, either more or less, near to this triumphant
Chariot, which they had placed in the midst, with a great deal of Majesty,
which was wrought with admirable Art, and extreme curiosity.

In this Chariot, was there a high Throne erected, whose seat was of Iuory,
Ebonie, and Gold; wherein were inchased many precious Stones, and a woman
sitting thereupon, with a Crown upon her head, like a Queen; her face most
beautiful; but as you drew nearer and nearer unto it, it did lose much of it is
fairness, and at last appeared most foul and ugly. Her body, when she sat
still, and did not stir, seemed lusty, neat, and handsome; but when she
rose up, and stood upon her feet, or walked up and down, she discovered many
defects. Her Robes were of changeable Taffaties, exceeding rich and glorious to
the eye, and full of variety of colors, strangely diuersified, and cunningly
intermingled one with another, but the threads so slender, so subtle, and of
that little or no substance, that the very air would puff it in pieces, and
every the least thing, either make bracks in it, or break and tear it to
fitters.

Truth, she stood still (poor soul) till this Squadron was past, admiring to
see so much greatness and State; but when the Chariot came right over against
her, the Lady Lie took notice of this poor honest Dame Truth, and commanded
those about her to stay. And causing her to come nearer unto Lie meets with
Truth.
her, she began to ask her whence she came, whither she would, and what she
went about? And Truth plainly told her all.

The Lady Lie thought it fitting out of state and greatness, and for a farther
addition of honor, to lead her along with her: For every one is so much the
more powerful, by how much the greater are the enemies, whom he overcomes:
and is by so much the more esteemed and reputed of in the world, by how much
the mightier the forces are, against which he makes resistance.

Hereupon she commands Truth to wait upon her. There was no remedy, she could
not avoid it, she must along with her, whether she would or no; but in the
tail of all the troop, being commanded to come last, for that Truth, where
she takes her place.
was her known place, and at that time did (as it should seem) properly
belong unto her.

He that will seek for Truth, shall not find her with this great Lady Lie, nor
with any of her Ministers, for she comes in the Rere last of all, and there she
manifests her self to those, that make inquiry after her.

The first days journey that she marched, she came to a goodly fair City,
where Favor went forth to receive her, a very potent and powerful Prince,
Favor goes forth to meet the Lady Lie.
who inuites both her and all her Train to his house.

The Lady Lie accepted of this his kindness, giving him many thanks for this
his courteous offer, but would needs go to lodge at the rich and sumptuous
Palace of Wit, where a great feast, and a curious banquet was provided for her.
Wit emertaines the Lady Lie.


Afterward, when she was to go from thence, and to pass on forward with her
Troops, my Lady Lies Steward, which was Ostentation, tall of Ostentation the
Lady Lies Steward.
person, with a long beard, a grave countenance, a settled gate, and words well
plaste, came to mine Host, that had given them this good entertainment, and
ask't him, what was to pay? The reckoning was summed up; and the Steward,
without contradiction, or abatement of any thing, told him it was well. The
coin, wherein the Lady Lie makes her payments.


Then the Lady Lie called Ostentation her Steward unto her, saying; See you pay
this man well, out of that money which you gave him to keep, when you came in
hither. Mine Host seemed to be amazed thereat, and began to wonder with
himself, what money this should be, that they talked of; and thought at first,
that they had but spoke in jest. But when he saw that they stood so stiffely in
it, and that the same was affirmed by so many of good (as they seemed to be)
condition and quality, he did very much complain, saying; That till now, he
had never been so ill used before in all his life. Upon that my Lady Lie, for
the justifying thereof, presents these for Witnesses; Idleness, her Treasurer;
Flattery, her principal follower, and chief Attendant Lies Witnesses, who
they be.
on her Person; Uice her Chamberlain; And Wily-beguile-you, one of her maids
of Honor, together with diverse other of her servants. And that she might
convince him the better, she commanded Interest, mine Hosts Son, and
Covetousness, his Wife, to be brought forth before him: All which avouched to
his face, that it was so.

Wit seeing himself in this straight, did rend the air with his Exclamations,
Wit complains of his wrong.
calling upon the heavens, that they would make the Truth known; for they had
not only denied him that which they owed him; but they demanded that of him,
which he owed them not.

Truth, seeing him thus afflicted, as being one that ever wished him well, came
to him, and told him; My friend Wit, you have reason on your side, Truth
speaks in favor of Wit.
but I know not how to help thee; for she that denies this debt, is the Lady
Lie, and here is no body on your part but my self, and all the service that I
am able to do you, is; to declare my self for you, as I do.

The Lady Lie was so startled, and so abasht at this her boldness, that she
commanded her Ministers, that Wit should be paid, but with Truths wealth; The
Lady Lie gives sentence on Wits side, but condemns Truth in the charges.
which was accordingly done. And so they set forward, taking up, as they went
along, Innes and other lodgings, as such kind of people use to do, letting no
place escape, where they did not purloine and steal. For one wicked Villain is
commonly the hangman to another. And evermore, (take it for a general rule)
one thief, one blasphemer, one ruffian, and one damned fellow, ends his life
by the hands of one that is as bad as himself: And these are a kind of great
Fishes, which feed upon the lesser Fry.

They arrived afterward at a place, whereof Murmuration was Mistress, a great
friend to the Lady Lie, who came forth to meet her, causing all the Murmuration.
great Persons of her Kingdom, and her own private servants, to lead on the
way before. Amongst the which went Pride, Treachery, Deceit, Gluttony,
Ingratitude, Malice, Hatred, Negligence, Sloth, Obstinacy, Revenge, Envy,
Murmurations followers, who they be.
Injury, Folly, Uain-glory, Madness, Self-will, besides other her familiar
friends and acquaintance. She invited her to be her Guest, and that she would
be pleased to make her Palace her Inn, and with that freeness, as if it were
her own. The Lady Lie accepted of her kindness, but with this condition,
that she might only have the use of her lodgings, and in all the rest, to be
The Lady Lie dines a^ her house, and upon what condition.
at her own charge. Murmuration was very willing to have shown her
greatness, and withal to have given her the best entertainment she could; but
because it was Lies pleasure to have it otherwise, she rested contented, and
thanked her that she would be pleased to do her house that grace, which she
esteemed as a great favor; and so without any farther reply on either part,
they went hand in hand together to the Palace. Solicitude, who was Steward; and
Inconstancy the Caterer, made provision of victuals; the fame Solicitude,
Steward of the house: Inconstancy, the Caterer.
whereof was so great, that many came from all the bordering places
thereabouts, with a world of all sorts of dainties, and whatsoever else was
necessary for the setting forth of so great a Feast; all which was taken up,
without any hucking or sticking upon the price; Look what they asked, that they
were agreed withal to have. But after dinner, when they were to depart, and
go their ways, the Owners of these things demanded money for what they had
sold. The Treasurer said, that he owed them nothing; and the Caterer, that he
had paid them all. Whereupon there was great stir, and much ado; insomuch
that the Lady Lie way feign to come forth her self amongst Lies she, that she
may (...) pay what she owes.
them, and said unto them; My friends, what is it you would have? Are you mad?
or what is the matter with you? Sure you are either out of your wits, or I do
not well understand my self. You are all of you paid already for whatsoever
you brought hither; and I my self saw with mine own eyes, when your moneys
were paid you before Truths face, and in her presence. Let her speak, if she
may be taken for a witness, whether it be so or no: I will be content to be
tryde by her. They going then to seek out Truth, to decide this difference,
and to award what was to be done in this business; she feigned herself to be
asleep. They called aloud unto her. But she bethinking her self, how ill she
had been dealt withal before, was in a doubt what she should do: at last she
resolved with her self to feign her self dumb, and had lost her speech,
that she might not pay for that, which others Truth becomes dumb, and the
cause why.
had bought, and were her professed enemies: Whereupon she has continued that
custom ever since; And now truth is grown dumb, for that she had paid so
soundly for not being mute before. And therefore he that speaks the Truth,
let him pay for it by my consent. For as the world now goes, he is worthy so to
do.

But it seems unto me (as I have painted it in mine Imagination) that Truth
and Lying how compared.
Truth and Lying are like the string, and the Wrest or Peg in some Instrument.
The string has a delicate sound, sweet, and pleasing to the ear; But the Peg
does skreeke, squeake, and creake like a Cart-wheele, and can hardly be turned
and wrested. The string gently yields, willingly stretching and enlarging it
self, till you have strained it to your liking; But the Peg goes still
twirling and turning, being wrung, wrinched, and pinch't upon by the string.
Just so stands the case, for all the world, betwixt Truth and Lying. Truth is
the Peg, and Lying the string: Well may a Lie go working and winding it self
upon Truth, which is the Peg, and leave some print, or sign therein, making it
to sound harsh and untuneable to the ear, but in the end, it goes (although
with some difficulty) turning and winding a Lie so long, till Truth remain
whole and sound, like the Peg; and Lying cracked and broken, like the String.

If I had treated Truth, all those torments, affronts, and afflictions which
Guzmans course of life, what it was.
I had run through and endured, could not in the end but have set me safe in
some one good Port or other, and have brought me with joy to the fortunate
Islands. But the whole course of my life, was lying, coozenage, and roguerie,
and so like the string of an Instrument, when it came to be put in tune, it
could not endure any the least straining, and so presently brake, it was not
able (I say) to resist and withstand Truths stretching hand, but went still
turning and twirling, from one mischief to another, and from one evil into a
worse. So one Deep calls up another, and one Wave comes head-longly tumbling
in upon the neck of his fellow.

The Pin is now turned, and I am raised up to be a Page, God grant I may come
down no lower. That thing which receives violence and is strained Guzman
turned Page.
to a course contrary to its nature, it is impossible, but it must reuert and
return to it is center, be it low, or be it high; for that is the place, which
it does naturally affect and desire. They took me from the height of my
glory, and brought me down so low as to serve, which (being so opposite
Nullum violentum diuturnum.
as it was to my disposition) you shall see how long I continued in that course.

He that walks too fast, will be quickly weary; And to pass so suddenly from
one extreme to another, as it cannot be done with safety, so is it conserved
with difficulty. If a Tree take not deep rooting, it will never bear any
fruit, but quickly dries and withers away; So he that is newly put into an
Office, cannot suddenly take any deep rooting; and say he should be settled
therein some years, he will hardly thrive in a strange soil, that does not
sort with his nature, and so will prove in the end as unprofitable to himself
as unfruitful to others. It was too great aleape, to rise from a Picaro, to be
a Page, (though in a manner they are correlatiues, and have a kind of relation
one to another, only their habit does difference and distinguish them) and I
could not choose but grieve, as often as I thought upon it. That which was common
with others, fell out quite contrary with me. For it is said, Que las honras,
quanto mas crecen, mas hambre ponen. That the more honor a man has, the more
he desires. But I was so far from that liking, that it was rather Proverb.
to me a loathing. Such high places did not please me; Those that I had
professed, those were for me. Cada vno, en lo que se cria. Let every man betake
himself to that, wherein he has been traind and bred up. Is it fit (think
Proverb.
you) to take the fish out of the ^ater, and to breed Peacocks therein? To put
an Ox to fly, and an Eagle to plough? To feed a Horse with sand? To sup a
Falcon with straw? And to ^ake from a man his Risibilitie (to speak like a
Logician) and faculty of laughing? I was bred up among the Fleshpots of Egypt;
my Center was a good victualing house; my Circle, a good honest Tavern; and
my end, Vice; whereunto I did bend amain; In that I took pleasure, that was
health and life to me; and what was contrary to that, I took no joy in it,
it was not for me, nor was I willing to make it mine.

My mouth was now daintily fed; my back delicately clad; my eyes swollen with
too much sleep; my hands (for want of work) as soft as silk; my belly, What
Guzman did whilst be was a Page.
(with too much pampering) as hard brac't as any Drum; my buttocks brawny,
and thicke-skin'd with too much sitting; and my chaps (like a Monkies) nimbly
walking on both sides, when I was at my meat. Tell me, how was it possible
for me to content my self; how endure to be put to a set Pension, to stay
waiting all day long at a door, at nights to stand with a Torch in my hand,
leaning against a wall, and standing upon one leg like a Crane, till it be
almost day-breake? Sometimes, (if not for the most part) supper-lesse, but
frozen (I am sure) with cold, expecting the Visits that go, out and come in,
being like a Ladder for others to go up and down; or like a Smiths pair of
Bellows, ascending, and descending, to bear others company, waiting upon my
Lords Caroche early and late; not only at some set seasons and certain times,
but at all hours both of day and night, being my red in the Winter with dirt;
and choked in the Summer with dust; holding a Trencher between my Thumbs at
meals; my belly growing lean and lanke through alonging desire, feeding on
the best dishes with my eyes, and wishing in my soul, that every daintymorsell
at the board, had been meat for my mouth. Besides, going upon one message, and
returning with another, tyring out my legs, and wearing out my shoes, and
being allowed but every month a pair, we were forced to go fifteen days
of the thirty bare-foote. These are the things, that yearly pass from the
first of January, to the last of December. Pages gettings, what they be.
And he, who at the end thereof should ask us: How have you thriu'd this
year? What have you got?

The answer is at hand, Sir, I rest upon my Lords love and favor, I refer my
self to his discretion and goodness. I eat of his meat, and drink of his
drink; in Winter feeding on that which is cold; in Summer, that which is hot.
And what I have in that kind, is but a poor pittance, and that little The
clock of a Pages stomach, must go still (...) hour after his Masters.
none of the best, and commonly somewhat of the latest, that aman were as good
go without it. I wear what clothes he gives me, such as you see; as a Livery
rather of my servitude, then of devotion to cloth me; not given me to keep
me warm, but to do my Lord honor: And those too must be made to their mind,
and our cost. So that our money pays for it, and they choose the colors.

Our greater gains did consist in cold fare, for there was not one of us that
could finger a full Trencher: scraps, and picking of their teeth, we had in
some abundance, and with these we entertained our selves, and the like poor
Relics that they left, and some refuse fruits, that were not worth the eating,
and such things as these, or worse, were all the fruits of our labors.

When the wind blew fresh, and that we had got a matter of some ten or twelve
A matter of some eight pence, or nine pence.
Quartes, which with us was a great sum, we raised this money out of so many
drops and flakes of Wax, which we took off from our Torches, which we sold
to some old Cobbler or other. He amongst us that could get up a little stock,
that were worth any thing; though it were never so small, this man had a
sufficient Patrimony, and did great things with it, he might buy him a
penny-pasty at the Cooks, and other the like odd kind of iunkets; but if he
were taken in the manner; he was sure to be whipped for his labor. This was his
judgment. Only it was permitted unto us to steal. I say (if we had stolen)
it was held the less evil of the two. For if it had been permitted, and that
we might have been suffered so to do, I would so cunningly have imployd my
wits in that kind, that I would in a short time have been able to set up a
Chandlers shop. But if I did make benefit of mine own Torch, or filch now and
then from my fellows some of theirs, that was all that I did. But they were so
base, and so crafty withal, that I never saw them busy themselves about any
other thing, being more desirous to lose their meat, then that; for victuals
are consumed in the belly, and can not afterward be sold to profit; and yet
for these things too, they had a thousand shifts and rogueries.

For I saw one of them once take a Hony-combe from the table, and presently
wrapped it in his Handkerchiefe, and clapped it into his Pocket. But because A Page
steals a Hony-Combe, waiting at table; The Story of it, and his punishment.
he waited at the table, and for that he could not carry it so speedily as he
would have done to the Haven of Safety, nor land it in so good a place as he
desired, it happened that the heat of the weather, and the warmth of his pocket,
melted the Honey, which in great haste came trickling down his Breeches, and
dropped out at his knees. My Lord spide it, as he sat at Table, who could scarce
forbear laughing; at last, to make himself merry, he called him unto him and
commanded him to put down his Hose. The Page did so. And when his hands came
to touch upon the Honey, it clung fast to his fingers ends, whereat they fell a
laughing, and he went away ashamed. But he had sour sauce to his sweet meat;
for besides that he never tasted of the Honey, he was so soundly lasht, that
his breech dropped Wax, as fast as the Comb did Honey. Which misfortune should
never have befalne me, for I was perfect in all kind of roguerie, and would
never have been to seek of some slight or other for cleanely conueyance. And
that my sword might not rust in my scabberd, but that I might still keep my
hand in ure, I was evermore a practicing upon some toys and trifles, petty
things, not worth the talking, only to set my fellows wits aworke, and to
give them a bone to gnaw upon.

The Devil (I think) brought Fools and Block-heads to the Court, who Foolish
Pages, not fit for Court.
let every good morsel slip besides their mouths: a troublesome and wearisome
kind of people to treat withal, unfit for the managing of business;
insupportable in their carriage, and tedious in their conversation. A man
should be like to a good Horse, or a good Greyhound, upon all occasions to take
his carreere, and to make his course; and moreover he must carry himself in a
cool and quiet manner.

There were Pages good store; but I must tell you, that the most of them, nay,
I will enlarge my speech a little more, and say; That they were all Chips of
one and the same block, a company of beetle-heads, dull-spirited fellows;
that had no wherry in them, not only when they were in their Lords presence;
but likewise, when they were out of his sight. They were as slow in executing
his will, as they were lazy in getting up from their beds; they were idle,
retchlesse, careless, all set upon loytering, exercising neither their bodies,
nor their brains, which made me the more willing to play the Guzmans tricks
being a Page. Guzman has a licorish tooth.
Wagge with them, and for my better pastime, to put one pretty trick or other
upon them.

I did store my self with Stockins, Garters, Bands, Hats, Handkerchiefes,
Points, Cuffes, Shoes, and whatsoever I could rape or wring from them, which I
hid between the Straw of one of my fellows beds, because, if any search were
made, they should not find them in mine. I altered the property of these
things in an instant, they never lay long by me, I would chop them for old
iron, rather then be troubled with the keeping of them. It behooued them to
look well about them, and to see that they had all safe and sure under lock
and key, for if they should carelessely leave any thing abroad, those eyes that
found it gone, did never see it return again.

Many of these waggish parts I played, which were but tricks of youth, and
nothing else. But I fell afterward into a fault, which I would have sworn of
all others (so far was it from my thought) I should never have offended in.
It was a licorish sin, even the sin of Gluttony. Which I do not know,
whether it proceeded from my eating by measure (as being stinted) or whether
that my longing did provoke and stir up my appetite? or whether it were now
muing time with me, and that I was to change my old feathers, and get me new;
for they say, that men, while they live here in this world, do at certain
times and seasons, (as other creatures shead their hairs, and recover new
coats) change and alter their manners and conditions.

I was now grown so licorish, and so sharpe-set upon sweet meats, (for the
pleasant taste they had, while they passed down my throat) that never any
blind man was half so forward to go repeating his Letanies, and other his set
prayers, from door to door, to get an Alms, as I was to please my palate:
And look whatsoever came within the The Spanish word is Columbrar. To discern
a thing a far off, which can hardly be perceued what it is. It seems to be
borrowed from the Latin word Collimare. Quod propriu^ est oculorum, cum eos in
angulum retorquentes, oblique aliquid aspicimus, penitusque in rem aliquam
defigimus, quem admodum Sagittarij solent, cum aliquid sibi addictum designant.
reach of mine eyes, were it as far as they could ken, and safe enough (as it
might be supposed) from catching, yet could it not escape my Eagles-talons.

And as the Heart, with his breathing, draws your Snakes out of the bowels of
the earth: So I, if I could but once come to set mine eyes upon such, or such a
dainty, it was sure mine own, they rendered themselves at first into my hands;
my hands, they turned them over to my mouth; and my mouth committed them close
prisoners to my belly, where these sweets remained, till they were no longer
sweet.

My Lord Cardinal had a great Chest (which kind of Chests are much used in
Italy) of white Pine; and I have likewise seen good store of them in Spain,
which they usually bring from thence, stuffed with Merchandise, but especially
with glasses, and earthen cups and dishes, the better to keep them from
breaking.

This Chest stood in a withdrawing Chamber, for to regalar, and cheer
himself withal, being full of diverse sorts of Conserues; there, I say, were
your dry Suckets delicately candied, your A Pear of a delicate taste, brought
from the City of Bergamo in Italy, whence it has the name.
Bergamota Pear of A gar^en of great both^ (...), and (...), ^ll of all (...)
of (...), (...) few ^gues from Madrid; It is the Kings garden.
Aranxues, your Genoa Cherry, your Melon of Granada, your Seuillian Cytrons,
your Oranges, and Pome-Citrons of Plasencia, your Lemons of Murcia, your pretty
little Cucumbers of Ualencia, your budds of the Islands, your A kind of (...)
growing on the ground like a Melon. Also they are called Amoris poma.
Loue-Apples, because they provoke a man to Lust. Vid. Couarru. Ver. Berengena.
Berengenas of Toledo, your A kind of dried Peaches, which ^eped some four
and twenty ^ures in Wine, are good meat.
Orejones of Aragon, your Potatas of Malaga: your Pippens, Parsneps, Carrets,
Pompeons, besides a thousand several sorts of Comfits, and an infinite number
more of sundry different kinds of Sweetmeats, which did disquiet my spirit
within me, not suffering my soul to take any rest.

As often as he made any Colation, or did eat any of these things, he gave me
the Key, himself standing by, while I took them out, never trusting me with
them alone by my self.

This distrust of his, begot anger in me; and this anger, a desire of revenge.
This (though I were broad awake) did I still dream on. I thought with my self
(God forgive me for it) how I might possibly come to have a fling at this
Chest, and open this Mine, which was more precious unto me, then all the gold
in the Indies.

I told you already, that the Chest was a very great one, being to my seeming
two yards and a half in length, one in depth, and another in breadth: it was
as white (if not more) then any Paper; the Bars and all the rest of the
Iron-worke about it, as small as your finest threads of Cambricke, curiously
wrought, smooth and neatly polished, strengthened with good strong plates at
the corners, set with studs very handsomely; the Lock stood in the midst,
there being but one Key to open to this sweet Paradise, and that was in my
Lords custody. If thou know what it is to steal, or have ever heard tell
of it; or would feign learn how to rob a Chest, and to take what thou will
out of it, without either falsifying of a Key, ripping open of a Lock, taking
off the Hindges, or breaking up the Boards; Listen but to me, and I will tell
thee how it may be done.

When it was my turn to wait, and that there were any Visits, or other
necessary businesses at home, whose present being in action, might promise
Guzman steals his Lords sweetmeates.
me security; I had certain Iron tools in a readiness, which I had prepared
of purpose, with the help whereof I did by little and little heave up the lid
of the Chest, till I could thrust in a pretty little wedge of wood, and then
heauing it up a little more, I did put in a round stick, about the bigness of
the head of a reasonable good big Hammer, and this I went wresting in by
degrees, turning and winding it fair and softly toward the lock, whereunto,
the nearer and nearer still that it grew, the more and the more did it still
heave up my corner, so that being (as I was) but a Youth, and having a slender
hand, and a small arm, I took out such Sweetmeats, as I had most mind unto,
wherewith I filled my pockets as full as ever I could stuff them. But when I
could not reach now and then to those that were farther off, that I might meet
at last with this their contuma^ie and rebellion, I did clap upon the end of a
Cane, or some little stick, two Pinn's, one having a sharp point, and the
other made crooked like a hook, and by the help of these two, I brought them
to their due obedience.

And thus I became Lord and Master of what-soeuer was within the Chest, without
the help of any key. In which theft, I carried my self so cunningly, that
though I had stolen much, yet there was nothing found to be missing. At last I
lighted upon a Melacotone of Castile, which being as fair, and as goodly a one
(for it is greatness) as ever I saw in all my life, and gilded all over, my
appetite was much provoked therewith, it seeming to be one entire piece of
Gold, when I first tasted it: the relish whereof (me thinks) remains yet
still in my mouth; me thought I never tasted any thing better, nor had I ever
seen the like before.

Now, because this was a known Piece, when it was once discovered, that this
curiosity was wanting, there was presently a general suspicion conceived; but
not any the least thought or jealousy, that it had been taken out so, as
indeed it was, but was rather imagined, that it was done by some counterfeit
key. And this did much trouble my Lord the Cardinal, that he should have any
in his house, that should dare to falsify his locks, especially in so private
and secret a room as this was, which he reserved for his own use. Whereupon
he forthwith called unto him his principal servants, to the end that he might
search out the truth of this business. But as good luck would have, it fell
out so happily, that all that I had stolen thence, was down my throat, and
thoroughly digested, not any the least remembrance thereof remaining any more in
my possession. Now my Lord had to his Steward a melancholy Chaplain, a fellow
of an ill concoction, who wished my Lord, that all his servants should be called
together, and afterward have them shut up in one chamber, where they should be
thoroughly examined, one by one, to see what could be got out of them, and that
their chambers likewise be searched; for such a piece of work as this could not
proceed from any man of reason, but from the lickorish mouth of some of his
Pages, or some other his younger boys about the house, which had a sweet tooth
in their head.

Well, we were all locked up close, like birds in a cage, but to no end and
purpose in the world; for they found us to be all true () blades, not one false
one (a) In Spain, all your Swordblades, are of one length, otherwise they be
held unlawful, and are forfeited to the Justice. Proverb.
amongst us all, but according to the right mark, just and even to a hair.
This storm was ouer-past with us, but not my Lords care; For, I can assure
you, our Master was wonderful desirous to come to the true knowledge hereof;
And by reason of the great stir that was made about it; I did refrain for
some few days, till this business might be ouer-blowne, and that the matter
was in a manner quite forgotten, y ^uuiesse otro asno verda; And that I might
have some fair occasion to have another fling at them.

Well, I durst not for a pretty while after put my hand to the Chest, nor once
offer to cast so much as an eye toward it. But that crookedness, which a tree
once takes in it is tender growth, the bigger it grows, the crookeder it is,
waxing still worse and worse; And therefore those Knauish tricks, which I had
learned in my youth, were so deeply imprinted in me, that they could not be
blotted out. So that I was as well able to live without them, as without
drawing air, and fetching of my breath: Especially in those things, whereunto
I had been accustomed from a child; for I had been long practiced in them,
and they pleased me passing well, and I took such delight and pleasure in
them, as in nothing more.

In a word, I must up into the Saddle again, though it cost me another fall I
could not choose but go visit my sweet friends, to see how they did; I got me
again to my old haunt, to see what good game I could find.

One day then amongst the rest, when my Master was at play, I thought with my
self, that my master could not (would he never so feign shift them off) but
keep those Cardinals company, that were come in kindness to see him. This
Chest stood in a by-roome, within his Bedchamber, much after the manner of a
Closet.

Now, I had no sooner trust up my doublet, and tuckt up the sleeue of my shirt,
and thrust in mine arm as far I could reach, but my Lord had list to make
water. Whereupon he rose up, and came into his Chamber, and not finding any of
his Pages there, he went and took the Vrinal himself, which stood at his beds
head, and whilst he was making water, it was my ill hap to hear him: which
sudden and unexpected accident did so startle me, and affright me, that going
about to get out mine arm quickly (that I mightnot be taken in the manner)
making (as it seemed) more haste then good speed, my round Rouler fell rumbling
on the floor, the Chest, that presently shuts it self upon me, while mine
arm, like a Sparrow in a Pit-fall, or a Mouse in a Trap, is taken prisoner
betwixt the lock and the lid, where it was held too fast to get forth in
haste. At the noise of the fall, my Lord asked, Who Is there? I could do no
less then make answer to his call, but the Devil a foot that I could stir
to come forth unto him. Thereupon he comes in, finding me upon my knees,
stealing the Hony-combes out of his Hiue. He demanded of me, what I made there?
I confessed the whole matter how it was, and without any more ado (for I saw
there was no fence for it) I told him the whole truth of the business. But
when he saw how prettily I was taken, the more he looked upon me, the more
desire he had to laugh; and to make his mirth the fuller, he called to those,
that were in the next room at play, that they likewise might come and see, how
the bird hung by the wing, and could not get loose. When they saw how I was
caught, they all fell a laughing, as though their hearts would have burst for
want of breath; yet had they so much left at last, as to entreat his Lordship,
that this fault might be forgiven me, as being the first that I had offended
him in; and the rather, for that it is given to al Youth, to have a likorish
tooth. My Lord stood off, and would by no means be brought to yield; no
entreaty would serve the turn, I must be whipped, there was no remedy, but I
must be brought to the block.

Well, when they saw they could not procure my pardon, then they grew to a new
Consultation, touching the number of the stripes; whereon they were so long a
devising, as if it had been a thing contained in the Decretals, or some
Pontificiall Act, that they had seriously sat on. In the end, the number
concluded on in this Conclaue of Cardinals, was twelve, a full doozen I was to
have, neither more nor less. And the care of this payment was committed to Sir
Nicholas, my Lords Secretary, my mortal enemy, who presently carried me away
to his Chamber, and laid them on so soundly, and withso good a will, that for a
fortnight after I was not able to sit upon my breech; but he did not go so
clear away with this business as he thought he should, for it was not long
e're I did cry quittance with him, and returned this payment seuen-fold into
his own bosom; so that he had no great cause, by that time I had done with
him, to brag of his bargain. And that I may not delay you any longer, this
trick anon after I put upon him.

My gentleman was much troubled with Lat: Culex. A Gnat, which the Spaniards
call by the name of Mosquito. They bumme more, and s^ing and bite worse in that
Country, then here with us, leaving knobs and bunches in the face.
Mosquitos, which did so persecute him, that he could not sleep for them, they
did so disquiet and torment him; All Rome did swarm with them, and in our
house we had reasonable good store.

Whereupon, (hearing him complain much of them, and how he was bitten and
vexed by them) I told him I would give him a remedy, which we did use in
Spain; wherewithal to destroy this troublesome Vermin. He thankt me for it,
and entreated me very earnestly, that I would do him the kindness to give it
him. I told him, that he should get him a good bundle of The Spanish word^,
Peregil. del nombre. Lat: Petroselinum. Apio minudo, que se cria ^tre las
penas; Deste se baze la sal. sa, que llamamos, Peregil. y se echa en los
quisados, y en las ensaladas. It is taken diversely, sometimes for Parsley,
sometimes for Smallage, and sometimes for Sa^piere. Guzman crye^ quittance with
the Secretary.
Petroselinum, and having steept it well in good Wine-Vineger, he should put
it at his beds head, to the smell whereof all the Mosquitos would come;
whereupon, as soon as ever they lighted, they would presently fall down dead.
He believed me, and presently puts it in practice. But when he was gone to bed,
and had laid himself down to sleep, such a swarm of these buzzing busy
Flies came flying about his ears all the night long, and did so plague and
torment him, as if they had pulled out his eyes with Pincers, and held him by
the nose with corne-tongs, as Saint Dunstan did the Devil.

Whilst they were thus nibbling on his nose, eyes, and all the other parts of
his face; he bestowed a thousand buffets on his cheeks, thinking with those
smart claps to kill these angry creatures; and persuading himself that they
would die at last, when they lighted upon the receipt, that was prepared for
them, he past away the time as well as he could until the morning.

But the next night after (because this remedy had not drawn only those of
the house thither; but all the rest of the Mosquitos, that were bordering
there-about) they did so be-peps him, that not only his face was most vilely
dis-figured therewith, but all the rest of the parts of his body, wher-vnto
they were able to reach, (for some they could not come at for the clothes,)
were taken in that excessive manner, so be-pimpled, and so be-spotted, that he
was forced to forsake his lodging, and to get him gone with all the speed he
could.

The Secretary was madded at the matter, and could have found in his heart to
have killed me.

But my Lord, when he looked upon this ill-fauour'd faced knave, and saw that
he seemed so like a Leper (for he had not one free place about him, but like a
Leopard spotted all over) and that I durst not appear for fear, but played
least in sight, he was ready to burst himself with laughing, when he heard
that I had put this jest upon him.

Whereupon, commanding me to be called in, when I came, he asked me, why I had
offered the Secretary so great an affront, and had thus played the wagge with
him?

Whereunto I answered; Your Lordship may be pleased to remember that you
commanded him to give me a doozen lashes about the business of the
Sweetmeats. His Commission reached no further. But I remember very well, how
he then used me. For what he gave me in gross, I told out by retayle, one by
one, as a matter much importing my posteriors. Besides, I know it was not your
Lordships pleasure (as a thing contrary to your mild and gentle disposition)
that they should be the stripes of death: but such as my tender years were
able to bear. But el Domine Nicolao, my Worshipful good friend Sir Nicholas,
that he might not be taxed for abad play master, gave me twenty good sound
lashes, the last being more cruel then the first. And so having exceeded not
only his Commission, but common humanity, I thought I had just cause to cry
quittance with him: And thus as you see (whereat I hope your Lordship will not
be offended) I have revenged the Wheales on my breech, by returning them on
his face. He was the man that stung me, and I got others to sting him. And I
hope, my Lord, this is but one for another. Only the difference is, that he
did prosecute this suit against me in his own person, and I against him by my
Attorney.

This was past over as a jest, and I heard no more of it. And for that, by
reason of my former bold attempt, I was not only beaten, but banished Guzman
banished the Cardinals Chamber.
from the service of his Lordships Chamber; I waited in the mean while (during
this his displeasure) upon his Lordships Chamberlain.

CHAPTER VIII.
Guzman de Alfarache reuenges a trick which the Secretary had put upon the
Chamberlayne, whom he then attended. He tells a tale of Shame and Fear; What it
is, and how painted forth. He is received again into the Cardinals service.
And how finely he coozened him of a Barrel of Conserues.

MY new Master was a merry pleasant Gentleman, without any gall or malice in
the world, set all upon sport and good fellowship, there was no harm in him in
the earth, no fraud, no deceit; but was a man of the old making, an honest true
Troiane, without any tricks or Iiggs, just in his dealings, and as plain as
any Pack-staffe. I knew no fault in him, unless it were a little choler; he
was somewhat too touchy, and would (which was the rendernesse of his nature)
quickly be tinded. Whereunto I may add his oue^alous and suspicious nature,
which would make him many times to imagine things to be otherwise then they
were meant, it being the condition of such dispositions to interpret all
things to the worst. Quit him of these two qualities, (which were not overmuch
inherent in him) and there was not a fairer conditioned man to converse
withal; if you would have sought a whole Country, you could not have met with
his fellow.

This Bonus Socius had but poor Parents, to whom he daily sent his own
allowance, and now and then he would either dine or sup with them, as he did
the night before that happened unto him, which you shall hear by and by.

What with his drinking of water, and eating certain Taxarinas (which is a
kind of meat made of Paste, cut out into slices, boiled with the fat of Birds,
and seasoned with Pepper) he came not home half well, and complaining of the
crazinesse of his stomach, he went directly to his Chamber, and got him
forthwith to bed.

Now his Lord, missing him at supper, asked for him: They told him how it was
with him. He sent one of his Gentlemen to visit him, and to bring him word how
he did.

To which message he made answer, that he did not find himself well, but he
hoped in God, he should be well the next morning, being much comforted that his
Lordship had been pleased so far forth to grace his servant, as to send unto
him, to know how he did, for which favor he rested much bound unto his
Lordship, returning the Messenger, with all humble thanks, and the best
remembrance of his love and service.

Thus this matter passed for the present. The morrow after I went to the house
of his Parents, with some provision for their dinner, one of my fellows
remaining with him, who was brushing of his clothes against his Master should
rise.

He, and the Secretary used to break many jests one upon another, and many The
jest that the Secretary put upon Guzman's Master.
merry passages past between them; And, because they were harmless, and
without any prejudice to either, my Lord was so far from misliking them, that
he took much delight and pleasure in them.

The Secretary, as soon as he was up and ready, went toward his Chamber, and
meeting with my fellow, who was there ready at hand, waiting when he should be
called for, asked him; How his Master did? He made answer, That his Master was
newly fallen asleep, and that he had not taken one hours rest all that night,
but that now (God be thanked) he slept soundly, and well hoped that the worst
was past.

It is well (said the Secretary) and seeing it is so, its pity to wake him;
but in the mean while, till he be ready to rise, (which I presume will not be
with the soonest) I prithee let me entreat thee to go a little way with a
servant of mine, to help him to bring home a certain commodity for me, which
he cannot well do alone, and make all the haste I pray that you can, for I
will tarry here till you come, lest your Master might chance to wake and call
for you. The young Lad did as he desired, and went his way.

Now the Secretary, taking hold on this occasion, that his friend had that
night supt abroad, and was not in his Lordships presence, (as he was wont to
be) that he might have him in his eye, as he sat at supper: devised with
himself how he might put some pretty jest upon him: and at last the conception
of his brain, brought forth this merry Babe. He dresses me a pretty Youth in
woman's apparel, attired in the habit of a Curtizan, and places this Boy softly
and secretly behind his bed. Now this honest man was all this while fast
asleep, and the entrance was free and open unto him, whilst the Secretary,
for the more surety, went in first himself without being heard; and afterward
taking this Youth by the hand, led him softly along, and there he hid himself
close behind the bed, as he had been before instructed, and there he remained
quiet, not so much as offering once to stir.

This being done, the Secretary went forth, and going to seek out his Lord, he
found him a walking, saying of some prayers to himself, as his manner was; who
as soon as he saw him, his Lordship demanded of him, how the Chamberlain did?
Who told him; I inquired thereof but now, and his servant told me, that he has
not been well all this night; And I do not much marvel at it; for being with
him last night, before I went to bed to see how he did, I talked unto him, but
me thought he answered me with an ill will. What ails him, I know not. There
is something in it more then ordinary, what ever it be; farther I cannot
inform your Lordship.

The Cardinal (who was charity it self) presently thereupon made haste to
visit him. And when he had set himself down by him, close to his beds head,
the Youth comes me out from behind the Hangings of the bed, and cries out; Woe
is me, most wretched and unfortunate Woman; What shall I do? Pardon me (good
Sir) for I must be gone, for it is late, and I am afraid my husband will miss
me. And with that, she went her way, passing through the midst of all the
Cardinals servants, attending there upon his Lordship.

The Cardinal, who thought him to be a Saint, began to bless himself, and
was much amazed thereat. And the Chamberlain, he on the other side, was as
much astonished, taking it to have been some Vision, or strange Apparition. He
first crosses himself, then cries out, JESUS! The Devil, the Devil: and
therewith lept out of his bed in his Shirt, running up and down the room, as
if he had been out of his wits.

The Secretary, and some other, that were privy thereunto, fell a smiling, and
had much ado to forbear laughing outright; whereby the Cardinal perceived,
that it was merely a jest, and they did not stick to confess as much,
telling the whole truth of the matter, and how it was carried.

But the Chamberleine could not stand still, but ran up and down from place
to place, not knowing which way to turn himself. And albeit they did all
labor to quiet him, yet for all that they could do; they could not in haste
bring him to himself again: but was much abashed; and mightily ashamed of
this scoff and jest that was put upon him; and the more, for that it was in
the presence of his Lord. But in the end (like a good Courtier) he dissembled
it as well as he could. And the Cardinal went away blessing himself, and
laughed heartily as he wont along at this conceited merriment.

Now, by that time I was come back, all this business was ouer-past: But I
was as sensible of it, as if they had given me so many stripes. And the
Chamberlain would with all his heart have parted with the best eye in his
head, to be fully revenged on him.

But when he saw, that I looked somewhat sad upon the matter (himself being
likewise no less heavy) he said unto me; What think thou (Guzmanillo) of
the wrong that these Villains have done me? To whom I made answer; They have
done well, Sir, and played their parts with you very finely, what would you
more? But if they had used me so scuruily as they have done you, I verily
persuade my self, that his Holiness should not need to inioyne them any
penance for this offense; nor would I leave it to mine Heirs in my last Will
and Testament to repay this debt, but I would quit scores with them my self,
and pay them home with advantage: And ere I had done with them, they should
very well put that in their eye, which they should get by the reckoning. They
all knew me to be a notable Wagge, and that I had an unhappy wit of mine own
for all kind of knavery.

But why do I spend the time in talk, when my Lungs are ready to leap out at
my throat, and swell with fullness of breath, out of the desire they to have
vent something? But I kept my self aloof, and was tender to touch upon that
string, as being loath to advise and counsel him what to do, not holding it
lawful for a Page to revenge the injuries of a grave Minister upon another
that is his equal, Ande cada oueja con su pareja. Like with like does well.
For it is no good jesting with a man's betters. One was enough for Proverb. Let
every m^n meddle with his match.
me, which might the better be borne withal, because it was in causa proprie;
I was touched in mine own person, and therefore had the more reason to right my
self.

But in this particular, why should I wilfully entangle my self in that net,
whence I should not afterward be able to escape, with less then the laying on
of many a sound lash; or to come forth with mine ears four fingers longer
then they went in, or with the loss of the hair of my head? I therefore held
my peace, and kept me quiet. But I, who was naturally of a hot and boiling
spirit, being often importuned by him, he making me great offers and large
promises, giving me besides to understand, that the Cardinal should know, that
it was a child of mine own begetting, and the workmanship of mine own
hands, in defense of him who was then my Master, I resolved with my self to
enter into the Action, and to undertake this business in his behalf, and to
be the sole Plotter and contriuer thereof my self. And so I let some few days
pass over, waiting for some fair occasion that might give warmth for the
hatching of this bird.

When I had found (as I thought) a fit time, and that the Ordinary Post of
Spain was to depart, the Secretary was very busy about his dispatches, which
required haste. I bought me then a little Rosin, Frankincense, and Masticke, I
pounded it, and sifted it all together, till I had wrought it fine, and as
small as any Meal. The Secretaries servant was that morning busied about his
Masters clothes, brushing and making of them clean with all the speed he
could. To him go I, telling him; Do thou hear (honest Iacobo) I am Guzmans
jest that he put upon the Secretary, to revenge his Masters quarrel.
come to tell thee, that I have a dainty piece of Bacon on the Spit, it is now
ready, Bread I have likewise provided, there is nothing wanting but Wine, if
thou will find that, thou shall share with me; if not, pardon me, for I shall
seek out one that will. He quickly replyde: No, (good Guzman) no, do not so,
for I will give thee Wine to it. Go to then (quoth I) stay thou here; for I
will presently be with both it, and thee.

Whilst that he went to the Despensa. El lugar, donde se ponen la^ cosas, que
se traen para comer, y beuer. Such places properly belong only to Ambassadors
of Princes, or to great Dukes, and not to ordinary persons.
Dispense for wine, I took forth my paper of Powders, and turning the inside
of the Breeches outward, I besprinkled them with a little wine, which I carried
about me in a little round glass Vial, and threw good store of these my
prepared Powders upon them: which when I had done according to my mind, I
turned the Breeches again, putting them just in the same order they were in,
when the Youth left them. He returned anon after with a good Jar of Wine, and
before he could speak unto me, his Master called for him to come in, and bring
him his clothes, for he would rise. He left the Wine with me, and I him
within. Where they were both so busy about their Papers, that it was noone
before they had dispatched, and were ready to come forth. The Secretary was a
very hayrie man of his body; and the Powders began to play their part, and to
work their effect. The Dog-dayes were then come in, and with the extremity of
those heates, they wrought so upon his body, that from the girdle downwards he
was as if it had been a Seare-cloth of Pitch, which clung so close unto him,
and was grown so stiff withal, that he was terribly tormented therewith, for
every hair did give him such a twinge when he did but move, or when with some
sudden reach they did rend and vnroot themselves from the flesh, that the
tearing of every several hair seemed unto him, the plucking out of so many
eyes out of his head.

When he saw in what case he was, he began to call his people about him, to
know the cause thereof, but none of them could tell, nor were able to answer to
that account, till that the Chamberlain came in, and told him; Sir, this is
Quid pro quo; one for another; Qui moccat, moccabitur. Harm watch, harm catch.

This, sir, is called, The beating of the Fencer out of his School. You see
for all your cunning, you may take a knock as well as another man. It is but
blow for blow; you have given me one Venew, and I have given you another. And
so let us shake hands and be friends.

Well, (to be brief) the jest ended in this, that they were feign to get a
pair of Sizars, and go cutting hair after hair, which was work enough for
two of his servants, and yet were forced in the end to unrip his Breeches, that
they might come the better to clip away the hayres.

This Jest took better then the former, because it was a little tarter then
the other, and stuck closer unto him. By virtue of this, I received the
confirmation of my Knauerie, and was taken ever after for the same man I was;
So that all did seek to fly from my jests, as they would fly from the Plague.

Two months of my banishment were now past and gone. After which expiration of
time, I returned again to my former Office; but with the same Guzman received
again into the Cardinals service. A Fable touching Modesty.
little Modesty, and fear of doing evil, as before. You may happily have heard
tell of that tale, when Modesty, the Air and the Water took leave one of
another. Who at their parting, asking where they should meet again and see
each other: the Air said, that they should find her on the tops of Hills; The
Water, that they should be sure of her, in the bowels of the Earth. But
Modesty, that she being once gone from them, it was impossible to meet with her
any more. I have lost her, she is quite gone from me, and without any hope of
ever returning. But it makes no matter. A quien le falta, la Villa es suya,
Where she is away, the Town is ours. Proverb.


Who would not have been feared with those former proceedings, and fully
resolved with himself never to do the like again? But what my amendment was,
I shall deliver unto you, and what happened unto me thereupon. I had certain
sweet guts in my belly, and so made and accustomed thereunto, that those days
that I mist of my sweet-meates, was a taking of water from the sick, or Wine
from a Drunkard. I would have ventured the breaking of my neck from the top of
A Castle in Rome. Proverb.
Santo Angelo, rather then I would not down to steal them, if they were to be
had upon the face of the earth. And hence is it; Que quien teme la muerte, no
gozala vida. That he that fears Death, does not enjoy his life. If fear would
have made me turn coward, I had never tasted that so sweet a life. I cast up
my account, and made this reckning with my self; Suppose they should take me
again with the like? What can they do unto me? or what hurt can come of it? I
have always observed, that Fear is painted feeble, leane-visag'd,
staring-hayr'd, pale-coloured, sad-countenanced, heavy, melancholy, naked,
fearful, and not daring either to say, or do that, which it feign would, and
most of all desires.

Fear is a seruill Act, only proper unto slaves; it enterpriseth nothing; nor
does any thing succeed well, that it undertakes; and is like unto a cowardly
Fear, how painted: And what manner of thing it is?
curre, which knows better to bark then to bite. Fear is the souls
hangman; and it is but foolishness, to fear that which cannot be avoided.

In a word, it was impossible for me (such was my condition) to abstain from
being in Action; I was not able to contain my self. Happen what may happen;
Come what will come; all was one to me. I said to my self; Audaces fortuna
iuuat; Fortune befriends brave spirits. Let the worst come to the worst; fall
back, or fall edge, I was sure to pay for it only in my person, and not in my
goods, either moveable, or immovable; for it was not Gods will, that I should
have any land of mine own, whereon to settle my self, and make my certain
abode; nor any Se-mouentes, such things as could move of themselves, and keep
me company, whither-soeuer I should go. My Lord was a great lover of your
moist Suckets, and such liquid Conserues, as they use to bring from the
Canaries in little Barrels, or from the Islands of the Ter^ras; Which Barrels,
when they were empty, were thrown aside, and no reckoning made of them, lying
here and there in every corner as good for nothing. I had got me one of these,
containing about half an Arroba, Is five and twenty pound weight. It is an
Arabicke word, Errubun, which is a fourth part of the Verb Rebbea, To part
into four parts. And according to this, an Arroba must be in weight, the
fourth part of a hundred. It has it is root from the Heb: Rubaat. Quadrum vel
quarta pars. In liquidis, est apud Hispanos, octo acumbres. i. 8. ^nophororum.
Arroba, which served me in stead of a Trunk, wherein I kept my Cards, my
Dice, Garters, Points, Cuffes, Handkerchiefes, and other things befitting a
poor Page.

The Cardinal (as he was sitting one day at dinner,) commanded his Steward,
that he should go amongst the Merchants, and buy him some three or four
Quintal, A hundred pound weight. Centipondium.
Quintals, of those that were the newest and the freshest, and but lately
brought in. When I heard him say so, I began presently to cast about with my
self, how I might make my self Master of one of these Barrels. The Cloth was
taken away, the Cardinal risen, all gone to dinner: and whilst they were
busy at their victuals, I got me into my Chamber, and in the twinkling of an
eye, before you could well say This, I clapped me within that Barrel which I
had, as many old rags, dust, gravel, or whatsoever other trash came first to
hand, till I had filled it brim-full, and thrust it down as hard as I could
for my life to make it lie the closer. This done, on went the head, then the
hoopes, making all fast and sure, so that it was now as handsomely fitted up as
heart could wish, and no man that should have seen it, but would have sworn
(it was so artificially handled) that it had been newly brought from the
Indies stuffed with roots of The Spanish word is, Escorzonera. This Herb the
Latins call Riperina. Of this you may read at large in Couarruuias. Verb
Escorzonera. Guzman plots to play the thief. His crafty and cunning carriage.
Tragopogum, or Goats beard, (as some call it) which is good against poison.

When I had trimmed it up, and made it feat and fit, I let it alone, having
still an eye, and standing as Sentinel, to watch what success this project of
mine might take.

Now, (as good luck would have it) behold, about the Evening I did des^y two
Mulo grande, y de hueso para litera, o carga de repuesto. Couar. p. 108.
Azemilas which came along laden with Conserues, who were no sooner entered
within doors, but they were eased presently of their burden. The Steward
commanded the Pages to carry them into the Cardinals lodgings.

I had now a fight of Fortunes foretop, and boldly told her, You shall not go
from me, till I have taken hold of your hair. And as I was speaking, I took
up one of the Barrels and laid it upon my shoulders, as the rest of my fellows
did, but lagging a little behind, giving them leave to go before me: as soon
as I was come right over against mine own chamber door, I suddenly slipped in,
when I saw the coast was clear, and took out that other which I bare to my
Lords lodging; and so I made my three returns, giving a good account of all my
lading.

When the last was come up, I stood very soberly in the Hall, where my Lord
Cardinal was, who said unto me: What think you of this fruit (Guzmanillo?)
you cannot put in your hand here, your Wedges will not serve your turn. I
replied to that point, and told him; My good Lord; Donde no valen (...),
aprou^chom vnnas. Where the Wedge naught preuailes, woe must make use of our
nails; if one thing will not do the deed, another must. And though mine arm
cannot get in, my hand may, and that is enough for (...), I will desire no more.

Very good Sir (said my Lord) but as they are now, neither your arm, nor your
hand will stand you in stead.

There lies the skill, quoth I to my Lord; for if they were otherwise (...) to
be opened, I would not care a button for them, there is no pleasure in such
a^ase. In matters of difficulty, your good wits come to their trial, which
only show themselves in things of great importance, and not in dri^ing a nail
into the wall, or in pulling on of a pair of shoes, things easy to be done,
and which naturally offer themselves unto us at the first sight.

^ist thou me so (quoth my Lord?) well, I will once set your wits a wor^g. If
within these eight days you shall show your self so nimble-witted, as to
(...) one of these from me, I will bestow it on thee for thy labor, and thou
shall have another besides into the bargain: But if thou shall fail therein,
thou shall then bind thy self to receive such punishment, as shall be agreed
upon.

My Lord, said I; eight days, why, eight days is a man's life; it is time
enough of conscience. The business will be too long a doing; and it may be, by
putting it off to so large a time, we may either grow cold in the bargain, or
the memory of it dye, and be no more thought upon.

I accept the favor offered me by your Lordship, and if to morrow by this
time I shall not finish this business, I shall willingly resign up my self
into the Secretaries hands, to be punished at his discretion; Because I assure
my self, that he would willingly have the tawing of me, that he might revenge
himself upon me for the late passage that I put upon him to his great grie^e:
for the sent of the Pitch is not yet gone from him, nor his hairs come again.

My Lord laughed, and so did they that were about him. And thus the bargain was
driven between us for the next day following. But because I was already on the
fore-hand, and was well assured of the business, I could, if I would, have
presently cleared my self of this debt, but I was willing to let the bond
run on, till the time it was due.

The board was covered, and my Lord was now set down to dinner, feeding on
such things at first, which I brought in, to procure him the better appetite to
his meat; and looking me in the face, he smilingly said unto me, Guzmanillo,
it is but a little now to night; That come, your time is past. What will you
give me now to be freed of your bargain? Master Nicolao has rods in piss for
you, and is provided for your payment. And me thinks that he is plotting, how
he may be revenged of thee, and thou, how thou may satisfy thy self upon
him. If I might advise, my counsel should be, that he should not deal with
thee, not so much for thy sake, as his own. Whereunto I answered; I am sure
(my Lord) that my punishment is in the Secretaries hands: But I am not yet sure
that the Conserues are in mine. Yet if I had store of money to set upon this
cast, and had ought to lose more then the poorness of my person, I would
venture it all for this once, because I am very confident of my Chance.

Thus dinner past on till the last course was almost ended, and ready to be
taken away; at which time, I went to the Court-cupboord, and taking from thence
a Siluer-plate, I filled it with the Conserues of that barrel which I had
stolen, and therewith I came to the Table, and set them down before his
Lordship.

When my Lord saw, what I had brought him, he blessed himself, and began to
wonder much at the matter, for he himself had the barrels in his own
custody, they were within his own lodgings, and there he kept them (as he
thought) safe enough. He would trust no body with them, in regard of the
bargain that was driven between us: He kept the key himself; he bore it
always about him. At last he calls the Chamberlain unto him, and wills him to
go in, and to count the Barrels, and to see if any of them were opened, or
ill-conditioned.

He went in, and finding them both in number and place, to be just the same as
at their first putting in, he came forth again, and told his Lordship the tale
was whole and entire, not a barrel that was missing, and that they were sound
and well-conditioned, and not the least suspicion to be had (for ought that he
could perceive) amongst them all, no not so much as the least hair of his
head. Ah, ah, ah, said my Lord, this trick will not serve your tu^* this is a
very poor one. Thou would make us believe, that thou have taken that out of
one of the Barrels, which thou have bought with thy money.

With that he turned himself toward the Secretary, and told him, Domine
Nicolao, I astigne Guzmanillo over unto you, to do what you list with him,
and to punish him as you think fit, for that he has lost his wager.

The Secretary made answer, May it please your Lordship to take the correction
of him into your own hands, and to dispose of him as you please; for I for my
part will have no more to do with him, I will not come near him, nor his
shadow, I dare not; I have had too much of him already: And if I should now
tickle upon a new score, and make him pay for the old and this together, I
should gain nothing by the reckoning; for I hold him to be of that unhappy
and dangerous, both wit and nature, that he would in revenge convey the next
time a nest of Hornets into my breeches, or some other venomous vermin, that
should either poison me, or sting me to death. And therefore if your Lordship
put him over unto me, and leave his punishment to my discretion, I freely
absolve him thereof, and am willing to embrace his friendship.

I have not as yet (said I) offended in that degree, that I had need of
absolution. Where there is no matter to work upon, it is needless to seek to
introduce a form. I am as good as my word, and have performed what I promised;
the wager is mine, I have won it. And if this be not true that I speak, and
that I make it not plainly to appear unto you, punish me at your pleasure, I
ask no favor at your hands. De que siruen las palabras, donde ay Proverb.
^bras? What need words, where there are Works? I say, and say it again, and
that confidently, that this Conserve is of that which was brought in yesterday;
and not only this, but a whole Barrel thereof is now at this present whole
and untouched in my chamber, save this little that I have set before his
Lordship.

The Cardinal crossed himself, and wondered how this should be. And until
dinner was done, and the table taken away, he did nothing else but bless
himself with both his hands. And being desirous to be certified of the truth
thereof, he rose up, and went into his lodging to be an eyewitness of it
himself. He looked upon all the Barrels, whereon he had set certain marks, he
found them faithful and true the number full and just, the key in his own
custody, and could not devise how this should be.

Hereupon he did verily believe, that I had bought a barrel of the very same
Conserues, as his were, and said unto me; Guzmanillo, do not thou thy self
know, that thou broughtest in thus many hither? count them now, and see if they
be not right. I did so; And when I had done telling, I told him; My Lord, here
is the full number. Pero de lo contado, come el lobo. But it is like the
Shepherds numbering of his Sheep; whereof, when he has cast Proverb.
up his reckoning, he shall find that the Woolfe has met with one of them by
the way. I see they are well, but not all so well as they should be. And that
you may see I tell you no lie, let that be brought hither which is in my
Chamber, and let this be opened that stands there, and you shall find that I
have changed the one for the other.

They opened it, whereby they discovered as well the truth, as the wit I had
used therein. For the dust, the gravel, the old rags, and the like trumperie
which I had filled it withal, did manifest as much.

They remained all, as men amazed, not knowing what to think of it, nor being
able for their lives, to imagine how this should be brought about. They did all
ask me the question, but I would not acquaint any of them with it: But
presently besought his Lordship, that he would be pleased to perform his
promise with me. He did so. So that I had that and one more, which were two in
the whole.

And because they should know that I carried a Noble mind, as it was delivered
to me with the one hand, so I gave it with another to my fellow-Pages, who
divided it amongst them. And howbeit my Lord was somewhat offended at the
finenesse of my theft, yet he did much more wonder at my liberality, and
thought the better of me for this my free disposition. He was much afraid of
these cunning and subtle tricks of mine, and questionless would have then put
me away, but that he was so good and holy a man; and therefore considered with
himself; If I should now cast off this young fellow, some great mis fortune
will befall him, by reason of his mis-demeanour. These things that he has done
here in mine own house, are but idle tricks of his youth, and I am ne'reawhit
the poorer for them. It is less harm that he should hurt me in a little,
then through want, offend others in much. And out of this apprehension, he did
(the better to dissemble what was past) make of this Vice a Virtue. And it is
great wisdom in any man, when a hurt may be healed, for to cure it; and to
remedy those things that may be remedied: if not, to dissemble it the best he
can. He made himself merry with it: And as often as any Princes and great
Lords came to visit him, as occasion was offered, he would not stick to make
report thereof unto them.

CHAP. IX.
Guzman de Alfarache treats of Charity: Discourses of Masters, kind, and
unkind: Tells of another theft of Conserues. His exercises, and distastes,
being a Page. He recounteth the tricks he used at Primera. That it is good to
know play; but better not to use any gaming at all. And how for playing he was
put out of the Cardinals service. And how proud-ignorance is the cause of all
evil.

THe Ordination of Charity (howbeit I have pointed at it heretofore) had its
first beginning from God. Next in Charity, and its (...).
order follows that of Fathers and Mothers, then of children, and after them of
servants; who if they be good, are more to be made of, and to be better
beloved, then children that are bad. And because my Lord had no children, he
did dearly love those that served him, and was very tender over them; placing
(next after God, and his Image, which is the poor) all his love upon them. The
poor are Gods own image. The fruits of Charity.


He was generally charitable toward all men; as being the first fruit of the
Holy Ghost, and the first fire that inflameth man's soul. It is the prime good
of all other goodness, that flows from our actions; it is the first beginning
of a happy ending. It contains in it Faith and Hope; it is the way that leads
to Heaven; it is the bond that binds God unto Man; it is the worker of
Miracles; it is the scourge of Pride; and the fountain of Wisdom.

My Lord did desire so much my amendment, as if his own had lain upon it. He
sought to oblige me unto him by love, that he might not affright me with
fear. And for to try, if he could reduce me to a virtuous course of life, he
did (that he might remove from me all occasion of longing) regalar me at his
own Table, feeding me from his own Plate with all the choysest dainties and
delicacies, and with all manner of sweet Meats: there was not the thing that
he did eat of, whereof I had not my share, telling me in gentle terms;
Guzmanillo, I give thee this, to be at truce with thee, in token of peace and
amity: Behold that I, as well as my Secretary, will hold no contention with
thee. Content thy self with this morsel, whereby I acknowledge my self to be
thy Vassal, bestowing this upon thee by way of Tribute. This would he
smilingly utter, and with a pleasing countenance, without respect L^ing Masters.
of whosoever sat at Table with him, were they never so great persons, or of
what quality or condition soever. He was a marvelous kind Gentleman, he
treated, and esteemed his servants well, he favored, and loved them
exceedingly, doing for them as far as his ability would reach, so that all
of them did love him with their very heart and soul, and did do him all true
and faithful service. For without all doubt, the Master that respects his
servants, is well served by those servants: and if he pay them well, they will
deserve their payment: but if he be loving and kind withal, they adore him as
a God. Whereas on the contrary, if a Master be proud, a bad Play Master, and
unthankful to his servants, he shall neither have truth, nor love from them.
They neither serve him with fear, nor entertain him Bad Masters.
with their love. He is abhorred, hated, scorned, made a common byword in the
Marketplace, in the streets, in the Tribunals, and every public Assembly,
discredited by all men, and defended by none.

If Masters did but know, how much it did import them, to have good and honest
servants, they would spare the meat out of their own bellies, to bestow it
upon them; for they are true riches indeed; and he that has a good servant,
has a great lewell. And it is impossible, that a servant should be diligent,
with that Master that is not loving unto him.

There were brought to my Lord from Genoa certain Boxes of Conserues, very
great and large, they were richly gilded, and curiously wrought upon the
Guzmans other theft of Conserues, with the story thereof.
top, as possibly could be desired, they were fresh and fair to look to, as
being but newly finished; which Boxes upon the way had taken a little wet. When
they were brought before him, it did me good to look upon them, and the
rather, for that they were made and sent him by a kins-woman of his, who did
ordinarily use to send him such kind of dainties. I was not in the house when
they came, and while I was lacking, they entered before my return into a
consultation, what they should do with them, and how, and where they were
best to dry them, that they might have a safe conduct from my person, that I
might not seize upon them: And the rather, for they must be forced to lay them
abroad in the Sun, which would have run some danger, if they had clapped them
up close in that An Vrne is an earthen Pitche*, wherein the Romans enclosed as
in a Coffin the Ashes of the dead.
Urne, wherein Julius Caesar's ashes were put. Every one broached his opinion,
but not one good one amongst them all. My Lord himself lighted upon one, and
said; It matters not much, to study for a place, where to keep them safe; if
we give the keeping of them to one, that will look well unto them, they will
that way be safe, and no way else.

They did all allow of my Lords reason; And as soon as I came in, his Lordship
called me unto him, and said; Guzmanillo, what were we best to do with these
Conserues, which are come thus wet, that we may preserve them from being
spoiled? The best course (my Lord) said I, in my poor opinion, is to eat them
presently.

And durst thou adventure (quoth he) to eat them all? I answered; It were no
great matter so to do, if a man had time enough. But I am not so great a
glutton, that now at this present I dare to venture alone upon so great and
honorable a Muster as is here made before me.

My pleasure then is (said he) that thou look unto them, and keep a true
reckning of them, laying them out every day abroad in the Sun. And here is no
evasion for you, for they shall be delivered unto you by tale, and by tale I
will look you shall return them unto me. Here you see them laid open before
you, and how fair and full they be; and if any harm come unto them, or ought
be missing, I shall easily know where the fault lies, and call you to account
for it.

I told him, that I was neither master of my self, nor them: I knew not what
to do in this case, I was not mine own man; I had not power over my self;
and that I was one of Eue's sons; and that being put into such a Paradise of
Conserues, the Serpent of the flesh might tempt me to eat of this forbidden
fruit.

His Lordship replied then again, and told me; See (sirrah) that you look
well to your charge; for I will expect, that you give them me, as I give them
you: I must not have a piece missing, neither in number nor in weight, quality
for quality, quantity for quantity, all whole and sound, or else you shall
see what will come of it, and therefore I would wish you to look well what you
do, and to use your best care.

I then made bold to tell him; The Plea (my Lord) that is between us, depends
not on this point; this is not the hinge, whereon it hangs; For to return
them unto you as they are, without finding any missing, or perceiving any hurt
they have taken, that is a very easy thing, I can do that presently. But it
is another point (my Lord) that I stand upon. What point I pray (says my
Lord?) I told him; I put my self into great peril; for I am privy to mine
own inclination and weakness, no man should better know mine own ability
and strength then my self, and therefore (to deal plainly with your
Lordship) if you will have me to comply with your Lordships command, if my life
lay on it, I shall not be able to hold my hands, I must needs taste of them, if
not fill my belly.

My Lord maruelling much at me, Well (quoth he) seeing it will be no otherwise,
I will for once make trial how discreetly you will behave your self; I shall
see by this, what manner of man you be. I give thee therefore free liberty,
that thou eat as much as thou have a mind to for once, and no more, and that
one time, I allow thee to fill thy belly as full as thou will thy self; but
with this condition, that thou deliver them up afterward unto me, without any
defect or fault; and in case the contrary shall appear, thou shall make me
satisfaction in such payment, as I shall be pleased to appoint.

I accepted of the condition of this Obligation; and thereupon they were all
delivered up into my hands.

The next day following, I laid them out in the Sun, in an open walk, and
amongst the rest of these sweet-meates, there was one of the flowers of Oranges
and Limons, which offered it self to my view, it looked very lovingly upon me,
as if it did desire to be better acquainted with me, and I who was loath to be
behind hand in matter of courtesy, made toward it, took it in my hand, and
with a little knife that I had about me, loosening those little tacks with
which it was fastened beneath, and heauing it up daintily by degrees, till I
had turned it vp-side down, and that the lid lay downward, with that very
knife, I took out almost the one half, from forth the bottom of it,
returning to make it fast again as before, putting in place of the Conserues
so much waste Paper, cut out so just to the same measure and proportion, that
no man was able to perceive it.

My Lord that night being minded to make a collation, I brought to his board
four of the said Boxes, and asked him when I set them down, whether I had not
looked well unto them? He told me; if the rest be like unto these, he was well
contented with them. Whereupon I brought them all before him, and he was very
well pleased when he saw them, because they were much dryer then they were
before, and better conditioned. With that I presently stepped aside, to go fetch
a Plate, and on it I brought him all that I had stolen; for in very deed I had
not tasted thereof the quantity of a Nut, having only done it for the
ostentation of my wit.

When he looked upon it, he ask't me; What Is this? I told him; I now divide with
your Lordship, part of my theft. He replied; I willed thee, that thou should
fill thy self, and not filch: And therefore now you have lost.

I answered, I have neither filled my self with it, nor so much as tasted what
it is, nor do I think that I have lost by doing of this; for this is that,
wherewith I mean to fill my belly. Besides, all that was stolen out of the
Box, is yet whole, and entire, as you may very well perceive; but if, because I
have showed my self honest, I must suffer for it, which way shall I walk to
go right, if you bar me of the path wherein I ought to tread? My punishment
does not trouble me, nor does it grieve me that I have lost, as long as I am
persuaded I have won, howsoever I may be ouer-borne. But I will be wiser the
nex^time, and be sure to lose no more upon the like match.

Nay (Guzmanillo) be not angry (said my Lord) I would not thou should grieve
or complain for this, I confess I have done thee wrong, and have blamed thee
without a cause; but I prithee tell me (said he) out of which of all these
Boxes did thou take this forth? I put forth my hand, and told him; This is it
(my Lord) and I showed him how and which way I did it.

He was well pleased with the subtilnesse of my wit, but he could have wished
that I had not had so much finenesse in me, for he was afraid, lest one time or
other, I would mis-imploy it to my greater hurt. He willed me to take the Box
notwithstanding for my pains, and to carry it away with me.

Many such things as these came from me; and he took pleasure both in them and
me, as being sleights of the hand, using these iuggling tricks more for sport
then harm. If any of my fellows should chance to fall asleep, when he should
wait and give attendance; they might the next day go buy them new shoes and
stockings, for The Spanish word is, Libramiento de cera. A Fly made of Wax
burning, which Pages put on the shoes of those that sleep.
Flies of wax were sure to be their Cocks to wake them. Our exercise, was
every day two hours in the morning, and two in the Evening, to hear our
Schoolmasters read unto us, of whom I learned (for the time that I studied
there) the Latin tongue; which I had reasonably perfect, I had a little Greek
too, and some Hebrew. The rest of that vacant time, which we had from serving
of our Master (which was, God knows, very little) we bestowd in reading of
books, telling of tales, and in gaming. If we went forth a doors at any tine,
it was only to coozen the What a Bun^olero is, I have margented elsewhere.
Guzmans exercises being a Page. The distastes that Guzman had, whilst he was a
Page.
Bun^oleros; and amongst the Cooks our credit was very good for Pye-meate. We
would go a-nights to play the waggs with the Curtizans, and to exercise our
wits upon them, and to sing songs at their doors. And thus did I spend my
time, till my beard began to bud.

And howbeit it may seem perhaps to thee, a life of entertainment; and full of
mirth, yet it was to me as if I had been ty'de to a stake, with a collar of
iron about my neck, exposed to shame. All this was as a stink in my nose;
none of these things could content me; night and day I did sigh for the loss
of my former delights.

But when I once began to write Man, and was able to girt a Sword to my side, I
would have been glad of any augmentation of honor, whereby I might have
gained some hope to have proceeded farther. And I verily persuade my self,
that if my Actions had deserved it, I should not have wanted the means.

But in stead of getting judgment, and doing things that were virtuous, for to
gain men's good wills, and thereby to bind them unto me, I fell to gaming,
Guzmans tricks at Primera.
even to the loss of my clothes from my black; and as I was somewhat of the
freest, so was I too liberal in my play.

I made it my study, to benefit my self by all tricks and cheating devices,
that I could invent or learn; and especially when I played at Primera. How
often when I went upon two Cards, would I take three, and conueying five now
and then into my hand, would set up my rest upon the three best? How often
would I take the last Card, and clapping it underneath, would see whether it
were good for me or no, and in an instant look on the other already seen, and
then make my best advantage of them, which was all one, as if I should have
robbed a man upon the highway? How often would I have a The Spanish word is
Diacono, which though it properly signify a D^, yet it is ^ken more largely
for any one that ministers help to a man. Couarruuias verb. Diacono
friend sit by me, which should seem as if he were asleep, and should supply
me with Cards under the board to serve my turn? How often had I a Copesmate
that stood by, looking upon the others games, who would tell me what Cards
they went upon, and what their game was? all which he signified unto me by such
secret and cunning signs, that it was impossible for them to find it out. How
often would I so set and pack the Cards, that I would deal to him that played
against me two and fifty, and having an Ace to help me, would make my self
five and fifty, or else with a five encounter four and fifty, and so either
win the Game by one peep, or by the elder hand?

Now when we were two against one, and played booty, and dealt the Cards one to
another, how often taking the discarding Card, and clapping it on the top,
would we play on till we could make our advantage of it? how by a beck or a
nod, did we know how the world went? how to shuffle and mix the Cards so, as
to make our game sure? how to set some privy mark or sign upon them, whereby
to know them? how to know them by the corners, being bigger or less, and a
thousand the like, which we made good use of either by the help of a stander
by that shared with us, or by corrupting him that sold the Cards, which are
ordinary things? O how many lewd prankes did I play in that kind? how many
rogueries? how many villainies? there was not that cheating or coozening trick,
which I was not acquainted withal and had at my fingers ends. And as I was
perfect in the knowledge of them, so did I put them in practice when time
served. For such is the blindness of play, that those that are crafty and
cunning in their gaming, have a large field wherein to expatiate themselves,
and to show their skill.

And if it might be lawful (I say, lawful) that as in the Commonwealth,
houses of sin are permitted, for the avoiding of greater inconveniences;
there were appointed in every principal City or Town, Masters of this
coozening and cheating Science, of whom, those that are addicted and given to
play, might be taught and instructed, it were very good for the avoiding of
deceit, and many a Gentleman would not be so easily fooled out of their money
and means, as now they daily are. For our Sensuality suffers it self easily
to be over come by Vice, and that is turned to an ill habit, and becomes a bad
custom in the end, which at first was invented for a lawful exercise, and to
pass away the time. And with reason may it be called a bad custom, when it
shall be disorderly followed, and that men are too much wedded to gaming,
altering the true intent and meaning thereof, and putting it out of its right
byas.

Gaming was first of all invented for the recreation of man's mind, and Gaming,
made only for recreation.
for the refreshing of him himself, when he found himself wearied with the
troubles and turmoyles which accompany this life; and when it breaks this
rule, and passes beyond its due bounds, it is wickedness, infamy, and theft.
For it seldom happens, that it is not attended with these Attributes.

I speak of those that are professed Gamesters, who make their living of it, as
a man would do of an Office or a Trade, and make a continual practice of it.
Notwithstanding, I could heartily wish, and it is one of my most earnest
desires, that those would leave it off, and give over this excess of play,
which are of the nobler sort, considering the hurt which may ensue thereupon,
especially Gaming, to be shunned by Noblemen and Gentlemen; and wherefore?
seeing that ill is balanced with good; and that if he win, and the other
lose, he is bound to give the loser leave to speak; to endure many bold and
intemperate actions; to bear with many indiscreet both words and deeds, and
other strange kind of gestures, and uncivil behavior, which he is tide to
suffer, only as he is a winner, not as he is a man of honor, who in things of
another nature, will risent the least wrong that is done unto him Other things
there are of like quality with these, which I dare not presume to press any
farther, that not only for them, and those already mentioned, they ought to
abhor gaming, but even those houses and Ordinaries, where Play is maintained.

But being that our appetite is so unbridled, and our natural inclination
thereunto so exorbitant, that it cannot in this kind altogether contain it
It is good to know play. And why?
self, it shall not be amiss, but rather good and fitting, that a young man
should know the Laws of play, learn the skill thereof, and understand all the
tricks, and cheatings that are used therein, that he may perceive when he meets
with a Cony-catcher. And if such cheating companions once begin to lose, and
that their metal melts away from them, let him power the rest of his own
moneys into his Boots, Breeches, Hand-wrest, Collar, Girdle, Bosom, Sleeves,
or any other part about him, whether he can cleanliest convey it, that he may
not lose his money like a beast. For besides the getting of it from him, they
will laugh at him when they have done. One thing I was ever careful to
observe; I would never sit down to play with a little money, nor for a little,
nor with that man that would not adventure to get much, playing my money freely,
without either offering, or taking of wrong.

Well, I was so wholly given to gaming, and spent so much time therein, that I
committed many faults. Nor is it possible, that a Gamester should perform A
Gamester cannot serve and attend his Master as he should.
those duties which belong unto him, much less he that serves, and is ty'de to
attendance. Neither do I know that Master that will give bread to that servant
that is a Gamester. For if he manage his Masters affairs, and have either
moneys of his in his hands, or other his goods committed to his charge, and
that he chance to lose his own, he will play then upon his Masters purse,
hoping to recover himself; and if peradventure he continue still on the
losing hand, and has not afterward wherewithal to pay, he runs himself
into greater danger then before, thinking that luck will turn, and so come to
relieve his losses. But say, he is not trusted with any thing of his Masters,
nor has any thing of his to loose; yet is it not possible, that he should
assist at those hours, when he ought to do him service, nor will he be in the
way to be found, when need shall require, as it happened to my self.

My Lord was greiued thereat to the very soul, nothing could prevail with me,
neither admonitions, nor persuasions, nor words, nor promises, to remove The
Cardinal shows himself a ^d and loving Master.
this evil custom from me. And being one day (in my absence) with his
houshold-seruants about him, he told them, how well he wished me, and the great
desire that he had of my good. And seeing that I could not be reclaimed by
fair means, his purpose was by some one device or other to bring me to be a
reformed man. And the plot was, that by discharging me from his service and
putting me out of his house for some certain days, it might be, that calling
my lewd courses to mind, and seeing mine own errors in the end, I might come
to a truer feeling of my misery, and by that means be drawn to amendment of
life: yet would he not, that my allowance should be taken from me, lest for
want of means, I might through necessity be driven to do some dishonest act
or other. O how singular a virtue was this in so great a Prince! how worthy of
eternal praise, and how fit to be imitated by all those, that desire to be
well and truly served! And certainly, it is impossible, but that servants
(unless they be such as I was) would be willing to lay down a thousand lives
(if they were Masters of so many) to give but any the least content to such
kind and loving Masters.

Well, I was driven by this means to my shifts, and wanted meat to put in my
mouth. O Lord, let it ever be in my Letany, that thou will deliver me Want of
food causes much evil.
from this evil. Other wants have some trouble with them. But when a man has
a good stomach, and wants meat, is extreme hungry, and has not where-withall
to fill his Maw; to see the hour of eating come, and he to remain fasting; to
pass over the day from morning to night, and not to find whereon to feed;
these (I say) are such things, as would make a man do any thing, be it never
so dishonest; Cloakes, Hats, and all walk then, (though it be but for half
they are worth, what shift so ever we make to come by other.

This misery befell me, and that in a very troublesome time: For having spent
a whole day and night in play, and having lost all the money that I had, Guzman
plays away his clothes.
and when that was gone, all my clothes, having nothing left me to cover my
nakedness, but a poor thin Doublet, and a pair of white linen Drawers, when
I saw my self in this poor taking, I retired my self into my Chamber, not
daring for shame to come abroad.

And albeit I would willingly have faign'd my self sick, I could not do it;
for my Lord was so careful of his servants health, and that they should have
all things necessary and fitting for them, that he would presently have sent
for Physicians to see what I ayled. Besides, I saw it was a needless remedy,
to use any such dissimulation; for by this time it had past from mouth to
mouth, how, and in what case I was, and what was the cause of my grief.

Now though that I had been wanting so many days from the service of his
Table, yet would he still ask and inquire what was become of me, and where I
was that I did not wait? He could not endure Tale-carriers, nor such as would
complain of their fellows, and make things worse then perhaps they were, by
mis-reporting of them; he did hate it to the death, to have his house, like
your Lawyers Courts, full of clamours, and untruths; and therefore that they
might not grieve or disquiet him, they would mildly tell him: He is here
(Sir) about the house, I saw him but now, or some such like excusiue answer.
But this would not serve the turn. For now he began shrewdly to suspect, lest
some misfortune had befalne me. And therefore pressing them hard to acquaint
him where I was, and how I spent my time, they were forced (for the giving of
his Lordship satisfaction) to deliver unto him the truth of the business.

This evil inclination of mine did much afflict his Lordship, when he saw how
dissolutely, without either fear or shame, I proceeded on in my lewd courses.
Whereupon, to put his former project in practice, he gave order that I should
have some new clothes made me, and that then they should presently dismiss
me, and rid me out of both his house and service, accordingly as he had
formerly ordered the business.

So his Steward clothed me, and then turned me out of doors. Which I took in
that foul scorn (holding it as a due debt, that my Master was still Guzman
has new clothes given him, and is turned out of doors.
bound to keep and maintain me, and to bear with all faults) that in a kind
of ^ullen and dogged fashion, (showing more stomach, then wit) I left the
house, with a full resolution never, (come what would come) to return thither
again, of all other places in the world; notwithstanding that I had received
many messages from the Cardinal, at sundry times, and by several messengers,
with many goodly offers, and fair promises, delivering unto me the end why all
this was done, and that there was no other drift in it in the world, save only
what should make for mine own good; thinking by this means, when I had champt
a little upon the bit, and tasted what hardness was, and known the loss of
so good a Master, I would have reformed my manners, reclaimed my self from my
lewd courses, and proved afterward a better servant, then ever I had been
before. They also signified unto me, how much his Lordship loved me, and what
he had spoken of me in my absence. But all would not do; they could never get
me back again. For I was stiff and obstinate, and too foolishly
selfe-will'd; thinking that I should revenge my self in so doing; and so as I
might spite them, I did not care Proud ignorance, and self-will, much hurts
young men.
how I sped my self. I brewed ill, and baked worse; I began in pride, and
ended in folly. And what could follow thereupon but my misery and ruin,
seeing that I was unthankful for those favors and benefits, which God had
been pleased to bestow upon me by the hands of that good and holy man my
Master, who had justly given me my doom, and pronounced this sentence of
expulsion against me. For he that cannot be won with good works, nor moved
with fair and gentle words, it is pity but he should smart for it, and that
rigor and chastisement should work that upon him, which rewards and fair
usage, were not able to effect. I had now quite lost those little wits that I
had, making little or no account of all these things, as if I had wanted
nothing. How did I scorn and contemn those many good things that were done
for me, without any why or wherefore, being things beyond the reach of my
capacity, unbefitting my service, and altogether unworthy of me by reason of
my unthankfulness? How unwise was I in conseruing that present good, and in
seeking to increase the hope of farther favors, which undoubtedly I should
have futurely received, if I had but endeavored to deserve them? How forgetful
was I of that kindness, wherewith I had been cured? How unmindful of the
care, that was taken about me? How ungrateful to that charity which was used
toward me? How careless of that diligence, wherewith I was taught? How
stubbornly proud, against that mildness, wherewith I was admonished? How
perverse, against those sweet words, wherewith I was persuaded? How deaf
against those grave yet loving terms, wherewith I was reprehended? How
surly against that patience, by which I was supported? How incorrigible
against that favor, by which I was defended? How rebellious against those
means, which were sought for my good? How incapable of that good usage,
wherewith I was treated? How neglectfull in amending those faults, which for
my sake were so kindly dissembled? If any of those two, that took me for
their son, had been alive, nay, if they were both now abiding here upon
earth, and might return to their former prosperity, they could not have done
more for me, or with more love, or would have borne half so much with my so
many, and prejudicial knauish prankes, which I did so daily, and so
disorderly play, and with that liberty and freeness, as if I had not been in
my Lords, or my Fathers house, but in mine own. I was more bold in his
presence, then I should have been amongst my equals, and he imitating God in
the sweetness of his disposition, had the patience to bear with me.

Certain I am, that he that begat me, would have abandoned and abhorred me,
so vvearie would he have grown of my ill government. But my Lord was so good
a man, that he was never weary of me, never angry, never offended with me,
and would not have cast me off (had not I cast off my self) because he loved
me.

O the noble and Princely condition of this worthy Prelate, given him by
inheritance from that true Father of love and goodness, that he could be so
kinde-hearted, in doing still more and more good to such a one as I was! He
looked still when I should return unto him, he tarried for me, a day, a week
a month, a year, nay many years; in all which time, he was not vvanting to
exercise his works of mercy toward me, to the end, that he might leave me
without excuse: And that touched at last with shame of mine own folly, I might
pronounce that sentence against my self, which the heynousnesse of mine
offenses had deserved.

But I for all this followed mine own humor, which was the rule by which I
directed all my actions: To all that was said unto me, I put on Merchants
Orejas de mercader. i. Deaf ears. A Proverb.
ears, was still deaf to all good counsel, appealing from good advice, to
mine own flesh, which being ready still at hand in favor of my vices, I did
utterly undo my self, by following of her ill counsel. For to execute her
suggestions, I had force enough; to seek out occasions of sin, ability
sufficient; to persevere in them, an vntyred constancy; and in not leaving
them, a firmness not to be removed. I was as well acquainted with all
manner of Vice, as I was a stranger to all kind of Virtue. And to lay the
fault upon Nature, I have no reason for it in the world. For I had no less
ability for good, then inclination to evil. The fault was mine own; for she
never did any thing out of reason. She was always the Mistress of truth and
modesty; she was never defective in what was fitting, but as she has been
corrupted since through sin; and mine were so many, that I produced the cause
of this bad effect, and became mine own hangman.

CHAPTER X.
Guzman de Alfarache discourses of ill Company; of Hospitality; of Patience;
And how being put out of the Cardinals house, he placed himself with the
Ambassador of France, where he playde some Knauish prankes. He relates a
Story, which he heard from a Gentleman of Naples. And ending with that, he
gives an end to the first part of his life.

I Could not (as I told you before) justly complain; or find fault with any
body but my self, that my Lord had thus dismissed me, and turned me out of
service. For the very truth was, he made earnest suit (through the importunity
of his servants, who were very instant with me) to have me to come back again
unto him; but because my blood (whose heat was not yet allayed) still boiled in
my breast, and was not come to its wonted coolness, I did ill consider mine
own good: or should rather have said, That I did well, ill, in not considering
my ill, well.

Being thus discarded, I wandered up and down at mine own pleasure, (as my
fancy did lead me) through the streets of Rome. And because in my The
conversation of the wicked destroys the soul.
prosperity, I had purchased some friends of mine own profession, they seeing
me vn-prouided for, and that I went up and down like a Masterlessehound, here
one would inuit me, and there another, howbeit it cost me dear; for that
meal that is made in ill company, though it give nourishment to the body, yet
it fills the soul with ill humors, to its utter overthrow and destruction.
Nor did those good morsels so well satisfy hunger, as their ill counsel and
lewd conversation did undo me; Whereof nothing now remains, but repentance.
For I began then, (and never till then) to know in what danger I was, when I
saw the water was come up to my chinne, and ready to run into my mouth.

Vices, come stealing in upon a man, they enter with silence, they are a smooth
still File, that cuts without any noise; they are not heard, till they have
wrought man's ruin. They are as easy to be received, as they are hard to be
rejected.

And such kind of friends as these, are those Bellows, which kindle that
flame, which sets the whole soul on fire, and with a little spark raises a
great blaze. I might very well have recovered my allowance, and had meat of
mine own to put in my mouth; for the Steward told me, that my Lord had given
him order, that I should daily come and fetch it, or send for it, as I would my
self. But I was so obstinate, that I would none of it. For I was so lewdly
given, that I had rather endure hunger with ill company, then feed upon the
best meat with honest and civil people. But they quickly paid me home, who
first gave me counsel to refuse my boord-wages, as I did, relying upon them
and their advice; for they were soon weary of helping me any longer, and they
did not only not relieve me, but because they would not do it, they did shun
and avoid me. So that I might starve for any succor that I was to look for
from them.

This same thing, called Hospitality, and entertaining of friends and guests,
Touching Hospitality.
carries a kind of mystery with it; I evermore found in his mouth that
inuiteth, honey, but in his hands gall; they promise liberally, but give
sparingly; they bid with joy, but eat with sorrow. He that will be another
man's guest, must be content to be ordered, as he will have him; besides, Guests,
what manner of men they ought to be?
he must be rich and well to pass, other-wise he shall not be welcome; he must
not tread many steps in the house, his breech must scarce warm his Chair, nor
must he sit long at board, for fear of being too troublesome. Do not flatter
thy self, that thou art liberally and freely welcome, because a man gives thee
good words, and speaks kindly and lovingly unto thee, and tells thee thou art
heartily welcome. For I have ever observed it as a true rule amongst other the
Laws of Hospitality, that a man may diet with his kinsman The Laws of
Hospitality.
a seuen-night, with his elder brother a month, with his friend a year, and
with a bad Father all his life time.

The Father only is not weary perhaps of entertaining his son, but all the
rest take dislike, if not a loathing of his company. If thou shall stay with
them beyond that time, they will hate thee to the death, and pick one quarrel
or other against thee; and if that will not serve the turn to set thee
packing; they will put crooked Pinnes in thy Bread, or lay baytes to poison
thee, that they may once be rid of thee.

But admit, that thou art invited by a married man, and that his wife be
close-fisted, a very Crib, her wealth her own, and she somewhat proud and
scornful, say she be thy Mother, or thy Sister, in fine she is a woman, who
for the most part are all of them greedy and covetous, so that they will whine
for anger to see thee there, look scuruily upon thee, grudge thee thy meat;
cha^e with her husband for bringing thee thither, curse both him and thee, and
wish you both choakt. Better is a hard crust in thine own house, then a Better
is a little at home, then a great deal of good cheer abroad.
crammed Capon in another man's. It is a miserable thing to set thy foot under
another man's table.

My friends growing now weary of me, I needed not out of shame to leave them;
for they had already cast me off, streightning more and more their hand toward
me, who were so far from giving me any thing, that now they could shamefully
deny me without blushing. They needed no mask nor disguise for to dissemble
the business. They could boldly bid me Go by. I was therefore driven to seek
out some Wall, where-against to lean, and betake my self to some Tree for
shelter, under whose shadow I might quietly take my feeding. For I was now in
that extreme want, that like the Prodigal son, I would willingly have
returned home, and been content with all my heart to be one of the meanest
mercenary servants in my Lords house. But such was my misfortune, that he was
now dead and gone.

Beaten with the rod of affliction, I began to be humbled, and was fully
resolved to turn over a new leaf, and betake my self to a better course of
life: but it was all too late, I came a day after the fair; And fit it is,
that he that will not when he may, when he would, he should have nay.

And it stands with very good reason, Que pierda por el mal qu^rer, el bien
poder. That throught the badnesse of will, we should lose the goodness of
power. There went the distance of some two months between my good and bad
fortune. And if I had been a stayed, and well-gouern'd Youth, as Want of
patience, the cause of much evil.
I had a running head, and a giddy brain, the least good that could have
befalne me, would have been (though the meanest of his servants) an honest
provision during my life, and might have run the venture of some better
fortune. But seeing it fell out as it did, yet must we thank God as well for
the bad, as the good. I cannot say, that my malignant Star was the cause
thereof, but that mine own evil inclination was the worker of my woe; For the
stars non compellunt, sed inclinant, they incline, but not constrain. The
Stars do not enforce a man to this or that.
They make men apt, but they do not coact. Some ignorant fools stick not to
say; O Sir, Destiny is not to be avoided. That which shall be, shall be. And
it is in vain to strive against it. I tell thee (my friend) it is a vain
thing to say so; and thou do not understand the truth thereof aright; for
there is no necessity, that it is, or should be so; it is thou thy self, that
make it so to be.

In these Moral and outward things, thou have a kind of free will conferred
upon thee, whereby thou may (if thou will) govern both thy self, and thy
actions. Thy star cannot constrain thee, nor all the heavens joined together
with all the force and power that they have, cannot compel thee against thy
will.

It is thou that forcest thy self to leave what is good, and to apply thy
self All evil that befalls a man, is for the most part occasioned by
himself. Guzman serves the French Ambassador.
to that which is evil, following thy dishonest desires, whence these thy
crosses and calamities come upon thee.

I was now entered into the service of the French Ambassador, with whom my Lord
(who is now in glory) held strict amity; who, in his lifetime took likewise
great pleasure in my witty jests, and merry conceits. He would feign have had
me serve him before, but he was loath to intertaine me, lest it might be taken
unkindly to receive another man's servant, considering the good love and
friendship that was between them.

Well, I was now with him, and he used me well, but with a different end. For
my Lord directed his actions to the profit and benefit of my person, but
Masters intertaine their servants for diverse ends.
he only for his own private ends, and the pleasure which he took in my
ierkes of wit, the merry tales that I would tell him, and the pleasing messages
that I should bring him now and then, from those his Ladies and Mistresses to
whom he made love. He did settle me in no set place, or office about him; I was
his servant at large; and he as largely paid me. For either he would give me
my payment himself, or else I my self would take it in his presence, with
some pleasant jest or other; or to speak more plainly, I was his chief
Minion and Favorite, though it pleased some to call me his Buffone and Iester.

When we had any guests (as we seldom or never wanted) we were very
complementall with them, and waited punctually upon them, our eyes still Guests
how to be attended on by those that wait at the table. Foolish and presumptuous
persons not to be observed by those that attend.
attending on theirs: but if they were either impudent, foolish, or troublesome
guests, which came thither unbidden, upon such as these we would put a thousand
jests. Some we would make to sit all dinner time without drink, that you would
have thought, that they had been so many Melones sown in a dry ground; to
others we would give very little, and that in pinching glasses; some had their
Wine ouer-watered, other-some ouer-warme without any snow. When they were ready
to eat their meat, we would take away their Plates from them, and set some
salt-meats before them, ill seasoned, with a little oil that was none of the
best. We would daily invent new devices, to abuse their palates, that they
might take dislike, and come there no more.

It happened once upon a time, that an Englishman claiming kindred of the Men of
good and bad behavior, to be respected according as they are. A tale of an
Englishman.
Ambassador, and it being a common custom with him, to come daily to our
house, my Master grew weary of him; for (besides that he was not his kinsman)
he was neither Noble in his blood, nor endued with good qualities, and
aboueall, in his conversation full of impertinencies, that it was a kind of
captivity, to keep conversation with him.

There are a certain kind of men, that a man's heart will rise against them,
and grow into a dislike of them, though he never saw them before. And again
there are another sort of men, that will steal thereinto, and thrust
themselves into our affection, and good liking, upon the first sight, winning
our good will from us, and procuring our best wishes; this, either hatred, or
love, not being in the hands of the one, or the power of the other. But this
was a mere lump of Lead, a man of no metal in the world, a dull and heavy
piece of flesh, in a word a mere block-head.

One night, when they were newly set at supper, he began to lay open his
vanity, with telling a thousand lies one upon the neck of another, wherewith
the Ambassador was much offended, and not being able to suffer such a one, to
go on in his fooleries, he spoke to me in Spanish, (which the other understood
not) and said unto me, Would I could be rid once of this fool; for I am as
weary of him, as ever I can be. He did not speak this to a Dolt or an Ass: I
had his meaning in the wind. Whereupon I took my friend to task; I followed
him with salt-meats, that were smart and sharp, and left behind them a kind
of tartness or tang upon the tongue; wherewith being bitten, he called for his
coolers, which he took almost faster then I could fill them.

The wine that he gulped down, was the gulf that swallowed him up. The glass
was great, his draughts answerable, and those often, and this powder took so
well, that at last he was powdered with a witness, and quite blown up*

When I saw he had yielded himself prisoner to his pots, and that he was
above one and thirty, being many peepes out, I took off one of my Garters, and
knit a sliding knot upon the instep of one of his feet, and fastened it unto
the stool whereon he sat. And when the Table was taken away, and that he
offered to rise to take his leave, and to go home to his lodging, he was no
sooner risen from his seat, but that he fell all along on the floor, his
mouth, his teeth, and his nose being shrewdly hurt, the blood gushing out
amain. So that when he was come to himself the next day, and saw in what
ill case he was, and how his face was batterd with the fall, for very shame
he would never more come near the house.

This business was well carried, for it succeeded even as I would have it.
But all darts do not hit right; nor all Angle-rods strike sure. There are some
A tale of a Spaniard, who (...) Guzman, and shows himself a (...) knave, then
he.
fishes that bite and carry away the bait with them, leaving the Angler
deluded, and the Hook empty, as it happened unto me with a Spanish Soldier,
that was longer then the mark.

O the whoreson traitor; how crafty and subtle a Rogue he was! how full of
his cunning shifts! Hearken well I pray unto that which passed between us.

This wily rascal came into the house about noone, when the Ambassador was
ready to sit down to dinner, and coming unto him, he told his Lordship that
he was a Soldier, and borne in Cordoua, and a principal Gentleman of that
place, though now he were in want, and therefore besought him, that he would
favor him so far forth, as that he might taste of his bounty. The
Ambassador took out a little purse, wherein were some Crowns, and without
offering to open it, he gave him both the Purse and the Gold that was within
it, because he seemed to be the same, he had expressed himself to be.

But not contenting himself with this, he continued still with him, recounting
what he was, and the services wherein he had been. And so running on from one
thing to another, the Ambassador setting himself down to dinner, he makes me
no more ado, but does the like. And pulling a stool to him, sets himself
cheek by iole with his Lordship.

I was then gone to fetch in meat, when lo, by the way, I might perceive two
other Ier-Falcons like the former, which were newly entered within the Court;
and when they understood, that this other was at dinner with my Court
Ier-Falcons what they be.
Lord, the one said to the other; As I am true Soldier, either the Devil, or
Sin, has clapped gyues upon our legs; for this cheating Rascal still gets
the start of us, and winnes all that he plays for by the elder hand.

When I heard them thus mutter and maunder against him, I came unto them, and
asked them; Whether they knew that Gentleman within, or no? One of them told
me, I know that Tauerne-haunter, whose father has many a time and often pulled
on my Buskins in Cordoua, where he keeps shop under the wall of the great
Church.

This is our unhappiness, that if some twenty Gentlemen of us go for Italy,
there return a hundred such infamous fellows as this is, that will equal
themselves with the best, and boast themselves to be descended of the ancient
Goths: and when they come where they are not known, they think that with
the gumming of their Mouchatos, making them bear up as stiff as if they were
starcht, and with the wagging of three or four feathers in their Hat, they are
grown into nobleness of blood, and purchased the name of Valor, being no
better then notorious Cowards. For it is not Feathers, and starcht-beards that
fight it out in the Field, but stout hearts, and men of stiff courage. Come,
let us go, I will make this effeminate Rascal next time I meet with him,
leave off coming in our quarter, and fyle himself in some other rank.

With that they went their ways, vvhilest I went considering with my self,
what kind of cattle these three were, that thus sought to grace and set forth
themselves.

But I was somewhat angry at those other two, taking them to be but
Braggadoccios, and mere puffes, as well for the vaunts they made of
themselves, as for the ill language they used, in defaming him, who sought to
honor himself, without any cost or prejudice to others.

I was likewise not a little moved against this new-come guest for his bold
and insolent carriage, who might very well have contented himself with that
which was given him, and so gone his ways, without being so impudent to sit
down at table in that swaggering and uncivil fashion; I had a months mind
to be at him, I longed to break one jest or other upon him, and to put it so
home, that he should not be able to avoid it; but thinking to go forth to
fetch Wool, I was forced to come back with my fleece shorn, failing very much
in this my intent and purpose. He entreated me to give him some drink. I made
as if I did not understand him. He beckned unto me with his hand. I drew nearer
unto him. He made me a third sign. I turned mine eyes another way, looking
very demurely, and carrying with me a sober and composed countenance, (though
I had much a do to forbear laughing.) He looking well upon me, and perceiving
that I either played the fool, or the knave with him, he would not speak, or
becken any more unto me, but turning himself toward the Ambassador, he thus
said unto him:

Sir, I beseech your Lordship, that you will not think it ouer-boldnesse, or
too much presumption in me, that I have offered (though unbidden) to sit down
at your Lordships Table in regard of those many excuses which I can render to
your Lordship, which may (if I have offended therein, and broken the rule of
good manners) plead somewhat in my favor.

First, the quality of my Person, and the nobleness of my House, does deserve
any common or ordinary courtesy.

Secondly, my being a Soldier, makes me worthy of any Princes Table
what-soeuer, because I have purchased that honor by my Sword and profession.

And lastly, I may add thereunto the necessity I now am in, which is common
to all, and may befall any man, as well as my self.

And I presume that your Lordship keeps this so free and honorable a Table
for to relieve such as my self; and therefore conceive, that your Lordship
holds it not necessary, that such Soldiers as my self, having any worth, or
good parts in them, should expect to be invited to your board.

And therefore I shall desire your Lordship to be pleased to command one of
your servants to give me some drink; for being a Spaniard, I perceive they do
not understand me, though I have often called for it.

My Lord there upon commanded us to give him drink, so that I could not
otherwise choose but do as I was bid; yet I would have sworn, he should not
have thus gone away with the Bucklers.

Well, I brought him drink, but in so poor and penurious a glass, and mixed
so much water with his Wine, that I left him in a manner as dry as he was
before. But because a little will serve a Spaniards turn, and that they are
inured to suffer much hunger and thirst, with that little pittance, which was
rather a drop, then a draught, he passed therewith as well as he could, till
dinner was done.

We that were Pages, having conspired altogether, not to look him any more in
the face while he was eating, lest he should speak again unto us by signs,
to give him more drink, and so bind us to bring it unto him. But he was an
old beaten Soldier, and knew well how to use the weapon of his wit, and being
too hard for us, did likewise beat us from this ward, which we thought had
been too sure a one, to be put from. For when he had filled his belly, and
well satisfied himself, and that the last course was served in, And your
Lordship will give me leave (quoth he) I will now go drink. And so rising up
from board, removing his stool from him, he went to the Court-Cupboord, and
taking from thence the biggest Glass that was there, he powered forth as much
Wine and Water as himself thought fit, and having quenched his thirst, putting
off his hat, and making a leg to his Lordship, got him out of the room, and
so went his way without speaking any one word or other. My Lord was ready to
burst with laughing, to see how he had put me beside my trick, and after that
he had wondered awhile at the resolution and boldness of this fellow, he said
unto me; Guzmanillo, this Soldier savors somewhat of thee, and thy country,
where all is carried away with Brauados, and an impudent kind of behavior.

Now, whilst we were talking at table of the liberty and free kind of
carriage, which the Spaniards assume unto themselves, there was newly come into
the house a Gentleman of Naples, who had no sooner saluted my Lord, but he told
him, that he was purposely come unto his Lordship to acquaint him with one of
the cruellest, and strangest accidents, that has happened in these our times,
which now very lately fell out in Rome.

The Ambassador entreated him to relate it unto him; And that I might the
better hear it, I did defer taking away, and brought him a Chair, wherein,
when he was set, he thus began to speak.

In this City, there dwelt a young Gentleman of the age of twenty or one A
pitiful and lamentable A^ident of two noble Lovers in Rome.
and twenty years, more noble in blood, then rich in wealth. He had a goodly
presence; he was virtuous, able, active, and in his own person very valiant.
This Gentleman fell in love with a Damsel, a young Gentlewoman here in Rome,
about the age of seventeen; being wonderful both fair and honest; they were
both equal in state and condition, but more in their good will and love to
each other. For if the one did love, the other did burn. His name was Dorido,
hers Clorinia. Her Parents bred her up so retiredly, Dorido and Clorinia, a
(...) of faithful Lovers.
that they did not suffer her to treat or converse with any, from whence any
danger might arise unto her; neither did she so much as show her self at the
Window, and did seldom look out, unless it were by chance. For such was the
excess of her beauty, that it was able to be a loadstone, to draw all the
youthful Nobility of Rome to desire her love. Her Parents, and one only
brother that she had, were very jealous of her honor; insomuch that these two
Lovers could not enjoy each other as they would.

True it is, that Clorinia, as one that was truly in love, could by no means
be hindered from showing her self to Dorido, as often as he past that way. For
near adjoining to her own Window, there was another of a friend of hers; who
(for that she was married) might with more liberty stand there, when she was
disposed so to do. And for that she had acquainted her with her love, as often
as Dorido past that way, she would give her some sign or token, through a
little hole that they had made of purpose in a partition Wall that was between
them, whereupon she would presently make haste to the Window to see him; And so
received from her Lover that short, yet full content, which the covetousness
and strictness of those times could afford.

This continued thus a good while: for other comfort had they none, then what
they took in this fugitive pleasure, seeing each other only in transitu, as he
past along the street; which (like a shadow) was as soon gone, as seen. But
Dorido, impatient of this poor content, and desirous to improve these favors
he received from her, sought means, how he might with more conueniencie enjoy
so sweet a sight, seeing he might not be permitted to proceed any further.
Whereupon he began to enter into a strict league of amity with her brother,
whose name was Ualerio; into whose friendship he had wrought Valerio, brother
to Clorinia.
himself, with that fastness and fervor, that Ualerio could not live without
Dorido. Which was an occasion that moved him many times to carry him home with
him to his house, wishing him to be Master thereof, and to make as bold
therewith (if he wanted any thing) as if it were his own, and to command it
with the same freeness. So that by this means, he had both liberty and
leisure to contemplate the divine beauty of his dearest Love.

With these baytes, their loves were led along, gaining still more ground, and
gathering more strength unto them, manifesting more and more their loves, by
their looks. But Clorinia being the weaker of the two, and peradventure more
inflamed, opened her mind to a maid of hers called Scintila; who desirous to
do her Mistress service, went to seek out Dorido; whom when she had met
with, she said thus unto him. Scintila, Servant to Clorinia.


Dorido, it is bootlesse to dissemble the business any longer, it is now no
time to hide thy self from me, for it is not unknown unto me what good liking
there is betwixt you and my Mistress, and what good love ye make each to
other; And that you may see, that I do not go about to deceive you, my
Mistress her self has revealed so much unto me, entreating me, that I would
be a means to lay open her heart unto you, and to signify unto you, how much
she loves you; and for farther declaration thereof, has by me sent you this
green silk Riband, as a hopeful token, desiring you for her sake, that you
will honor her so much, as to wear it about your arm. I assure my self you
are persuaded, that it comes recommended unto you from her own hand, for that
your self have seen it many a time hang in the dressing of her hair. So that
from hence-forward, you may rest confident of my faithfulness toward you, so
great is the desire that I have to do you service.

When Dorido heard this, it struck amazement into him, neither did he seem to
like well of it, for that he had never any great good conceit of this Wench,
as being jealous of her discretion not holding her to be a fit instrument for a
business of that great trust and consequence as this was; fearing lest their
loves might, through her weakness, come to be discovered; But seeing there was
no other remedy, and that it was Clorinias own Act, and none of his, he
dissembled his dislike, and in the best manner that he could, made show unto
her, in how much he did esteem this her love and service; and how ready he
would be upon all occasions, to deserve this her free and voluntary offer.

Some few days being past, and Dorido's desire increasing to speak face to
face with his Mistress, and finding no means how to do it, Love, that can
overcome all difficulties, and make those things facill that seem almost
impossible, opened a way thereunto: showing the means unto him, whereby he
might come to compass his desire. There was fastened to the Wall of that house
where Clorinia dwelt (which butted on the open street) a piece of an old Wall,
whereof the one half was fallen down, and run into decay, being scarce so
high, as to reach up to the Window belonging to the house, and a little beneath
that, was a hole stopped up with a moveable stone that might be taken out, and
put in again at pleasure. This did serve Clorinia sometimes in stead of a
Lattice, viewing through it, (without being seen) those that did pass to and
fro in the street.

This was well known to Dorido, for that he had often seen his Mistress
peeping out at that hole. This opportunity seemed to be favorable to his
desire; whereupon he brake with Scintila, and entreated her, that she would
stand his friend; telling her: Since (Scintila) my good fortune has been
such, that I have found you well affected to our Loves, and willing to pleasure
me all that you can, and to afford me your best furtherance therein; I will not
refuse to put my self into your hands, assuring my self, that you will always
and in all things have that care, which the love you bear to your Mistress,
and the desire you have to do me any courtesy, does oblige you unto. You
know, that since the time that I surrendered up my soul to Clorinia, and put
her into the possession of my heart, making her the true Lord and Owner both of
it, and of my life, I have got no other thing thereby, save a correspondencie
of affection expressed only by looks, having as yet no other interpreters of
our minds, but the eyes, and all for lack of better commodity, and more fit
and convenient means. Which the more I am debarred Priuatio generat appetitum.
of, the more it augmenteth my desire. For evermore privation ingendreth
appetite.

Now, there is a thing come into my head, how by your good help, my desire may
rest honestly satisfied. You cannot but know the hole, that is underneath the
Window; this must be the place, and thou the instrument of my good fortune.
Thou shall speak unto Clorinia, (entreating her as from me) that she will be
pleased to correspond with me in this my just request; and in case she should
refuse, as not daring out of fear to venture so far, thou may then labor
to persuade with her, and so guide and rule her will, to be brought to yield to
this so easy a condition; and that this night, seeing that the darkness
thereof is so much our friend, when all the people of the house shall be a bed
and asleep, she will be pleased but to speak with me at that hole. As for any
other thing, I neither entreat it, nor pretend it.

This suite seemed to Scintila, very easy, and without any danger in the
world; she puts him in good hope, promises him to solicit it, till she had
effected it; she comply'de with her obligation, and pointed him the hour when
he should come; giving him a certain sign, what he should do, when he came
to the Window.

Dorido, when night was come, disguising himself, went to the place appointed,
where he stood waiting for a good occasion.

When all those of the house were sure and safe enough, as sleep could make
them, Scintila went to the Window and opened it, taking occasion to throw out a
little water. Which being seen by Dorido, who had got upon the Wall, standing
there to wait a good hour, and knowing that it was Scintila, he said softly
unto her, Here I am. She willed him to stay awhile, and shutting the Window,
in she goes.

Doridos heart in the mean while fell a leaping in his bosom, beating and
thumping thereat as if it had sought to get out, being ready to burst with
desire, inflamed with the fire of love, fearful of the various success of
things, lest some cross accident might interpose it self betwixt him, and
this his glory, whereunto he was now so near, studying with himself what
words he were best to use unto her, and in what kind of phrase he should
begin his Court-ship. His thoughts ran through a thousand several things,
and his eyes were never off from that hole, looking as fa^e there-into, as that
ill-placed stone would permit him.

He might one while hear Clorinia talking with Scintila; another while with
her father and mother; now perceive how she rose from the place where she
sat, and by and by again past to and fro, one while to this, another to that
side of the house, till that (her Parents being abed) I saw her approaching to
the place appointed, whither she came so troubled, (such a conflict was there
betwixt Love, and Shame; Modesty, and Affection) that she was about to go
back. But enforced thereunto by Scintila, at last she came.

Now, when they were come to this inter-view, and saw themselves thus happily
met together, Dorido was so transported therewith, that although he had
premeditated beforehand what he would say unto her, he was stricken quite
dumb, and had not a word to say. And she no less trembling, not having any by
in that coniuncture, which might give breath either to the one or the other, to
bring them to pronounce but so much as one word either good, or bad; at last by
little and little, when their frozen tongues had recovered a little warmth,
they made a shift to exchange some few words on both sides, wherewith they
saluted each other.

Dorido entreated her hand and she willingly gave it him; he took it, and kissed
it again and again blessing and stroking his face therewith never suffering
it to depart from his mouth. After he had thus taken his pleasure of her fair
hand, he stretched forth his to her, pleasing his touch with the delicate
softness of her beautiful countenance, unable to enjoy any other pleasure,
nor could that place and time afford him any farther content.

In this sweet exchange of mutual love they entertained themselves a great
while. And whilst their hands did speak, themselves were silent. For the
talk of the one, did hinder the speech of the other. And because Scintila made
haste to part them, for fear of being discovered, if they should dwell any
longer upon these complementall kindnesses, Dorido with many indearings of his
love, took leave of his Clorinia, entreating her, that the next night
following, at the same hour, and the same place, he might enjoy the same
Regalo, and sweet comfort again. She promised him he should. And so for that
time, they tool eleaue of each other, both of them remaining wonderful well
contented. But much more he, who was ready to leap out of his skin for joy.
And wishing that night and the next day would post away apace, he went home to
his lodging.

Where offering to sit down, he could not rest himself there; and seeking to
case himself by rising up, he sought some place where-against to lean; and
when there likewise he could not be at quiet, he romed up and down the room,
walking to and fro on the unsteady legs of Dis-rest, and Desire; so that
nothing could give him case and content.

Thus did he suffer, and thus wear out that wearisome time, till the night
following, and the time appointed, whose minutes he measured out by those
glasses which distinguish the hours, giving himself over to this idle
curiosity.

The hour being come, he went to the place appointed, expecting when the
sign should be given; he had placed himself* in the hollow nooke of an old
gate, which joined to the wall near unto the window; and being about to get up
to the hole, he saw two Gallants pass by, which were in love with a couple of
Gentlewomen in the same street who walked there up and down, giving many a
turn to and fro, waiting when the street should be clear, that they might
make benefit of the like occasion. They were Doridos very good friends, and
were not ignorant that he was inamoured of Clorinia. They were well acquainted
the one with the other. But because Dorido was somewhat more reserved in the
love that he made to Clorinia, he would not discover himself unto them, for
fear of giving suspicion of that, which he was not yet Master of. And
therefore whilst they continued walking there, he durst not mount the wall,
lest happily they might chance to see him. For albeit that the night was very
dark, yet the bulk of his body might, like a confused lamp or mass, be
discerned by those that walked up and down in that still and prying fashion,
though by those that walked along the streets at large, and minding no such
matters, it was not so easy to be perceived. And therefore, because they
should not know him, getting him thence, he removed himself a little farther
off, looking still when they would be gone, or else intertaine themselves in
their own standings, that he might betake himself to his.

But when he saw that they stayed there still, and that his hour was now come,
he thought with himself, that if his Mistress should come, and not find him
there, not knowing the cause thereof, she might tax him of too much
carelessness; or accuse him of his lack of love.

This drove him, (helped on by choler) into that desperation, that he was
fully resolved to set upon them, meaning to chase them away, if they did not
make head against him; and if they did stand to it, and seek to defend
themselves, then to kill them if he could. Which he might well have done, as
well in regard of the greatness of his strength and courage, as also for that
he was every way well provided for them. Besides, that his anger, which had now
set him all on a raging fire, (being the whetstone, that sets an edge on
Fortitude) would have added greater force to his Valor, especially when he
should set upon them (which is no small advantage) unawares.

But considering, not so much the peril of his own person, as the present
estate of his businesses that he had now in hand, that they might not be
ouer-throwne by being ill managed, and by rash and inconsiderate courses, he
pawsed on the matter, and grew a little cooler, biting his lips, wringing his
hands, casting his eyes up to heaven, and beating the ground with his feet like
a madman.

And when he perceived, that the time was past, he was now as sad and
melancholy, as the night before, he was merry and iocond.

The very next day after, these two Gentlemen went to look out Dorido, whom
they had no sooner met withal, but they told him; You know, Sir, that we two
are your friends, and that we truly love you; and being such, (as we
unfeignedly profess our selves to be) it is neither fit, nor just, that we
should conceal any thing from each other, but be free and open-hearted to one
another: And it is likewise meet, (if you be the same to us, as we be to you)
that you do the like on your part, telling us the truth of that which we shall
ask you, if it be no way unlawful, or prejudicial unto you so to do.

Yesterday, some four hours after night was in, we two, walking through our
street (for so we may term it) in regard that both our hearts have there
their abode: seeking, I say, our adventure at that time of night, we might
perceive a third man, which dogged us all the way, following us almost close at
the heels, scarce losing sight of us all the while, so long as a man might say
his Paternoster.

We had a great desire to know who this should be, but we let him alone,
because we would not cause any scandal. We could not so much as suspect, much
less conceive, who this should be, till we were afterward certified (by that
which succeeded) that you were the man. And the assurance that we had
thereof, was; that we having staid awhile about your Mistresses window, we
might hear it open, and perceive Scintila put forth her head, who seeing our
outward Bulkes, and not knowing who we were, spoke in a low voice, and said:

Dorido, why do not you come up? When we heard her say so out of an impertinent
curiosity (relying on your friendship) I answered; Which way? This word was no
sooner uttered, but without replying farther unto me, she clapped to the window,
and away she went. From whence we imagine you had made some set match, and
because we would not hinder you of your purpose, we presently departed thence,
and went to look after you, but could not find you. So that we could not
till now acquaint you with what had past.

But because we desire to serve you, and that (by conseruing this good love and
friendship between us) our particular pretensions may the better proceed,
without any hinderance or impediment each to other, let us divide the night
between us.

We will take our time from midnight, till it be day, leaving the former part
of the night free to you; and if you will exchange turns with us, liking,
perhaps, better of ours, then your own, be it as you please, and take which of
the two you have most mind to, for to us it is indifferent, being all one in
the reckning.

Dorido would feign have dissembled the business with them; but finding
himself by these pregnant proofs, and forcible reasons, too fast ty'de to get
loose from them, he could not so shift them of. And therefore accepting their
friendly offer, he made choice of the former part of the night, according to
their own agreement.

And with this plain proceeding, he prosecuted his Visit the third night,
though without hope of obtaining it, doubting she would not do him that
favor, in regard of that unlucky accident that fell out the night before.

But for that Clorinia loved, (and that she truly loved) nothing could detain
her from him, but with a great deal of care, was still inquiring, whether her
Gallant meant to come again, to glad her heart with his cheerful and
comfortable looks, being very inquisitiue to know what should be the reason,
that caused him so to fail the last night of his promise.

Now, whilst her Father and Mother were at supper, rising from the table, she
went to the foresaid hole, which she might safely do, for that the chimney,
near whereunto they supt, stood on the one side of the Hall, (being a very
large one) and the window where the hole was, on the other side, near
adjoining to the corner; in the midst whereof, were certain things placed
between, which did shadow and hinder the sight from the one side to the other.
Her father and her mother sat so, that she might easily go thither, and
speak softly, without being heard of any.

The truth is, she watched an occasion (having well advised with her self what
might happen) to make quick dispatch, and to rise from table as soon as
possibly she could. Who came thither so opportunely, and in so good a time,
that Dorido was there ready expecting her coming; for from out the street, he
might hear the footing of certain steps in the Hall, which was a sure sign
unto him, that those paces were trodden by his Mistress, so that he made all
the haste he could to get up to see her. And because this was the second time
of their meeting, they were a little better flesh't, then they were before, and
met not with those stoppages, which heretofore had hindered their speech. So
that they now discoursed more boldly, and more freely, as far forth as the
time would give them leave, (which that night was but short, and in a manner
stolen) and afterward they took their leaves with a great deal of
tenderness on either part, having agreed between themselves, that as long as
the Moon was in her wane, they would enjoy the fullness of their loves, which
increased now apace, till some better means should be found for their freer
access.

In this interim, a young Gentleman, a very great friend of Doridos, called
Horatio, fell in love with Clorinia: He courted her, he served her, and
observed her, as became a Lover, notwithstanding, that he knew, that she was
his friends Mistress. But he knew withal, that he did not treat with intent
to take her to wife, but himself did.

Relying therefore upon this their great friendship, the justness of his
request, and the honesty of his cause, he entreated him of all loves, that he
would desist from making love to Clorinia, and give way to him, seeing their
ends were so different.

Horatio's affectionate words, and lawful request, were of that power, and
prevailed so much with Dorido, that he told him, that for his part he was
well contented therewith, promising him, that if his Mistress should so like
of it, and that she could find in her heart to fancy and affect him, he would
give over his suite, leaving the field open unto him to take his pleasure,
without any contradiction in the world; and that he should rest himself
assured, that he would no way stand in competition with him. For the better
effecting whereof, he would do two things: The one, to dis-deceiue Clorinia,
by delivering plainly unto her, that by reason of a certain Vow, that he had
made to himself, it was not in his power to be married unto her, which he
would not break for all the world. The other; the better to make her forget
him, he would go about to make love elsewhere. Yet, for that great
friendship, that was betwixt himself, and Valerio, he must hold him excused,
if he did not forbear now and then to visit her, which might turn much to
his good, but no hurt at all; being that his true intent and purpose was, to
favor his pretension, upon all occasions that should offer themselves unto him.

Herewith Horatio rested content, and was wonderful well satisfied, and gave
Dorido many thanks; not considering, that having left it to Clorinias choice,
and putting himself upon her Election, till that he knew her mind, and had
gained her good will, he had negotiated little, or nothing at all. And the
offer made by Dorido, was upon the confidence that he had, that to speak
thereof unto Clorinia, was no other, then the tearing of her heart from forth
her breast. But Horatio carried away with vain confidencies, and various hopes,
entreated Dorido, that he would speak a good word for him. He promised he
would, that he might still maintain his friendship with Horatio, and not give
any note or scandal to their love.

To comply therefore with his promise, and to make good his own offer, when he
met with his Mistress, he made a long discourse unto her of all that had
passed between them; Telling her, that if she could find in her heart to love
Horatio, and be brought to settle her affection upon him, God forbid that ever
he should go about to hinder so honorable an intent. But in case she could
not, yet at least was she bound in thankfulness to accept of this his good
will, by not showing her self coy and strange unto him; and if he past by the
street where she was, she should not scornfully shut the Window against him,
and fly from his sight, and should show him a cheerful look, though it were
but feigned.

To this Clorinia answered betwixt anger and scorn, telling him; that he
should surcease, to lay any such command upon her, and that he should speak no
more thereof unto her; for if for this cause, he should leave and forsake her,
she would rather be content to be hated and abhorred by him, then to wrong
either him, or her self, by placing her love elsewhere: Who as he had been
the first, so he should be the last as long as she lived; which life of hers,
she would presently sacrifice unto him, for to take away all occasion from him
of commanding her to love another, or to forget him; as for the rest, he might
do as he saw cause, she would not hinder him, let him take what course it
pleased him, so as it liked him, she would not stand against it.

Dorido took wonderful contentment in hearing this answer come from her; for
these words of her, were that true Chrisole wherein the Gold of their loves was
refined, and that touchstone that tryde the pureness of their affections, and
gave assurance that it was not counterfeit metal. So he treated of this matter
no more, but followed his wonted Visits both day and night, having first given
an account to Horatio of what he had done. He would not believe it, yet waxed
wondrous sad, when he heard it. But for all this, he did not leave off to serve
her, but could never find her indisposition to do him the least grace or
favor, but rather to use him with all sharpness and rigor.

Whence it came to pass, that seeing himself disdained, and Dorido preferred
before him; fury provoke his patience, setting his heart on fire with an
infernal rage; insomuch that his love was now turned into hatred. And whereas
before he was always desirous to do her service, from that time forward he
laid wait to do her a mischief, beating his brains, and bending all his
wits and study to work her overthrow; or at least to put some foul disgrace
upon her. So that this Horatio, having dogged Dorido diverse times, till he had
learned the hour, the place, and the means how he got up upon the Wall, and
the manner of his carriage and fashion when he came to speak with her, and she
with him.

One night amongst the rest, he did anticipate and prevent the coming of the
true Lover, and feigning himself to be Dorido, he clambred up to the place,
and made a little noise, by iogging the stone that was in the hole of the Wall,
as he had observed him to have done the like diverse times heretofore. Now
Clorinia taking notice of the sign, but not considering the great
anticipation, and prevention of the time, came presently at this call, and
taking out the stone, with many sweet and kind words, she received this
feigned Lover, who remained silent all this while, which loving language of
hers, did but the more encourage Horatio in his intended treason; and putting
his hand into the hole, took hold on Clorinias fair hand, and took it forth,
feigning that he much desired to kiss the same. And holding her fast thereby
with his left hand, and with his right, plucking out a sharp Knife, which for
that purpose h^ bare about him, with little difficulty, but a great deal of
impiety, he cut it off, and carried it away with him, leaving this poor
afflicted Damsel lying in a swoune upon the floor, by striving to suppress
her sorrow, which she ought to have vented with her voice, and with her cries
and lamentations; but she did smother them, offering force as it were to this
her womanly weakness; and did shut them up close in her heart, and so
offending the vital spirits, she remained in a manner dead. And there
questionless would she have breathed her last, if she had not had present
help; for her Father and her Mother missing her, and not seeing her in the
room where they were, they called unto her, and because she returned no
answer, they maruailing much thereat, went forth to seek her: they found her
weltering in her own blood upon the ground, hard by that hole, which was left
open in the Wall, and trickled down with the blood that came from her, which
streams of blood were as so many proofs and evidences of the cause of her
death; for so they deemed her to be, because they could not find in her any
sign of life.

Her sorrowful Parents, seeing this cruel and doleful spectacle, and the
trunk of her arm without a hand, being unable to bridle their grief, fell
down in a swoune close by their unfortunate Daughter, no less breathless
then she was. But coming presently to themselves again, they began with the
greatest lamentations that were ever heard, to bewail this so great a
misfortune that had befalne them, being able to move any other eye to pity,
and to power forth tears in abundance, to see so young and handsome a
Gentlewoman so butcherly and so inhumanely abused. But in the amidst of this
their excessive sorrow, they began to consider with themselves, that if the
life of their Daughter should be lost, with it they should likewise lose their
honor, which in their discretion, they held not fit to hazard together with
her. They resolved therefore with themselves to keep this deed secret, and so
leaving off their lamenting, drying their eyes, and smothering their sighs,
they likewise quieted those of the house, and bearing Clorinia from thence,
after many remedies, which they applied to her, they had somewhat brought her
to her self: Who, when she saw her self in the midst of her mournful
Parents, and in that pitiful manner, her sorrow redoubled upon her, which
receiving increase from her shame, she swouned anew. Wherewith her Parents
grief was a-fresh renewed in that terrible manner, as if their hearts had
been rent from their bodies by the roots. And with the tendrest and kindest
words they could use, they did seek all they could to comfort her; speaking
unto her in the sweet and loving language of such a Father and Mother, that so
dearly loved a Daughter, indeuouring by those soft and gentle phrases, to cure
the wound of her mind, which was more then that of her body. With this, poor
wretched Clorinia began to gather breath, and bewailing her misfortune (which
till then she was not able to do) she did move the very stones to compassion,
and to take pity of this her woeful and miserable condition.

Then they presently began with great secrecy to treat of her Cure. Valerio
her brother went forthwith to fetch a Surgeon, a friend of his, of whose
secrecy he was confidently assured. The night was exceeding dark, and
therefore he took a Lantern along with him; and as he was crossing the
street, it was his hap to discry Dorido a far off, who in a careless kind
of fashion was coming along the street, with purpose to go see his Mistress,
being ignorant of what had passed. He began to call unto him with a sad and
mournful voice, and when he drew near unto him, with a heavy cheer he said;
O my true friend! Whither art thou going? Go thou peradventure to condole
with us our great disaster, and that Tragic sorrow, which must shorten our
life? Have thou either seen, or heard of the like mis-hap unto ours, and of
the unfortunate accident that has befalne our dearest sister Clorinia? Woe is
me; yet to thee, that art our true friend, I cannot conceal that, which we
must hide from all the world besides. For I know assuredly, that thou will
bear a part in our sorrow, and be a Companion of these our miseries; nay I
know thou will, as one of us, use all diligence in revenging this wrong, and
labor all thou can to find out him, that has been the cruel murderer of
my sister. Will thou Dorido? I am sure thou will.

Dorido, whilst he was hearing this sad story, stood amazed like a man, that
had been bereft of his senses: And it was a wonder, that he was able to stand
upon his legs, being so word-strooken to the heart as he was, but recollecting
himself by degrees, which was helped on by the desire which he had to
understand how the world went, striving to fortify himself against this
fierce assault, which had already shaken the very Walls of his hearr, with a
troubled voice he began to inquire what the matter was.

Ualerio, from point to point delivered unto him all the particulars, and told
him that he was now going to call a Surgeon; entreating him, that he would go
along with him, fearing lest the life of Clorinia, through too much delay,
might run some hazard. Dorido accompanied him; and albeit he had more need
of comfort himself, then to give comfort unto others, yet notwithstanding,
framing himself thereunto as well as he could, at length he brake thus with
him; Friend Ualerio, this doleful misfortune of yours, and the lamentable case
of your unfortunate sister Clorinia, does so nearly touch me, and works that
true sense of sorrow in me, that no less then to your self, they may give me
the Pesame: and come and condole with me this disastrous mischance, for I am so
truly sensible thereof, that I dare a^ow, you have no advantage of me, nor can
your sorrow exceed mine.

But seeing our grief can do us but little good, and that it is to no end to
weep, and take on for that, which cannot now be helped; My advice is, that
you would consult what is to be done in this case; and if I may persuade, I
would have all diligence used for the finding out of that Traitor which has
done this villainous Act, to the end that vengeance and full revenge may be
taken of him, which was never yet executed upon any other. This task you shall
put upon me, I will take this charge to my self, and doubt not, but by one
means or other I shall come to find it out. Go you, and call the Surgeon:
For it is not fit, where so many things are to be done, we should be all busied
about one and the same thing, especially, that which belongs to my charge,
being a business, which will require much labor. Let every man take his Qu,
and perfect his own part. Follow you yours, and I will follow mine; and so
farewell; for I have not the patience to defer it any longer. And so they
parted.

Now Dorido had a strong belief, and did confidently assure himself, that
Horatio, and none but Horatio, could be the author of so great wickedness and
falsehood, induced thereunto by those many reasons, which did concur to
confirm this persuasion, the least whereof was a manifest token, and
apparent evidence, that it was only his Act, and none but his. Whereupon he
resolved with himself, to inflict such a punishment upon him, as should be
equal to that his just disdain, and answerable to the heinousness of his
offense.

With this determination he went home to his own house; and being entered into
his lodging, shutting the door to him, he let loose the reins to his tears,
grievously lamenting this sad mischance that had thus unhappily befalne his
Mistress.

O Clorinia (said he) the delight of my eyes, and the joy of my heart, I see
what harm thou have suffered for my sake; I (unfortunate I) was the cause
thereof. It was that Traitor Horatio, that thus deceived thee, whom thou
supposedst to have been beloved Dorido.

O unhappy Mistress of my life, I have brought thee to this miserable pass, it
is I that have killed thee, and no body else; for it was I that did disturb
thee of thy rest; it was I, that drew thee out from thy retired and reserved
course of life. O accursed chinke! O accursed eyes, that ever ye peep't
thereinto! O accursed tongue, that made the motion, that we should there
meet, and talk together. O my dear Clorinia, Clorinia, my life; yet not my
life, but my death: since that mine must follow thine: I was the cause of all
this ill. Yet will I spare my self so much life, as to live to revenge this
notorious wrong; and live thou too, Clorinia, till thou see the vengeance that
shall be done upon this Traitor, which shall be as exemplary, as just: that it
may remain as a memorial to all succeeding Ages.

And I here solemnly vow to sacrifice to thy sacred and innocent ashes, the
impious blood of this vile Traitor Horatio. For that one hand, which he has
taken from thee, I will give thee two of his. He cut off one, that was
innocent and harmless, and I will cut off two, that were wicked and
sacrilegious. Let Heaven lengthen thy life so long, till I effect this my
purpose, and suffer thee to enjoy that recompense, which I do owe unto thy
love.

And thou (sweet Clorinia) pardon so much of the fault, as was in me. And if my
death will do you any pleasure, or that it stand with your liking, mine own
hands ere this, should have made way thereunto, and laid it down at your
feet.

With these and other pitiful complaints, did he bewail this heavy accident,
worthy of eternal tears; and surely sorrow would there and then have made an
end of him, so extremely had it seized upon him, and with that violence of
passion, if his afflicted soul had not been vnder-propt with the desire of
revenge; and thus between death and life did he spend that night.

The next day following he went to visit Clorinia; whither when he was come,
her Parents, and her Brother began afresh to renew their tears, embracing and
weeping one over another, till at last the father of Clorinia began, as well as
his grief would give him leave, to say; O son Dorido, what misfortune can be
so great, so miserable as ours? What rigor of the heavens has conspired
against us? What infernal fury ever invented the like mischief? What think
thou of this sad chance? What deem'st thou of our honor? What cloak will
cover so foul a spot? And what revenge may mitigate so great a wrong as this?
and give satisfaction answerable to these our sorrows? Tell us (I pray) what
comfort can we look for? Or how can we live without her, who has given us
life? Dorido, not being able to abstain from tears, comforting her afflicted
Parents, and Brother, told them: We are not now to spend the time in tears
and lamentations, but in that which may import us most.

And albeit, that which I am willing to propose, ought rather to proceed from
any body else, then my self, yet the occasion, and the secrecy wherewith it
is fit it should be carried, obliges me thereunto:

You all know very well, and have seen to your griefs, the general
misfortune that has befalne us all; being as well yours, as mine; and rather
mine, then yours, for that your sorrow is joined unto mine; which addition
makes but the heap of mine own the bigger. Besides, I see the thread of my
life cut off before my face, that now I expect a death as bitter, as I thought
it would have been pleasant unto me, if it had made an end of me, before
Clorinia. Ye are not ignorant what I am; and I likewise know your great worth
and quality; which if it shall not ouer-sway mine, it is the singular love and
friendship ye have borne me, that must equal the scales, laying an everlasting
obligation upon me to deserve the same. This case then I make to be mine own;
I challenge it as a thing proper unto me.

And that the world may so understand it, and so take it, that which hereafter
I shall entreat you for by a third person, I will now demand of you by way of
grace and request: Which is; That you will be pleased to give me Clorinia to
wife. Wherein ye shall do these two things: First, ye shall thereby recover
your honor. Secondly, ye shall execute your revenge by this hand of mine. If
heaven shall be so propitious and favorable unto me to bless me with her
life, she shall live and remain with me, though not according as her worth
deserves, yet answerable to that desire which I have to serve her; making that
up in my love, which is wanting in my means. And if ought succeed hereafter in
the righting of this wrong, it is fit the world should take notice, that her
husband did that whereunto he was obliged; and not Dorido, her parents friend.
Make good therefore this my request, for the good which from thence may redound
to us all.

To the Parents, as also to the Brother, this did seem to be a very just and
honest motion, and gave him many thanks for this true testimony of his love,
both to them, and their house. But because there was one as yet vn-askt, which
was to be a principal party in this business, which was Clorinia, they would
see if they could draw her to consent there-unto. Which when it was broken unto
her, the tears gushed out of her eyes for very joy, and she said unto them:

This is that alone, which I hope, will keep life in me: and if I should buy
it at as dear a rate, as death, yet I should think it cheap enough, and that
I had a good pennyworth of my bargain. I trust in God that I shall live
contentedly, and dye comfortably. And therefore, I beseech you, that I may be
espoused to Dorido, according as he has desired. Presently here-vpon they
called him in, and (when they came to see each other) for a good while, they
were neither of them able to speak a word, both their hearts were so full, and
their souls so overwhelmed; hers with joy, and his with grief.

That fit ouer-past, they plighted their trothes, and were made man and wife,
using those diligencies therein with the best secrecy they could, till the
time should come, that they might be openly espoused in the Church.

Three days were spent in this Solemnity, and with this content Clorinia
seemed to be upon the mending hand. But it was but a lightening before death:
for through the store of blood which she lost, she lived not long after. Dorido
perceiving, that it was impossible that his Spouse should escape with life, to
the end that she might die fully contented and satisfied, (if there may be any
such thing in death:) on the fourth day, holding it now a fit and convenient
time, to put that in execution which he had devised and plotted with himself,
on the fifth he invited Horatio to his house, as he had done at other times
heretofore. Who trusting in the secrecy wherewith he had committed this foul
offense, and that there was no talk thereof in the Town, nor so much as a
word spoken of it, went thither as securely and as boldly, as if he had done no
such matter, and without any suspicion or jealousy at all.

Dorido, to lull him the more asleep, and to make him more secure, feigned,
not to know of any such thing, he entertained him with a cheerful look,
laughed, and was merry with him, that growing thereby the more confident, he
might the willinger accept of his inuitation. Dorido had put such a kind of
Confection into one of his Bottles of Wine, that it should cast him that drunk
thereof, into a most deep and profound sleep. Which he secretly commanded he
should be served withal at the table, as often as he called for any Wine. And as
he had commanded, so was it ordered. And when he had even now dined, the last
morsel being scarce out of his mouth, he sat me in his Chair like one that
had been dead.

Dorido, when he saw he was sure enough now in his hands, and that the Foul
could not escape the snare, binding his legs and arms as hard as he could
for his life, to the legs and arms of the Chair, and having made fast all
the doors of his house, he put to his nose a kind of little round ball (like
a Pomander) made for that purpose, which he had no sooner smelt unto, and taken
the sent thereof up into his head, but that he presently awaked from that deep
sleep, wherein he had before been buried. And finding himself bound in that
fast manner, without being able to wag, he knew then that his punishment was at
hand, for that hand which he had so cruelly cut off. Dorido was as quick in
cutting off both his hands, as he was nimble in vn-ioynting that of hers. That
done, throwing a cord about his neck, making use of one of the corners of the
Chair, he gave him the Garrote, wherewith he was strangled to death. The next
morning, before it was peep of day, he drove him along before him in the
Chair upon a Horse, till he came to the house, where Clorinia dwelt, and
putting a piece of Timber Gibbetwise, into that hole in the Wall, where he had
committed this odious and vn-manly act, he left him there hanging with his
hands tied about his neck in a string, (like a childs pair of Mi^ens.) and
some Verses hanging at his Hempen chain, to give satisfaction to the world,
upon what reason this was done. And so Dorido, when he had thus revenged
himself upon Horatio, left Rome, with purpose never to see it again; thinking
with himself, that without his Clorinia, neither Country, nor life, nor any
thing else could be comfortable unto him. And about the break of day, when
this spectacle began to be seen, and talked of, Clorinia within a little after
finished her life.

This lamentable Accident caused great both sorrow and admiration in the
Ambassador. But his hour was come, that he must to the Palace, which made
them break off for that present, and to take their leaves. I thank God a
thousand times, that he made me not a Lover: And if I had not been a Gamester,
peradventure I should have done worse, as you shall see in the second part of
my life, whereunto (if my first have pleased thee) I inuit thee.

The Verses, which were hung about Horatios neck, turned into our vulgar
tongue, sound thus:

I was rash He; blinded with jealous love,
Seeing my friend, preferred in my Loves choice,
(Counterfeiting his Signal, clothes and voice)
Whom deep Disdain did to foul Hatred move,
To Heaven and Men, I cruel Traitor grew;
Fair Clorinia (with innocence bedeckt)
I wronged, (urged by my Love, and her Neglect.)
Whose Story, may all eyes with tears bedew.
Her Hand and Life (that I on her might wrecke
Revenge) I did cut off: Cause of her end,
Her Hate to me, and Love unto my friend,
He hung these hands of mine about my neck.
Was Party, Witness, and Judge: Whose sentence
Was too small a punishment for my Offense.
FINIS.
THE ROGVE: OR THE SECOND PART OF THE LIFE OF GUZMAN DE ALFARACHE.

WRITTEN IN SPANISH by MATHEO ALEMAN, Servant to his Catholic Majesty, and
borne in SEUILL.



LONDON, Printed by G. E. for EDWARD BLOVNT. 1623.

TO THE CVRIOVS READER.
ALbeit I was still afraid to expose this my Second Part to the light, after it
had been some years finished and perused, (though more had been too few, for
the presuming to publish it) and that it were better for me to uphold the good
opinion gotten by my first, (which with open arms was generally so kindly
embraced by all) then to hazard their good wills by this second; I was in doubt
with my self, whether I were best to put my reputation upon so ticklish a pi^
either because it should not perhaps be so well accepted; or that I might
chance to fall short of my desire, missing the mark whereat I aimed: For
commonly where the greatest care is taken, those that are unfortunate, are wont
to fail most. Yet notwithstanding, it being with me, as with that bad servant,
who with blows and kicks, is awaked out of his deep sleep; being rouzed up
by so violent a stroke; that happened to my self, which is wont to befall lazy
and slothful persons; to do one thing twice over. For having been too
prodigal in communicating my papers, and the conceptions of my brain, they
caught me when I was upon my wings. So that seeing my self (if I may lawfully
use that phrase) robbed, and defrauded, I was enforced to fall a-fresh to my
labor, seeking out some new supply of moneys, wherewithal to pay my debts,
and to dis-ingage my word, which I had formerly past. So that by this means I
was driven to differ, as much as possibly I could, from that which I had
written before. Surely it was Esaus own ouer-sight, some peculiar slip or
fault of his, that being tired out in the chase, and killing of his game, gave
occasion to Jacob to steal away his blessing from him.

Truly, I must ingeniously acknowledge in this my Competitor, Concurrent, or
Corriuall (who ere he be) his great learning, his nimble wit, his deep
judgment, his pleasant conceits, and his general knowledge in all humane and
divine letters, and that his discourses throughout, are of that quality and
condition, that I do much envy them, and should be proud that they were mine.
But by the way, let him give me leave to tell him (which is no more then what
others say) that if upon any other occasion saving this, he would have been
pleased to make use of these his good parts, so honorable would his pains
have therein appeared, that the grauest person that is, need not to have been
ashamed to discover both his name, and his face; but to deal after this
manner, was to foyst into Castile, the coin of Aragon. But herein, that
succeeded unto him, which usually (we see) befalls many women, whose parts
and members, considered severally by themselves and apart, are of that rare
and singular perfec^n, that desire cannot wish it more, nor the pensill exp^e
it better. But afterward, when all these distinct parts shall be conjoined,
made one whole piece, and examined together, they fall short in the making up
of a fair and well-fauour'd face. But he proceeded therein discreetly; taking
that course, which they use to do, who go (presuming on the actiuenesse of
their person) with their Lance in their wrest, masked and disguised, to
encounter their adversary. But because these are things of adventure, and
depend much upon fortune, if they hit right, they make them selves known, but
if they miss, they go away ashamed, and you shall never see the face of them.
Well, whatsoever has been done in this kind, or howsoever carried by him, he
has enforced me to defend my self. For that he argues; That the great pains
that he had taken, and so worthy of excuse, in following the tracke of my
steps, and the imitation of my works, grew first from this, that he esteemed
them to be good. I pay him again in the same money, by following of him. Only
we differ in this; That he has made a second part out of my first; and I only
imitated his second. And shall do the like in the third, if being elder hand,
he shall vye upon me. Whereunto if I be put, I shall not refuse to see it.
Assuring my self, that I shall not be shut out, but have a place amongst the
rest. For the field being so large, through the pleasantness of the subject,
whereunto the sharpness of the appetite will likewise give some help, more
parts will daily come out of this book, then Conies out of their Berryes, and
more glosses made thereupon, then on the fair Angelica in the days of
Castilejo. But I advise in this case, that they would not be too nimble fingerd
in taking pen in hand, till they have wearyed their eyes with perusing, and
enlarged their understanding, that it may be made capable to receive
whatsoever shall be brought unto it. Nor would I have them to write, till they
be well read, if they will attain to hit the white, and not shoot beside the
butt. For our Guzman having purposed to play the good Student in the Latin and
Greek tongues, and in the study of Rhetoric, and having gone forward in his
studies with a full purpose to profess Religion; to take him now out of
Alcala, thus on the sudden, so quite alienated from his former inclination,
and so bad a Proficient, were cortar el hilo alatela, to cut the thread before
the web were wouen; contrary to that which is pretended in this History of his
Life; which was only to serve as a sentinel, to discover all sorts of Vices,
and to draw treacle out of diverse poisons: That is to say; To describe unto you
a man, perfect in his parts and person, punished with troubles, and afflicted
with miseries, and falling afterward into (of all other) the basest roguerie,
is put into the Galleys, where his wings were clipped, that he could not get
thence in haste. Let us slip it over, That he could not be called a most famous
thief, for the stealing of three cloakes, howbeit two of them were very fair
ones, and of much value, but the other a poor one: Let us likewise omit, That
it is improper to fabulous Histories, to introduce public and known persons,
naming them by their proper names: And let us come to that obligation, which he
had to return to Genoa to revenge the wrong wherewith he threatened his kindred
in the last chapter of the first Part: And many other things, which without
giving satisfaction, he passes over in diverse different fashions, altering,
and reiterating not only the accident it self, but even the very words used
therein. So that undoubtedly I am of opinion, that it is a thing of more
difficulty, then every man is aware of, to undertake the pursuit of another
man's discourse. For it leads its undertaker along even from his purposed, and
first intended course, to those things, whose chase he cannot choose but
follow. Nay should he come to confer mouth to mouth, with the party himself,
it is impossible but he should go out of the way: For there are many conceits,
that are thrust into by-corners, and there hid; wherewith even its own proper
Author is much troubled, upon a sudden and present occasion, with calling them
to mind, time having worn them almost out; whereby men may fall into
mistakes; quoting K. Don Fernando of Zamora, in stead of the Infanta Dona
Vrraca, his daughter. This does not argue want in the understanding, nor is it
a defect, that another should iump upon my conceit, and think my thoughts. But
I say it is rashness in him, that will offer to run with that man, who must
needs outstrip him, through the others slownesse of footmanship, or that he
runs not right upon the mark. If here the phrase be not so significant, the
style not so lofty, the language not so sweet, the proverbs not so pithie, the
stories not so pleasant, nor so cleanly carried as I could wish; My excuse must
be; Many ouer-sights cannot be avoided in the writing but of a little; which
will ask a larger time to correct and amend them. But having finished my third
Part, and following Horace his counsel therein, that I may be the better able
to offer it to your view (which shall be shortly) I could not excuse this
passage, as being very necessary for those ends which I pretend. Accept of my
good will, which is to serve thee. For the times are not still alike; nor the
stars always favorable; nor Calliope continually set upon the merry pin.

ANCIANT LVYS DE VALDES HIS ELOGIVM To Mateo Aleman.
AS if Arms, and Learning were not Sisters, some prattling Sophister seems
(me thinks) to tell me, That I should do well to follow my military
profession, and let Elogiums alone, leaving them to Scholars; it seeming unto
him, that these two, are of too different a nature, to consort together. But I
shall be able to point forth unto him, not one, but many Caesar's, as dextrous
in Letters, as disciplined in Arms. And that I may take away all occasion from
such Cauillers, of alleging against me, That I am too forward in usurping the
office of an Orator, taxing me of too much boldness and inconsiderate
rashness, I will march as far off as I can, from their dangerous style of
flattery and ostentation, safely retiring my self into mine own Trenches, and
there to defend and maintain the truth, a thing as proper to a Soldier, as is
his Sword and Target, or his Pike and Corslet.

I will be but the Echo, not the Chronicler, of what I have seen, heard,
treated, and known abroad in the world; for I have been in my time in many,
and different Nations, and Countries. I will go on, and cumply with my desire,
not fearing the face of Calumniation, because I know my self to be
dis-interessed, and a freeman. For love, interest, and fear, are those three
ropes, that halter Justice.

And for that it is so just a thing, to reward men's labors, encouraging the
virtuous with a shout, as they do in war, giving it them as a thankful pay,
which being truly deserved, is a true treasure. I have therefore been willing,
seeing so many so drouzy in the business, to take up the pen for them, though
least of all obliged thereunto in the common opinion of the world, by reason of
my profession. But no man shall outstrip me herein. We are all beholding to
Mateo Aleman, we are all indebted unto him, and of all he does justly deserve
condign commendation. For we must acknowledge him to be the first, that till
this very day, has in such a kind of style as his, come to discover and
excommunicate Vice: (with such a sweetness and softness) which being to them
a venomous Aspe, robs them of their lives, when they are in their sweetest
sleep.

Many Physicians minister to their sick Patients, pills of Aloes for to purge
the head, but few or none of them have taken pleasure in chewing of them, nor
so much as to touch them with their tongue, neither have they been able so to
sweeten them, that moving a desire to eat them, they should procure a general
appetite. Only Mateo Aleman, has taught us the way to taste things with
delight, instructing us by other men's actions how to govern ours: with no
small hurt to his health and estate, having much wasted both the one and the
other by his painful studies. And we may very well say of him, That never
Soldier had a poorer purse, and a richer mind, nor a life more unquiet, and
full of trouble, then was his; and only, because he accounted it a greater
honor unto him, to be held a poor Philosopher then a rich flatterer. He left
(as it is well known to the world) voluntarily, and of his own accord, the
Kings palace, where he served almost twenty years, being the best, and as it
were the very cream of his age, in the Office of Contador de resultas, to King
Philip the 2. and in many other weighty businesses, besides visitations and
suruayes, which were committed unto him, in all which he behaved himself so
well, that he evermore gave wonderful good satisfaction, proceeding so
uprightly, that he grew to be so poor, that not being able any longer, by
reason of his wants and necessities, to continue these his services, he retired
himself from that course of life, to one of lesser both ostentation and
attendance. And though he wanted the goods of fortune, yet was he rich in the
endowments of the soul, which are of much more estimation and price, then
worldly pelf, whereof no man could more truly boast himself.

Let the tongues of men be listened unto, and ye shall hear nothing so common
as the publishing of his praise: no less in Spain (where it is no small
wonder to have a Prophet liked in his own Country) then in Italy, France,
Flanders, and Germany, which mine own ears and eyes can truly testify and
avow. And I might (if need were) boldly swear, That I never heard his name
mentioned, but with the addition of some honorable Epithet, even to the
giving of him this noble Attribute, El Espan^ol divino, The divine Spaniard.

Who, like him, in less then three years, and in his own life time, saw his
own works translated into so many sundry languages, that like your Cartillas
in Castile, his books ran posting for Italy and France? What Author ever writ,
who at the very time when he was willing to bring forth his Labors to the
light, they have scarce come forth of the womb of the Press, but that they
were strangled in the mid-wifes hands, and left for dead. And those his works,
that came forth into the world alive, and did breathe, and enjoy their life, as
these of this our Author, they flew abroad with such swift and nimble wings,
helped by those of Fame, that with extraordinary speed they past through all
parts of Christendom, in so much that there was not any one Province, whereinto
they have not flowen, and received, where-euer they came, most honorable
entertainment?

What works can ye instance in, that in so short a time, have had so many
Impressions? The whole number of those books that have been printed amounting
to more then fifty thousand volumes. There have been (of my knowledge) six and
twenty several Impressions, whereof he was robbed, whereby others became rich
and the Owner of them, poor. Against whom but him, did ye ever find the gates
of Murmuration shut? Who, but he, had so perfectly learnd the way to beat
Malice out of the field, and to put her to flight? If this be so; or if (as by
euidext Mathematical demonstrations) it shall require a necessary proof of
witnesses, let the best of the world be brought forth, I mean the famous
University of Salamanca, where being celebrated there, by the best wits of that
Academy, I have heard many speak of him, as the Grecians of their Demosthenes,
and the Romans of their Cicero; reputing Mateo Aleman as the Prince of
eloquence in the Spanish tongue, as well for the modesty, and dextrousnes of
his style, as for his elegancies, and choice phrases. Of which opinion, was
areligious Augustine, as discreet, as learned; who maintained in that
University, in a public Act, that there was not from the beginning of the
world, to this present day, that the first Part of this was printed, any book
of like nature to this, (being no divine subject) of greater either profit or
pleasure.

Valenciano testifies this truth; who (denying his name) falsely styles
himself Mateo Lujan, that he might be taken for Mateo Aleman. And albeit he
might parallel him in his name, and Country, yet that he should be the same man
in his works, it was not possible. Only therein his malice may be discovered,
and that he did that he did, moved thereunto out of the benefit that he should
reap thereby: which if it had fallen out (as he expected) had been no small
matter; But it fell out, (as fit it was) contrary to his expectation. For in
that very self-same year that it came forth, I bought one in Flanders, which
in the Frontispice, had its Impression in Castile, taking it to be authentical
and good, till I had read a little of it, and then it was not long, that his
ears Mostrar las orejas fuera del pellejo, is metaphorically an Ass.
shot out of his skin, and so came to be known what he was.

But to let this pass, and to speak of those that admiring such a deal of
depth and profoundnes both of wit and learning, being wonderful willing to
have some learned and grave Fathers to adopt this child of his begetting, they
all labored to seek out some one, who for his quicknes of wit, greatness of
Schollership, and singularity of eloquence, might be able to undertake so rare
and admirable a piece of work; all which does argue the worth thereof, and
redound to the greater glory of the true Author. And then shall they free
themselves of this doubt, when they shall have perused his St. Antonio de
Padua, which out of a vow that he had made, to set forth his life and miracles,
made him so slow in publishing this his second Part. They shall see how
miraculously he treats of them, and it may almost be counted a miracle, if we
will but consider how wonderfully he carried himself in the printing of them.
For putting his papers from hand to hand to the Press, and wanting matter for
that days work, I knew for certain, that ouer-night he composed so much
stuff, as did serve to keep the Press going all the next day following: for
he was troubled at that time with diverse other businesses, which did
necessarily require his help and assistance. And in those short hours of the
night, he was seen to employ himself with a great deal of diligence, as
well in the affairs of his other businesses, as in the ordering and sorting of
papers to send them to the Printers, as also, in the composing of more matter
for the Press, besides his attendance upon other things, importing his own
person and house. Every one of which would have well required a whole man, free
from all other encumbrances. And that, which he wrote in this manner, was all
the whole third Book. And though euery-where through-out in all the rest of
his writings, he has showed the Ocean of his wit, being that therein they
shall find a most rich treasure of diverse Histories moralized, and expressed
with all the elegancie that can be devised, yet this is that enamelling, that
beautifies that Jewel, and sets it best forth. As all those have affirmed, who
had the good hap to have a sight thereof.

What shall I say of this his Second Part of Guzman de Alfarache, and in how
short a time he made it? Which seems almost a thing impossible, being so
differing from his former, which he was forced to change and to alter, casting
it in a new molde, for the reasons before delivered. This will render
sufficient testimony of his worth, and bridle those rash tongues and
headstrong spirits, which shall kick against him, and vainly and foolishly
run on to the wronging of their judgments. If all that I have said be truth,
if the learned approve it, the vulgar deny it not, if the world confesses it;
(for here every one may meet with that, which shall please his appetite, which
Horace holds so difficult a thing,) if under a profane name he does write so
divinely, that he may serve for a bridle to the bad, for a spur to the good,
for study to the learned, for entertainment to ordinary capacities, and in
general, for a fine Political, Ethicall, and Oeconomicall School, and so
full of sweetness and pleasure, that it may inuit any man to look thereinto,
and to dwell upon that, which he shall find there set down, both for
pleasure, and for profit. What do I throw upon him? or what do I in this,
more then to pay him that, which he so justly deserves? O happy Sevill, that
may amongst thy many Greatnesses, nay one of thy greatest, glory in this thy
Son, whose laborious endeavors, and indefatigable studies, (equalling the very
best both Latins and Grecians,) have thus truly merited and deserved, that all
the nations of the world, crowning his head with Bays, and celebrating his
name, should willingly, and with a great deal of triumph, sing forth his due
praise.

UPON THE BOOK, and the Author thereof.
Poor Guzmans life, the mapp of Vice and Sin,
Story'ed by Aleman, is as a Voice
From Heau'en, showing how thou should make thy choice.
The word, Shun thou to be what I have bin.
Who stands here as a Mark; that thou may see
Where his ship was drowned; How the same was split,
More through lack of Wisdom, then want of Wit.
Which was the cause of all his Misery.
The dainty style of this his pleasing quill
By Guzmans roguish life, advises thee
What an upright and honest life should be.
How this, does lead to good; how that, to ill.
How slight so e're this fiction seem to be,
None, can be fuller, of Morality.
FRATRIS CVSTODII LVPI, LVSITANI, Ordinis Sanctissimae Trinitatis de libri
vtilitate,
EPIGRAMMA.
SVnt duo quae pariter virtus perfecta requirit:
Quod praue nunquam, quod been semper agas.
Haec tibi, si cupias, vllo ne tempore desint.
Auctoris geminum perlege, Lector, opus.
Antoni nunquam ponat tua dextera librum.
Nec tibi Guzmani pagina displiceat.
Si refer as diui mores: infanda prophani
Si scelera abijcias: omnia puncta fer^
Reddite Matthaeo grato pro munere g^:
Quo duce conspicuum fit piet at is iter.
Planius hoc fiet, postquam ex incudibus Auctor
Sustulerit plenos vtilitate libros.
AD MATTHAEVM ALEMANVM de suo GVZMANO, TETPADISTICON.
Ruy Fernandez de Almada.
VIlibus exemplis Pharij quid grandia caelant?
Planaque cur simulant abditiore typo?
Nempe vetant Sophiae mysteria prodere vulgo
Intimiusque animo pressa figura manet.
His ducibus Guzmane geris, ceu Proteus alter,
Plana sub obscuro, magna minore typo.
Ergo cum site (...) dones
Te sibi (...), Hispalis almacanat.
IOANNIS RIBERII LVSITANI ad AVTHOREM,
ENCOMIASTICHON.
LAus, Matthaec, tibi superest post fata perennis,
Quam nullo minuet tempore, tempus edax.
Orb pererrato virtutem extendere factis,
Factum ingens: opus est Martis, and Artis opus,
Fortunam mayor variam superare labor,
Herculeis mayor Quiribus iste labor.
Maius opus, mayor labor est coluisse Mineruam:
Mayor and ex proprio condere Mart libros.
Heroas decorare solent duo nomina, Mars, Ars:
Munera tu pariter Martis and Artis habes.
Mars dedit inuictum, quo tendis ad ardua, pectus:
Excoluit mentem docta Minerua tuam.
Ingenij monumenta tui super aethera nota,
Testantur larga praestita dona manu.
Multa Hispana ^anit Musa: atqui nullus Ibera
Dogmata pinxit adhuc (...).
Testis hic est codex modico qui venditur are,
Attalicas superant, quas dabit emptus, opes.
Cuius ab aspectu morsus compressit inanos,
Inuidia, heu multis iniuriosa nimis.
Zoile transuerso calamo, qui vulnera figis,
I procul, en contra numina bella paras.
Contra Mercurium, Phoebum, contraque Mineruam,
Mortalis poterit tela mouere manus?
Quisquis auarus ades, redimis qui sanguine gemma,
Gemma tibi ^ruo venditur aere, veni.
Hauris ab (...) pericula terra:
Hic liber arcanas fundet, and addet opes.
Decolor est dives, fuluo quod pallet in auro,
Non sunt diuitia delitiaque simul.
At liber hic auri venis qui pulcher abundat,
Nunc tibi delitias, diuitiasque dabit.
Aureus hic certe gemma est pretiosa libellus,
Quis tenui gemmam respuas are datam?
To the Translator.
Live (Guzman) to a Caveat; Live to praise
This languag'd Man; who has renewed thy days
By a new birth. Translating thee, as tho
The English Rogue, were not the Picaro,
But a more lively piece. Lo, what Art has done.
Here the Reflection's brighter then the Sun.
One Language is too narrow to contain
The boundlesse-rascall-froath of Guzmans brain.
It cried for more. This Author, hearing it,
Imployes his Pensill, draws it to the quick
In English colors: and so sets it forth,
As Guzmans shame, and furtherer of worth.
For me, to Guzman-it in Rhyme, or to rehearse
His Prose; were but to spoil a Rogue in Verse.
No: Let the Prose remain: Let it commend
Him, (whom I dare not praise) because a Friend.
E. B.

To the Translator.
But is the Rogue revived? Is Guzman made
A Spanish-English Rascal by his Trade?
It Is so. And (as our homebred Spaniards guess)
He Is printed liueliest in the English Press.
Tongues, have but one Horizon, if they prove
Each others true Interpreters; and move
Alike to all the world. But if they fear
To join; each Language has his Hemispheare.
And so had Guzman. But this English (...),
Makes it appear to Us, as well as Spain.
Thus, like a blazing Star, each Author is
Stretched to a streaming length of Languages.
E. B.

To the Translator.
WOuld any man sit still, and yet suruay
The world at large? Or study to betray
All humane Quiddities? Or would he view
All men unmasked, discerning false from true?
Would any man see Proteus? Would he see
Proteus again, and say; That this is he?
Or see the Moon? And when she waxes light,
Know her to be the same, at second fight?
In this same Optick-Art, who strives to thrive,
Let him use Guzman as a Perspectiue.
Guzman, is all the World; know him alone,
And then ye know a Multitude in One.
The Spanish, lim's him: But this English phrase,
Adds life and color; and prolongs his days.
The Spanish, was too small a Mapp: But this
Draws him at large; and shows him as he is.
Nor let the subject of this Book seem ill,
Because it is Guzman. Painters, show their skill
No more in Beauty then Deformity:
No less in Devils then a Deity.
All Is one to them. Nor do they think it more
To draw fair Virgins, then a Blackamore.
Why then, should not a Rascal honor those,
Whose Language shows him to the life in Prose?
Read him: and as his Labor shall appear,
Commend his Pen by which he landed here.
Edw: Burton.

To the worthy Gentleman the Translator.
SIR, I embrace the occasion, and am glad,
After that worthy mention I have had
From both our equal Friends, of you, I find
A means to know the person with the mind.
By what you give us here, you, from a wrong
Wherewith she trauel'd, vindicate our Tongue.
The Spanish Rogue? Why it was a Ladd so hye,
So full of National propriety,
Sententious and Prouerbiall; that his Nation
Would sooner sheathe them in the Irish fashion
Then he could put on English. As if here
Our Language were but just as one poor Shire
For one of his profession to walk in.
This (...) wherein so many men have bin,
You have dispersed. And till an English strain
Be taught (as well as this) the tongue of Spain,
Our Nephews shall reproach it to their Heirs,
This way our Wus have ouer-master'd theirs.
W. BROWN.

THE PRINTER To the curious Reader.
IT were a hard task and rarely to be performed, for any Printer to undertake
the printing of a Book of this bulk and nature, without some faults; yea,
were his Copy never so fair, or his Apprehension so quick. It is a decorum in
Guzman to commit many Sol^cismes, whose life was so full of disorders. This
life of his being 26. several times printed in the Spanish Tongue in a few
years, did never appear to the world, but with Errata's: which makes me the
more presuming on your humane courtesy: And as in the first, so in this Second
Part, vouchsafe with your pen, the amendment of these few faults, before you
begin to read the rest of his life.

EDW: BLOVNT.

Page. Line. Fault. Correct. 32. 15. will apply apply. 39. 38. discourses
discourse. 110. marg. quandem quando. 118. 20. should him say should one say.
154. 34. turning himself. turning my self ibid. 35. he said I said. 227 36
the would not they would not. ibid. 54. when I come when I came. 269. 44. shoot
at shoot. 273. 51 in out it out. 293. 21. ^d ebb an ebb. 335. 16. herd
measure. hard measure.

The Contents of the Second Part.
THE FIRST BOOK.
CHAP. I. GVzman de Alfarache excuses the process of his discourse, craves
attention, gives notice of his intent; shows that Lying of all other things
is the worst. He treats of the ill government of great men; Of Courtiers, and
their vices: Of the Spaniards love to Radishes. Of the order and end of this
Work. CHAP. II. Guzman tells what place he served in, in the house of his Lord
Ambassador: And that Fools and Iesters, are both fit and profitable for
Princes: falling into a description of their conditions and qualities. CHAP.
III. Guzman recounteth that which happened unto him with a Captain and a Doctor
at a banquet, which the Ambassador his Lord made. CHAP. IV. The Doctor finding
himself aggrieued, that Guzmanillo had wronged him in the presence of so many
Gentlemen, would be revenged of him. The Spanish Ambassador takes up the
quarrel: The French causing another of the guests, that was there at table, to
relate an accident that befell the Constable of Castile, Don Aluaro de Luna.
CHAP. V. A Roman Matron, not knowing how to free her-selfe (without suffering
in her honor) from the persuasions of Guzman, who solicited her in his Lords
behalf the French Ambassador, put a jest upon him, which was the occasion of a
second disgrace that afterward befell him. CHAP. VI. Guzman de Alfarache
recounteth, how in the house, whereinto he had withdrawn himself, to make
himself clean, another disgrace befell him, and many other misfortunes. And
that which passed afterward, between him and his Lord the Ambassador, with
whom he discoursed of politic and grave matters. CHAP. VII. The jest being
publicly known through Rome, which befell Guzman, together with the ill
success that he had with the Boore; for very (hame he departs from thence, and
goes for Florence. In which journey, a thief enters into friendship with him,
that he might the better under that color, rob him of all that he had. CHAP.
VIII. Guzman de Alfarache discourses of Deceit. He departs from Rome. He
desires to see Siena, where certain thieves meet with his trunks, which he had
sent away before, and rob him of all that he had. CHAP. IX. Guzman de
Alfarache, not recovering his lost goods, shrewdly complains of the small
punishment that is laid upon thieves. Wherein he delivers many things worthy
the noting.
THE SECOND BOOK.
CHAP. I. GVzman de Alfarache, leaves Siena, and goes for Florence. He meets
with Sayavedra, whom he takes into his service. And before he comes to
Florence, he recounts unto him on the way, many admirable things concerning
that City. And when he was arrived there, he shows him all, that was worth
the seeing. CHAP. II. Guzman de Alfarache goes to Bologna in pursuit of
Alexandro, who had stolen his trunkes from him; Whither, when he was come,
going about to imprison Alexandro, himself was clapped up. CHAP. III. Guzman de
Alfarache, discourses on the injustice, which some Judges do, blinded by
gain, or by passion. CHAP. IV. Guzman de Alfarache, being freed out of prison,
falls to gaming, gets money; Whereupon, he resolves with himself to go to
Milan. CHAP. V. Guzman de Alfarache traveling toward Milan, Sayavedra upon
the way, recounts his own life unto him. CHAP. VI. Sayavedra meets in Milan
with a friend of his that served a Merchant; Guzman de Alfarache lays a witty
plot how to rob him. CHAP. VII* The robbing of the Merchant of Milan, as Guzman
de Alfarache could have wished it. Aguilera shares so much with him, as of right
belonged unto him: And he and his servant Sayavedra go for Genoa. CHAP. VIII.
Guzman de Alfarache comes to Genoa, where being known by his kindred, he is
feasted by them. He persuades every one to live virtuously; And shows the
hurt, which Murmurers, Hypocrites, and false Witnesses, bring to men's souls,
honors, and riches: He delivers the great profit, we shall gain, by
avoiding such venomous Basiliskes. And concludes with telling us, who are true
thieves indeed. CHAP. IX. Guzman de Alfarache robs his Uncle and Kinsmen in
Genoa, and imbarkes himself in the Galleys that were to go for Spain. CHAP.
X. Guzman sailing toward Spain, Sayavedra by reason of a great storm, grows
Sea-sicke. He falls into a Calenture, or burning fever. He waxes lightheaded,
and loses his wits. He cries out, that he is Guzman, and growing mad, throws
himself into the Sea, where he is drowned.
THE THIRD BOOK.
CHAP. I. GVzman de Alfarache, having taken his leave of Captain Favelo,
telling him that he was to go for Sevill, makes for Saragoca, where he peruses
the statutes of Gotam College, otherwise called, The Hospital of Fools.
CHAP. II. Guzman de Alfarache goes from Saragoca, and comes to Madrid; where he
turns Merchant, and is married. He breaks his credit, and turns bankrupt.
He treats of women's subtle tricks. And of the inconvenience of
counter-writings; and of their remedy. CHAP. III. Guzman de Alfarache
prosecutes the success of his marriage, till such time as his wife dyed. And
how her dowry returned back to his father in Law. He discourses of bad wives,
and the hurt they do their husbands. CHAP. IV. Guzman being now a widower,
resolves to go to Alcala de Henarez, to study the Arts, and Divinity, that
he might make himself fit to say Mass. And having fulfilled all his terms,
and duly heard his Lectures, he leaves all and marries again. CHAP. V. Guzman
de Alfarache leaves off his studies; he goes to live at Madrid; he carries his
wife with him; from whence they were both banished. CHAP. VI. Guzman and his
wife come to Sevill: He finds his mother to be now somewhat ancient, and well
s^ucken in years. His wife gets her away to Italy with one of the Captains of
the Galleys, leaving him alone to himself, and exceeding poor: whereupon he
falls to his old trade of theeuing. CHAP. VII. Guzman being preserred to a
Gentle-womans service, robs her: upon the theft he is apprehended, and
condemned to the Galleys during life. CHAP. VIII. Guzman de Alfarache is taken
out of the prison of Sevill, to be carried to the Port, to be put into the
Galleys. He recounteth that which befell him on the way; as likewise in the
Galleys. CHAP. IX. Guzman de Alfarache prosecutes that which happened unto him in
the Galleys: And by what means he came to be freed from thence.
THE ROGVE: OR, THE SECOND PART OF THE LIFE OF GVZMAN DE ALFARACHE. The first
Book.
Wherein, he recounteth what befell him, from the time that he served his
Master the Lord Ambassador, till he left Rome.
CHAP. I.
Guzman de Alfarache excuses the process of his discourse, craves attention,
gives notice of his intent; shows, that Lying, of all other things is the
worst. He treats of the ill government of Great men; Of Courtiers, and their
Vices. Of the Spaniards love to Radishes. Of the order and end of this Work.

COME, let us away. Thou have now bayted and refresht thy self in thy Inn;
Come, I Cu^pany makes the way less tedious.
say: Arise, and let us be gone, if thou be willing to have my Company, and
that I should do thee service in this journey; though there is another journey
that I must go through with, for whose happy end I go traveling through
these stony and desert places.

Through these craggy Rocks, and uneven The Author goes excusing himself.
ways, beset with Bushes and Briars, I doubt not but I shall make this journey
seem easy unto thee, with that assured promise which I shall be able to make
unto thee, of bringing thee safe to the end of thy desire.

Pardon my bold proceeding, and tax me not of inciuilitie, that I treat with
thee in this manner; I confess that I fail in that respect, which is due unto
such a one as thou art.

But consider, I pray', that what I say, it is not spoken to thee, but that
thou should reprehend others, who perhaps have as much need of reproof as
my self.

I go talking at random, (like those that play at blind-man-buffe) and thou
may very well tell me, that my tongue runs riot, and that I talk like a
fool, or a madman, because I shoot my bolts without fear or wit, and
unadvisedly throw the stone out of my hand, not knowing where it may light, or
the harm it may do.

But I shall answer this, with that which a fool once said, that fell a
throwing of stones, who as often as he threw, would cry out aloud, saying, Take
heed, take heed, my Masters, for it cannot fall amiss; where-euer it light, it
must needs hit right. So I likewise tell thee, Que como tengo las hechas, tengo
sospechas. Proverb.
That if I have sat upon any bodies skirts, or shall chance to sit closer unto
them, I have reason to suspect, that they will pay me home if they can. For he
that reprehends other men's faults, cannot but live in fear of being Chi
riprende l'altrui diffeto, viue con sospetto. Proverb.
told his own.

I imagine with my self, that all men are just such as I am; weak, facill,
and full of natural passions; nay, sometimes strange and extrauagant humors.
But it were a thousand pities, that all Mal seria, si todos los Costales
fuessen tales.
Sacks should be alike. But being bad my self, I think no man good: such is
my wretched condition, and of as many as bear the same mind. I convert
Violets into poison; throw dirt upon Snow; and in my thought, trample the fresh
and fragrant Rose under my feet. It might in some sort have been happy for
me, that I had stayed when I was well, and had not gone on with this my
discourse.

I know, that albeit I have been troublesome unto thee, thou will hold me
excused, and therefore I shall not need to crave thy pardon, and to beg thy
good word and attention; the purchasing whereof, is that which I principally
pretend: And albeit many, and peradventure all those that have tasted of the
Apple, will deem it to be impertinent and superfluous.

But me thinks it is not possible that it should be so. For albeit I should
be as bad as thou would make me to be, or that I were such an arrant Ass and
Coxe-combe, as you forsooth in your Idea would form me to be; yet cannot I
persuade my self, that thou had set thy figure right, or that thy judgment
were truly grounded. For no man thinks himself to be the same man, that
other men would make him to be; nor judges himself by another opinion. I
think of my self, as thou think of thy self. Every man holds his own
fashion the best; his own life, the vprightest; his own cause, the iustest;
his own honor, the greatest; and his own conceits, those that hit rightest.
I took counsel of my pillow, it seeming unto me (which indeed is true) that
a prudent consideration does evermore beget happy events; and that too much
haste is the mother of various and unfortunate issues; whose Handmaid is
repentance. For do you grant but one absurdity, and a thousand will follow
upon it. And therefore, that the ends may not err, (as too too usually it
happens,) it is fit, that we make a faithful examination of the principles;
which being found out, and well chosen, they afford us that help, that we
may Principia prius quaerenda.
boldly say, that the better half of the work is already finished, reaching
forth such a resplendour and fullness of light unto us, that afar off, by
natural signs and tokens, they discover those things unto us, which are
likely to happen hereafter.

And howbeit in themselves, they are in substance small, yet in their virtue
and operation, they are great, and are in a disposition to matters of much
importance.

And therefore, when we will experiment them, we must propose all the
difficulties, examining them with all diligence, seeking to draw all the good
out of them that we can, and the soundest counsel; but when we are once
resolved that they are actions of Prudence, and so generally taken and
esteemed, they ought in all men's judgments to be bravely followed, and put in
execution: And by so much the more, by how much the more noble shall that
enterprise be, which we pretend to undertake.

And it is an imperfection, and a notable note of lightness, to enterprise To
begin things, and not to go through with them, argues lightness. Proverb. How
a good son in Law ought to carry himself toward his father in Law.
those things* which we cannot effect, especially if they be not crossed by some
sudden and unexpected accident, or some great impediment or other; for in their
end, consists our glory.

My purpose only was (as I told thee before) to benefit thee, and to teach thee
the way, how thou might with a great deal of content and safety, pass
through the gulf of that dangerous sea wherein thou saylest. The blows I shall
receive, thou the good counsels; The hunger is mine, but the industry must be
thine, that thou may not suffer hunger. I endure those affronts, from whence
thy honor rises. And since thou have heard it said, Que a que se te hizo rico,
que te hizo el pico. That is, that he that made thee rich, made thee likewise
to open thy beak, that thou might be ready to receive a blessing.

And therefore thou must strive to imitate that discreet son in Law, who
knows by the sweetness of his behavior and courteous carriage, how to gain
the good will of his hard-laced father in Law, and to draw him gently along, to
pay his house-rent, to bestow upon him his diet, and his lodging, to put money
in his Purse, and for an vp-shot, a fair wife in his bed; And these are those
father in Laws which (like slaves, and common iesters) breed, serve, and
entertain their children.

I am now imbark't, I have set foot a Ship-boord, and I cannot go back. The
Dice are thrown; my promise is past, and I cannot recall it. I have begun, and
I must go on. The Subject is mean and base; the beginning small; But that
which I intend to treat of, if like the Ox, thou will ruminate thereupon, and
chew the Cud, suffering it to pass from thy stomach to thy mouth, it may prove
important, grave, and great. I will do all that I can to satisfy thy desire;
knowing* that I should have rather given thee trouble, then content, in
unfolding one part of my life, and hyding the other from thee.

I persuade my self, that many will, or have already said it; Better had it
been, that God had never given it thee, and by consequence, that thou had
never spoke of it; for being notoriously bad and wicked, it had been better
for thy self to have smothered it; and for others, that they had not known
it. Thou art far wide of the truth; thou have no good ground for that thou
say: much less therefore can I be persuaded, that thou meanest well, or
that thy drift herein is so fair and honest, as thou would seem to make
show of; But I am rather afraid, and do shrewdly suspect, that because they
touch thee to the quick, the very wagging of the rod does (though it never
come near thee) much affright thee; thine own guiltines makes thee to
shrink; and it is the galled back, that makes the Horse winse, before the
Saddle touch him.

There is no Men's whipping of themselves, is used by religious persons, for to
more fie the ^sh, and in remembrance of those stripes, which our Savior
suffered for us. There are some that ^sh themselves merely out of Ostentation.
These are fools, and as abominable as Baals Priests. The Prelates of the
Church, and other secular Mogistrates should take order to debarie those to go
in Procession, that use it so profanely, and to punish them severely, for ^ose
their ro^ excesses, w^ch I am ashamed to speak of. an Germany, there was a
Sect of Herelikes, called Flagellantes, that were notable Villains, and
Drunkards, and condemned for such. Vide Couarruuias. Verb. Diciplinarse. L^es
have ever the best attention.
Disciplinante that whips himself in the holy week, that does at any time
complain of his own lashing, nor does half so much feel the smart of those
stripes which he gives himself, as he does the pain and anguish of another
hand, when he comes to dress and cure his wounds.

I either tell thee truths or lies. Not lies. Would to God they were lies. For
I know, that out of thine own natural inclination, thou would be well
content to hear them; nay, to play and champe upon that bitt, it would make
thee carry a white mouth, pleasing thy self with the some and froth of
untruths. But I deliver truths unto thee; and these are as bitter Pills unto
thy Palate. Thou find fault with them, because they lay open thy faults.
Only displeased, because they please thee not. If thou find thy self sound
and in health, and thy neighbor sick and weak; if the Lightning shall light
upon another man's house, and thine own escape the flame, thou would the
better bear it, so as thou be left untouched, no morsel is unsavory to thy
mouth, all is Phesant and Partridge, and I shall be well received, and kindly
entertained by thee. But that thou may not (like the Eele) slip out of my
hands, I will seek out some Fig-leaues against these your slippery tricks, I
will hold you fast while I have you; you shall not for this once, so easily (as
you think) escape my hands.

I tell thee, (if thou art willing to hear me, if thou will not, thou may
choose) that this general confession that I make; this public opening of my
Pack, laying before thee all my Knacks, and my Trinkets; I do not therefore
show these things unto thee, that thou should either imitate me, or my evil
actions; but rather, that (when thou shall come to know them) thou may learn
thereby to correct thine own. If thou see me fallen, because I was wilful,
and would not be ordered; look thou so well to thy steps, that thou may hate
and avoid those occasions, that wrought my Take the good, and leave the bad.
fall. Set not thy foot, where thou have seen me slip before thee; but let my
trippings and my stumblings, serve as so many marks to make thee more wary.
For thou art a man, mortal as I am, and peradventure neither stronger, nor
wiser then my self.

Look well into thy self; run over very leisurely and carefully, the house
Look well into thy self, and let others alone.
of thy Soul, and see if thou have not made there, even in the greater and
better part of it, Dung-hils of filth, and all manner of beastliness; and do
not sift and pry so narrowly into thy neighbors, to see if thou can find
but the feather of some bird at the foot of the Stayres, whereat thou may
pick a quarrel.

But here I know thou will tell me, that I preach unto thee, and that he is a
fool, that will seek his cure, from a sick Physician. And that he that
Medice, cura teipsum.
cannot help himself, can hardly give health to others.

What wholesome Medicine, or good Cordial, can a man have from a Vipers tooth,
or the sting of a Scorpion? How shall he, that is ill himself, advise another
not to be ill? I do not deny, that I am such a one as thou say: But that
will befall me with thee, which betideth some nimble and cunning Caruer at his
Lords table, who curiously cutteth up the Brawne, the wing, or the leg of
some dainty Foul, and having respect to the quality of the Guests, whom he is
to serve, gives every man his several Plate, studying to please and content
them all; They all eat, all rest satisfied and well contented, whilst he
himself goes away both weary and hungry.

At mine own cost and pains, I discover shelfes, quicksands, and dangerous
rocks unto thee, to the end that thou may not fall upon them, and dash thy
self in pieces against them, or run thy self on ground, where there is
never any hope of coming off.

Your Arsenicke is not altogether unprofitable, but that it will serve for some
good use or other; it is worth money, and it is sold in Apothecaries shops. And
though it be bad to eat, as it may be applied, it will prove good. In a word,
with it those Worms and Vermin are poisoned, which bring hurt and prejudice
to man's body.

My example might serve as Treacle to a Commonwealth, if these fierce beasts
that govern it were poisoned; not excusing housekeepers, though The hurt
which ill government, ^ses in great men's houses.
never so much in appearance, seeming familiar and friendly unto us, as being
one of the worst qualities that they have. For, figuring forth our selves unto
them, to be men of flesh and blood, kinde-hearted, and subject unto passions,
we deposit our secrets in their bosoms, and trust them with all that we have,
as relying on their says and their love, and they cunningly shed Tricks of
Courtship.
seigned tears in a seeming commiseration of our miseries, when in the mean
while not-withstanding, they rend our flesh, and tear our very sinews from
the bone with their tyrannies, injuries, and violencies.

O that it were in my power to consume and destroy another sort of cruel
beasts, as those that look big, and grow proud of their ease and plenty,
go vaunting and boasting of their valor, tearing up the stones in the
streets, world-wandrers, Vagabonds from Country to Country, from Parish to
Parish, and from house to house, making themselves skimmers of other men's
pottes, being no way of any profit, or serving for any other use, then the
Porters in the Al^ondiga is a house appointed for Country people, to bring
their corn into the City, and there to lay it up. It signifies also a Ware
house for merchandise, where some bring in, and some carry out. Vid. Couarru.
page 48.
Alhondiga of Seuilla, to lay in one burden, and to take out another; venting
lies in one place, and taking them up in another, carrying news to and fro,
reporting those things, that he ought to have silenced, being trusted
therewith, and willed to be secret, uttering them in prejudice of the person to
whom he reuealeth them, who cannot but take it ill; maliciously causing
differences, and relating things worse then they were meant; bearers of false
witness, raysers of dissension, robbers of men's honors, defaming the good,
persecuting the just, stripping men of their wealth, and murdering and
martyrizing the innocent. It were a pleasing sight to see all such perish, and
to be made a public spectacle to the world. Nor is there in all Bruxels any
such goodly hangings, that do either so much adorn, or half so well become
any Noble man's house, as these would the Commonwealth, if they were hung up
one after another by the Common Hangman.

For, it is very fit, that there should be Poena and praemium; A punishment and
a reward. For if all were good and honest, Laws had been superfluous Laws
were made for the wicked.
and impertinent. And if all men should have been wise, Writers had been
fools. Physic was made for the sick; Honors for the virtuous; and the
Gallows for lewd livers. And because I likewise know, that Vice is so
powerful, for that it rises out of a desire of liberty, without
acknowledgement of any Superior either humane or divine, I am much afraid,
that these my written labors, and my many endured misfortunes, will not be of
force to bridle thy unruly appetites, and to bring forth that good fruit which
I could wish; Holding that pains vain and fruitless, which is undertaken
When a man's labor is lost.
upon any respect whatsoever, if it does not in that it pretends, obtain
it is desired end. But because that the Rhethorician does not always persuade;
nor the Physician cure; nor the Pilot arrive safely at his Port; I must
together with them comfort my self, in that I have performed my duty, by
giving thee good counsel, and by affording thee light, being therein like the
Flint, which being strooken, gives fire to others, to be kindled in this or
that place, though it self remain without: In like manner, the lewd liver
loses his life, receives punishment, and indureth affronts, making himself
an example to all those that shall look upon him.

But here I will betake me to that way, which presents it self unto me in
this place; Imitating therein your rude Clownes, as also your nice Courtiers,
who passing along by the Roperia. i. Locus Vestimentarius.
Roperia (which is a public place where all sorts of clothes are to be
sold;) if by chance they lift up their eyes, and look upon them, those
Merchants that sell these commodities, (like your Birchen-Lane men) fall
presently a balling and plying of them; one draws him this way, another that,
and keep such a calling, and such a tugging of them, that they know not well
which way to turn or wind themselves, they are so distracted by them.

For they having an opinion (if not a thorow'perswasion) that they do all
deceive, all coozen, and lie, they go warily to work, when they buy any wares
of them; and I well wot the cause why, which I need not to tell you, The ^ery
of so^ Tredes-men.
because that which they sell, will speak it out alowd, without any other
bodies help.

Well, let us now give them way, and suffer them to pass by, if for no other
reason, at least for those favors and courtesies which I have had from
Receivers of stolen goods.
them, in the buying of things that were never bought, giving me good money for
that which I brought, and sold unto them; and for teaching me from ouer-night
against the next morning, how to make Cassocks of Cloakes, selling them the
shreds for to foot Stockins, and to make soles to keep the feet warm, and
free from wet.

Or shall I here tell thee, that the same is like to befall me, which usually
happens to the careless traveler; who not knowing the way, goes from The case
of a careless traveler.
home, never inquiring how he may hit it, which hand to take, or what turnings
to make; so that when he has gone some half league on his journey, he
chances to come to the foot of a Cross, where he meets with three or four
several ways; and straining himself upon his stirrops, writhing his body, he
turns his head about, to see if he can espy any body, that is able to direct
him in his way?

But seeing none there at hand, he falls to a Cosmographicall consideration with
himself, choosing either this, or that, which shall seem likeliest unto him,
to lead directly toward that place, whither he intended his journey.

I see here present before me so many diverse dispositions, and such various
and sundry sorts of tasks, all of them hanging about me, every one striving to
hale and pull me as it were by force, to come into their shop. But God he
knows, why, and wherefore they do it.

One would have sweet and pleasant things; another, those that are tart and
sour; this man will have his Olives fryde; that will no salt, no not The
diverse gusts and palates of men.
with an Egg.

And if one man have a mind to eat the leg of a The Spanish word, is pie de
la perdis, but the other fits better with our phrase of ^peach.
Lark roasted in the snuff of a Candle, another would not be wanting, who
shall make no bones to tell they, that of all the pulse and roots that God
made, there was never any yet that could compare and come near to the Radish
for goodness.

The truth whereof was to be seen in a certain Papelistas; Los que son
dados a entender en papeles. Couarruuias. A short tale of a covetous Spaniard.
Papelisticall Minister, a kind of Officer (as I may so term him) betwixt a
Clerk and a Scriuener that is conversant in Paper-businesses; a fellow
wonderful ill beloved, a notorious liar, and above all, extremely covetous;
who removing from one house to another, after that he had carried his
household stuff, and other old moueables belonging thereunto, he stayed there
behind alone by himself, searching and prying very diligently into every
nooke and corner thereof, rifling and ransaking it from the floor to the
roof, not so much as leaving a nail to the walls, for to hang a Hat on, or
the like necessary use.

At last, it was his hap to come into the Kitchen, where he lighted upon an
odd hole in the chimney, wherein were three or four Radishes, which had lain
there a long time, being dry, tough, withered, and good for nothing. These he
charily ties up in one bunch, and very carefully brings them home to his Wife,
and with a Black-Smithes face, looking frowningly upon her, he said unto her;
Is this your good hous-wifery, this your care of my house and goods, to let
things run to spoil? Is money so easily come by (think you) that you make
no more reckning of saving a penny? But as you brought me nothing in Dowry, so
you care not (it seems) which end goes forward; sink, or swim, all is one to
you. See you this waste of yours? Look I pray upon these Radishes, they cost
money I can tell you. You have done well, have you not, to look no better unto
them? Keep them I pray against I call for them. I think there is not a more
wastefull woman in the world; but I am the worse of the two, and may thank my
self, that I would be such an unthrift as to bring a whole bunch into the
house at once, when as fewer would have served the turn.

His wife laid them up safe, as he had willed her, and that very night (that
they might not fall out any more about them) the crafty Hileding, very demurely
and with a sober countenance, without any the least show of choler, or
dislike, sets them down before him, when he was sitting down to supper, who
falling earnestly unto them, spoke to his Wife, and said:

Now in troth (Wench) I swear unto thee, there is no meat in the world can
relish better, or has half so good a savor and taste with it, as an old
Radish. I protest unto thee, I like them better a thousand times, being thus
lyther, and withered as you see, then when they are fresh and cripsie. I
prithee Wife prove one of them, and then tell me if it be not as I say.

The poor woman had as little fancy to make trial thereof, as she had faith
to believe it; but my Spaniard (carrying as they do all a kind of high The
Spaniard generally carries a great command over his Wife.
hand over their wives) forcing her in a manner thereunto, by his stern both
looks and words, made her to eat one sore against her will, and much against
her stomach.

There are a certain kind of men, which are not contented only to commend
that, which they themselves like, (be it what it will) but they The capri^ious
humors of some extrauagant persons.
will (and are angry and offended if it be otherwise) that others do the
same, pressing them, as it were, to follow their humor, and contrary to their
own will, seem to approve it, at least not stick to praise it.

And there are likewise another sort of people, which discommend other men's
tastes; not considering, that de gustibus non est disputandum, for that they
are diverse and various, as are the conditions and countenances of men.

For though peradventure two may be found, that may resemble one another, yet
it is impossible that they should be so like, that you may not perceive some
difference. And therefore I must be driven to do that here, which was my hap
once to do at a Comedy; where, for that I was one of the first, it was my
fortune to be one of the foremost before the Stage. Writers, whereunto they are
likened.


Now those that came after, being nothing so well fitted, spoke unto me, that I
would lean a little on the one side. I did so; but in this my moving somewhat
aside, others thought much of it, complaining that I hindered their sight; for
whom likewise to give them content, I was forced to shift a foot. So that,
both the one and the other, made me to stand where they would have me. For they
were all willing to see. Insomuch, that not knowing how to accommodate my self
for pleasuring of them, I put on Merchants ears, not vouchsafing to give them
the hearing: and standing stiffely Proverb.
on my right leg, gave them leave to shift for themselves, to hear, and see,
as well as they could.

The Melancholy man, the Sanguine, the Chollericke, the Flegmaticke, the
Civil, the Swaggerer, the Rhetorician, the Philosopher, the Religious, No
writer can please all.
the Reprobate, the Courtier, the Clown, the rude, the Discreet, nay, even my
Lady Ninny-hammer would that I should only write for her pleasure, words
finely pleyted, and curiously folded, and that I should apply my self to her
conceit, and conform my self according to her style, making her Mistress
both of my pate and Pen.

It is not possible for me to second so many humors, and to satisfy such
different desires: For then had I need (besides the making for every particular
man his several Book,) to live so many men's lives, as there are sundry The
Author approves this to be his true Second Part.
opinions.

I have lived but one only; and that which they would falsely entitle me
withal, is a testimony against some, of the great wrong they have done me
therein.

My true life, I shall only set it down my self. I will go prosecuting of
that, though they go persecuting of me. For there will not another (a) Gill
Prou. Nunca falta un Gil, que no^ persigua. Dando a entender, que aunque
desista un emulo no falta otro que se substituya ensu lugar. No sooner one
corriuall gone, but another comes in his place. The Authors end and purpose.
be wanting for the third Part, to come forth against me, as in the Second;
and charge me with that, which I never either did, said, or thought.

That, which I entreat at thy hands, is; That thou will neither fear me so
much, nor be angry with me in so high a measure, that (I know not out of what
humor) thou should wish me hanged; for I find not my self fit for it at
this time, neither indeed do I deserve it. Suffer me therefore to live, since
it has pleased God to give me life, that I might correct my errors; and
time, that I may amend my faults.

For my punishments, and my misfortunes, if thou will truly inform thy self
of them, will serve thee in stead of a Looking-glass, whereby thou may see
how to link a little better together the past, and the present, with that
which is to come in the third Part; to the end, that thou making it all one
continued piece of work, weauing it well and handsomely, running along in even
threads, thou may the better (which is no more then becomes thee) be
instructed in the truth of things.

And this is that mark, whereat I have aimed, and the white, which I seek to
hit. Nor am I dainty in discovering my conceits, to those that will be pleased
to save me this labor: yet, let it be so carried, that they may boast them
of that is their own. For I hold it as a thing indecent, and unseemly, for a
man to deny his own name, and to put forth his works under that of another,
which has, and shall upon the like occasion, oblige me at any time, to write
so much again as this, that I may not beetaken for a Fool, by taking upon me
other men's ouer-sights. But let this rest, lest I might seem to some, to
speak more out of passion, then reason; though the judicious (I am persuaded)
will excuse this my just complaint, and not think it in this place to be
impertinent to the purpose.

But to return again into the way, whence we have stepped a little aside, I
say; That I would have every man to make choice of his own Plate, and Of the
order and end of this Book: And whereunto it is likened.
to fall to that dish (amongst those many, that we shall serve into this board)
which he has most mind unto; Leaving that unto others, which shall not
please his palate, or not agree with his stomach. Nor would I have my guests to
think, that this book of mine should be like unto Heliogabalus his banquet,
whose board was furnished with many and sundry sorts of meats, yet all of them
only serving for the food and sustenance of man, whether they were Peacocks,
Chickens, Phesants, wild Boar, Fish, Milk, Sallets, or Conserues, it was one
only kind of Vyand, but like Manna, differenced by men's several tastes;
howbeit those of Manna, were as every man would have them to relish as
himself desired; but these other, according as the Cook was willing to season
them, seeking therein to please the filthy luxurious throat of his Master. With
variety, nature is adorned; this is that, that beautifies the Fields, to see
here Hills, there Valleys; in this place Brooks and Rivers; in that Fountains
sprinkling and sparkling forth their pearled drops.

Let not men be so couetously minded, as to desire to have all to themselves. I
have seen the bestowing of many Liueries in my lifetime, and the little Page,
(I have perceived) was as well contented with his, though it were not so full
of Silk, as the tallest man, that had twice as much as he, in regard of the
largeness of his stature. I am resolved to follow that path, that shall seem
best unto me, for the more direct bringing of me to the end of my desire, and
to that place, whereunto I intend my journey. And thou (my discreet Host) who
stay'st looking for me, since thou do so well understand and know the
miseries, that he suffers and indures, who (like my self) goes traveling
abroad to see the world; do not look scornefully upon me, when thou shall
meet with me in thine own Country, and though I come to thy Gate like a
Rogue, poor and pennilesse, dis-fauoured by fortune, and forsaken of my
friends, yet do thou vouchsafe me a cheerful countenance, and give me that
kind entertainment, which thou owe unto thine own worth. For my errand is
only to thee, thee only do I seek after, and for thy sake have I undergone
this journey, not for to put thee to any charge; nor with purpose to oblige
thee to more then thy good will and affection, which thou naturally owe unto
him, who offers thee his love: Which if I shall receive from thee, I shall rest
fully satisfied, and remain besides, in requital of thy good will, indebted
unto thee in an infinite number of thanks.

But if they which take pleasure in hearing me talk, if they shall likewise be
desirous to see me, let them beware, that do not befall them, which is wont to
happen to those that are ouer-curious, who watch and listen, to hear what is
said of them; Which kind of men do always Male audire, hear no great good
spoken of them. For with the finest gold, is the bitterest Proverb. Con oro
fino, se cubre la pildora.
Pill covered. And oftentimes, that moves some to laughter, which indeed
ought to draw tears from their eyes.

Besides, if any man shall long to know the life that I lead, and the place
where I live, he shall therein bewray his own needless curiosity, and give
me just cause to suspect the vniustnesse of his intent, and the little good
love that he bears me.

Let him first apply himself to consider my state and condition, and the great
misery, whereunto my disorder brought me. Let such another as I am, be set
before him, or let his own imagination represent it unto him, and then shall
he presently be able to go discoursing with himself, what passe-time may be
made with him, who does pass his time (being a Prisoner and laden with Irons)
with a Renegador, or some ruffianly blaspheming officer, that looks to the sure
chaining of the slaves in the Galleys; unless happily he will take pleasure in
my miseries, and make himself merry with them, as some do with the Bull that
is brought in the Marketplace to be bayted, whose Darts sticking in his
sides, whose strokes and wounds glad the beholders; though I for my part, hold
it an inhumane act. And if thou shall twit me in the teeth, and tell me, that
either I cause nauseousnesse in this my Discourse, or that I fell it unto thee
at too dear a rate, seeking forsooth to be entreated, or that I strain too
much courtsie, or that I am a little too coy, and too nice with you, making my
self more dainty then needs, or that by my indearings and flatteries, I
should commend it for good unto thee; it would grieve me, that thou should
have that conceit of me.

For albeit it be wellknowne, that I always served my Lord Ambassador as a
merry companion, and to make his Lordship laugh at my pleasant and witty
conceits; for I could then make him sport, when I knew not so much as I do
now; and now that I know more, I can not do it. For it is a thing that costs a
man dear, and the times are not still alike.

But that thou may well understand what I say, and know what my jests and
merriments were then, and what now shall be thought necessary in that kind,
hearken, I beseech you, with attention to that, which I shall deliver unto you
in this ensuing Chapter.

CHAP. II.
Guzman de Alfarache tells what place he served in, in the house of his Lord
Ambassador: And that Fools and Iesters, are both fit and profitable for
Princes: falling into a description of their conditions and qualities.

FRom the great power, and little virtue now a-dayes in men, it so comes to
pass, that faithful servants are not so Why great men respect more a pleasant
co^ited fellow, then a faithful and painful servant?
much rewarded for their good services, and personal paines-taking, as for the
sweet words, flowing from their vain tongues; For the one, they think to be
due unto them, out of their powerfulness and their greatness, and therefore
are not pleased to accept it in good worth, or thankefully to esteem and
acknowledge it. And for the other, they afford them, (for their wits sake) many
graces and favors; and because they want it themselves, they buy out this
default with their money. It is great pity, that these men should think, that
Virtue should derogate from Nobleness; and by their ill-conceiued opinion of
it, will not (as a thing abhorred by them) use and exercise the same. Why great
men study not virtue.


And for that it is likewise to be purchased and gotten with a great deal of
difficulty, and by hard and sharp means, (things that are contrary to their
sensuality, and quite repugnant to their power and greatness) they are never
without flatterers at their ears and elbowes, smoothing up vice, and stroaking
their evil actions, with a soft and gentle hand.

This is that milk which they have sucked; thief, those swathing-cloathes
wherein they were wrapped; They made it their natural Center by use, and by all
use it continues still with them. Hence arise those superfluous and excessive
expenses, those profuse prodigalities, and those vain magnificencies, which
are soon paid, and quickly told out, (when the money is powered forth on the
table) but with a great many sighs and tears, when they see how they have
fooled it away.

It is a lamentable case to see, that a Nobleman should bestow a rich suite of
clothes upon a Fool and common Iester, and scarce give a cast hat to the Why
great Lords favor flatterers.
virtuous to cover his head. But this is a reciprocal kind of giving, a chop
and change, that runs current among them. For they apparel their bodies with
good clothes, and these in requital, cloth their minds with toys, and idle
vanities: They throw many favors on those, who softly smooth their humors,
with sweet and pleasing words, such as shall sound handsomely, and have their
cadence and consonancie correspondent to their disposition.

But they buy this their pleasure at too dear a rate, and not unjustly
neither, for that their praise passes through the mouths of such kind of men,
leaving the gate carelessly open, for the better sort to publish their vanities;
they falsely conceiving, that that shall redound greatly to their honor and
praise, which in truth and in very deed they ought to esteem as a reproach and
shame unto them. Yet will I not therefore say; that great Princes should not
have their Pastimes; it is fit, that they should have their entertainments and
recreations; but withal, in their due place and season: For all things have
their time and their reward.

A witty lester is sometimes as necessary, and as useful as a wise
Counselor. Fools and Iesters, are sometimes necessary. Proverb. When money
is well spent.
Nor do I think it meet, that their hands should be bound from giving,
gratifying, and favoring of them; For money, (as I said before) Nunca se goza,
si no quando se gasta. We never enjoy it, but when we spend it. And it is never
said to be spent, when it is well and wisely bestowed. For I my self (in
punishment of my sins) have had experience of the one and the other; and can
make this good unto you out of mine own proper actions, the smart whereof I
have since soundly felt. For, at that time as I served my Lord Ambassador (as
you have formerly understood) I was his Favorite, and as it were the apple of
his eye; And I can assure thee, that any other corporal A Iester, a painful
kind of Trader.
labor would have been of less trouble unto me, and not have lain half so
heavily upon my shoulders: For to utter pleasant conceits, witty jests, and to
give a frumpe, or a flout with a grace, that it may take handsomely, there must
many things concur and iumpe well one with another.

Hereunto will be required a particular gift of nature, which shall give credit
and grace thereunto, with a joint coniuncture in the carriage of the
countenance, shape, and motion of the body and eyes; So that the one may help
the other, and every one by it self, have it is particular grace, that meeting
all together, they may move the more.

For one selfsame thing may be delivered by two different persons; The one
after such a manner, that he will make thee vnbutton The Spanish phrase is,
Qui-^tar el calcado, y desnudar la camisa.
thy doublet, and be ready to burst with laughing. The other, with that ill
grace, that thou will think the door too far off, and too narrow to get out
quickly, and be gone. And let such a one strive all that he can, to give his
iestes that life, and that grace, that is fit and necessary for them, yet it is
not possible (if they do not well become him, and come cleanely and nimbly
from him) that he should hit the mark he aims at.

There will likewise be required a continual reading, to know how, and
Necessary things for a Iester.
when; and from what he is to form his Conceits. He has likewise need of a
strong and able memory, for the keeping in mind of all those accidents that
have, and do daily happen abroad in the world, and the knowledge of all sorts
of persons, that he may know how to apply and accommodate that which is to be
said, with that, of whom it shall be said.

He must take a great deal of care in the inquiry of those things, that are
most worthy the reproving of other men's lives, and most of all, in those that
are most noble. For, neither making of faces, freeness of tongue, gestures of
the body, life and quickness of the eye, sundry sorts of Matachines, and
mimicke actions, nor all the skill and wit in the world shall be auaylable to
move the mind of one that is vain, if they be not seazoned with the Pepper
and Salt of Murmuration.

That little touch of tartness, that corn of Salt, that drop of Vinegar, is
Tart jests take best.
that which gives a good relish, and a pleasant farewell to all the rest, be
it never so simple, never so unsavory. For what is otherwise, is accounted but
a dull Picture, a course piece of work, and the plain artifice of a poor wit.

It will also much concern him, to consider the opportunity, and the time,
Jests must not be unseasonable.
when, and wherein he is to break his jests. For, being delivered out of
season, and not to the purpose, they utterly lose their grace. For men will not
always be willing to hear them, neither are they always, and at all times to
be vented; nor they themselves always able to broach them. Ask but this
question of him that has the strongest and ablest wit amongst them; Take the
best Iester of them all upon the sudden, and put him to exercise his ierkes of
wit, and to play his pleasant prankes, and you shall find him frozen, and not
able to open his mouth.

This befell Sisneros, (a most famous Comedian) talking with Mancanos,
Sisneros, and Mancanos, Two famous fellows for their quick wits.
(who was no less famous then himself, and both of Toledo) being a pair of
wits, not to be paralel'd in their time; to whom Sisneros said; Thou see,
Mancanos, that all the world does take us for two of the pleasantest and
happiest wits that this present Age affords.

Tell me, do thou think, that upon this same that goes of us, the King our
Master will cause us to be sent for, and to come before him? But say it should
so fall out: then let you and I come in together* and when we have both done
him that due reverence that becomes us, if we shall afterward stand solemnly
before him (having sent for us upon the opinion of out wits) it is a thousand
to one, that the first question that he will ask us, will be this; Are you
Man^os and Cisheros? Then you shall make answer and say, Yea and it like your
Majesty, for I will not speak a word. Then will he (as it is very likely)
say again unto us; Come, let us hear some pleasant conceits come from you.

Now, I would feign know of thee, what we should do in this case, and what
answer we shall make him? Mancanos told him; Brother Cisneros, when it comes
to that, (which God forbid) there is no other to be made, but this; That they
are not yet fryde. So that, neither to all, nor of all, nor at all times are
they to be spoken, and when they are to be in request, they are not worth a
fig, nor the least hair of thy head, unless they be nipping ones, and dipped
in the sauce of Murmiration. And I held this to be one of my greatest
unhappiness, that like a setting dog, I was driven to wind out other men's
weaknesses.

But because this was the fifth element, without the which those other A (...)
must apply himself to please others.
four cannot well subsist: and that repugnancie and contrariety does conserve
them; I was continually careful in seeking out that, which to that office
which I now professed, was necessarily required, that I might still go getting
of ground, and accommodate other men's tastes to mine own. For the better and
more essential part is, to win the good will of those that hear him, that
they may the more willingly commend that, which by him is either said, or done.
So that, those indowments which Nature had deny'de me, I was forced to make
good by tricks and devices, assuming to my self illicit license of language,
and using prejudicial darings and boldness, which were much helped by a
particular kind of viuacitie, liveliness, and quickness both of wit and
spirit that I had in me, having (God he knows) no learning at all. For then
I had no more knowledge but of a few languages, which I had learned in my Lord
Cardinals house; and those too were as yet but raw in me, in regard of my
green years.

Consider therefore I pray' with me (which you may easily gather out of that I
have told you) what I might have in me, and what was wanting unto me, being not
left to mine own liberty, and living in necessity.

In those my younger days, and in that Springtime (as I may so term it) of
my flourishing years, all went currantly with me; all that I did, became me
well, and to all did I fit and apply my self*

For these, and other the like things annexed thereunto, I was always Guzman,
the (...) man with his Master.
well clad, much made of, I was the Favorite, the familiar friend, the Master
of my Master, as also of all those that were interessed in his friendship.

I was the principal door, whereby they entered into his grace and favor, and
only I the Lord of his Will. I kept the golden key of his secrets. He had
sold his liberty unto me, and I was bound to look well unto it, and to take
care thereof, not only out of that, but even for charities sake, and the
respect I owe to the Law of Nature, as also for the particular love, that he
bare to me, and I to him. For he was not ignorant, but had made often trial
of my secrecy, and with what great sufferance I did ever silence those
things that he committed to my bosom; which I would none should unlock but
himself, who only had that key, to open and shut at his pleasure.

It comes now into my mind, and so lively represents it self to my thoughts,
that me thinks I was then like to a trumpe Card, which every (...), when, and
how he list; or as a common pack-Saddle, that serves for all Horses* All did
make use of me, though after a di^ers and different fashion; some, of my
actions, for their own proper interest; and others, of my words, for their
pleasure and delight; only my Master drew in the same yoke with me, both in
words, and deeds.

I have taken occasion to speak thus much, that men may not conceive this
opinion of me, that I go about to tax those Princes, that keep Fools and
Iesters in their Palaces, for their intertainment, and pleasure.

Nor shall it be amiss that they intertaine them in their houses, not so much
for sport and pastime, as by that conduit-pipe, to draw something Why Iesters
are to be permitted in Princes Courts.
to their knowledge, which would not so well and so cleanely be conuayed
otherwise unto their ears. And such occasions often offer themselves, whereof
these kind of men may make very good use, by aduising, counselling, and
revealing grave and weighty matters, under the color of foolery, which wiser
men dare not adventure to utter in earnest.

There are some witty discreet Iesters, which speak Sentences, and are able so
soundly to deliver their opinions, that their Masters will not stoop to ask
advice of any of his other servants, although it might much concern them, and
were great Statists, and very well able to give counsel. Nor Why Princes
refuse the advice of their Counselors.
indeed will they consent, that they of all other, should give them counsel,
that they may not to their inferiors confess their ignorance, or to seem to
understand less then they. For even in this, they would feign show themselves
to be Gods.

And such kind of servants as these, are those Parrats, which Jupiter desired
to have shut up in a Cage; Nor is this mischief of a day old, or was borne
but yesterday, that great Persons should scorn and contemn the counsels of
wise, understanding, and well qualified men. So great in these men is their
pride, and ambition, that they seek to aggregate and draw all things unto
themselves, making themselves Masters and absolute Lords, both of our
spiritual, and temporal; good, and bad, without controulement. Insomuch that
they think with themselves, that by their only breath, they give grace unto
others, and not doing them any good in the world, they look to be praised and
extolled, as if they were the only men, of whom they did hold their life,
their honor, their wealth, and also their understanding, which is the utmost
blasphemy, whereunto in this case their folly can reach.

There is also another great inconvenience, which is this; That as in a
chapel of Miracles, we must ha^g up* to sooth their vanity, the spoils,
and Trophies of our miseries. For if we recover our lamenesse, and be once
able to go, we must offer up our Crutches unto them, whereof we made use,
when we were be-nummed, and oppressed with poverty.

If we escape any dangerous sickness, or mischance, we must sacrifice unto
them that winding sheet, which fortune had cut out for us, burn Tapers, and
set up Images of Wax, declaring to the world, that this miracle was wrought by
them, and must hang up those chains in the Temple, wherewith we came forth
from out the captivity of our miseries, and were now brought home, and landed
in a safe Haven.

But this were not altogether so much to be blamed, if these things did only
occur upon virtuous occasions, and that they had truly done these men good.

For there is a kind of thankfulness, due to every good turn that is done A
good (...) requires thankfulness.
us. And then we make it known that we have received a benefit, when rendering
thanks unto God, we do likewise publish the virtues of those men, that did
do these good deeds: because with an ardent zeal, and seruent affection, they
did use their best industry, employed their persons, spent their friends, took
hold of all occasions, let slip no time, and therein wasted and consumed their
money. So that things being thus fairly carried, those that are benefited by
them, shall vvorthily deserve much blame and reprehension, if they shall not
render them all fitting and convenient thanks. But they fall as short of these
good things, as they do excel in all filthy and beastly vices; wherein they
strive to exceed, and be counted the only men: A short Tale of a Nobleman;
that was much given to Lying.


As was to be seen in a certain Nobleman, that was exceedingly given to
Lying, and lash out so unreasonably in that kind, as no man could outstrip
him, who one day talking in conversation with diverse other Gentlemen of
quality, told them that he had killed a Stagge, bearing so many branches or
antlets on his head, that it did plainly appear to be a Lie, though he
carried it very handsomely. They all admired it, they said; (but not gaine-said
it) that it was one of the strangest things, that ever was seen, or heard of.

This liked the Nobleman well; But whilst he and the rest were thus wondering
at it; Why (quoth an ancient Gentleman, a near kinsman of his) that was there
then in company, (after a pretty kind of fashion bringing it forth;) does your
Lordship and these Gentlemen make such a vvonder at this? This is nothing, my
Lord; For, within these few days I my self did kill one in the same Forest,
that had two more then this that you talk of.

When he heard him say so, the Nobleman blessed himself, saying; It is not
possible: and looking angerly upon him, (scorning as it should seem to be
out-lyde) said unto him; Sir, speak no more of this, tell it no farther, for
it is such a thing, as was never yet seen, nor will I for my part ever believe
it, though I hold it a courtesy so to do.

The Gentleman, with a stern countenance, and undaunted courage, (his Age and
Alliance heartening him on) in a discomposed kind of voice, boldly brake
forth, and told him; Zwounds (my Lord) me thinks your Lordship should content
your self, that you have The Spanish word is, Sesenta quentos. Now un quento,
is diez vezez cien mil. But that is not likely, he had so much: and therefore
we set it 60000. Couar^uuias verb. Contar.
sixty thousand crowns a year coming in more then I, without seeking to
outstrip me in Lying, as you do in Living. Let me (I pray) though I am a
poor man) lie as I list: I beg nothing of you, nor any man else; nor do I
rob any man either of his wealth, or his honor.

There are likewise a certain kind of witty-conceited fellows, that are
naturally simple and ignorant; from whose mouth, oftentimes, drop mystical
sayings, and worthy the consideration, which God (it seems) permits them to
bolt forth now and then, making them also to keep in such things as are fit to
be silenced: who (though simple as they seem) have an extraordinary grace in
the delivering of them. Which happiness lighted upon one, that was a simple
ignorant fellow from his cradle; in whom, one of the greatest Princes in
Christendom took much pleasure, who for some secret An answer of a sample
Fool, to a great Prince.
causes, best known to himself, had discarded one of his grauest, and
chiefest Ministers; And this simple fellow, coming one day into his presence,
(which was shortly after the other was dismissed the Court) he was no sooner
entered in, but the King asked him: What news in Court? He told him, That his
Majesty had done very ill, in putting N. D. away: And that it was without any
reason, or justice in the world.

The King imagined, (that cause having been justified by many other of his
Ministers) that this had proceeded simply out of his own mouth, and told him,
Thou speak thus for him, because perhaps he was thy friend, not that thou
have heard any man else say so besides.

The Fool replied. My friend? In faith thou lie. Thou art more my friend then
he: I say nothing, but what all men say. The King was offended, that any should
dare to question his actions, or to examine his breast. And being desirous to
know, if any man of worth had presumed so far to trench upon what he had
done. He replyde and said; Since thou professest that so many have said it, and
that thou art my friend, name one of those unto me, of whom thou have heard
this complaint.

The Fool paused upon the matter. And when the King thought that he had been
calling to memory, whom he should name unto him, he angerly made answer; The
blessed Trinity told it me. Now see which of these three persons thou dare
apprehend and punish. The King thereupon thought that it was a business of
heaven, and so forbore to speak any more of it.

There are another kind of pleasant Companions, which are good for nothing
else but to dance, to play upon Instruments, to sing, to murmr, to blaspheme,
to swagger, to lie, and to devour victuals, good drinkers, Buenos beuedores, y
malos viuidores. The vanity of some great Men in rewarding Fools and Iesters
and bad livers. And of these, some are only good at one of these qualities;
other some at all. Wherein some great ones take such delight, that they shall
have what they will of them, doing them many extraordinary graces and favors,
which is a most grievous sin.

To these, (and only for these Iigges) they give Jewels of great value, rich
suits of clothes, and hand-fuls of gold; which is more then they will do for
a wise, virtuous, and honest servant, which shall treat with them of the
ordering of their Estates and Persons, illustrating their names, and honoring
their house with glorious Titles. But rather when it so falls out* that these
come unto them about matters of importance, and which nearly concern them,
they reject them, and will not be advised by them.

Your Presidents, Governors, Counselors, and every other Officer Why
Counselors of State speak not their minds truly to their Masters.
in Court, or that have ought to do in the Palace, being greedy of honor, and
blinded with passion, if they be called to speak their opinion, they often
say that in public, which their own private opinion approues not, though it
be never so good; because they conceive that in so doing, they shall conform
theirs, to that of their Lord and Master, and so mannerly seem to run along
in the pleasing of his humor; As also, for that it would grieve them to the
very heart, that another should get the start of them, in gaining their Princes
grace and favor from them. So that many are not admitted Plain speaking
speedes not always best.
thereunto, for that they had not this trumpe in their hand, and would not play
the like tricks, these getting more by their foul, then they by their fair
play. By reason whereof, many things remain without remedy and redress; and
great businesses oftentimes overthrown.

And if consultation shall be had of such things, whereof great profit may
redound to themselves or to the State, they will tell the Author thereof coldly
and dryly, because they will neither thank him, nor reward him; We Good
labors ill requi^ed.
knew this before; but there are a thousand inconveniences in it.

But cursed be those Counselors, who because they were not the first in
delivering that sound opinion in such a business, blame the Author thereof,
and carried away with the wind of their vanity, and greediness of gain,
send him away empty: but using them first as Apothecaries do their Simples;
who first distill or pund them in a Mortar, and when they have squeezed all the
juice, and wrung the substance out of them, throw out the cake on the
dunghill. They will first inform themselves thoroughly of the business, the best
that they can; and when they find they are well and fully informed, they take
it to themselves, casting from them the true Author thereof; and that good
counsel of his, they sell for their own; and this they do cu^ priuilegio.

Some there are, that are like unto those glasses or other vessels, that have
Shallow (...) neither good for them^es nor others.
great bellies and little mouths, they understand things amiss, and fill
their stomach with all that they hear, and whatsoever is said unto them: But
although mentell, and power into them never so much, and though they be as full
as they can hold; yet because they know not how to conceive things well, they
cause others to apprehend as little. And for this reason their businesses
miscarry, and take not so happily as they should; for they can not be so well
informed of that they treated upon, as those that were the proper Authors
thereof, and had beaten their brains about it many days and nights, breaking
their sleeps, and losing many a meal, for the better examining of all the
contrary objections, and for the advancing of their pretended profitable ends.
Much good may it do them, let them go beyond me this way and spare not; for I
would be loath in the end to rent such kind of gettings, or to farm them out
of their hands.

My Master took pleasure in hearing me, and liked me for something else For
what services the Ambassador made much of Guzman.
too besides my talk. For like a good Gardener, he did gather those flowers
together, which seemed fittest unto him for the making up of his Nose-gay,
picking out the best and the choysest for his particular use, and the rest
(which were but as it were the riffe-raffe and refuse flowers,) he reserved
only for entertainment.

He treated with me of that in private, which others did not stick to speak in
public. And these his secrets he did not only communicate to me alone; The
Ambassadors noble disposition.
but when he desired to know any thing, and to attain to the true
understanding of businesses, that he might not err, he would consult with men
of wit, and those that had the best abilities, he would make very much of them,
favor and honor them; and if they were poor and needy, he would supply their
wants as well as he could, and more particularly in those things whereof he
knew they stood most in need. And this he fastened upon them in that wise and
discreet manner, that it should not seem to be bestowed upon them by the way
of Alms, leaving them thereby well contented, fully satisfied, and above all,
exceeding thankful: It was his fashion, to have two or three of these usually
at his table, where were propounded grave politic questions, and businesses
of State; and especially touching those things, which did press and import him
most, and nearest concerned his own particular ends. By this means, without
opening and discovering of himself, he received their opinions, and reaped
the chiefest fruits that their wits could afford him.

The like course he took with the Officers in Court, particular Gentlemen, and
some Citizens of the best esteem in Rome; with whom he holding His course to
come to know what (...) done (...), and in Court.
friendship, came to know the wrongs they received, the remedies to be applied,
and how and which way they stood affected. And then afterward having a good
judgment of his own, he did so dispose of things, as might make most for his
advantage, and the King his Masters service; so that he did seldom err or
fail in those things that he undertook. He was very discreet, of a settled
and well composed behavior, virtuous, courteous, well studied, and a great
lover of those that had in them such commendable parts of learning as were
worthy the recommendation. He was endued with all those good qualities, which
were to be required in a person of his place and employment; he was like a
goodly room, furnished with all those rich ornaments which might set it forth,
and make it appear fair and beautiful in the eyes of the beholders, but in
the midst thereof, even in the very best part of all the room, there was a The
Spanish Refran. Estaua sembrado y nacido un pero. He had one ill quality,
which did drown all the rest. I take that to be (...) sense, though I have not
elsewhere met with the (...) of this (...) of (...).
choake-Peare sown and grown ^p, which did much blemish it.

This Apple was our general ruin; this Pear the perdition of every
particular. He was an Enamorado; one that was over head and ears in love. F^
^ere is no (...) so found, that has not some corruption; nor no body so free,
that has not some one infirmity or other. And his was, that he did but love
too well; yea, even to excess. But in a matter of this nature, let every man
judge, as shall seem best to his own liking. Howbeit, many wise men have
said, that a man can not be absolutely perfect, unless he have once in his
lifetime been in love.

And of this opinion, it seems, was that pleasant-conceited Country fellow,
that was the common Crier in his Parish, who having often cried an A ta^ of a
Crier.
Ass, that another Country fellow had lost, and could by no means hear any
news of him, (for it should seem some Gypsies had stolen him, who that he
might not be known again, had put new marks and colors upon him) did
earnestly entreat him, that he would do him the kindness to cry him once
more upon the Sunday following, after high Mass was ended; and if he should
chance to hear any tidings of his Ass, he would for his labor give him a
little young fat Pig that he had at home.

The knave Crier greedy of the Pig, did as he had requested him. And all the
people being met together in the Market place, he stood in the midst thereof,
and cried out with a loud voice; To all manner of people, that are dwellers in
this Town, or borderers thereabout, be it known, that if there be any man or
woman, that has never yet been in love, let them come in, and tell their
name, and they shall have a fine young Pig for their labor. And God save the
King.

There was placed right against the same, leaning himself against the Wall of
the Council house, a lubberly-Lad of some two and twenty years of age, with
long shagge hair, a russet Cassocke on his back, welted with the same does,
open about the shoulders, and close before, Breeches of white cottond Bays,
gathered and playted beneath at the knees, a Shirt with a band thereunto, so
hard quilted throughout the stock, that a Turkish bow with a very sharp
Arrow, was not able to pierce it, a poor threadbare Cloak, a pair of high
shoes of Neats-leather, knit together with two strings of twisted Hemp, and
bare-legged, who coming in all haste to the Crier in his Clownish kind of
language, said unto him; Brother Sanz, give me the Pig: for by these ten bones
I vow unto you, that I was never yet in love, never had my head puzzled with it,
nor ever paid any Tole to that Mill.

Then the Crier calling the Owner of the beast in all haste, and pointing to
this Chop-loch with his finger, said unto him, Anton Berrocal, give me my Pig,
and take you here your Ass.

But that this may be proved, and that truly by some President of these present
times wherein we live: There was in Salamanca a principal Doctor of the
Another tale of a Doctor of Salamanca.
Chair, one of the famousest and grauest Advocates in all that University;
that often visited (for his entertainment) a certain Gentlewoman, that had
professed her self a Nun, very fair she was, well descended, and wonderful
discreet. And he being enforced to absent himself from thence for some few
days, he went his way without taking his leave of her, thinking that he had
now attained to the perfection of his love, and that there was no need of these
finenesses, and niceties between them.

Afterward, when he was returned from his journey, he went (as he was wont)
to visit her. But when he saw, that she would not admit of his Visit, he
became very pensive and sad there-vpon; because he could not imagine what
should be the cause of this sudden strangeness, having always heretofore
showed her self very kind and loving unto him. But when he came (by some
diligences, that he had used) to know the reason of it, he was vvonderfull well
contented therewith, it seeming unto him, that this in some sort was rather a
kind of grace and favor of hers, the^ otherwise.

Well, he sent unto her to excuse himself, earnestly entreating her, that he
might be so much beholding unto her, as to see her, using therein the mean^ of
such Ladies and Gentlewomen as were friends to them both.

At last (through much importunity) fore against her will, she came forth to
receive his Visit, but with that anger and disdain, that she could not
contain her self, but must needs show it: for the very first words that she
let fly at him, were these:

Base, and ill-nurtur'd as thou art; for such base thoughts, argue no less
then baseness of blood; which is confirmed by thy vngentlemanly proceeding;
whereof, to thy shame thou have made too open show. For having thy being, as it
were from me, and for my sake, and having come thereby unto that height,
wherein now thou art, forgetting all the good I have done thee, and all the
charge that I have been at to qualify thee, and put thee forward in the
world, thou have lost all that due respect and thankfulness, which I deserved
at thy hands; but since the fault was mine in raising thee, it is no marvel,
that mine should be the punishment.

To these she added many other more sharp and bitter words: so that the poor
Gentleman being dashed quite out of countenance, because many were there present
when she used him thus coursely, and gave him such a sound rattling; incensed
with the excess of this her rigor, he made her this short and cutted reply:

Gentlewoman, touching this complaint of yours, be it with, or without any just
cause, I will not stand to dispute it; And for your accusing of my vn-mannerly
proceeding, let that likewise pass; For, Cada vno, siente como ama. Every man
best knows, how, and how much he loves. And I acknowledge, that all this
arises from the many and great favors, that you have been pleased to confer
upon me.

But whereas you touch me in my reputation, (being forced thereunto by you,)
it is fit and necessary that therein I should satisfy those that are here
present, I must be so bold with you as to tell you plainly; That since God
has been pleased to raise me to that I am, I come not thereto either by
corruption, or favor, but by mine own great pains, and continual studies,
have I procured my preferment. She then interrupting him, and not suffering him
to go on, returned him, but with a great deal of choler, this quick answer:

Thou lie like a Villain. Thou rise by thy learning? Thou had not come to
that great knowledge that thou have, nor had ever had so much wit, as to
learn to mend so much as an old shoo, if I had not put spirit into thee,
quickened thy wit, and perfected thy understanding, by giving thee leave to make
love unto me. This whetstone put an edge upon thy dull sconce; and but for
this, thou might have sunk, and never been able to lift up thy head.

By this then we may see, how much it may import a man to love; and Touching
(...).
that it is not so great a fault as some would make it. Mistake me not; I
mean, when the ends are good, and honest.

But in my Master it was taken in the worfer part; for his ends did exceed and
pass their bounds; and the blame of all that ill was laid upon me; every man
conceiving, that I was the cause thereof: Complaining, that since I came to
serve him, I had opened his scull, and put into his head nothing but
Hawkes-bels and Rattles: All that he took delight in, were merry tales, idle
jests, and the like vanities: which till then, he had never formerly been given
unto.

It might very well be, that with my heat I might cause some buds or little
sprigs to sprout forth. But for to speak the truth (seeing the Parties are not
here to be examined, and I am the man whom they thus accuse) I assure you,
that others had the handling of him before, that wrought him this harm.

For when I entered into his service, and that he ca^e to put his cure into my
hands, the Physicians despayred of his recovery, and had given him quite over,
and would have no more to do with him; I will not deny, but that I might
minister much thereof unto him; for by reason I was in such favor with him, I
had likewise the freedom to use many odd foolish jests, and prejudicial
liberties of speech.

I was familiarly acquainted with all Rome, I had as free access into every
house, as into our own; excusing my pretensions, that I only repaired to
Guzmans course of life in Rome.
such and such places, to give lessons to some to sing to the Gitterne, and
teach other some to dance.

I did intertaine your young Wenches in good conversation with merry and
pleasant jests; and your widows, with whispering tales in their ears; and
entering into a league of friendship with your married men, I got likewise the
good will of their Wives, to whom they would bring me to laugh and make sport,
wherewith they were well pleased, for the good contentment they took in my
harmless mirth.

And all this I did, to the end, that from this good ground, my Master might
take occasion to declare and open himself more freely to me. For I relating
unto him, what, and how things passed abroad, it was an easy matter for me to
kindle with the breath of my words, the fire that was in his heart, by blowing
first away the ashes from off those coals, that were already thoroughly tinded,
alive, and very quick within him. He was in a good disposition thereunto, and
therefore any the least occasion would serve the turn. He was a kind of house
made all of thatch, so that a little spark was enough to raise a great flame,
having such combustible stuff to work upon, being still affectioned to that,
which himself had most mind to, without having respect to that discreet
carriage, which he formerly observed in all his actions.

I do ingeniously confess, that I was an instrument of his excesses and
flyings out, and that in regard of my being seen to walk here and there
Guzman an i^ instrument to his Masters desires.
to and fro, to enter into this house, and to come out of that, many houses,
and women of good quality, were spotted and branded with infamy.

But let us here leave my Master as a man, to whom albeit these things did
cause him to be noted, and to have his good name called in question, yet was
not he so much to be blamed, as those who did know well enough, what manner of
fellow I was.

I would many times demand of them, what honor or profit I did reap, by being
interessed in these businesses? Why should Widows take delight in hearing of
tales, and pleasant jests? Why Parents bring such straggling wanderers home to
their Daughters? Or why Husbands make their Wives merry with such dangerous
intertainments? What other good can be expected from your neat Pages (such as I
then was) who do scarce touch the ground that they tread on? What do your
Princes witty Iesters, and your Pages and Dwar^ of (...) use.
Great men's Dwarfes serve for, but to talk with Ladies and Gentle-women, and
to indeare unto them their Masters love? who again inquire of them, what good
tables they keep, how gallantly they live, how much they spend, what in Amber,
and other odours and sweet perfumes, what in the pomp of apparel, and what in
Music that they daily bestow upon their friends and Mistresses?

Why do they talk and give ear to such things, whereby they afterward give
occasion to others to open their mouths, and to utter with their tongues all
that they either know or imagine? Do not they perceive, that i^ so doing, they
build but their own prison, and weaue that vvinding sheet, wherein their good
names must be winded and b^yed? What b^fit can the content they take in
hearkening to merry (...) bring them? which (...) to no other end in the world,
but to give way unto them, that they may report to their Masters, what they
take most pleasure in, besides the questioning of their good name amongst their
neighbors? Let these a Gods name make themselves merry with the reward of
their errors; and if they be lovers of jests, it is no marvel if they be
iested withal. They desire a life to have music play at their windows,
whilst others in the mean while are making Ballads of them, to sing forth
their shame at every man's door.

A Widow, that respects her honor, and will have a care of her credit, A
lesson to Widows.
must keep her door shut, her daughter chamber'd up, her casement close, and
above all, not suffering her to have her own will, and to do what she list;
that she be visited but seldom, but be always occupied; for, of idleness,
(a) grows wantonness. And it stands with good reason, Que la madre Proverb.
Del ocio nace el negocio.
holgazana, saque hija cortesana: That a light mother, should breed a loose
daughter. And if she love to have her train played withal, that her daughter
will prove a Wagge-tayle. And if she hap to be married, she will turn ill
huswife, because she has been ill taught.

By this you may see, what obligations the Parents have to look well unto
their Children: Let them take away all occasions of scandal; Let them A lesson
to Parents.
weigh with themselves, what (upon the like occasions) they murmr and whisper
of others. And then let them consider, how much better it were, that their
Wives, Sisters, and Daughters, should rather learn to handle their Needle,
then to play on the Ghitterne; to govern well, rather then to dance well: For
hence it comes to pass, that many women, not knowing how to look so well as
they should, into the corners of their own houses, busy themselves, in
working strange alterations in those of others.

Speak I truth, or no? I know, ye will tell me that I do. For such truths as
these are not to be treated, or mentioned, but upon necessity, and urgent
occasion.

I confess it to be so, and for my part, I approve it. But because that which
I have said, touches none of those that hear me; it is therefore well said,
to the end that when it shall be needful, and men see their time, they may be
the better able to give good counsel unto others, when they see them step out
of the way, and go awry.

Maloes lo malo, que nunca puede ser bueno. Ill is that ill, that never can be
Proverb.
good. It was not good, I confess, that I should be a Bawd to my Master, But
every man would feign live. And this Office I performed by those tricks Guzman,
his Masters Bawd.
and devices I told you of before, taking occasion by my familiar and general
acquaintance in Rome, to go as boldly into every man's house, as I would into
mine own, excusing this liberty of mine, by those pretensions I made, of
teaching some to play upon Instruments, and some to dance; intertaining in the
mean while Maidens with merriments; Widows, with old wives tales, and what
was whispered abroad; and entering into amity with married men, good honest
kind Cuckolds.

But I was in some sort to be excused, (if not borne withal) for that my wants
and necessity drove me to do as I did, and opened that door unto me, whereat
I might get forth to seek my living.

But what excuse can they have, who for the light toys of this world, will
venture the loss of their reputation upon earth, and those rich treasures that
are laid up in heaven for those that live well? which two things every man
ought most to esteem, and have ever before his eyes. But what I did herein,
was to wedge my Masters affection unto me, and to work my self into his
favor, both which I came to be possessed of; and not with intent and purpose to
reclaim him from this his weakness, and to persuade him unto better courses,
but rather to spur him on in this wretched race that he ran.

But he that would trust me in such like businesses as these, and communicate
himself unto me in this kind, what could he look or expect from me? I know
there are many men, who think it is a great credit unto them, that they do
nobly, and get a great deal of reputation and esteem, by these their visits,
their ingresses and their egresses, when indeed, it is quite contrary.

For your women that entertain chat with your crack-rope Pages, with your
giddy-headed Poets, that never go without a musk The Spanish word is, Alco^ca
^i. vna costa de acucar refinado con mezcia de poluos cordiales. Alcorcillas,
we call Pastillas de boca. Vid. Couarruuias. Verbo Alcorca.
Comfit in their mouth, or chewing the rind of a Lemmon, with your flat-Capt
Citizens, your country Lads, and the like; some perhaps may hold them
discreet; but I am sure they lose the name of chaste, which as an inestimable
Jewel they ought highly to esteem, being for their labor ever after
accounted fools.

Now the profit that I made by this my occupation, trading with this person,
and with that, with the other and the other, this my conversation being so
general, it was the only means, that kept me from being discovered to be a
Bawd.

But (to say the truth) they might very well have put the implumed Hat upon my
head, which I have seen worn by many others in my days, who did less
deserve it then my self, in token they were Love's Ambassadors, whom he
employed in his chiefest and most secret affairs.

Here, in me, may you see how misfortunes fall to men by inheritance. Hither to
it has been delivered without any disguise or masking, how I led my Master
along, never suffering him to take any rest or quiet; and how he made me
another Adonis, in the neatness and gallantry of my clothes, and delicacie of
Perfumes, for the great care and diligences that I used in these and the like
businesses.

But true and certain it is, that murmurings and whisperings attend such False
murmuration bites, true kills. Proverb.
Actions. And if a good man be now and then bitten, what wonder is it, that a
bad man should be bruised and crushed therewith to pieces? Y que aya sospechas;
donde no faltan hechas; And that there may well be suspicion, where deeds make
confession.

It were a great deal of simplicity and ignorance in me, and other such as I
am, for to seek after any better name, or to go about to make (as they say) a
stone Wall of Proverb. Tapiar, a piedra lodo.
mudde; thinking to stop men's mouths, and to hinder their ill imaginations and
bad conceits of us, when as we our selves give them such evident occasions to
conceive amiss of us.

None can impose, or set any sessing or ratable fine upon men's censures and
Men's censures not to be avoided.
opinions; for that were, Poner puertas al campo; to set up gates to shut in
such a vast circuit, as is Salisburie-Plaine.

Thou can no more limit a man's thoughts, then thou can number the sands of
the Sea. It is not I that can make them to think, or not think as I would
have them; I cannot be master of their thoughts; nor will it boot any one man
to deny that which all men affirm. It will be but trouble without profit, a
needless and endless piece of work; wherein we shall show our selves as
foolish as he was, who went about to lock up the smoke, to make doors to
shut it in, and to keep it close prisoner.

But what shall we now say of our foolish Masters, who persuade themselves,
that this their business passes secretly and safely through our hands? Shall I
deal truly with you? I will. Take it then from me, and I know it to be true,
Que no ay ciencia, que corrija un ena^rade. There is no scourge of Proverb.
wit or learning, that will lash a wanton Lover out of his lust.

For matters of Love, there are no Bartuli, no Aristotle's, no Galens; their
counsels fail them; their wisdoms are too weak; and their Medicines can Love
hardly removed.
do no good upon them. Nor there is not any thing, that does more publish and
manifest this truth, then men's solicitude and care in these things, from the
which none (that are taken therewith) can contain themselves. For with two
Visits of ours, and one intercourse of theirs, or but a passing by their door,
make the little children (those shrill trumpets of truth) to sound forth their
lightness aloud through the streets.

The greatest punishment that lighted then upon me was; that my hayres began to
sprout, and my Chinne to put on a beard, the which the more I shau'd, because I
would not have it perceived, the thicker it came, and grew the faster. And for
that it is a peculiar Office belonging to handsome and witty Pages, to be Uenus
and Cupids chiefest Ministers, the more diligence I used in tricking, adorning,
trimming, and setting my self forth in lafciuious manner, the more occasion I
gave the world thereby to talk and judge of me accordingly. I studied to be
neat and handsome in my clothes, but took no heed how foul the fashion of my
behavior was; and therefore it was no marvel if they threw dirt upon me with
their tongues. In a word, either actiuely or passiuely, every one would bestow
upon me El nombre de las pasquas, and Proverb.
force me to wear their Livery, you know what I mean; And though I told them
they lied like a company of Rogues and Villains as they were, they would
laugh, and hold their peace, giving by this their mystical kind of silence, a
more open way unto the truth. Their taunts against me were true, and struck
deep, but whatsoever I replied upon them, they made but a jest of it; my words
were but as the pecking of strawes, theirs as the piercing of Darts.

There are a kind of considerate and discreet men, which take the sayings of
men, not as the words sound in themselves, but as they are, from whom they
come; regarding more the speaker, then the thing spoken. And this is a great
point of wisdom.

Again on the contrary, there are some (I know not whether I may be so bold to
call them fools or no) who from some dis-fauour of their Mistresses, A c^g
trick to defame in this manner.
form an injury, and as if it either were, or might be so, they will be
revenged of them; and laying some imputation upon their honor, seek to
scandal and defame them, without any reason or cause in the world. I was not
able to stand against so many, nor could my Sword cut out his way through such a
multitude that set upon me: I saw they had reason on their side, and therefore
I was willing to bee-^ush, and to pocket up these wrongs with patience.

And albeit it be an Act of true humility, patiently to suffer reproach; yet
in me it was cowardice, and deie^tion of the mind. For that I held my peace
and said nothing, there was good cause why; because I knew all the speaking in
the world could not help it. It might well have made matters worse, but never
a whit the better. And seeing that I had not one spark of shame in mine own
house, I would not for shame go seek it elsewhere; the fire of my zeal to
good was quite out, there was no recovering of it. And therefore (making a
virtue of necessity) I was forced to pass over all these bobs and ierkes they
had at me, sometimes with a smile, sometimes a jest, and sometimes with both.

In conclusion, howbeit I ought rather to have endured any the greatest hurt
that could come unto me, then submit my self even in the least degree Proverb.
to base gain; yet notwithstanding, I had, like the Melon, Tenia como el melon
la cam^ hecha.
my bed made for me. I saw I could not well be worse thought of then I was
already, and therefore casting aside all thought of amendment, I counted it a
credit unto me, and took rather a pride in it then otherwise, and so making
light of it, and jesting it out, I did set a good face on the matter, when they
said any thing to me, that I might not seem to be dashed out of countenance, or
bound to give them an answer, which would but have made them to vex me the
more, and done my self no good. So that by this they persecuted me the less,
and I past the more quietly along by them. To pass things by with patients.


And why should I take (seeing this did serve my turn, and that I past well
enough with it) any other course with them? Which in these dangerous cases, if
I should have attempted any other way to pacify them, I should never have
been able to do it; and should thereby have but made the fire more to flame,
by seeking to assuage it with Flax and Rozin.

Let him therefore, whosoever will take upon him to set open a shop to Vice,
provide himself of a Tortoyse shell, arm his back with patience, and keep
his ears, and his mouth shut. And let not any man flatter himself, that
having foul conditions, he shall get him a fair report. For, El nombre, sigue
al hombre; As is the man, so is his good name. And as every one deserves, so
shall he be esteemed.

CHAP. III.
Guzman de Alfarache recounteth that which happened unto him with a Captain and
a Doctor at a banquet, which the Ambassador his Lord made.

THere is so thin a Pale put betwixt Deceiving and Lying; and are so near
kin the one to the other, that I Of deceiving and lying.
know not who can tell, or is able to distinguish and difference the one from
the other: for though they are different in name, they are one in identitie,
and of the same paritie in effect, and in essence alike. For there is no Lie
without Deceit, nor no Deceit without a Lie.

He that will lie, does deceive; and he that will deceive; does lie. But
because they are commonly received after a different manner, and for different
purposes, I will take them as they stand in use, and accordingly discourse
thereof.

Deceit then, in respect of Truth, is as Truth, in regard of a Lie: or as the
shadow of a Glass, and that natural form which it represents. It is as
aptly disposed, and is made as facill to effect whatsoever great hurt, as it is
lord and difficult to be found out at the first; for that it is so like unto
good; that representing the very selfsame figure, fashion, motion, and
proportion, it does the easier destroy it. It is a most subtle net, wrought of
the slendrest and smallest threads, in comparison and likeness whereof was
framed that other, which the Poets feign, was made by Uulcane, when he caught
him that cuckol'd him.

It is so imperceptible, and so fine, and thin; that there is not any sight
so clear, any judgment so subtle, nor any discretion of that discerning, nor
any wit of that nimble apprehension, that is able to discover it, nay, scarce
to perceive it.

It is so artificially wrought, that though it be spread out abroad, and laid
forth as plain as may be to our view, yet are we not able to escape it, in
regard we walk on securely, not so much as once dreaming of any fraud or
deceit. And by this means it is so strong, that few or none do break it,
without leaving some sign of the harm that they have taken. And for this
cause, it is justly called Maximum vitae damnum; the greatest hurt that can
happen unto us in this life. For under a tongue of Wax, it carries a heart of
Diamond; it clothes it self with Hayre-cloth, though it never come near the
skin; it keeps a chupping and sucking in of the cheeks, for to make it
seem lean and meager, when its belly is ready to crack with good cheer. And
having store of health to sell to others, it speaks pulingly, and pitifully;
and only that it may seem to be sick, it puts on a sorrowful countenance,
powers out its tears, offers us its bosom, Of all mischiefs, decei^ is the
greatest.
and with open arms, runs to receive us, but as Ioab did Amaza; embrace, to
kill.

And as Birds give the Empire to the Eagle; Beasts, to the Lion; Fishes, to the
Whale; and Serpents, to the Basiliske; so amongst all other mischiefs, there
is none greater or more powerful, then that of Deceit. As an Aspe, it kills us
sleeping; it is that Sirens voice, whose delight (like a Butchers Curre) first
seazeth on the ear, and next, on the throat; its rauishing, is murdering; it
offers a fair assurance of peace, and with a great deal of smoothness,
professes friendship; but neglecting all humane and divine Laws, breaks them
at her pleasure, leaving us with as much wrong, as scorn.

She promises cheerful contentments, and certain hopes, which she never
performs, nor do they ever come to pass, because she goes chopping and
changing them from Fair to Fair, to make her own market. And as a house is
built of many stones; so one deceit is an addition of many other; and all of
them serve for one and the same end. It is the Headsman of all goodness, for
with a seeming kind of sanctity, it makes every man secure, and there is none
that are either aware of it, or fear it. It comes unto us in the habit of a
Hermit, the better to execute its ill intents.

This contagious infirmity is so general, that not only men, but Beasts and
Birds do likewise therein suffer with them. Also the Fishes in the Waters
exercise deceits; and this they do, the better to preserve themselves. Trees
and Plants do deceive, promising pleasant flowers and fruits, which fail us
at their time, passing bravely away with it. Stones, though they be but
stones, and without sense, trouble our sense, with their counterfeit splendor,
and lie, in that they seem to be that they are not. Time, occasions, and our
senses deceive us; and above all, our best and most considerate thoughts. In a
word, all things deceive, and we do all deceive, one of Four manner of ways
of deceiving. The first.
these four manner of ways.

The one is, when one uses a deceit, and goes cunningly away with it, leaving
the other deceived: As it happened to a certain Student of Alcala de Henares;
who, when the Feast of Easter was drawing near, and A Tale of a Scholar of
Alcala.
having nothing vvhere-with to make himself merry against that good Time, he
called to mind a neighbor of his, who had a Court or yard, with great store
of Hens in it, with the which he did himself no good at all.

He was a poor beggarly fellow; and as he was very poor, so was he
extreme covetous; an erranter mizer was there not in all the Country. He fed
them with the bread that was given him of Alms; and a nights he shut them up
in the same lodging where helay.

This Student went plotting with himself, how he might steal them away, but
lighted upon none that did yet like him. For in the day time it was impossible,
and in the night they roosted in the same room where he himself lodged.

At last he bethought himself of feigning a packet of Letters, and to put
there-vpon two Ducats In Spain, they do not pay for the carriage of their
Letters before-band, but p^t so much Port under the Superscription, to be paid
by him that (...) it.
Port, directing it to Madrid to a certain principal Cauallero, and a
Gentleman very well known: And before the break of day, he very secretly laid
it on the threshold before his door, that as soon as he opened it, he might
presently find it. He got him up in the morning, and as soon as he saw it,
not knowing what it was, he took it up.

This Student past that way in the mean while, as it were by chance. Whom this
poor man espying, came unto him, and entreated him to tell him what those
papers were. The Student told him; Marry such (said he) as I would be glad
with all my heart I could light upon the like.

These (quoth he) are Letters directed to Madrid with two Ducats Port upon
them, to a rich Gentleman that resideth there, who shall no sooner receive
them, but will see you truly paid for your pains.

The poor man began to look up, and was so ouer-ioyed therewith, that the
tears did trickle down his cheeks. He thought with himself, that one days
travel was a thing of nothing; especially being that he might perform this
journey by noone; and though he went thither afoot, he might in the evening,
without any trouble, return home in some one Cart or other that was to go for
Alcala. Whereupon, he went and fed his Poultry, shut them up safe, leaving out
such food as he thought sufficient for them, and so hies him away with his
Letters.

The Student that night made a shift, by getting over some back-sides, and
out-Courts, to get into that yard, where the poor man's house was, and heauing
the door off the hindges, he gets me in, taking nothing away thence but the
Hens, leaving no more but one only Cock behind, with a mourning-hood on his
head, and a Mantle of black Bays, so surely sowed on, that they could not
fall off; which done, he withdrew himself homeward to his lodging.

When the poor man was come home to his house the next morning, and saw the
misfortune that had befalne him at home, and that he had bestowed his labor
in vain; for there was no such Gentleman to be found in all Madrid; he, and
his Cock did bitterly bewail this their solitude and widdow-hood, making
lamentable moan each unto other: the good man with his mournful words; the
poor Cock, with his mourning weeds.

Another kind of deceit is: When together with the deceived, the Deceiuer The
second.
is also deceived. As it happened to this Student in this very case. For, he
being not able to effect this business alone by himself, and that he must
needs use the help of some body else, he took unto him one of his Camrades,
whom he acquainted with the business, promising if he would assist him in
this theft, he should share half with him.

This his Companion discovered it to a friend of his; he, to a third; so that
the word past from one to another, till it came to the ears of certain mad
Waggs of Andaluzia; And for they were old Castilians, (and their Opposites for
this cause) they agreed together to strip them of their Hens, by another pretty
device.

They knew the house from whence they were to come, and the streets, through
which they were to pass; They fained themselves to be the Justice, and they
watched till they should return, at the turning of the street: whom they had no
sooner espied, but they issued out This is the fashion, and language of the
Justice in Spain, when they walk the Round.
upon them in form of a Circle, hedging them in on every side, with Lanternes,
Swords and Bucklers, having appointed the foremost man to ask, Who goes there?
What are ye? Stand. Upon this, they verily thinking, that he was one of the
Justices servants, and being loath to be either known or taken with that
badde word of bidding them Stand, they threw down their Hens, and began to
take them to their heels, as hard as they could drive. So that there were not
some vvanting, who did also coozen, and deceive them.

The third kind of deceit is; When it is without prejudice. Neither deceiving
others, together with themselves; nor decei^ed, when they go about The third.
to deceive. And this may be done two manner of ways; Either by Works, orby
Words. Words, by recounting Stories, telling of Tales and Fables, and other
things of intertainment. Works, as by iuggling, sleights of the hand, tricks
on the Cards, and other the like devices, which are done without any harm or
prejudice to any.

The fourth kind is; When he that thinks to deceive, is himself deceived;
that trick that he would put upon another, being put upon himself: The fourth.
As it befell a great Prince of Italy, though some report the same of Caesar:
Who, that he might grace one of the famousest Poets of his time, carried A
pretty passage betwixt the Prince of Italy, and a Poet.
him home to his house, where at first he used him wonderful kindly, made
exceeding much of him, did him many favors, and bestowed many gifts on him, as
long as his humor was pleased with those Poems that he presented unto him.

But this lasted not long, the Princes affection falling off by a little and a
little, till at last the poor Poet was feign to content himself with his bare
lodging, and some short allowance. So that he suffered much want and
necessity; and was grown so poor both in his purse, and his apparel, that
he durst not go abroad for shame, because he had not where-withall to cover
his nakedness.

The Poet weighing and considering this his unhappiness; and seeing himself
shut up as it were in a Cage, and that neither (which is permitted unto
Parrats) the Prince himself, nor any about him, would vouchsafe to hear him
speak, he resolved with himself to rowze up the Princes long sleeping
favor, and waiting an opportunity to do it, understanding such a time, that
he was to go abroad, he attended at a certain place, which he thought
fittest for his purpose and when the Prince drew near, he made toward him,
and kneeling on his knees, when he came at him, he presented him with a Poem
that he had made; which the Prince receiving, he thought by this means to
revive that remembrance of him, which had so long lien dead. He continued in
these kind of diligencies so long, that the Prince being wearied out with
these his importunities, was determined to put some jest or other upon him, to
make him to desist from giving him farther trouble in that kind.

And having himself made a Sonnet, and going out to walk one Evening, when he
saw the Poet was coming toward him, preventing him in the presenting of his
Poem, he drew the Sonnet out of his bosom, and clapped it in the Poets hand; the
Poet understanding the trick, as one that was discreet, feigning to have read
it, highly commending both the Verse, and the Invention, put his hand in his
pocket, and plucked out a (a) Royal of eight which he had there, and gave it to
the Prince, telling him withal; Such a good wit well deserves a reward. I give
you all that I have, had I more, you should have it.

With this the Prince was fast, being caught in the same snare, and paid A
Royal of eight, i^ four shillings English.
with the same trick that he purposed to put upon him. And from that time
forward he favored him, as he had done before.

There are many other kinds of these deceits; and one above the rest, which is
a very dangerous one; which is that of those, who would make us to believe that
for Gospel, when as our own eyes and knowledge do both see, and know the
contrary. Many other dangerous deceits.


A fellow that is basely both bred and borne, and well enough known to be such
a one, will seek by his hawtie carriage and proud looks, to gain Proud
fellows.
unto himself the name of a great man, though (God he knows) he is scarce
worth four Marauedis; giving (by his ill proceeding) occasions to others, to
scoff and laugh at him: And to say, what fellow is this? What was his
beginning? Of what continuance his Ancestors? Whence does he fetch his
Pedigree? What did his Gentilitie or his Office cost him? What trade was his
Father of? and of what occupation his Mother? These men think to deceive
others, and they deceive themselves. For not by this means (that is to say, by
pride) but by humility, affability, and fair behavior, they go by degrees,
throwing in their earth, till they come in time to fill up those ditches, and
to be level and equal with the best.

Others seek to deceive with their fierce looks, thinking thereby to be
Swaggerers.
counted valiant, as if we did not know, that they are the only men, that dare
not meddle with a Mouse; or tread upon a Worm, if he should but offer to
turn tail.

Others with their too much prattle, and quoting of Authors, seek Talking
scholars.
to be held wise men, and learned Clearkes, not considering that many
Stationers have far more in number, who notwithstanding in matter of
knowledge are merely ignorant men. For neither the long Gown, nor the
broad-brim'd Hat, nor the Mule, for all his grave Foot-cloth, shall be
sufficient to cover the disease they are sick of, but at three or four
shakings of the Vrinall, we shall discern those rags, and cloudie streakes
that are in their Urine, and then they will plainly be discovered what they
are.

I have said of some, that they repute themselves wise and learned, because
Stationers.
they have store of books, and that your Stationers have many more then they;
but many of them are worse then these block-headed Doctors, who with a great
deal of pains, and by tradition, understand the Frontispices of books, and
yet notwithstanding, being often therein deceived, they fall headlong into the
pit of ignorance; now would I have thee to tell me which of these two do
deceive most? I shall tell it thee. They are both of one grain, sown and
reaped under one and the same Moon, bread of the same meal whereof most men
do eat, and is their only nourishment.

But out of the number of these, do I except Paulus and Aldus Ma^tius;
Printers.
Henricus, Robertus, and Carolus Stephanus; Adrianus Turnebbius, Franciscus
Sansouinus, and many others like unto them, not only mere Stationers, and
Printers, but learned and famous Scholars, and of great note in the world,
whose works and labors do and shall ever render thereof a perpetual
testimony. There have been diverse other worthy understanding men in this
their profession; who in their lifetime, have published and brought to light
many most noble and excellent Authors; who, if they had not by them been
revived, had been buried for ever in the Churchyard of oblivion. Whereas now
many of them by these men's great pains and industry, are raised from their
graves to immortality.

Others are grown so foolish, (and indeed are accounted no better) who Old men.
being now grown old, decrepit, and unable for any kind of use or exercise,
and this their weakness being notorious and well known to all the world, and
this their rotten building ready to fall, yet are they willing to deceive
themselves, and every body else (if they could) contrary to all truth and
reason, by dying the hairs of their heads and beards, as if any man were so
ignorant, and did not know that there are none of these changeable colored
beards, but at every motion of the Sun, and every cast of the eye they
present a different color, and never a one perfect, much like unto those in
the ^cks of your Doves and Pigeons; for in every hair of these old Cox-combes,
you shall meet with three diverse and sundry colors; white at the root, yellow
in the middle, and black at the point, like unto one of your Parrats feathers.

When women do the like, there is not any one hair of theirs, which has not
it is different color. There was a certain Gentlewoman in the Old women.
world, that shall be namelesse, (which of mine own knowledge, I am able to
affirm) who did use this dying and coloring of her hoary hairs, which one
day I did diligently mark and observe; and believe me (for let me not live if
I lie unto you) some of them seemed green unto me, some blue, some yellow,
some vermilion, and others of diverse other colors; and in some one odd hair,
all these colors did conioyne and meet together. So that seeking thus to
deceive Time, and to dissemble her Age, she discovered her folly, and became a
laughing stock to as many as looked upon her.

That some young folks should use the like deceit, who by inheritance have
been borne with gray hairs, (who like the fruits that grow in the Young
folks.
fields of Placencia, grow ripe before their time) it is no great marvel. Yet
even these too (though better to be borne withal) give occasion of having that
freely spoken of them, which they willingly would avoid, whereby it comes to
pass, that as they increase in years, they decrease in credit.

O thou unfortunate, miserable, and wretched old Age, thou sacred Temple; Old
age, a venerable thing. Old age necessary, yet not regarded.
thou Sanctuary of safety; thou stop to the desperate carreeres of this life;
thou Inn of rest to our weary bones; How is it that thou art so much abhorred
in this life, being that thou art the Haven, which all men desire to attain
unto? How is it that they, who respect thee a far off, when they come nearer
unto thee, stick not to profane thee? How is it, that thou being the vessel
of Prudence, thou art derided as foolish? How is it, that thou that art honor
it self, respect and reverence, art by those that are thy best friends reputed
infamous? How is it, that thou being the Treasury of knowledge, art despised
and contemned? Either there is some great defect in thee, or some evil
disposition in them; whereof the latter is most certain. They come unto thee
(wanting the ballast of grave counsel and sound advice) like a Ship without
sand or gravel in the Keele of her, to keep her steady; through lack whereof
the Barkegoes roullingand tottering to and fro, because their shallow brains
want that due weight and counterpoyse, that should ballace their understanding,
and keep it straight and upright.

To this purpose I will tell you a tale, worthy of long consideration, though
the discourse be short, and feigned for this effect.

When Jove had made the fabric of this Universe, it seeming unto him, A
pretty Tale.
that all was fair and perfectly good, before he created man, he formed all
other living creatures; amongst the which, the Ass being desirous to be the
most remarkable and renowned of all the rest, (which had he not done, he had
not been an Ass) as soon as he had scarce newly opened his eyes, beholding
this glorious and beautiful frame, he was wonderful iocund and merry; began
to Jupiter and the Ass.
leap and to skip from one place to another, and to bray (as they use to do)
aloud (being the first trumpeter, that ever was in the world) till being quite
wearied out, and glad to take his ease, being a little gentler and cooler then
h^ was before, it began to come in his mind; How, from whence, and when he was
an Ass; for that he had not been an Ass from the beginning, nor begotten by
an Ass. Which made him to examine with himself why, and to what end he was
created, and what place should be provided for him, where he might take his
rest; it being a thing proper unto Asses, to take the ends of things into their
confideration, when they are already past all remedy, and (as we say) at the
last cast, when the iollitie of their youth is past, the^ merry days spent and
gone, and their pleasures at an end.

And yet would to God, that some would come to this amendment, and persevere
therein, Tempran^ se recoje, quie^ ta^de se conuierte.
Que temprano se recoje, quien tarde se conuierte. For he recals himself in
time, that returns at last. In this melancholy humor, my honest Ass comes me
to Jupiter, humbly beseeching him, that he would be pleased to reveal unto
him, who he was, and for what end he had created him? Jupiter told him, For
the service of Man, and told him by piece-meale one after another, all those
duties and services belonging to his charge, and what manner of burdens he was
to bear.

Which news was so unpleasing unto him, that upon the very hearing of it,
there suddenly came bruises and gallings upon his back, and hardness of
hoofes, with his head and eyes hanging down to the ground for very grief. And
out of a conceited fear of his future labor, (for evils not yet endured, out
of the noise and rumor that they make, do, at the first nomination of them,
fear us more then when we afterward prove them) he remained in that sad and
melancholy dumpishnesse as we now usually see him, conceiting that to be a most
yerkesome and painful kind of life whereunto he was destinated.

Whereupon he farther entreated of Jupiter, that he would be pleased to tell
him, how long he was to lead this miserable life? Jupiter told him, he was to
continue therein, the full term of thirty years.

The Ass hereupon began to mourn and grieve anew, it seeming unto him, to be
as it were a perpetual and eternal slavery, if it should last so long: And
therefore once more he humbly besought Jupiter, that he would have compassion
of him, and not suffer him for so long a season, to endure so hard a servitude.
And being that he had not yet dis-merited of him, by any fault that he had
committed against him, nor would (if otherwise he could choose,) ever offend
him, that ten years might suffice for his living in this base fashion; all
which time he would faithfully promise unto him, to serve man well and truly,
like an honest Ass, with all meekness and fidelity. And those other twenty,
which were over and above remaining unto him, that he would bestow the
ouer-plus of those years upon some one, that were better able to bear them.

Jupiter being moved with these his humble and earnest entreaties (looking,
poor silly fool, most pitifully,) granted him his request. Whereupon the Ass
was not al-together so sad as he was before.

The Dog, whose nature it is, to wind and sent out things, stood all Jupiter
and the Dog.
this while attentively hearkening to all that had passed betwixt Jupiter and
the Ass. And being desirous likewise to know something concerning his good or
bad fortune; albeit he carried himself herein like a Dog, seeking to nose out
that which was not lawful for him; to wit, the secrets of the gods, which are
only reserved to themselves, (of which nature are future things, and such as
are to fall out hereafter;) yet notwithstanding his error therein was worthy
some excuse, because he had the manners to crave this kindness of Jupiter,
and did not, as some women do, and some of those peradventure that now hear
me, who without God, (but not without the Devil) seek after Witches and
Gypsies, to tell them their fortunes.

But how can they tell thee any good, who themselves are so bad? They Witches
and Gypsies, full of fraud and dec^.
tell them a thousand lies, and fraudulent inventions, and steal from them (be
it good or bad) all that they can finger, leaving them afterward amazed,
ashamed, mocked, and deceived, and laughed at for fools as long as they live.

But to return to our Story that we have in hand; The Dog came to Jupiter,
and besought him, (seeing that he had proceeded with the Ass, his Companion,
so graciously, giving him upon the hearing of his Petition, satisfaction to his
demands) that he would likewise afford him the like favor.

Who made him this answer; that his Office must be to run a hunting, and to
kill Hares, and Conies, but not to touch or eat one bit of them, but The Dogs
office.
with all faithfulness to resign them up unto his Master. And afterward,
when he should return home weary and stiff with hunting, and following of his
Game, he must be content to submit himself to be tide to a post, to guard the
house, where he should wait the eating of late and little suppers, feeding on a
few cold ^raps, and be glad to gnaw upon a bone, that had been already picked
and thrown away. And besides, (which was worse then all the rest) he should
have many a bang about the loins with a Cudgel, and many a spurn and kick
with the foot.

Then did he ask him again, for how long a time he should endure all this
pain? Jupiter told him, thirty years.

The Dog, when he heard this his doom, was very much daunted, and
discontented, as thinking it too intolerable a thing to be endured; But relying
on that grace and favor, which Jupiter had showed the Ass (hoping that he
should taste as much of his goodness, as his fellow before him) entreated him
to take pity of him, and that he would not permit, that he should receive so
much wrong, and be so hard and coursely used; for he was the workman-ship of
his hands, and no less his creature then was the Ass; and besides, he was
more loving and faithful, then all the other beasts of the field. And that
therefore he would vouchsafe the favor, if not to lessen the time of his
troublesome life, yet at least to equal him with the Ass. Jupiter
condescended. The Dog, in token of his thankfulness, bowed his nose to the
ground, remitting into his hands the remainder of those his other twenty years.

Whilst these things were a doing, the Ape did not sleep, but lay close, and
listened very diligently to all that had past, longing to see what Jupiter, and
the Ape.
would be the end and success of these their supplications. And because it is
a peculiar property belonging to the Ape, to imitate that, which others do,
he would likewise in this follow his fellows, being desirous also to know,
what should become of him? Persuading himself, that he that had showed so
much mercy to the Ass, and the Dog, would take no less pity of him.

Here-vpon, he goes me to Jupiter, and humbly entreats him that he would
deigne to give him some light of that, which was like to befall him in the
passage of this his life, and for what end he had created him; for it was not a
thing to be doubted, that he had made him in vain.

Jupiter signified unto him, that it should for the present be sufficient for
him, only to know, that he must go trayling of a chain upon the ground, The
Apes office.
with a great clogge at the end of it, that should continually accompany him,
and be bound as a Surety for him, in case he were not ty'de fast to some Post,
or the bar of a Window; where, in the Summer he should suffer heat, and in
the Winter, cold; endure hunger and thirst; eating his meat, leaping, and
skipping, and fetching many a friscall. And that for every bit they gave him,
he must first make a thousand chatterings with his teeth, and as many mowes and
mops with his mouth, in requital whereof he should receive so many lashes with
a whip, only to provoke others to laughter, and to make them merry.

He thought this was hard teaching, he did not half like it, it was too cursed
a School for him to be trained up in, and would then, (if he could) have made
show thereof by his many tears; but putting a good face on the matter (as your
Apes can when they list) and patiently brooking his hard fortune, he would
feign likewise know, how long he must be ty'de to this hard course of life? He
received that answer from him, as the rest had before, to wit, thirty years.

Grieved with this answer, but comforted with the hope that he had in the all
merciful Jupiter, he besought him that they might not be more then those of
other beasts, and even those few, he thought were too many to be endured.

Jupiter made good his request, and granted him what he desired; and the Ape
kissing his hand (as if he had been borne a Courtier) with a low Conge took
his leave, and went away with his other Companions and friends; the Ass, and
the Dog.

After these things were thus finished and set in order, Jupiter at last
created Jupiter and the Man.
Man, making him a more perfect creature then any of the rest, giving him an
immortal and discursiue Soul; He gave him power and dominion over all that he
had created upon earth; making him the vsu-fructuarie Lord thereof. Man was
very well pleased there with, and took great delight in beholding how goodly a
creature he was; how fair and beautiful; how curiously organized; how
handsomely shaped; how strongly set; how great and powerful a Prince; insomuch
that he began to think with himself, that such an excellent fabric, was
worthy immortality. And therefore he entreated Jupiter to tell him; not, what
should become of him hereafter, but only, how long he was to live? Jupiter
replyde; That when he first determined the creation of all kind of living
creatures, and more particularly of Man, he was then resolved to have given
every one of them thirty years of life apiece.

Man here-vpon, began much to marvel, and wonder at the matter, that for so
short a time, he had made so admirable a piece of work; for in the opening and
shutting of the eye, like unto a Flower, his life should pass away, and should
scarce bring his feet from forth his mothers womb, but that he is entering with
his head into that of the earth, rendering up his body to the grave, not
inioying his age, nor that delightsome and pleasant seat, wherein he had been
created.

And therefore considering with himself what had lately passed betwixt Jupiter
and those other three beasts beforementioned, he humbled himself before him,
and with a lowly (but pleasing) countenance, bespake him thus:

Supreme Jupiter; if my demand shall not be troublesome unto thee, and H^ man
should treat with God?
against thy divine Orders and Decrees, (for my intent shall never extend it
self to any the least breach of the least of them; nor shall I ever require
any thing of thee, but what shall be fitting for me to crave, and shall stand
with thy willingness to grant, always conforming my will to thine) I humbly
beg this boon at thy hands, that thou will be pleased, (since that these
brute beasts, unworthy of these thy favors, have refused that life which thou
gave them, the happiness whereof, as being deprived of reason, they did not
well understand, in that they have every one of them surrendered twenty years
of those, which thou granted'st unto them,) to bestow those years upon me,
which they have refused, that my life may thereby be enlarged; and thou, by me,
the better served.

Jupiter gave ear to this his Petition; and granted unto him, that (as Man) he
should live but his own thirty years. Marry when they were spent, he should
inherit those of the other three in their order.

First, he should enjoy the Asses twenty, supplying his Office, in moyling and
toyling in the world, tumbling and tossing to and fro, first to one place, and
then to another, carrying and re-carrying home, and out again, carking and
caring to provide for the necessaries of this life. This thou must do, (if
thou mean to live another day) from thy thirty, to fifty.

Now from fifty to seventy, thou shall live like a Dog, barking at ^e,
snarling at another; grumbling at this, and growling at that, vexing thy self,
and offending others.

And lastly, from seventy to ninety, thou must play the Ape, counterfetting
those thy defects of Nature, and using of tricks and toys, and I know not what
foolish and fantastical devices.

And hence is it, that we often see in those that come to this Age (for all
The folly of some old men.
they be so old) would feign seem young; Tricking themselves up so neatly and
so sprucely, ietting it (like young Gallants) up and down the streets in gay
clothes, visiting this Lady, making love to that Mistress, and undertake, I
know not what impossibilities, that they may be accounted jolly stout
Gentlemen, representing that, which indeed they are not, even just for all the
world, as the Ape does, who is never quiet, nor thinks himself well pleased,
but when in his actions he is imitating man, though he can never come to be a
man.

It is a terrible thing, and not to be endured, that men will, in despite as
it were of Time, (which discouers all deceits) and ought likewise to put them
out of this their error; will apply themselves to run a course contrary to
the truth, and that with their tinctures, playstrings, lees, and
slibber-slabbers, should play as it were with a Iugglers box, to coozen
others, and discredit themselves.

As if by these Artifices, they could eat the more, sleep the sounder, live
the longer; or be troubled with the fewer infirmities and diseases; or that by
this course they take, the teeth which they have shed, would come again, or to
keep those from falling from them, which are yet remaining. Or as if by this
means, they could repair their feeble limbs; recover their natural heat;
quicken anew their old and frozen blood; or as if thereby they did think they
had the power in their own hands, to make themselves what they list, and as
lusty as they list: In a word, as if they were ignorant what the world talks
of them; when as they themselves talk of nothing else, then which is the
better lie, and which the better dye; which either this, or that other man
makes. Nor is all this, which I have now delivered unto you, much amiss from
the purpose; being that I am to make my conclusion touching this point, the
propositions consisting of two Gentlemen, both freemen of this foolish
Company, for whose sake you have had the Premises.

My Lord the Ambassador (as you have already heard) kept a free Table, was
rich, and took great pleasure in keeping a good house. And because all A Tale
of two Gentlemen, that dined with the French Ambassador.
guests do not always give content; it one day happened, that he made a feast
for the Spanish Ambassador: and amongst diverse other Gentlemen, there came two
to dinner unto him, that were principal Persons: the one a Captain; the
other, a Doctor of Law: But to his Lordship both troublesome and wearisome
alike, for the great pleasure that they took to hear themselves talk. Of
whose impertinencies, and frivolous discourses, my Lord had in private some
speech with me heretofore.

For albeit he took great delight and contentment in hearing men of wit and
learning, speakers of truth, and such as were discreet in their carriage and
behavior; so on the contrary, could he by no means endure any kind Lyer^ and
Flatterers, hated of all good men.
of falsehood or lying, though it were but in jest and merriment.

He could not abide an Hypocrite, or a flatterer; plain dealing with him was a
jewel; He would, that men's words and works should be simple, without
sophistication, and truly noble, without any manner of doubling, and
dissimulation.

And howbeit in these two men, there were very good motives and reasons to
cause men to hate and abhor them, yet I am of the mind, and hold it
infallibly true, that in the liking, or disliking of this, or that man, one
more then another, there is some Celestial influence conspiring there-withall;
and on these two had it wrought with great efficacy, and strong effects; for
there was no man but did hate them.

My Master would feign have rid his hands of them, and have shook them off,
but he could not; for that they met him in the street in his way homeward, and
would needs wait on him to his house, as men that did much honor his
Lordship, and did owe him a great deal more service, then this their willing
attendance upon his person, whereunto they owed all respect. So that my Lord
(being so noble a Gentleman as he was) was driven by force to inuit them to
stay dinner, who had as it were by force accompanied him to his house. Nor is
there any vexation, that can vex a man more, then such petty vexations, which
a man would feign put off, but knows not handsomely how to do it. O this
incroaching kindness, what a cross it is, when it shall be enforced upon a
man whether he will or no, unless the one will be as uncivil as the other is
impudent!

As soon as I saw my Lord enter within the gates, I perceived presently by his
countenance, that something, what-euer it were, did trouble him. I looked
earnestly upon him, and he understood my meaning. He told me what it was,
(speaking unto me with his eyes, by casting them upon those two Gentlemen;) and
I needed no farther instruction to direct me, what I had to do.

I held my peace for the present, and dissembled my anger, beginning to cast
about with my self, what course I were best to take, to make these men, (who
had so distasted my Master) a sport and laughing-stocke to all the rest of the
company, and so make them pay dearly for their dinner.

I had no sooner entertained this thought, but there came presently into my
head a pretty odd pranke, that made fit for my purpose. Nor did I take much
pains in the finding of it out; for they came thither handsomely interlarded,
and the jest, themselves had brought it along with them ready dressed, and very
well seazond. Only I expected a fit occasion, to set it before them, which was
now near at hand. But I did defer it, till the last course should be served
in, and al-most ended, that it might take the better. For the Que la boca se
hincha de risa, no ha de estar el vientre bazio de vianda.
mouth, that will be filled with laughter, must not have it is belly Proverb.
empty. A merry heart, and a hungry maw, seldom meet. Tanto se rye, quanto se
come. As a man likes his fare, so he laughes; proportioning his mirth,
according to his meat. The Cloth was laid, meat on the board, the Guests were
merry, healths went round, and when I saw their bloods grew warm, and that
they were set upon the merry pin, talking and laughing on all hands, some of
one thing, some of another, a little before they were to wash, the Towell being
not yet thrown on the board, nor the Basin and Ewer set down, I came close to
the Captains side, and rounding him in the ear, told him a notable non
sequitur; He laughed heartily at it; and being bound to requite me with another,
made me bend down my head toward his bosom, that he might the better tell it
me in mine ear; and so in secret, we made two or three passages one upon
another; and when I saw my time, and that it served fit for my purpose, I began
to raise my voice anote higher, and with a cheerful look, smiling merrily
upon him, (as if we had talked all this while of that which I shall now tell
you, when (God he knows) we had never a word of any such matter I told him,
No, my Sen^or Capitan, no, Guzman puts a trick upon the Doctor and the
Captain.
you shall pardon me, I will not; if your Worship will vent it your self, you
may better do it then I, for you have a good tongue to put it home, and a
better arm to maintain it. I will hatch none of your eggs (good Captain)
forth with them your self. For these are no fit and sauory Jests, for such a
poor Youth as I am, and being so great a servant of Master Doctors, as no man
in the world can be more.

With that, My master, and all the rest of the Guests besides, began to cry
out unto meat once, How now, Guzmanillo, what is the matter? I know not, Sir,
unless my noble Captain here long to see my crown shaven, and to have me to
take my Degrees, which it seems, he would feign have me to do, seeking to
set the Doctor and me together by the ears, and putvs to the paring of each
others nails, till we be both touched to the quick.

The Captain, when he heard me say so, was frost-bitten, and maruelling what
the mystery of this roguerie should be, suspected there was some knauerie in
it, though he knew not what. And not knowing what to do, fell a laughing,
without speaking any one word at all.

But the Spanish Ambassador called unto me, and said, Friend Guzman, now by my
life, you shall not smother it; what is the matter, I prithee? Let us know of
thee, why at one and the selfsame time, thou laughest, and yet seem angry?
It must needs be some good conceit or other, and therefore out with it.

Seeing your Lordship hathlaid down so great a pawn as your life, I shall
(though loath, and much against my will) tell you what it is; and I protest unto
your Lordship, that I had rather have held my peace; and had you not sworn by
your life, I would sooner have had my tongue drawn backwards out of the nape
of my neck, then to utter the least syllable of that which I shall now fully
deliver unto you. Your Lordship shall therefore understand, that my Captain
here laid his Command upon me, that I would break a jest upon this Doctor, my
worthy and noble friend; girding at the cut of his beard; for he says that the
fashion of his beard, is just for all the world like one of those upon your
Flemmish Iugges, and that a-nights he puts it in a Press; made of two thin
Trenchers scru'de wonderful close, that no Ghitterne can be closer shut up in
it is Case, that it may come forth the next morning with even corners, bearing
in gross the form of a Broom, narrow above, and broad beneath, his Muchatos,
Ruler-wise, strait and level as a line; and all the other hairs, as just and
as even, as a Priuet hedge, newly cut; answering each other in a uniform
manner, having the point thereof in form of a Quadrant, drawn neatly out,
that it might make the fairer and larger show. For such a goodly Beard
accompanied with a Roman Bonnet, (like your Briefes and your Larg's in a
Singing-mans Book;) does grace his lesser and grosser notes. As if this were
sufficient to make him be held a great Scholar; As if this fair outside,
were a qualification for him; as if men had not seen your Cauallos Argeles,
some horses with one only white foot on the far side behind, having all the
other parts of their body of another color, and yet come of a very good race.
And some great block-heads, (though bred up in Universities,) whose ignorance
is a great deal larger then their Gowns; being like herein unto some kind of
Melons, which coozen us with the gloriousness of their color, seeming to be
good Melons to the show, but indeed are worse then Pompeons; no stuff, no
goodness in them. And this is that, which my Captain would have had me said,
as from my self. And this was it which made me cry, No, no; and that he
should tell it himself, and he would, for I would none of it. This is all, my
Lord: if there be more behind, your Lordship may be pleased to lay your
Command on the Captain, who (I know) will be ready in this, or any thing else,
to do your Lordship service.

The Captain blessed himself, when he saw whither I had driven the nail,
wondering at this my subtilnesse of wit, and cunning conueyance, himself and
all the rest of the company laughing at it, but none of them witting whether it
were a truth or a lie, that had past thus between us.

But my Doctor, having his head well warmed with Wine, knew not whether he were
best to be angry, or to turn it to a jest? But because they looked still more
and more upon him, and every ones eye was fixed on him, he pawsed a while, and
carrying a countenance betwixt anger and shame, at last he vented himself, and
spoke thus unto them:

My Lord, if my profession would permit it, that I should give my self that
satisfaction, which such an impudency as this deserves, your Lordship might
easily believe, that I would comply with that obligation, wherein I stand bound
to my Progenitors, and the honor of my House.

But being that your Lordships presence does privilege this insolent
boldness, and that this place will afford me no other weapons then my tongue,
your Lordship may be pleased to give me leave to demand of this Captain, How
old he is? For if that be true which he says, that he served the Emperor
Charles the fifth in his wars, being with him at the battle of Tunez, how
comes it to pass that he has never a white hair in all his beard, nor black
one in his head? And if he be so young, as he would seem to be, why does he
say, that he was present with him, at such an ancient piece of service, and so
long ago as that was? Let him tell us, I pray, in what Jordan he has washed,
or to what Saint recommended himself; to the end that we may all offer up
Tapers to his shrine, and have recourse unto him for help, when we shall have
the like need? Let him first declare this, and then let him go on with his
game, and I will play mine as well as I can. And since he has first trumped
about, let us try, who can soonest beat out one another and win most
Tricks. For there is no reason he should so carry it away, nor shall he get
any thing by his crossing of me, while I have a trumpe in my hand.

All the whole board fell a laughing a-fresh, but especially my Master, for
that two things were then treated, which of all other he did hate and detest,
and desired the reformation of them, as no man more.

And having well observed all that had passed herein, he said unto me; Now
tell me, Guzmanillo, what thou do think of this? Since thou have The
Conceit consists in the word, Lie; for that they did color the hairs of their
Beards, with lees made of purpose for that use.
proposed the Argument, I will have thee to resolve the Question. I then told
him, All the Answer that I can make your Lordship, is only this: That they have
both said Truth, and yet both of them lie (a) in their beards.

CHAPTER IV.
The Doctor finding himself aggrieued; that Guzmanillo had wronged him in the
presence of so many Gentlemen, would be revenged of him. The Spanish
Ambassador takes up the quarrel: The French causing another of the guests,
that was there at Table, to relate an accident that befell the Constable of
Castile, Don Aluaro de Luna.

THey did all highly commend the jest, and some did indeare it so far, that
the Doctor thereby was the more enraged, insomuch that they were sorry they had
pressed it so far, and given it so great an applause.

But the Ambassador of Spain, through his great wisdom, threw in his The
Spanish word, i^ meter el baston. A metaphor borrowed from a Master of Defense,
who when his Scholars grow (...) and angry at play, throws in his cudgel
between them, whereupon they ^old their ^ands. So that meter el baston
signifies metaphorically, the reconciling of friends* when they begin to grow
ch^ one with another.
Warder, and took up the quarrel, making it (by his discreet handling of the
matter) a merry meeting only of friends, where no exception was to be taken
at any thing that should merrily pass amongst them.

The Captain was a good natured man, well behau'd, an old beaten Soldier, and
a good fellow, who laughed heartily at it, let it pass as a jest, and blessed
himself, vowing and protesting, that he never spoke any one such word unto
me, nor was it ever in his thought to touch upon any such point. And though he
were nipt, yet because he was a discreet Gentleman and a Soldier, (amongst
whom now and then jests are broken, as well as Lances) should the Doctor have
used him worse then he did, he would either not have heard it, or seem to set
light by it, for that he thought he had some reason so to do, because what he
then spoke, came from him, as one that had been much injured and abused.

But when the Doctor certainly knew, that I had been the only Author of all
this mischief, he did set upon me in that fierce and terrible manner, The
Doctor grows very angry with Guzman.
that he did cut his words with his teeth, not being able to pronounce them
plain, through his too much eagerness, and heat of choler. And he would
feign have risen from the table to have had me by the ears, and to have
pummeld me soundly about the head and the nose, and to have buffeted my cheeks;
but they would not suffer him so to do.

And seeing he could not be revenged of me as he would; and having no other
weapon left him to beat me withal but his tongue, he roundly laid about him,
and letting the reins loose to his rage, he bestowed his Livery upon me,
calling me by all the vile names, that he was able to reckon up; whereof I
made little reckoning; but did rather help him on, by teaching him what he
should say.

This madded him more then all the rest, to see me thus mock and scoff at
all that he said, which made him break out worse then before, and to grow
far more violent and outrageous with me. For, as if this bitter jest had
been some Excommunication, that by a joint consent, and general Council as
it were, had gone out against him, and that every one of us had a finger
therein, he cared not whom he paid; and almost, nay, more then almost, (if my
Master had not stopped him in this his furious course, as one that knew well,
what a huge dust, a foolish choleric fellow will sometimes raise, both to his
own and others hurt) this business had grown exceeding foul. The French
Ambassador seeks to (...) the (...).


He sought to pacify him with the best reasons he could then use unto him, as
one that would feign turn the water another way, and divert these his evil
intensions toward me; Which that he might the better do, he began to
shuffle the Cards anew, sundring the one from the other; and that he might
wholly cut off all that former offensive conversation, he turned himself
toward Caesar, that Neapolitan Gentleman, who had told him of that sad
accident, that had befalne Dorido and Clorinia (who was likewise one of his
guests) and said unto him:

Sen^or Caesar, since the hard hap, and untimely death of the fair Clorinia is
now known to all Rome, and to these Gentlemen that are here present, let us
entreat you to do us the favor, to deliver unto us, what became of constant
Dorido; for I have a great desire to know how he sped. That, and it may please
your Excellency (said Caesar) you shall hear in its due place and time; for
this is no fit season for it; it being not meet to mingle such misfortunes
amidst our merriments, nor will it suit so well with this day of feast and
iollity, especially considering what has passed here already to the
disturbance of this good company, that are met here of purpose to be merry.

But since that we have now dined, and the time of each man's taking his The
Spanish word is Siesta.
nap, draws on, I will recount another Story unto you, which this present
occasion represents unto me: Which for that it is a true one, I doubt not but
ye will be much delighted therewith. They all kindly entertained his
proffer; and when he saw they were attentive to hear him, he thus began:

The Constable of Castile, Don Aluaro de Luna, in the time of his greatest
Greatness (his Honors increasing daily more and more) residing in A Tale of
diverse and sundry accidents of Love.
Ualladolid, took great pleasure in the Summer to rise betimes in the morning,
to go abroad to use some exercise, and to take the fresh air of the fields.
And after that he had been walking thus abroad, he would (before the Sun
should be able to offend him) withdraw himself home to his house.

But having one day amongst the rest enlarged his Walk, and entertained
himself longer then he was wont to do, in a pleasant garden, near adjoining
to the River Pisuerga, recreating himself in beholding the variety of the
Walks, the beautiful Flowers, the delicate Arbours, the shadie Trees, and
sauourie fruits, the heat entered in so far, before he was aware of it, that
what out of his fear of not returning back with conueniencie, and the content
that he took in this his sweet and delightful recreation, he was resolved
to remain there, and to take his full pleasure of that place, until such time
of the evening, as the heates should be ouer-past.

And whilst his other servants were busy in providing all things necessary
for his dinner, that he might the better in the mean while pass away the
time, he entreated two Gentlemen, that accompanied him thither, the one Don
Luys de Castro; and the other, Don Rodrigo de Montaluo, that each of them would
tell him some Loue-Story, whose success had been full of dangers, and full of
cares, as none could be greater. For, he very well knew, that these two
Gentlemen were the only Gallants then in Court, and great Lovers of Ladies,
being both of them, besides Noble in their Name and Blood, discreet, valiant,
active in their persons, of fair both feature and behavior, curious in their
clothes, witty in their jests, vn-offensiuely pleasant; in a word, so
generally well qualified, and so adorned with all those ornaments, that might
grace either their speech, or their actions, that they were very well able to
give him that satisfaction upon this subject, as more could not be desired.
And the better to animate them on he promised, in reward, a rich Diamond Ring,
that he then wore upon his finger, to him, whose tale, for the strangeness of
the success, should best deserve it. Don Luys de Castro was first to begin,
and thus he proceeded:

It may be (my Lord Constable) that other Lovers, in the recounting of their
misfortunes, go painting and setting of them forth, with feined sorrows,
Hyperbolicall amplifications, such delicacie of phrase, and tenderness of
words, to work compassion; that with the smoothness of their style, and the
meltingnesse of their language, they move many to pity; and of these in this
kind much has been written. But that really and truly stripped naked of all
kind of dressing, and the neat clothing of eloquence, there should happen in
these present times a business of the like nature, as is mine, that I have now
in hand, is a thing impossible. For it is one of the strangest, and the most to
be wondered at, of all that ever I yet read, or heard of. And because your
Excellency is to be my Judge in this case, I am very well persuaded you will
acknowledge as much, when you know my sufferings.

I loved a certain Lady of this Kingdom, that was a Virgin, and ful-filled
Don Luys de Castro his Loue-Story.
with all those laudable and noble qualities, which might be found in any other
who-soeuer; being as fair and beautiful, as she was discreet and honest:
whereof, (and much more then I will now speak,) I make Don Rodrigo de Montaluo
here present, my Witness; as the only friend, that bare me company, and was
thoroughly acquainted with all that which past between us; I served her many,
(and those the best part of my years) with that punctualitie and secrecy,
that there was never any the least notice taken of it, yet still observing her
with that diligence, as the like was never known; and indeuouring always to
give her all those contents, which she could possibly desire from me. For her I
ran at the Ring, and ever made my self one, at the ^uego de toros, y can^as,
maintained Turneys, and Tiltings, ordained Royal Feasts, and Maskes; and what
not? And for to quit all suspicion, and to carry the business so handsomely,
that none might find me out, and discover this my love; nay, that they might
not have any the least presumption thereof; at all these great and solemn
meetings, my eyes were never placed upon her, but some other of the Ladies that
were there, though she notwithstanding did really and truly know, that those
of my soul were never off on her, but still waited upon her, and that she
was the sole Mistress of my heart, and that for her sake only, and none but
hers, I invented all these honorable pleasures, and delightful intertainments
for her.

Upon these kind of Feasts and Sports, and other the like occasions, directed
only to this end, I spent so much, that I wasted and consumed a great deal of
wealth, letting my money fly the faster, in hope it might make her come the
sooner; and selling away my possessions, that I might compass the possessing
of her; which was to me a treasure of more worth then all the world besides.

My father (it is well known) left me wonderful rich, both in goods, and in
lands, but in short, I sent it packing; and past away one thing after another,
till in the end I became so poor, that your Lordships favor is the only prop
that does uphold me, without the which I must have fallen. And though this (I
must tell you) be none of the least griefs, to see a Gentleman of such parts
and qualities as my self, to be outed of all that he has, to become so poor
and needy, that necessity must tie him to serve, who was wont heretofore to be
served; (howbeit, I acknowledge it a happiness unto me, that I am your
Lordships servant.) Though I must confess withal, they are the happier men,
and the more beholding to fortune, who A free c^tented (...) the best.
lead a quiet and secure life, free from other men's commands, not beating
their brains, nor breaking their sleeps, in seeking means, how to creep
into this man's favor, or to scrue himself into that, or the other Lords good
grace and opinion.

But of all my misfortunes, the greatest that ever befell me* and which ^its
closest to my heart, and does fret the very soul of me, and fill it with
anguish, was, That my Mistress having entertained me with false hopes, and
vain promises, vowing, that she would never bestow her favors upon any other,
but that in recompense of my constant love* she would be married unto me,
whereunto she plighted me her faith and troth. But whether these were the
words of a woman, or the works of my short fortunes; now when she saw my
means were spent, and my self grown poor, vn-mindefull of all those in
dearements, vows and protestations that had past between us, she shook off
that hand of hers from mine, to whom she had first given it, and gave it to
another, and forsaking me, married him; failing (false as she was) in her
faith, and quality: for scorning my poor condition, and not esteeming those
my other good natural parts, she made choice of those goods of fortune, taking
a Husband far unequal to her self; for, as he exceeded in wealth, so he did
in years. But such is the force of money, that it can supply all defects, and
drive unequal matches, to draw in one yoke.

Thus have I briefly discoursed unto your Lordship touching my love, showing
you how happy the beginning was, and how disastrous the end. And although (that
I might not weary and tire out your Lordship, I have been so brief, that the
shortness of my Discourse may seem to lessen my misfortunes, and the miseries
that I then endured;) yet I presume, your Lordships discretion will supply that
want, and fully conceive what, and how great they were; As also take into your
consideration, how many troubles they have suffered, and how many perils they
daily run through, who wing their thoughts with ^uch high-flying feathers, and
who use such great diligence and secrecy in the carriage of their love, to the
end that nothing on their part should be wanting, which they thought belonged
to their duty, in that behalf. Which my self had special care of.

I do not think that either Don Rodrigo, or any other Gentleman whatsoever
can instance in a success of more misfortune then this of mine; for that
loving her with that firmness and constancy, (as I did) and serving her with
that love and faithfulness, (as none possibly could be more;) I lost my time,
I lost my means, and last of all (to make the roll of my miseries the fuller)
I lost my Mistress. Only there is left unto me by fortune, (in exchange of these
my many mischances) the receiving of this Ring, by way of reward.

And here Don Luys made an end of his amorous discourses, and Don Rodrigo de
Montaluo entered upon his, in manner following:

The Ring (Don Luys) is none of yours, you have lost it, and I ought of right
to have it. And turning himself toward the Constable, he thus went on in his
speech:

Most noble Sir, Though I confess that to be true, which Don Luys has
delivered unto your Lordship, for that I was an eyewitness of all this
business, in regard of that great love and friendship, which was ever between
us; yet now at this present, he has no reason to pretend the Diamond; for if
he would but free himself of passion, and put on temperate consideration of
the pa^ssages in this his love, and that he and I might but change places, I
do assure my self, that he would judge this cause in my favor, and give
sentence against himself. But being that he is now blinded so with passion,
that he can not discern things with indifferency; your Excellency may be
pleased to judge first of his Love, and afterward to censure the bad success
of mine: which shall take it is beginning from the end of his, which your
Excellency has already heard him recount. And thus (may it please you to give
me the hearing) did things pass.

It is not long ago, that he and I went walking abroad near to this River
side, where now we are, talking and discoursing of some things far out of the
reach of our hopes; when unlooked for, there came to Don Luys, an ancient
servant belonging to this Gentlewoman his Mistress, from whom he secretly
delivered him a Letter. Which he having opened, and read it over, when he had
done, he gave it me, that I likewise might peruse it. Which I did again and
again, wondering very much at the Contents thereof. For which cause, (as also
having a reasonable good memory,) I carried it all away; which speaks after
this manner:

Dear Sir, you have little reason to accuse me of ingratitude, only because it
seems unto you, that you have some just cause so to do. For it is not
possible that any one should forget (as you have thought of me) him, whom he
truly loves. And since I know mine own Obligation, and your constancy, I
would have you likewise to understand (though perhaps you will not acknowledge
so much) that I neither now do, or have heretofore committed any fault against
you. And that my Actions did not correspond with your deserts, the reason was,
because they could not stand with that Decorum, which was due to my
Mayden-state, and the danger that might ensue thereupon. My Marriage with you
(which I desired more, then I did mine own life) the obedience of a Daughter
did disturb, and the Commands and earnest importunities of my Parents, who
were violently carried away, moved thereunto by vain interest, and the Title
of a Countess, which I hold against my will, since they did force me to yield
my body unto him, to whom I could never surrender my soul, being in condition
and years so contrary unto me, I have been yours, I am yours, and shall be
yours all the days of my life. I shall give you to understand, that the Count
my Husband is to undertake a long journey; hasten hit her unto me as soon as
you (...), and bring no other person along with you save your friend Don
Rodrigo. And when you shall come to this Town, you shall find in a Heremitage
adjoining thereunto, order given you for that, which you are to do. Love me
with all your heart (as you were wont) and as I do you. And live you as
happily, as I wish you; Concluding my Letter with dear imbracements, which
attend your coming.

These were the Contents of the Letter; which Don Luys having well seen and
considered, did expect nothing less, then what was therein contained, which
was the only thing he wished and desired above all other happiness in this
world. So that if I would, yet I should not be able to express unto you, those
amorous passions that he then felt. He read it over and over, dwelling upon
every word and syllable of this Letter. He looked upon every line, more then
once or twice, weighed them as a man would weigh gold; and when he had
balanced them in his judgment, and found they were not light, but bare their
full poyze, putting them to his mouth, he kissed them a thousand and a thousand
times over. He first looked earnestly on the Letter, then on the bearer, and
my self, as if he stood expecting that we should speak our minds, and with
a loud voice proclaim the certainty of this his promised good, and the great
content that he took in this fortunate, but unexpected news. For as yet he
doubted thereof: but at last, when he had recollected his spirits, which had
been all this while a wool-gathering, with somewhat a troubled, but more
cheerful countenance, he said unto me, What is this (Don Rodrigo) that we
see? Am I out of my wits? Or is this a dream? Art thou sure, that it is thee
and I, that have read this Letter? Is this happily the Countesses Letter, this
her own hand? and that, her old Servant? Does my judgment peradventure fail
me? Or, as an afflicted Lover, growing on to desperation, do I feign
imaginations to my self, to deceive my fantasy?

After that he had thus continued a while, driven to and fro with these
distractions, as a Boat that waves this way and that way, having the tide with
it, but the wind against it; I assured him, that these were not illusions, or
idle apparitions, but things really true, and that carried along with them
assured hopes of recovering and inioying his lost Jewel. And thereupon I
heartened him on, that he should hasten his departure with all possible speed,
that he might comply with that, which his Mistress had given him in charge.
This was presently put in execution; for we straight took horse, and away we
went. And when we came to the Heremitage, we found therein a very grave and
reverend Dame, who, for that she had notice given her before hand, of the day
and hour that we were to come thither, stayed there, expecting of our coming.

Now, when she knew that we were the men she looked for, she delivered us a
Message, the effect whereof was this; That her Lord, the Conde, was gone forth
upon his journey, but was now newly returned, by reason of a certain
indisposition of body that seized on him upon the way: But entreated us
notwithstanding, that we would have the patience to stay there, till she went
to the Palace, to acquaint her Lady the Countess, of our coming* She went; we
staid; I much amazed, and Don Luys quite out of heart: I for those
difficulties, which might offer themselves; He in considering his cross
fortune, which did never leave off to persecute him.

Now, while this good woman was gone upon her errand, in the mean while, till
she should make her return, we ran over many stories, and I know not what
idle tales and discourses* which being of different subjects, are not fit to be
inter-serted with this that we have now in hand.

Well, about eleven a clock at night, she came back a gain unto us, and
told us, we must follow her. We did so. The darkness of the night did much
befriend us, so that by this good help, she brought us unseen, and with much
secrecy, into a Lodging in the Palace, where we no sooner were, but the
Countess comes forth, and receives us with extraordinary tokens of joy and
gladness. And after that some few ceremonies were ended, and that the
Para-bienes had past to and fro of this long desired inter-view, which
Compliments were very short and brief, the Countess said unto me, Don
Rodrigo; the time, that is now offered unto us, to enjoy this fair occasion,
you, in your own discretion may judge, how soon it will be gone. You know
likewise the obligation of true friendship, and the firm affection, which you
have always made show to bear unto Don Luys: but say, this should fail
(which I no way mis-doubt,) yet for my sake, who beg it at your hands, your are
bound in courtesy to grant me my request. You have already understood, how the
Count my husband not finding himself half well, returned (being well advanced
on his way) back from his journey, who came home so weary, that he presently
got him to bed, where I have left him fast asleep. But because it may so
fall-out, that in turning or waking, he should stretch out a leg or an arm,
toward that side of the bed where I lie, and should find my place empty, and
no body there, it must be a great deal of danger, that I must run, besides
the great scandal, that would grow thereby to the house, that therefore,
whilst your friend Don Luys and my self shall entertain the time in talk,
(which at the most shall be but some quarter of an hour, or there-abouts,)
you would be pleased to go lie down in my place, and remain there in bed,
that I may in the meanewhile abide the safer here. And I will assure you on my
honest word, that you shall not thereby incur any danger. For besides that
the Count is old, and that he never wakes a-nights, until it be broad day, and
does seldom or never turn above once, and then presently fall asleep again;
He is so tired with his journey, and of that indisposition of body at this
present, that there is no fear to be had, that he will so much as but offer
to stir, or move himself at all. But say he should, and that he should
turn and touch you, for the foresaid reasons, he will not dream of any bodies
being there but my self.

God he knows (and your Excellency may conceive) how much it troubled me,
that the Countess should put me upon such a perilous piece of service. But
because the actions of cowardice are so foul in themselves, and so
ill-beseeming a Gentleman, it seemed unto me, that if I should now fly off,
and refuse to undergo this business, I should not give satisfaction either to
mine own Honor, or my friends Love, or the Countesses request, I told her, I
would very willingly, and with all my heart do her this service: but withal,
did very earnestly entreat them, that they would not stay too long in the
intertaining of their loves, seeing they were not ignorant of the danger,
where-into for their sakes I did thus voluntarily thrust my self. They
promised, nay swore unto me, that they would not; and that at the most she
would not tarry away above half an hour.

The Countess put me into a night-dressing, and a Smock: and when I had put
off all my clothes, she led me along to her Withdrawing chamber, and
afterward made me to lie down in her bed. There was no light at all in the
Chamber, all was as dark as hell, and in a still silence. I softly laid my
self down upon the very edge and brimme, as it were of the bed, as far from
the Count, as I possibly could devise, and in that manner, I remained there,
not a quarter, or half part of an hour, but five good long hours and more,
till it was break of day.

Now let every man consider and think with himself, in what a poor case I
was, being in such a place as this, and at such a time; with what a deal of
care that I might not be known, and with what a deal of fear, lest this
deceit should be discovered, and did least of all think on that, which did
most concern me, which could be no less then death, if the Count should
chance to awake. For in regard that I went in thither naked, and unarmed, I
must fight it out with my fists only, and try how the strength of my arms
would help me; and admit I should have struggled with the Count, and had the
fortune to escape his hands, yet could I not those of the servants of his
house, because I knew not how, nor which way to order my flight.

But these were not all the griefs I then endured, they went on a little
farther. For Don Luys and the Countess, did laugh and talk so loud, that I
might hear every word almost that they said, as I lay in the bed, wherewith
my fear was much increased lest happily their dis-composed carriage might
chance to awaken the Count; and it did mightily vex me, and almost mad me,
that I could not call unto them to keep less noise, seeing they would not yet
break company, it grieuing me to the very soul, that they should seem as
forgetful of themselves, as they were of me. This made me to bite my fingers
ends for very anger; as also, that I durst not for mine ears stir a ^ot from
the place where I lay for fear of spotting mine honor; and less did I dare
to call unto them, for fear of waking the Count.

After all these lingrings, and fearful passages, when they saw that day was
now so nigh, they came both of them laughing hand in hand to the beds side,
with a light in their hand* (I being frighted almost out of my little wits)
where they sportingly frisked and skipped about me, making a great noise, as
well with their tongues, as their feet.

Then I began to imagine with my self, that through too much content, they
had both run mad. So that now, I was as sorry for their misfortune, as mine
own; for that the infamy and punishment was like to be general, and to light
upon us all, not permitting any to escape; upon them, for offending; upon me,
for consenting. I was in that pitiful taking, that within a very little
space, I had a thousand imaginations in my head, but not one that could do me
any good, or stand me in stead.

And whilst I was thus puzzled, in the midst of my greatest conflict, they
drew nearer to the bed it self; and the Countess drawing the Curtain, that
we might now plainly see one another, then was I quite out of my senses;
insomuch that I would have feign fled away, had I well known whither: but I
quickly came to my self again. For I, who had hitherto thought, that I had
the Count lying by me; the Countess lifting up the clothes of the bed,
cleared that error, and gave me to understand, that it was not he, but the
Countesses Sister, a pure Virgin, yet as fair as Uenus. Whereat, as likewise
the jest, (which I now perceived they had put upon me) I was so ashamed, and
dashed out of countenance, that for my life I was not able to speak a word, nor
knew not what in the world to do, but to rise up in my smock (for in that
case was I then) and to get me out to look my clothes; so that my fear
before was not half so much, as my shame was now. Let your Excellency
therefore be pleased now to consider into what danger I did put my self, and
then to give your judgment, which of us two does best deserve the Ring.

The Constable, laughing heartily hereat, said in the end, That Don Luys had no
reason to complain of his Love; seeing, though late, and with a great deal
of cost and trouble, yet at length he had obtained his desire; so that he
could not be a deseruer of this promised reward. And Don Rodrigo, as little;
for that he was not in any danger by sleeping with the Count; howbeit, the
jest they had put upon him, was a witty and a good one. And therefore his
Sentence was this, that neither of them deserved the Diamond; yet, taking it
off from his finger, he consigned it to Don Rodrigo, with condition that he
should send it as a token to this Gentlewoman, by whose side he lay; for that
she only had incurred the danger, and had also run the hazard of her
honor, if she had been known what she was.

With this, they gave an end to their Loue-Discourses, they all remaining very
well satisfied. And it being afterward discussed, whether the Constables
Sentence were discreet and just; all the Courtiers highly commended it. And so
every man's businesses, calling some one way, some another; this conversation
was broken up, and taking their leave of my Lord Ambassador, they went whither
their occasions called them.

CHAPTER V.
A Roman Matrone, not knowing how to free her self (without suffering in her
Honor) from the persuasions of Guzman de Alfarache, who solicited her in his
Lords behalf, the French Ambassador, put a jest upon him, which was the
occasion of a second disgrace that afterward befell him.

THey that write of Lightening, report, (and we see the same confirmed by
experience,) that so great is its The nature of Lightening.
pride, that scorning the weaker, it works its effects on the strongest. It
breaks the steely hardness of the Sword, and leaves the scabberd whole: it
splits in sunder, and rendeth up by the roots the strong and sturdy Oak; and
not once touches the feeble and yielding Cane. It ouer-turnes the tops of your
highest Towers, and leuelleth your stately buildings with the ground; and
pardons your poor Shepherds humble Cottage, that is made of ill composed
twigges. It kills your biggest beasts, and cracketh man, as if he were but
Potters Clay in pieces; it bruiseth and breaks the bones, and leaves the
clothes untouched; it melts Silver, Gold, Metal, and Money, and yet hurts
not the Purse wherein it is put. And albeit, it be of this proud nature and
haughty condition, yet is its force broken, in its coming to ground. This
only is that, which makes its resistance against it. And therefore, in such
tempestuous times, those that do fear its terrible effects, do use to get
themselves into Caves, or to hide themselves deep under ground, because that
they know, they are there safe and free from danger.

The violence of Youth is such, that we may truly compare it unto Lightening;
for it never bends its force against things that are fragile, soft, The
violence of youth, compared unto Lightening.
and gentle; but does commonly aspire to things of greatest difficulty, and
such as are beyond all reason of atchieuement; it observes no Law; it excuses
no kind of Vice; it is a Horse that runs on in his Carreere, without The
defects and various effects of youth.
an eye to its way, or once thinking on the place, or the end, where he is to
take up himself, and make his stop. It always follows its own fury; and
like an untamed Colt, will not suffer himself to be saddled by reason; and
without it, disturbs both himself and others, not enduring any burden, be it
never so light: In such sort it flies out, that it will not (no though you let
it have its own will) be at quiet with it self. And yet this being so furious
a beast, as we have here set forth unto you, it is only corrected by
humility; this (and nothing but this) tames and keeps it in order. This is
that earth, against which its force cannot prevail; this that Dock, that
drives out the Nettle; and this that Fort, where it finds its safety.
Insomuch, that there is not any good to be hoped from that young man, who
shall not be humble. For that youth in it self is the entrance to evil, and
the door that opens unto sin.

I was wantonly bred up, suffered too much to have mine own will: I I^ (...),
the cause of all Vice.
would not endure reproof, much less correction. And for that Wisdom is the
Daughter of Experience, which is gotten by the trans-cursion of Time, it was
not much, that I should err as being a Youth. But that having befalne me
(which you heard before) in the love that I made at Malagon, See the first Part.
and Toledo: And being that I should, like the Dog which is scalded with hot,
fear also cold water; after all these fair warnings, it may He is a fool,
that makes (...) a prey to Women.
seem somewhat strange, you will say, that I should give any more credit unto
women, and that I should suffer my self to be taken anew in their snares. That
I should be such an Ass, as not to know, by my many the like experiences, that
they always go subtly to work with us, and deal deceitfully; which must
either be imputed to our too much simplicity, or must otherwise be attributed
to the intemperate passion of our appetite. And would to God this foolishness
of mine might here make it is stop, and here in this Port set up my Plus vltra,
by erecting the pillars of my woeful proofs, and often skarrings, without (as
you shall see here-after) my frequent fallings into the like weaknesses; being
unable to make my vaunt, that I had once got of them by the hand, and made my
party good with them. But because he that loves, does always make a free
donation to the party, whom he loves, of his will, and of his senses, it is
no marvel, if being stripped of them, multiplying my errors, I commit a
thousand fooleries.

My Lord Ambassador fell in love with a principal Gentlewoman, nobly
descended, whose name was Fabia; her husband, a Gentleman of Rome; before A
story of the French Ambassadors love.
whose house I did often use to walk; whereof, no small notice was taken, and
he himself began to conceive some suspicion of me, though without any just
cause; for the for her part never gave consent thereunto. But because every man
may love, protest, and run his head, if he will, against a Wall, and none
shall hinder him; my Master did that, which his passion did dictate unto him,
and she, that which was befitting both her own, and her husbands honor.

True it is, that we were not so blind, that we could not see through the
Proverb.
holes of a No estauamos tan ciegos, que dexassemos de ver por la tela de un
cedaco. The greatest enemies, that a fair woman has.
sieve; for although we were deprived of the cleerer kind of light, yet we had
some glimpse and glimmering thereof, though it were but little. Her husband was
old, poor, and ill accoutred; three strong and powerful enemies against a
woman, that was young fair, and well brought up. For these reasons, and by the
help of a Maid of hers (which had been a Virgin heretofore) but was now my
sweetheart, and mine own dear Love, I was verily persuaded, what by the
means that she, and what by those, that my self should use, as also by making
benefit of the foresaid occasions, we should easily get the game. But who,
(save such an unlucky and unfortunate Rogue, as my self) could have lost so
fair a set, having such store of sound Trumpes, and other good Cards in my
hand? But I had wonderful crosse-Carding, and every trick that I played, fell
out to the worst; so that, No es todo facil, quant o lo parece; A man may be
deceived, when he thinks Proverb.
himself most sure. Virtue will trip up the heels of Vice, and win the
Goal away from him, play he never so cunningly; Nor is there any thing in the
world, that can make a virtuous woman to spot her honor.

When this Gentlewoman understood, what had passed betwixt my self and her
servant, she began to devise with her self, how she might be revenged on us
both, without any hurt to her self, but as much prejudice as might be, both to
my person, and the plot that was laid between us, for the effecting of my
Lords desires. And this she did the rather. for that she saw, that her
waiting-Gentlewoman, for my sake, did so earnestly solicit this cause, and
that for my interest, and to do me a pleasure, she did follow this business
with all care and diligence, taking her fit times to put her often in mind
thereof, not suffering a Card to pass without a Vic, and sometimes making The
wickedness of some servants.
many false ones, using many other tricks, as she was well skilled in them, and
knew handsomely how to put them home: Insomuch, that when this honorable
Matrone saw, she could not be in quiet for her, but was thus hardly set upon in
her own house, and barked at abroad in the street by a company of malicious
mouths, she made no Vociferations, nor Outcries, no squeamish replies, no
cunning impostures, which some women use to do, for to qualify their
honesty, that under that shield, they may ever after the more safely offend.
For, an honest woman will, by honest means, manage her affairs; not beating
the air with her clapper, nor ringing out the bell that hangs in her mouth, so
loud, that all men may hear the sound thereof, and censure her accordingly,
and give every one occasion thereby to construe her Actions, as they list
themselves. For in regard the good are the fewest, the most do judge amiss:
And the reason of this ill is, because they themselves be ill. And this common
voice choaketh a good name, as your Tares do come.

Now, as this Gentlewoman was a Roman, so did she perform a Roman Act. She
knowing, that we went about to work her overthrow, she wisely The discreet
carriage of a woman tempted to ^dnesse.
sought to prevent it, seigning her self to be somewhat touched with Loves
passion, and that she was now upon the point of yielding, if not wholly
overcome.

One day, when as her Maid was making of her ready, and was instant with her in
this business, looking upon her with a smiling and cheerful countenance, she
said unto her, Nicoleta, (for so was she called) I assure thee, that if thou
had not wrought upon me, using so many strange inventions, and had not
spent so many elaborate and well studied words in this suit of thine, thou
had e're this made that will of mine to yield, which has hitherto stood out
so long. For I wish well unto Guzman, and approve his discreet proceeding in
this business. Besides, his Master is of that merit, that any woman
whatsoever, be she of never so honorable quality, without being so much
solicited, as I have been, ought to embrace his love and friendship, and
offer her service unto him. But as thou thy self both know, and see, I
do not know how it will be possible, that this our Treaty shall be secure from
scandalous tongues, being that now upon no just cause given, and I for my part
having as yet yielded no consent unto that, which perhaps I so much desire,
that is whispered already in every corner, nay through all Rome, which neither
in mine own house, nor with thee, (which can only be the instrument of our
pleasures) did I ever yet communicate. And since it is now come to this pass,
that the popular voice runs on with so great liberty, and that I am not
able any longer to hold out in withstanding the love of this noble Gentleman,
all that I will entreat at thy hands, is; that thou will dispose and order it,
with the greatest secrecy that may be. Speak therefore to Guzman, that he
wait and attend here-abouts for some few nights, for I will find opportunity
some one night or other, to give him entrance, that I may see him, and talk
with him concerning the carriage of our loves.

Nicoleta fell down upon her knees to the ground, not knowing, which she
should kiss first, her feet or her hands, with a face set all on fire with too
much joy: for a great while together, she never left giving of her thanks,
qualifying the easiness of effecting it, and disgracefully laying open the
faults of her old Master. Then did she reduce unto her remembrance those former
distastes, which she had received from him; in what wretched estate, through
his misery, she lived in; his base kind of carriage, and what dry fodderings
he did give her, and all, that she might encourage her the more to go bravely
on in this her resolution, which she did simply believe, she had now entered
into.

Hereupon she came forthwith flying unto me, flinging her arms abroad, and
strongly twining them about my neck, she claspt me as hard as she could for
her life, demanding A reward for good news.
Albricias at my hands. Which when she had received, she would relate unto me
what had past between her and her Mistress. I took her by the hand, leading
her along with me, (as those that carry with them the spoils and trophies of
some famous victory) into my Masters withdrawing Chamber, where, with a great
deal of joy we celebrate this gladsome news; plotting and contriuing with
our selves touching the hour, how and where I might best find entrance to
speak with Fabia. And my Master giving to Nicoleta a little Purse which he had
in his Pocket, crammed with Spanish Pistolets, she made as if she were
unwilling to take them of him, but did not all this while cloze her fist, nor
pull back her hand, but out of modesty held it between forward and backward
like a Phisician, when he is offered more then his fees, and with a iocund
smile, gave him thanks for this his courteous liberality; and with this, she
took her leave both of him and me. But my Master continued with me, rendering
me an account of his love, and I giving him the Para-bien thereof, in which
kind of discourse, and the like, we spent all that Evening. And when it was
night, at the appointed hour, I took up my standing, gave the watchword, and
made such signs, as were ordered between us, but neither that night, nor some
three or four more following, could this agreement made between us, take
effect.

One day amongst the rest, there happened to fall a small, but withal a shrewd
driving rain, wherein at my wonted hour I was to make my accustomed Proverb.
walk, being dabbled (as they say) up Con lodos, hasta la cinta.
to the girdle. I came thither reasonable well wet, the night being very dark,
which suited not amiss with my fortunes. It was my hap (but would to God it
had never happened) to have the end of my desires. And for that, in things of
interest, and matters that concern our pleasure and content, it imports
much, to cast off all fear, and to undergo all difficulties with a daring
resolution, I did show more courage at that time, then became discretion, in
that I was so forward to come to the Call, beating my forehead against the
Walls and corners of the house, when the rain powered down on my head from
heaven, and my feet stood up to the ankles in dirt. As soon as I had given the
sign, it was known who was there, yet notwithstanding they made me to wait a
good while in the rain, till I was so thorow-wet, that the water that came in
at my Pole, dropped out at my knees, and went guttring down into my shoes: and
then at last, after I had been a long time in this cold bath, they called unto
me, and willed me to have the patience to stay yet a little longer.

In the end, when all my clothes and my self were dung-wet, and that I had
not a dry thread about me, I might perceive the door to open very softly, and
Nicoleta to call unto me. And then (me thought) that very breath which came
from that voice, brought that comfortable heat with it, that I was thorow-drie
all over on the sudden. Now did I no more think on my fore-passed troubles,
being cheered up with the sight of the (a) Fregoncilla (b) A Maid servant, that
washes and starches, and does the like services of keeping all things clean.
Muget de buen fregado. La dishonesta que se refriega con todos. Couarruuias. p.
413.
of my soul, and the comfortable hope of inioying the beloved Fabia. Nicoleta
and I exchanged but a few words; for she had scarce bid me welcome, when lo,
her Mistress came down, and calling to her servant, said; Do you hear
(Nicoleta?) Get you up, and see what your Master is a doing, and if he chance
to ask for me, come and call me, whilst I in the meanewhile stay talking here
with Sen^or Guzman.

Now, all this interim we were in the dark, so that we could scarce discern
one another, and if we did, it was as much as possibly we could do. Then did
she begin to question me concerning my health, and how it was with me, as if
she had seemed to wish very well unto me, or as if my welfare had been a
matter of importance, and much to her contentment. I replyde unto her with the
like demand. That compliment performed, I delivered her a large message from my
Master, in acknowledgement of those many thanks which he did owe unto her, for
the undeserved favors which she had vouchsafed to show unto him, and how great
a servant he was of hers, enlarging this Theme with an elegant Oration, which
I had studied of purpose only to this end. But before I was come to the
conclusion thereof, and when I was in the greatest force of this Argument, and
my words began to gather strength for the gaining of her good will, I could not
fasten her farther attention, nor like Wax, work her as I would; because she
seeming to be amazed and startled with some sudden perturbation, abruptly said
unto me:

Sen^or Guzman, as you love my life, let me entreat you to hold me excused;
for with a conceived fear, that at this present instant has seized Guzman
notably mocked by Fabia: And in what manner.
upon me, me thinks, every bodies eye is upon me, all in the house watch and
observe me. And therefore for Gods sake, let me entreat you to enter in here
this way, and there right over against you, you shall find a lodging Chamber,
get you quickly into that, and tarry there till I have given a turn or two
about the house, to see if the coast be clear, and all my people safe, and I
shall presently return again unto you; but I pray have an especial care in
the mean while, that you stand still, and make not any the least noise in the
world. I gave credit unto her, and went straight on as she had directed me,
and thinking that I had gone athwart a little open entry, making more haste
then good speed, I lighted ere I was aware, into a huge The Spanish word, is
patio. la part de la casa des cubierta. Couarru. verb. Patio.
beastly Hog-sty, that stood in a filthy durty Court, where I had no sooner
gone some two or three steps, but I stumbled (through too much haste) upon a
great dung mixen, and fell with my head just against the wall, giving my self
such a sound knock, that I lay there for a while senseless. But with that
little life that was left me, by little and little I came to my self again,
and scrambling up as well as I could, I went groping along the walls with my
hands (as children do that play at Blind-man-buffe) to see if I could find
out this appointed Chamber: but I could find no other outlet, save that
whereby I had made my entrance. I rounded it once again, imagining with my
self, that by reason of my new received blow, I could not happily meet with it
so upon the sudden.

And wandering thus up and down this Maze, it was my hap to light upon a little
narrow Lane, as it were, whereat there was no going forth, having a house of
Office at the end of it, ill covered, and that not wholly neither ouer-head,
where was only the the one half of an old broken great Pitcher, which was full
of Ordure, being fixed fast to the ground, and beastly berayd round about,
yielding no very sweet sent, whereby I began to conjecture the danger I was in,
and to consider with my self the many misfortunes that had befalne me.

Well, when I saw how the world went, I sought to get out where I came in: but
I found the door was shut fast upon me, and that there was no hope of getting
forth. It rained extremely, and showred down so fast upon me, that I was
forced to shelter my self under that poor miserable old ruinous open, I
cannot tell whether I should term it rather Houell, then House, standing up
to the knees in dirt, whose perfume was none of the pleasingest.

There did I pass over the remainder of that night, which was far worse,
then that I endured at Toledo, and of no less peril to my person, then These
two misfortunes of his are mentioned in the first Part.
that which I was put to in the house of the proud Genoues, my kinsman, Nor was
it only the falling of the rain, that did now afflict me, which came not
drizling or mizling down upon me; but with a full and open gutter, and when
at least, with drops as big as Pease. But I began to think with my self
what should become of me; for I could not but imagine, that she that had made
that Mouse-trap for me ouer-night, would the next morning deliver me over to
the Cat.

After this conceit had run a while in my head, I entered into other
discourses, wherewith I might comfort my self, saying; Free me (O God) from
the stormy blustering Northern winds of this tempestuous night, and give me
leave to escape with life till it be day, that when the Master of the Ship
shall find me here, all that I will say unto him, shall be, that his Maid
brought me hither, and that I am her husband. For it would be the lesser harm
unto me of the two, to be married unto her, then to see my bones marred with
torment, to make me to confess what I made there; and I would rather seek to
content them with this answer, then that they should kill me, and bury me
afterward in this stinking Churchyard, and so end my life in this miserable
manner.

Thus I went beating my brai^es about, discussing to and fro, what would be the
issue in the end of this business; when lo, anon after two of the clock in
the morning; I perceived that the door was opened; wherewith all the misery
that I had suffered, was turned into joy; and flowers of comfort, thinking that
Fabia was now returned. But when I came to the door, and found it unlocked, and
no body living there-abouts, I began to be more afraid then I was before,
and my heart began to misgiue me, conceiving, that behind some wall or door
of the house, they staid waiting for my coming forth, that they might with
more ease and safety rid me of life. I unsheathed my sword, and taking that in
one hand, and my Dagger in the other, I went by little and little, taking
notice (by that poor little mornings light) of all those steps which I had
trod (which, were not many, nor very hard to be hit again) by which I
entered. So that, with more fear, then shame, I got at last to the street
door, which I likewise found was open.

When I had once set my feet upon the threshold, I opened my eyes, and then
plainly perceived, that what had already past, was in punishment of my
ouer-boldnesse; and albeit this trick that had been put upon me, was not so
easy to be digested, yet this jest might have fallen out far worse. I comforted
my self as well as I could, looked into my error, and acknowledged my fault;
and champing upon these things, as I walked along the streets, I came at last
home to our own house, and opening my Chamber door, I put off my clothes,
and got me in between the Blankets to recover some heat, which through the
waters and the winds I had lost.

In this manner did I lie, till it was about ten a clock in the morning,
tumbling and tossing, not being able for very shame to fall asleep, thinking
and devising with my self, what answer I should make unto my Master. For if I
should deal plainly and truly with him, and acquaint him with the whole
passage of this business, it would be a great affront unto me, and that I
should be played upon every moment with whole Vollies of jests, and move even
the very children of the street to scoff and laugh at me. And Proverb.
to deny it, and intertaine his Lordship with vain and idle hopes, me thought
that likewise was not fitting. For Nicoleta had already recovered her
Albricias, and was well rewarded for her good news; and therefore this might
seem unto him to be a mere invention to defeat him of his money. Todo lo veo
matas, y por rozar. Del negocio, que no esta bien compuesto, y tiene muchos
inconuenientes. Couarru. verb. Ma^a.
Todos eran matas, por rozar. All the fat I saw, was in the fire; and that this
business did not go on well and handsomely, but had many inconveniences in
it; it went ill on the one side, and worse on the other. Which way so ever I
sought to wind me, was but a Proverb. Saltar de la sarten, y dar en las brasas.
leaping out of the Frying Pan into the fire.

And whilst I was thus musing with my self, how I might invent some means to
set all right, one of the servants of the house came knocking at my door, and
told me, that my Lord would have me come to him. O vvretched and unfortunate
man that I am (said I to my self) what shall I do? For they have now found me
with my Prou. Traer las manos en la masa. Andar metido en algun negocio.
finger in the Creame-Pot; they have taken me in the manner, the theft is
discovered, I am put to my shifts, and must answer for my self as well as I
can. Coragio then (quoth I) Coragio, Guzman! When were thy spirits wont to
fail thee in this manner? When were thou ever as yet put to that plunge, from
which at length thou did not fairly come off? The Sun is as yet clouded;
and Time will discover the true path. And who took thee by night out of the
yard, will bring thee as well out of my Lords withdrawing room.

Well, I got me up, shifted my clothes, and put on a fresh suit, the best
that I had; and being then as fine and as gallant, as if no such disaster had
happened unto me; I hy'de me up unto my Lord, who expected my coming, and had
no sooner seen me^, but presently asked me, how the world went, and how
chanced it, that I had no sooner come to give an account of what had past
betwixt Fabia, and my self? I told him; That they made me stay waiting in the
street until it was midnight, expecting a fair birth of this business, but
it proved in the end to be a shitten-ars'd Girl; so that I was dismissed with a
non licet; telling me, that she could not possibly either speak with me, or
open the door.

I also then signified unto him, that I would go and lie down a while upon my
bed, to see if I could take some rest, for I did not find my self half well.
He gave me leave so to do. Whereupon, I went to my Chamber, put off my
clothes, got me to bed, and there fell to my victuals, where I remained till
it was almost night, hatching a thousand conceits in my head, wasting my wits;
and Limbeking my brains, without drawing any juice or substance thence at all.
And because, what in regard of my rage and anger, as also the sundry thoughts
and imaginations that troubled my mind, I was not able to take any rest on
either side, but lay tumbling from the one to the other; If I lay on my back, I
straightway waxed weary; if I sat up in my bed, my Hips were too feeble to
bear up my body. Whereupon, I resolved with my self to rise. And I had no
sooner taken my clothes into my hands, and put my feet out of my bed, but one
of the Grooms of the Stable came into my Chamber, and told me; Sen^or Guzman;
There are some pretty Wenches beneath at the stairs foot which inquire for
you, and stay waiting your coming in the Portall within the gate. Apocks upon
them, quoth I: What have I to do with them? The Devil take them for me. Go
down, and either bid them go to the Stews, or else tell them, that I am not
within. For I imagined with my self, that all Rome by this time had rung of
my disgrace, and that these were some roguish harlotries, that came to laugh
and scoff at me, and to make themselves merry with my misfortunes. I was
very jealous, that they came of purpose to play the Wags with me, and
therefore willed him to dismiss them: and so they went their ways.

That night my Master willed me to continue my wonted Station. I told him, that
I found my self not half well; whereupon he advised me to get me betimes to
my lodging, and that I should call for any thing that I wanted; and if need
were, he would send a Physician unto me. I kissed his hands, thanking him in the
best fashion I could, for this his great favor and love toward me; and got
me forthwith to my lodging, where I remained retired, and all alone, as I had
done the rest of that day.

The next morning, I was no sooner up, but I received a Letter from my
Nicoleta, complaining of me, that having come to visit me the day before, I
would not be spoken withal, nor give her notice of that, which had past the
other night betwixt my self and her Mistress, and what great business I had,
that I did not round that street the next night following, telling me that
she had waited there for my coming, till it was after midnight.

Unto these, she added some other words, which lest me no less perplexed, then
confounded. And that I might clear all doubts, I wrote her an answer; telling
her, that I would not fail sometimes that Evening to come and visit her in the
back Lane, that was behind the house. For Fabia's house stood as it were
between two streets; on the backside whereof, right against the principal
gate, was a little Posterne door, and over that a pretty little lodging
Chamber, with one little window belonging unto it, from whence Nicoleta might
very conveniently talk unto me even in the day time, for that the Lane was
little frequented, as being scarce passable, for that it was very narrow, and
full of dirt and mire. And even then at that time, it was so bad and so foul,
that very hardly and with much ado, (considering the late rain) could I get
to that place, where I was to speak with Nicoleta.

Well, when I was come thither, and she ready to receive me, she began to ask
me; what was become of me? What great occasions did hinder me, that I had not
come and seen her the night before? And if not for her, yet for her Mistresses
sake, I might have taken that pains. She formed many complaints against me,
accusing the inconstancy of Men, who made love unto Women, not so much for any
good affection that they bore them, as The inconstancy of idle young men.
to get the conquest, and Mastery of them; And when they had gotten what they
desired, and received some Pledge from them, they did quickly slight them, if
not wholly forget them.

By this, as likewise by that profession, which she made of her love unto me, I
knew her innocence, and Fabia's subtlety, who went about to deceive us both.
Thereupon I told her; My Nicoleta, thou art quite out of the way, and so
mightily deceived, as no woman can be more. For I would have thee to know,
that thy Mistress has played the Jack with us both. Then I up and told her
all that had befalne me, and how vilely she had used me. She blessed her self,
crossing and crossing her self over and over, thinking it to be a thing
impossible. I stood thus talking with her, being gallantly clad, and in my best
bravery, strutting my legs abroad, stretching out my neck, and discoursing of
my misfortunes, being careless of that present disgrace, which my evil
fortune had too near at hand for me. For it so fell out, that whilst I was
thus discoursing with her, by that little Posterne; (through which there was a
way to go in and out to the Stable) it happened, that there entered in thereat
(whilst the Grooms had led the Horses forth to water,) a huge big Bore; this
Bore one of the Grooms found nuzzeling in the litter, which he had made ready
for his Horses, turning it topsie-turuy, and scattering it all abroad the
Stable. He being much moved thereat, took up a great bat in his hand, and
belabored his back and sides, as hard as he could lay on for his life. It was
a fat rogue and a great; and like a Bull that is bayted, came running forth, as
hard as he could drive. And for that these kind of beasts, either out of
custom, or nature, use to run always foreright, and seldom or never turn
aside, he came directly upon me, and took me so on the sudden, that I could by
no means avoid him, and perforce made his way just between my legs; so that I
rode as it were a-stride on horseback, but the clean contrary way; and to
keep my self from falling, I took hold on his tail with both my hands,
using that in stead of a Bridle, which I held as fast as possibly I could. I
was not able all this while to recover my self, and had my life lain upon it,
I knew not for the present how to quit my self handsomely from his back: and
whilst I was devising with my self how I might come fairly off, he ran
with me through the midst of a durtie puddle, that was nothing but mire and
filth, so that for to save my self from falling, and that he might the better
bear me through the dirt, I was forced to let go his tail, and to claspe my
arms about the sides of him, with all the might and force I could. And as if
we had played at binding of barrels, or Iuego de nin^os.
a punt a con cabeca, giving him many a rap at the wrong door, flinging up his
snout, and huffing and puffing with his nostrils, he carried me (in spite of
my teeth, for I was forced to hold fast, for fear of falling in the dirt) in
his hoggish kind of gallop, some three or four streets from off that place,
grumbling and grunting as he went along, and with his whining and crying,
calling the people together to see what he ayld, whilst I perceiving the shame
and danger I was like to run, fell off from his back of mine own accord,
not regarding when, or where I should light. And much better had it been for
me, had I done this before in mine own little durty Lane; for besides that, I
should not have there received so much harm, the disgrace would not have been
so public, and I should have met with a remedy for this mischief nearer at
hand.

Well, I got me up as well as I could on my legs, but all bemyr'd, and berayd
with dirt, being hooted at by the people, and affronted by all the women and
children in Rome, my face being all besmeared with dirt, and my clothes from
top to toe, all playstered over with mire, that I seemed to have been thrown
out of the belly of some Whale. The people from out their doors and windows
shouted out so loud, and the boys did so flock about me, that as one that was
out of his wits, and deprived of judgment, I sought where I might best hide my
self. At last I spyde out a house hard by, where I thought I should find some
good entertainment. I entered there-into, and made fast the door, and so
barrocadoed my self up close against all that company, that were desirous to
see me. But it did not fall out so well with me, as I could have wished; For it
is not fit, that any thing Al malo, no es justo, suceder le cosa bien.
should succeed well with the wicked. It is a punishment of his fault: and so
it fell out with me, by that bad entertainment which I there received, as you
shall hear more at full in the chapter following.

CHAPTER VI.
Guzman de Alfarache recounteth, how in the house, where-into he had
withdrawn himself, to make himself clean, another disgrace befell him, and
many other misfortunes. And that which passed afterward, between him and his
Lord the Ambassador, with whom he discoursed of politic and grave matters.

THe night was now dark, but much more my heart. Every house was full of
lights, but my sad soul was fuller of darkness. I did not weigh and consider
with my self, that it was now late, nor that the Master of the house was not
willing that I should stay there, but reuiling me with odious terms, sought
to drive me out with evil language, thinking every hour a year, till he had
thrust me out of doors. For, he was Guzman makes every one suspicious of him.
jealous of me, and began to suspect, that this was but some trick or
stratagem of mine own plotting, having taken hold on that occasion to get into
his house, and to bring my purpose more easily to pass. Nor was this my honest
Gentleman much out of the way. For the Gentlewoman his wife wore the Breeches,
she was Master of the house, a friend to her own will and pleasure, very The
Spanish word^, Serrada Sienes. I would be glad (...) be informed of the
propriety of this phrase, if a^ can render it better.
headstrong, and not sure of foot. So that it was no wonder that her husband
should see Visions, and dream of strange apparitions, taking every shadow to
be some fearful ghost, and conceiving, (out of his jealous humor) that all
the world went about to coozen him. So that every the least apprehension
(though of never so farre-fetcht a supposition) made him presently to take the
Alarm. Whereupon, he no sooner saw me within his doors, but he called all
his people about him, and leaving me all alone in the outward Porch to the
great Gate, would not suffer his servants to do me so much kindness, as to
afford me a bucket of water to wash my self withal. So that I (poor man)
with my clothes all to be-myrd, my hands all to be-durted, and my face so
foully besmeared, that there was not one white spot to be seen, I went
intertaining my going forth with a great deal of fear, lest some might chance
to be still waiting at the gate to look upon this my new Livery, which might
better bear the name of Leprosy. And for that they, who beheld this my
misfortune, were not a few, the company Guzman laughed at by common people.
increasing, and standing in a round thick together, they related it afresh to
them that were newly come into their company; and for that they had a general
dislike of me, they detained all that past by, relating unto them the disgrace
that had befalne me, whereat they all laughed out aloud, making great signs
and tokens of joy. And it may be, that most of them had reason so to do; and by
this their rejoicing, did revenge themselves of those wrongs, which they had
heretofore received from me. There might you see that verified of me, which is
commonly sung up and down the streets. Mas enemigos, que amigos, tienen
Romance.

Su cuerpo cercado;
Dizen vnos, que lo entierren,
Y otros, que no sea enterrado. More foes then friends, his body have
Incompast round about;
Some cry, to put it in the grave,
And some, t'shall lie without.




The street was full of men and boys, which did persecute me with Guzman
hated and persecuted.
shrill shoutes, and loud cries, calling in a sharp and high key; Thrust him
out; Thrust him out; Why do ye let this foul beast abide with you? put out
this same pickled pigge amongst us. O these base Raskals, how had they almost
made me to lose my patience, and my judgment! There were some honest folk
amongst them, that took part with me; and all those that were such as I was,
showed themselves on my side. These sought to defend me from their fury,
laboring to pacify that rude rabble with threats and menaces; for they were
grown so shameless, and so impudent, that they began to throw stones against
the gate, being very desirous to have me come forth amongst them.

But I neither blame them, nor excuse my self. For I would have done
Curiosity admits no respect.
the like my self, upon the same occasion, against mine own father. For,
those things of curiosity, which do not (like Shroue-tide) come once a year,
I do not hold it any great excess to be desirous to see them. And I assure
thee (nor do I speak this, to make the matter seem more then it is) that if
for to make profit, I would have suffered my self to be seen, I might by
this means have got a good sum of money; For I was nothing all over, but a
mere lump of dirt, having like your Negro's; no more white about me to be
seen, save only my eyes, and teeth; this misfortune befalling me in the most
liquid kennell, and rottennest mixen that was in all the street.

True it is, that with the knife that belonged to my Sword, I scrap't away as
much of it as I could, but all was but as a thing of nothing, being either
little or nothing the better; for the mire, by reason of its liquidnesse, had
soked it self quite through my clothes, so that they remained as wet about me,
as if they had been steeped in some bath. And I held it some happiness unto
me in this my misery, that I did not go dropping through the streets, like a
basket of Buck-cloathes, when they are taken Those that are unfortunate, seek
to sh^n the sight of all men. Proverb.
from the washing-Bole, and carried forth to be dried in the Sun.

In this pitiful manner, it being now late, and all the people gone, I
sneaked out in that lamentable pickle, as I would have wished them to have been
in, who took most pleasure therein. If there be happiness in unhappiness,
in regard of the comfort which we receive from thence; this day it should seem
that fortune did play the wanton, and went sporting her self at the juego de
Can^as with m^; for, though she had disfauour'd me with these the like
troubles, that you have heard; yet did she afterward assist me with the
night; yea, and with such a dark night, that the people went their way, giving
me leave to depart thence, sound, safe, and free, from the clamor of the boys
and children, which stayed watching for me. I got me forth, throwing my Cloak
over my face, without being known by any, and making large strides, seeking
(if it were possible) to fly from my self, in regard of that store of dirt,
and that evil savor which I bare about me in my clothes. But this could not
be dissembled; for which way so-euer I went, I left some sign thereof behind
me, beside the heat of the sent, which might very well be followed afar
off, it was so strong. And none that past by me, would turn back to look
upon me, because they did suspect no harm. And if any did chance to find
fault with me, others would excuse me, and say; Let the poor fellow alone, it
is but a little slipperinesse of the Guts, a looseness of the Hilts, a little
laxatiue oil that is come from him, which upon occasion may be every man's
case, as well as his: He would have help it and he could, and therefore you
must pardon him. Others would say; Inquire no farther into the matter, make no
more do about it, but give over the haunt; for the Crow No putde ser el Cueruo
mas negro, que las alas.
cannot be blacker, then are his wings. Others, stopping their noses as they
went along by me, would cry out Foh; There has more store of rain fallen, then
we were aware of. Others, This Disciplinante must needs have given himself
some great wound, he stinkes so vildly, (for they saw me muffled up in my
Cloak, like those, which come from whipping themselves in the Holy Week.) Let
me advise you, friend, to make all the haste you can, and call quickly for some
water, before you begin to swound.

I had matter enough for all of them to work upon, and there was not any that
past by me, but had a fling at me. And some would not stick to ask me; Tell
me (friend) how sell you a pound of this Wax? And others; What Is the price of
your Honey-combes? And a third; Sure this must needs be some perfumer or other,
since he smells so sweet. I answered them all with silence, and replyde not a
word unto them, by which means I past the better along by them, though ever
and anon they would be girding and scoffing at me. But for those that cryde a
pocks on me, and bid the Devil go with me, calling me Pole-Cat, and the like
stinking names; mumbling softly to my self, as your young Nouices do their
Mattens in a Monastery, I paid them again in their own coin: And so hanging
my head in my bosom, I hy'de me homewards as fast as my durt-loaden legs
would carry me.

That, which did most trouble me, was, to see the Dogs in every street come
barking after me, who the faster I went, did so much the more fiercely set upon
me, and especially your The Spanish word is, Gozquejo. A kind of Dog, which
at first was in great esteem, when they were brought out of Gothland into
Spain, a Country in Europe, which confineth upon Denmark and Norway, called in
the Almane tongue Got, from whence came the Goths, which came into Castile.
This race of Dogs is now bastardized, and in a manner lost. So that now your
Gozques, are a kind of Mongrell Curs, which your poor and baser sort of
people breed up and keep. They are short-legged, long sided and headed,
balling and barking at their neighbors, troublesome to your Gallants, and
abhorred of thieves. They sleep all day, and this makes them wake, and bark
all night long. And your Tradesmen and Shopkeepers, will rather endure that
you should strike his Son, then kick his Dog. Couarru. verb. Gozque.
Mongrell Curres, which followed me close at the heels, and would now and
then give me a nip at the Calves of my legs. I would feign have fraid them
away, but I durst not, fearing lest by making that defense, greater Dogs and
more in number, hearing the noise that they would have made, would thereby have
been drawn forth of door, and come mainely running upon me, and have torn me
(like another Acteon) all in pieces.

At last, after these my many misfortunes, like a Ship that comes from the
West Indies, beaten at Sea, and rent and torn by Pirates, I arrived safe at
Seuill. I was now come to my old home, and being unseen and unheard of any,
had got me up to my lodging. And I should have held it no small happiness, if
I could have got in as soon as I came to my Chamber door. I put my hand in my
Pocket, to take out the Key, but could not find it. Then did I feel for it in
the other Pocket, but could not meet with it. I cut two or three capers in the
air, hoping to hear it gingle; but all was one; then did I fall a searching
of my breeches, to see if happily it had got in betwixt the linings of my Hose;
but the Devil a Key that was there. I rummaged every corner about me that I
could suspect it to be in, but all to no purpose. For questionless I lost it
in that house, whither I had with-drawne my self, when I took out my
Handkerchiefe to wipe my face and my hands. This was a great grief unto me,
and did vex me more then all the rest; in which agony and anguish of mind,
lifting up my eyes to Heaven, as a man in desperation, I breathed forth these
words of complaint.

Poor, miserable man, as I am; What shall I do? or whither shall I go? What
will become of me? What course shall I take, that my Masters servants, Guzman
laments his misfortune.
and other my Companions and fellows of the house, may not come to the
knowledge of this disgrace that has thus unluckily befalne me? How shall I
cloak and dissemble this business, that I may not be made a laughing stock
amongst them? I may boldly tell all the world besides, that they lie, but I
cannot do so to those of the house, if they should hap to see me. To others I
might deny it, either in part, or in whole, as shall seem best unto me: But
here, if they chance to light upon me, I am openly taken in the manner, the
theft found about me, the cause opened, and my mouth shut, not being able to
allege any thing in mine own defense, nor can I invent that Lie, that will
be able to give them satisfaction, and make good what I shall say in mine own
excuse. Those that envy my inwardnesse with my Master, will bathe themselves
herewith in Rose Water; it will be meat and drink to them, and they will not
stick to call their friends about them; who, like swarms of Bees, will fly
in presently upon me, and come buzzing about me, to work my more shame and
amazement. I am utterly undone, my Bark lies all a the one side, and is ready to
be drowned, because it has no Pylot to set her upright, and to steer her in
her true course, nor any Master that is able to govern her.

With these exclamations (wretched as I was) I rent the air, and was ready to
run out of my wits: but was not so wise at that time to call to mind, what
an ill name I had gotten in Rome, and yet with outcryes and lamentations must
thus pitifully bewail an accident of fortune. O would to God, that
(considering the great troubles of this world) we would be as sensible of the
adversities of the mind, as we are moved with the afflictions of the body!
But that does happen unto us, which is wont to befall those, which sweep all
clean before the door, and when they have done, throw the dust into the
house. Thus did I stand, making funeral lamentations over my misfortunes,
when lo, there came a thing into my mind, which had happened some few days
before, which was of great comfort unto me, adding new courage and strength
unto me against all such accidents as might hereafter succeed unto me. And
thus it was:

There was a Curtizan of Rome, who caused another woman, because The revenge
that a Roman Curtizan took of another woman, for being to lavish of her
tongue.
she had been somewhat too lavish of her tongue, to be slasht over the
face, cutting her athwart the nose, from one cheek to the other, the cut
running equally on either side of her face. And while the Surgeon was a
dressing of her, after that he had given her some sixteen or seventeen
stitches, she weeping said; O what an unfortunate woman am I! Gentlemen, let me
entreat you for Gods sake, that my Husband may not know of this. A waggish
fellow, that stood there by, told her, If this slash had been upon your
buttocks, as it is upon your face, it might happily have been hidden from him;
but seeing there is no Veil to cover it; why do you inioyne us to keep it
secret?

In like sort, it seemed simplicity, and mere foolery in me, to use such a
deal of nicety in the business. And the rather, for that this mischance was
public. And because, (by reason of the general knowledge thereof) it could
not be conceiled, I thought it the best way for me, to get the Game by the
hand, and to speak of it first my self, telling as many of it, as I should
meet withal, making a jest of it, and recounting the whole Story thereof unto
them, before they should receive it from some other hand, and so at last come
to know what a badde and long voyage I had made. Which if they should have
done, it had been better for me, that I had been out of this miserable world.

Let him endure the title of a badde name, that desires to have it dye The best
way to shake off a nickname, is to set light by it. Haga nombre de mal nombres
quien dessea, que se le cayga presto.
quickly. For, with the more violence we seek to shake it off, so much the
closer it cleaves unto us. Insomuch, that it continues many times to the
fifth generation; and then those, which succeed them, do glory and boast
themselves thereof, and blazon that for their Arms, which their Ancestors held
for an affront. The like has befalne this my poor book, which I having
entitled with the name of Obseruatio vitae humanae.
Atalaya de la vida humana; The Watchtower of man's life, they have put the
nickname of Picaro, (...) a Rogue.
Picaro thereupon, and now it is known by no other name.

I was much perplexed, and as yet unresolved what I were best to do. And for
that I thought with my self, that in our miseries, there is no other Sanctuary
on earth to fly unto, but those that are our friends; though I must confess I
had but a few, and amongst those never a true one, I held it not amiss, to
have recourse to some one of my Companions, that had professed much love unto me,
and had made me the fairest shows of friendship.

This being now concluded on, I got me to his lodging, and knocked at his door,
which he presently opened unto me: where I did remain, while the lock was
ripped off from mine. You may conceive with your self in what a woeful case I
was, that I durst not sit down upon a trunk that was there in the room, for
fear of leaving therein the print of this my error. This unhappy Accident
could not be kept so secret, but that it must needs be known. And it is a
misery, that follows great men's houses, that there is not a servant therein,
that does not strive and labor all that he can, to flatter and Servants given
to flatter their Masters.
soothe up his Lord and Master, although it be with merry jests, and fained
tales, when as there is no such matter. For they deal with him, as those that
play booty, seeking to serve one another turn, using all their art and skill
to coozen and deceive him: Whereby every Master knows, how and to what end his
servants love him, and with what affection they serve him. And he is a kind
of unfortunate man, and in a miserable and wretched taking, if he think to
win them by rigor, and to work them to love him for fear. For few or none
have ever been able to bring this to pass. For the heart of Love, is gained
by love, and not by rigor. Man's heart, a tender thing.
man, is a noble thing, and must be won with gentle usage; it must not be
roughly dealt withal, but stroaked with a smooth and soft hand.

I had scarce shifted my clothes, and washed my self clean, but that my
Master knew I was all bedurted. They had told him in what case I was, but none
of them could tell him the cause of it. This was all they could say of me, and
so they left me, as they found me; so that by this means, I had a fair white
to shoot at, and might make my aim as I would my self. He demanded first of
one, and then of another, how this came about, but none could inform him
farther, then what they had seen.

Afterward it was told me, (which was no more then I heard from his own
mouth) that he conceited with himself, that they had caught me in Fabia's
house, and that knowing my tricks, and cunning carriage, they had turned the
keele of me upwards, and had thus trimmed and pitched me over, as your Seamen
do your ships: and that I seeking to escape their hands, fell by misfortune
into some durty puddle, or filthy dunghill: Or else, that wrestling and
striving with some of the servants, that were sent out after me to catch me,
they had thrown me down in the dirt, bemoyling me in that beastly manner,
being more willing to do me shame and reproach, then to take away my life. I
likewise at the same time was casting up my Account with my self, making me a
Haziendo cun^a del mismo palo. Proverb.
wedge out of the same piece of wood, that I might drive this business the
better, and come home unto him, by iumping with his conceit, and cleaving the
same block, that he had already entered upon, hoping thereby to give him the
better satisfaction. And though his Cards and mine were not the same, yet were
they both of a suit, and the Trumpe was turned up right for either hand; and by
different Proverb. Por caminos diferentes, y bomos ambos a un parador.
ways we hapt both to meet at one, and the same place: only we did differ in
this; that he by his wisdom did conjecture, what was the most likely; and I,
out of a vain and idle humor, made report of that, which might be least
prejudicial to my reputation. He had all that night been busy a writing, and
making his Dispatches for France; but laying his Papers awhile aside, out of
the great desire that he had to know the truth of the matter, he presently sent
for me in. But when I was come, and had presented my self unto him, he said
not a word unto me, till he had retired himself into his withdrawing Chamber,
and dismissed his servants, and that we two were all alone.

Then did he begin to ask me, how I came by my fall, and where? I told him;
that I stood at a neighbors door, that was right over against Fabia's house,
watching very diligently, if I could have the opportunity to speak with her;
and whilst I was carefully attending this business, her Maid Nicoleta came
forth, making signs unto me, that I should quickly come away. And being
ouerioyed with this unexpected good fortune, I would needs cross the Lane,
where the way was worst and foulest, (because I would not lose time in going
about by that which was the cleaner) fetching a nimble leap, thinking to pitch
sure with my foot upon a stone, that was not so firmly laid as it should have
been, it tottred aside, and so my foot slipped; I sought to recover my self,
but could not, and so fell into the dirt, where I was most pitifully bemyred.
Whereupon, Nicoleta, the people that passed by, beginning to flock about me,
withdrew her self, and went in. So that I was enforced to come home, without
effecting what I went for; Which did much more grieve me then my fall. But all
things do not always fall out as we would have them. He then said unto me, I
suffer more in this, then thy self. The harm is more mine, then thine.

This business (Guzmanillo) goes not luckily along with thee. It was a work
of darkness, thou wentst about it late in the Evening, in an unfortunate
hour, and upon a Tuesday: this disgrace could not have befalne thee, in any
man's service, but mine, nor have lighted so unluckily upon any but my self,
such is my misfortune.

Whereunto I replied; I would not that your Lordship should make this ill
construction to your self, nor would I have you to reckon this in the number;
but I am rather persuaded, that it would have been worse with us, if this
misfortune had not befalne me. For we have a Proverb in Castile; Proverb.
Que breme un pie, quicas por mejor. I brake my leg, and it may be, it was
all for the best. And I am the bolder to tell you so, for that her Husband was
at that time at home in the house, and therefore it makes me to suspect, that
there was some trap laid for me, and that I was called into some ill end; but
suppose it were otherwise, and that the wind had blown fair in the Poope,
and that I had entered into the Haven; say, that the servants of the house
should either have spied me, or ouer-heard me talking with their Mistress,
what does your Excellency think, would then have become of me? Assure your
self, they would have cudgelled me soundly, and have used me so hardly, that I
should not have escaped their fingers, till they had broken all my bones, and
sent me home without a nose. For my so often rounding of that house, has
caused some notice to be taken thereof; and albeit that some do think that I
only do it for Nicoleta's sake, yet many, that do not know the good love that
is between us, are apt to conceive the worst. And I have of late observed,
that the good old man, Don Beltran, has looked askew upon me, as if he were not
well pleased with me. He was wont heretofore to speak kindly unto me, asking
my opinion concerning the Ladies, and Gentlewomen of this Court, and if I knew
of any good Spanish ware in that kind; but now he passes along by me, not so
much as once offering to speak to me: and if I put off my Hat and salute him,
he looks another way, as if he did not see me, and goes along by me like a
logge, without any life or motion toward me at all.

This was the effect of that which I then said unto him; my Master all this
while being very attentive unto me, and ever and anon knitting his brow, and
casting up his eyes, whereby I knew, that I had stung him, and made him to sit
musing, as one that had been amazed upon the report of some strange and sudden
accident. I saw all his Cards, and knew what gam^ he had in his hand, and how
he would play it, and found by him, that he was afraid both of his reputation,
and his person, and that it would be little for his honor, if any disgrace
should befall him in that house, in regard it was one of the greatest, and the
noblest allied in all that City. I taking hold of this occasion, came in a
little closer unto him, helping to turn the Key about, when I saw which way it
was winding; and so thinking it fit to strike the Iron whilst it was hot,
prosecuting my purpose, I spoke thus unto him; There is not any thing now in
this world, that can work astonishment in me, nor make me to abate one hair
of my courage; for I am well acquainted with misfortunes, know how far
Disgrace can throw the bar, and the utmost harm she could do me. For he
that shall tread in my steps, and run those courses that I have done, shall
hazard both the loss of his life, and honor. But I have armed myself with
patience, to endure any misfortune whatsoever. I have learned long ago
courageously to suffer and abide the changes of Fortune with an undaunted
mind, for I always suspect the worst, looking From Fortune, we are to suspect
the worst.
for the hardest measure she can give me, and prevent her better usage, by
expecting no good at her hands. Her effects are never so great, as are her
threatenings; and if I should have been cowed with them, they would have
followed me still close at the heels, as the Greyhound does the Hare, and
never give me over, as long as she could wagge her tail, or fetch her breath

No great heed is to be given to that which has succeeded in this business,
nor that I entered into it upon a Tuesday; For I am neither wedded to
superstitions, nor think that your Lordship is descended of the House of the
Tuesday observed to have been an unfortunate day to the house of the Mendocas.
Mendocas, that you should be taken with these vain and idle toys of the
Spaniards, as if all other days had a particular privilege, and Tuesday only
had received a curse from heaven. And if Fortune should fall upon me, with all
the forces she can make, come what can come unto me, be it never so bad, all
her rigorous dealing toward me, shall not wring one word out of my mouth, that
shall be prejudicial to any man. Your Excellency may do well to dissemble
this business, and to seem to take no notice of what has past, nor to care a
pin for it. For mine own part, I shall ever truly serve you to the death,
fall back, fall edge, hap what will hap, all is one to me. Yet withal, true
it is, and I shall make bold to tell you so, that if the Case were mine, as it
is yours, I would not only desist there-fro, considering how cross things go;
for of a thousand days, I cannot get one day of Audience; so that it is likely
to prove an endless piece of work, and an immortal kind of business, like
unto that of your Mayorasgo, is the heir of a house.
Mayorasgos, or Primo-genitureship, which your fathers settle upon their eldest
sons, but shall not come to enjoy their estate, till they be dead. Besides, I
may not well set my foot any more in those parts, by reason that my haunting of
that place is now generally noted, and some stick not to talk too liberally
of it.

There are not wanting in Rome as good, and better ware then she, which may be
had with less danger, at an easier rate, and give your Lordship more content,
and less trouble. I know not how it is with others, but my love is not so
fervent, as to love for love, but for fashion sake to laugh and be merry, and
to make sport, as they use to do in my country. I am like a Melon-mongers
Knife, cutting here a slice, and there a slice, now at this corner, then at
that, changing and altering my marks, rouing sometimes at one, sometimes at
another, here to day (as they say) and to morrow in France. I take thought for
nothing, nor am I wedded to my will in any thing, nor am I constant in my
purposes, especially in matters of love. For if one will not, another will. I
eat, and sleep at my due hours; I sigh not, when I am out of my Mistresses
sight, but in her presence, I fetch many a grievous groan, and utter my
complaints. And this is that mill, wherewith I grind. But your Excellency
runn's a clean contrary course. For you do all that you do, with a great
deal of gravity, and with a Lordly kind of carriage and greatness. And
being a great and powerful man, you have those things in chase, which are
hardest to be achieved, and like the Falcon fly at the Hearne, making wing
after her, till she be quite out of sight; pursuing your game to the utmost you
are able, cost it what it will cost, or come what will come of it, you care
not. For as you have force and strength to make resistance, so you accommodate
all things handsomely by your discretion and wisdom; you have a good staff to
trust to; and good legs to bear you up.

You do not well understand (Guzmanillo) what you say, said my Master unto
me; but is rather all quite contrary to that, which thou have spoken. For
there is nothing now at this present more prejudicial, nor more noted and
observed, then any the least spot or weakness in a public Every little spot,
a foul blemish in a public person.
person. For men of my quality are bound to wear such clothes as befit such
Ministers, and not as shall fit best with our own fancy. Otherwise, we shall
be taxed by those that cast an eye upon them. And every little indecencie in
them, turns to a stain at least, if not a foul blot. A little breath (you
know) will make the biggest Organs go. And your greatest men sound lowdest in
the ears of the world, when the noise of their actions are blown abroad by
the bellows of the peoples breath. And I swear^ unto thee, that if I had not
engaged my self by my word, and more particularly im-pawned my credit to
Nicoleta, by giving my faithful promise, that I would come and visit Fabia in
person (besides it would grieve me, to be accounted inconstant, or cowardly,
blaming me of lightness, that my love should be like that of children, or
like water in a Sieve, or that I went about but to try of what metal she was
made, and then to laugh and scoff at her coozening of both her and my self of
these our good hopes, and that it should be said of me, that I did then turn
tail, when I might have seized on my game, and had the Partridge in foot,
which I might have trussed, if I would my self) I would not have cared a
button. Besides, being (as thou say) that this business goes on so slowly,
and so coldly, I do not find my self so fast entangled in her love, and so
transported with passion, that I do not understand and consider with my self,
that she has a husband, that is one of the principal, and chiefest in Rome,
rich, and noble, out of which respect we ought to walk very warily, as
professing to have some honorable beginning, and not to dis-honour the house
we come of, for which cause I ought to keep a good Decorum, without doing
vvrong or injury to any. And although she be young and fair, (and as such a
one obliged to take hold on those fair occasions that are offered) yet ought I
not to follow her blandishments, and perhaps to my too great cost, but with a
great deal of caution and heed; as shall best stand with that duty which I owe
to my nobleness of blood, and to the honor of their house and kindred.

Many times, without due consideration, we vn-aduisedly will see a man's game,
and upon badde Cards (though we have little reason for it) set up our rest,
and when we are once in, we cannot give over the Vye, unless we will be
accounted simple, cowardly, and weak.

But since that on our part, we have used all possible diligencies, and that
they prevail so little, and cost us so much, (as the case stands now with
the honor of this Gentlewoman;) if my sensual appetite, like Gunne-powder,
has with its fire scorched, if not burnt my reason, by acknowledging now the
ill, which I have taken in hand, that fury is now ouer-past, and prostrating
my self on the earth, I confess my fault. I will go no more (as thou say)
following of that, which flies from me. But with this Lady, which was in a
manner in my hands, I will deal with her, as does the generous Hawke, by
letting this Bird go; by which nobleness of mine, that ill name shall be
quite buried underground, which for my sake has been raised of her; taking
therein the best course that I can, that may make most for both our reputations.

This was that he said unto me. And me thought that this his resolution was
my salvation. For therein, I found the Paradise of my desires opened unto me;
and praising this his good purpose, the issue was the easier, not so much for
his intention, as for my reputation. And therefore I said unto him, Your
Excellency shall herein do like your self, and proceed in that which you
both say, and do, with that correspondencie, which is most agreeable to your
wisdom. For albeit it be a great happiness, to obtain that which we
desire; yet I hold it a greater, not to desire that, which our sensuality
suggesteth unto us; much less, if it incite us to the hurt of others, and more
especially toward persons of quality.

This is a Christian consideration, and a Daughter worthy the birth of your
Lordships brain; and therefore fit that you should father it, and not cast it
off. And for the manner how you shall come off from this business, leave that
to me. For a faithful servant, although for to maintain himself in his
Masters love and favor, he is wont to give a heat unto that What a serua^
ought to do to maintain himself in his Masters favor.
appetite which he finds to be in him, yet is he bound, when he shall see
this humor corrected in him, to turn the reins, encouraging him to continue
in this his good purpose. This being said, he licensed me from him, saying;
Farewell (Guzman) and think upon this business, which I put into thy hands,
as I have already done mine honor. And so we parted.

CHAP. VII.
The jest being publicly known through Rome, which befell Guzman de
Alfarache, together with the ill success that he had with the Boore; for very
shame he departs from thence, and goes for Florence. In which journey, a Thief
enters into friendship with him, that he might the better under that color,
rob him of all that he had.

I Have often considered with my self, how much Passion blinds him, that is
in Love. And I begin now to think Passion blinds Lovers.
upon my Master, that he should recommend his honor unto me, as if I knew how
to handle it, without soyling it. It comes likewise unto my remembrance, (nor
can I choose but laugh, when I think upon it) how it was possible for me,
being so notorious and offensive a Liar, as I was, to stand in such favor as
I did with my Lord: and that his Excellency should treat with me, more then
any other, of matters of importance; as also, that he should trust me with his
secrets, and his substance, admit of my opinion, and give credit to all that I
should say; and that I being such a one as I was, from whose mouth never came
any Truth, which was not adulterated by me in its going forth, yet I could
not endure a Lie in another.

And for that very cause did I hate that man to the death, and could never
afterward abide him, that should abuse me (though but once) in that kind. A
Liar loves not a Lie in another.
Nor was this any wonder in me, being that it is natural to all those that
negotiate businesses, to be much offended, if they be not in all things
punctually dealt withal; when as they themselves know not how to speak a true
word, and are never weary of lying. They begin with the highest, and end with
the lowest. For what can be more noble then Truth? and what The effects of a
Liar.
more base then Lying? If you are to receive any courtesy from them; or that
you would have them to do you a favor (though this kindness shall cost them
nothing) how many sleights; how many tricks; how many delays, and puttings off
from one day to another, and from this, to the next morning, which morning
never comes; being like unto that of the Crow, which cries still Cras,
promising that which she never performs?

But if you are to give them any thing, and that you do not keep touch with
them at the time appointed, (and which is the fault now and then of your best
Watches) that you miss but one minute, if you fail never so little of your
promise, if you do not justly make payment, and delay them but one hour, you
are no man of your word, nor do you know what belongs to good dealing, nor are
so honest as you should be. I did the like with those that I had to do
withal. I did consider (but foolishly I must confess) with my self; What
will it benefit me to tell truth? What does it concern me, that it is the
Vice of those that are vile and base, and Lying, the food of beasts.
the repast and food of beasts? What harm shall I receive, if men will not
give credit unto me, if I have got the same already, although they apparently
see that I lie, and that such is their passion, that they will not dis-deceiue
themselves of my deceit? What honor have I to lose? How can I fail in my
credit? I am well enough known, and the world is now come to that pass, that
only for this cause of my lying, they uphold, maintain, favor, Notable
instructions for great Princes, and men of quality.
and esteem me.

Lying, and Flattery, is meat alone for g^ men, it is the only dish that
pleases their palate, the only music that delights their ears. But you
are no welcome man unto them, if you come and tell them, that it is time for
them to leave off gaming, that they have wasted and consumed their estate, and
that their Vassals and Tenants are grown poor and beggarly. That they should
not play the Fanfarrones, roysting and swaggering where e're they come: nor
show themselves dissolute, and loose in their behavior, either in the open
streets, or in the Church, which must needs give occasion of much both hurt and
scandal. That they should not be such lavish and prodigal spenders, as to
ruin themselves, and to break their necks through too much haste, by taking
Posthorses, as it were to run out of their estates. And seeing that they can
find in their hearts, and make no bones of it, to fool away such a deal of
money as they do, and that so vainly, and so idly, that they would yet make
a conscience to pay their servants their wages, and not to let them go
tottered and torn, and ready to starve for hunger. That if they be rich, and
in favor with their Prince, that they dispense a part of these their good
fortunes to the poor. That if they have their Kings ear, and are inward with
him, that they should make benefit of this their priuacie, by procuring
themselves good and sure friends; for there is no firmness in Fortune; nor no
Princes favor so fixed, but it may fall off. That at least, on Festival
days, they should rise betimes and get them to Church to hear Mass. And that
they should truly and sincerely make confession of their sins, and not only
for fashion sake, to cumply with the Parish, being therein only nominall, but
not real Christians, having the name, but not the nature of true Christians;
for there are a kind of men, that make a show of having faith, and that
observe the precepts of the Church, but for no other end, least they should be
punished, if they should do otherwise. That they should look well into
themselves, and learn to know that they were but men.

And in case that they should be old and strooken in years, that they are now
wrestling with death, who is ready to trip up their heels, and throw them into
the grave, which lies ready open to receive them; Their sentence is already
notified unto them; and as they that are to be executed, take leave of their
friends, and have those Ensigns borne before them, Deaths sentence what manner
of thing it is?
which are prepared for that conflict; So must they at last take their farewell
of all those things, whereunto they living bare most affection: As their
taste, their sleep, their seeing, their hearing, and the like; To which sweet
Senses sentence of death is daily, if not hourly notified, by the Reins, the
Kidneys, the Liver, the lesser Guts, and our Urine: The stomach begins to
languish, the strength of it waxes weak, its natural heat begins to fail;
here the eye-teeth drop away, there the gumm's fall on aching: all which are as
a mouldring away of these our clods of earth, and that the timber of this our
house is rotten, and the roof ready to fall about our ears, and that there
are no buttresses to uphold this tottering wall; from the foundation to the
very top, it is wholly run to decay, and the ruin thereof is at hand.

Admonish a young man of these, and the like things; or some rich young
Necessary lessons for young Gallants.
Gallant, who is as daring, as he is indiscreet, and so headstrong, that he
will not be ruled; represent, I say, unto him, that he does not know his
friends from his foes, that for speaking thus, looking there, commending that,
and peradventure for but walking by, if not entering where he should not, he
will be suddenly stabbed at one time or other, not having so much time as to
receive the blessed Sacraments, nor to call upon God, to help him in this his
extremity; or to advise him to consider, that his blood is corrupted, ill
humors abound in him, that he lives disorderly, as given to all excess and
riot, that he uses little exercise, and that his often surfeitings will bring
him to an Apoplexy, or some other dangerous disease, that will quickly make an
end of him, or that the Lamb goes as soon to the Shambles as the sheep; and
that he should not flatter himself, because he finds himself strong in his
arms, so and in his feet, lusty in his legs, able in his body, and free from
all aches, either in his head, or those his other parts, that therefore he is
safe, is priuiledg'd from sickness, has an established health, and assurance
of long life.

And here (me thinks) I hear this young gallant say; Such poor Rascals as
thou art, must come to die, and suffer such misfortunes as these; For I am The
poor reasons that the rich allege against the poor.
rich, strong, valiant, discreet, and nobly descended. I have a faite house to
dwell in, a soft bed to lie in, I eat what I list, I want nothing that my
heart can desire, I live at pleasure, and do what I will, without
controlement; and where there are no troubles, nor no care-taking, there is no
sickness, there no door open for old age to enter. Ah, poor silly fool
that thou art! Samson, David, Solomon, and Lazarus, were more good, more
discreet, None live for ever in this world.
more valiant, more gallant, and more rich then thou, and yet they died, when
their time was come.

There have been many millions of men from Adams time to thine, and yet there
was not any one of them that lived for ever in this world. He then that shall
tell them this Truth, or any thing else that may be for their good, they will
take him to be a fool. Who then will adventure to tell them their faults? Or
who dare speak their mind freely unto them? Let There is a Spanish Proverb
that says, Aueriguelo Vargas Let Vargas approve it. Which is to be understood,
when a (...) is very intrua^ and hard to be decided. This Proverb grew first
from the Licenciado Francisco de Vargas, of the College of Santa Cruz in
Valladolid, a man of a strong brain, and of a quick dispatch, whom King Don
Fernando made choice of to be his Secretary. And because he did remit all his
Memorials to his scanning, and to give him an account of them, he would usually
say, when any made suit unto him; Aueriguelo Vargas. Couarru. Verb. Vargas. We
must neither jest with great men, nor tell them the truth. We are all of us
but weakelings. We ought not to flatter our selves.
Vargas speak to this point. He must be either desperate or foolish, that
shall presume to tell Princes and great Persons of these things; for if thou be
a man of understanding, and have any thing in thee worthy commendation, they
will presently call thee into the Court, and frame a bill against thee,
executing that Statute upon thee, of Scandalum magnatum. And if thou be a
Buffone and common Iester, they will send thee to the Porters Lodge, and there
have thee whipped. Therefore thou must neither jest with those that are rich and
mighty, nor yet be so plain with them, as to tell them the truth. For, I am
not bound to speak the truth, where I know it will not be accepted, and
whence I am sure I shall get great hatred, if not harm, for my good will. It
shall be sufficient for my understanding, and all such as I am, to know that
all things in this world pass away, and that we shall pass away likewise with
them. I could be content to say this over and over a thousand times together,
and repeat no other lesson; For, to understand this truth alone, is that which
most imports us, and does most nearly concern us. And why should we promise
that unto our selves, which we can not accomplish? He that holds himself to
be the strongest man, of the soundest constitution, of the best composed
humors, and the purest mixed elements, this man, I say, (for all his well
ordered frame of nature) has no assurance of his long continuance, but is more
apt to fall, then those other houses of Clay, which are less substantially
built. There is not any man's strength, be it never so great, that can resist
but a puff of sickness; the best of us all are but dung-hills, and heaps of
dust, which a little blast of wind will scatter away, and lay us level with
the earth. Let no man flatter and deceive himself: let him not feign that to
himself, which is nothing so: nor intertaine that, which his lying sensuality
shall dictate unto him. For she will speak that unto thee, which she vtters to
all the world besides. She will tell thee; Thou art great and powerful, and
may therefore do what thou list. That thou art a Gallant, and may
therefore go up and down, and take thy pleasure. Thou art fair and rich, and
may therefore be dis-honest, and dissolute. Thou art noble, and may
therefore lawfully scorn thy inferiors, and think none to be equal unto
thee. And if thou receiuest an injury, it is not for thine honor to put it up,
but to revenge it to the full. Thou art a Governor, and set in authority over
others, and therefore may govern according to thine own will, and order
businesses for thine own best advantage, though it be to the hurt of others,
let them maunder their worst, or come what will come, thou need'st not to care.
Thou art a Judge, and may therefore judge in thy friends favor, may tread
justice under thy foot and pervert the Laws at thine own pleasure. Thou art
favored by the King, and art able to show favor unto others; thou may
therefore use this thy favor, as thou shall Proverb.
think fit, and shall suit best with thine own liking, and blow Dara un humo
a narizes. i. disgu^arle, y ^ojarle. Couarr. Verb Humo. None is so good as he
thinks himself to be. Man is but dust; and what kind of dust.
smoke in the noses of the poor, not regarding how thou do offend, and
distaste them. For it stands not with thy reputation, thy Office, thy Dignity,
nor thy honor, that they should ask thee that which thou owe them, nor
speak to thee for that his cloak, which thou have wrongfully taken from him.

But, in good faith (my Lords) I must be so bold to tell you, that be ye never
so great, or be ye so great as ye imagine your selves to be, (though you can
never be so great, as you conceit your selves to be) yet the very best of you,
when you are at the best, are no better then a little dust. Make your choice of
which dust ye will; be it earth, or ashes; for there are no other sorts of
dust. If of earth; let it put ye in mind, that your beginning was dust,
though tempred with a little water, giving ye thereby to understand (if your
greatness make ye not like beasts, that understand not) that you should make
your selves fruitful for heaven, by entering into a due consideration of your
selves, and an acknowledgement of your own unworthiness. Ye know well
enough, that the earth cannot, without water, yield any fruit; And if this
earth of yours become dry through your vices, and that it be not watered with
the deaw of heaven, with holy inspirations, and with good works, that it may
fructify and bring sorth fruit, by pardoning of injuries, asking forgiveness
for those wrongs which ye have done to others, by paying those debts that ye
owe, and by showing true repentance, ye shall be but as heaps of Ashes, good
for nothing, and cast out upon the dunghill. And that in the end shall befall
ye, which we see to happen unto Ashes, whereof that Soap is made, that serves to
take out the soyles and spots that are in clothes, and are afterward as
things of no use, thrown forth upon some one filthystinking mixen, or other.
Ye shall by your bad examples, so terrify others, and make them so afraid of
following the evil courses, that they shall thereby be saved, and ye damned
to the pit of hell, that everlasting burning coalepit, whose fire shall never
go out. These I tell ye, are truths, and now it is time to tell ye them. And
if I told ye lies in my youth, out of a kind of pride and bravery that I
took in them, now experience teaches me another lesson, and riper years have
brought me to the knowledge of those many errors, which I then committed.

Nor let any man endanger himself, for to think, that that may happen We must
not defer our amendment upon hope of long life.
unto him, which has befalne me; to wit, Long-life; and relying thereupon,
grow slack and careless of their amendment, hoping that they may do that
time enough hereafter, when they begin to wax old; for a sharp Easterly wind
shall come upon thee on the sudden, ere ever thou art aware of it, and nip this
thy flower of youth, with the cold bitter frost of death, and sheere thee down
to the ground in this thy green and flourishing state, as grass is cut down
by the Sith of the Mower, and thou shall presently wither, and be carried
clean away, never more to be seen. I was never sure that I should come to
live thus long, nor can any man else warrant his own life. For we are all of
us but as Birds that fly abroad in the (...) s singing and sporting* while in
the mean time the Eagle comes, and seazeth upon one of them, which seems
best unto him. Or else comes the Owner of those grounds, using a thousand
tricks and devices to take them. None of us know the set hour of our death,
but all of us know this, that we must go one after another. I likewise, have
followed mine own idle humor, not thinking upon any settled course in this
world; but because the end which I intend, is to build up a perfect man, still
as I meet with stones fit for this building, I go The Authors intention.
setting of them up; these occasions, are my Center, and by them, as by so many
lines, I come thereunto. But here I will lay down this load of stones, and
when time shall serve, I will return again with another, and it shall not be
long e're I gather more, and bring them in place.

Returning therefore to our present purpose; I say, that I was wholly compacted
of lies, as I had ever been. With some I would be a Martyr, with Guzman, a
notable liar.
other some a Confessor. For all things are not to be communicated to all. And
therefore I would never truly impart my troubles to any, nor punctually publish
them; but when I was forced to manifest the same, I would tell one man one
tale, and another, another; and no man had it without it is comment. And because
a Liar (they say) had need of a good memory; I, that A liar had need of a good
memory.
had none of the best, to day I would recount the case one way, and to morrow
another, and so many times, so many different ways did I vary from that which
I first delivered: So that, bearing my self in this manner, I gave occasion to
those that knew me to be a Liar, not to give credit so much to me, as to the
general voice and report that went abroad. For they did all of them truly and
really agree upon the thing it self; they did iumpe in the matter, but not in
the manner. For every one did either take away, or add thereunto, as he
thought best; and as thou thy self perhaps art wont now and then to do.

Now, for some few days, as a novelty that had been newly set abroach, there
was no other thing talked of in all Rome. My misfortune was the theme of their
Discourse, and my being be^myr'd, the salt that seasoned their conversation. It
came likewise to my Masters ear, but he being wise, gave it the hearing, but
spoke not a word of it. For a Master is not always bound to take notice of all
that is done; for then he should be ty'de (by the Law of goodness, and out of
the nobleness of his nature) to remedy what is amiss. He did dissemble it
all that he could, but not so cunningly, but that by some inter-smilings, and
casting of his eyes, he made it known. He plough'd with me, and therefore knew
what furrow I had turned up. And as it was fit for A Master is not bound to
take notice of every (...) tale that is told him.
him to dissemble it, so was it for me to deny it. We were silent on all
sides, but not very long, for the Devils cloven foot at last brake out at his
shoes. There was a certain friend of his, and consequently my enemy, who
taking him one day all alone, told him, how much it imported both his quality
and credit, to rid himself of me, in regard of the public and open language,
which I used of those things which his Lordship had in-trusted me withal, and
that every one might scrue what he would from me, and draw all those secrets
from me, which he had committed to my bosom. That Gentlemen of his place and
profession should proceed according to that, which represented An Ambassadors
must have a care as well of his Masters, as his own reputation.
it self unto them, and that his Lordship doing the contrary, it would prove
very prejudicial to his own reputation, and his masters service. This
discourse is mine own; and though happily these formal words were not
delivered just in the same phrase, as I have now delivered unto you; yet I
verily believe, they were like unto these, if not more effectual then what I
have here set down. But howsoever they were the same, or not the same, I am
sure that none of them all could tell him more, then he himself already knew,
nor advise him better then he was able to advise himself. And I make no
question* that he was not well pleased with that which they said unto him. But
he spoke not one word thereof unto me at that time, nor made any show of
alteration, or carried any other kind of countenance toward me, then he was
wont to do. Only, because Lent was now newly come in, he made use of that
occasion, to live a little more retired, and not to talk of profane and idle
matters, and particularly, not of women.

Thus did things run along. But in regard that I was become the common
Table-talke of all the Town, those that waited on my Lord in his Chamber, his
Pages, and other his ordinary servants, took a little more liberty and
license of language unto them, then did well beseem them. For, to make
themselves merry, and to intertaine the time, what between jest and earnest,
they did so nip me with their witty jests, and pay me home with their
Satyricall lashes, that your Mariners do not more strain their tacklings in a
tempest, then they did wrest and wring the very bowels within me. So that now
at last, neither at home, nor abroad, had I any place, wherein I might rest
secure; nor any wall, where-against to lean, and from whence some Echo did
not sound, that did voice forth the sins that I had done.

I had now so lost all patience, and was so in a manner besides my self, How a
wise man may be made to turn Fool, or madman.
that one day as I past along the street, I was almost enforced to have
committed many fooleries. He said well, who being ask't, in how long a time, a
wise man might turn fool? Answered; That is according as the boys in the
street shall flock about him, abuse him, and hoote at him. This was it that
brought the water up above my chinne, and was ready to drown me; this was it
that made me to for-sweare all sufferance, and to renegue my wonted patience.

Many little children, as well as the greater lubbers, did persecute me,
Guzman persecuted by boys and children.
wheresoever I went, laughing and scoffing at me, with strange outcries, and
loud showtings, making a most hideous noise. I took up stones, and would have
thrown at them; but a young man, of mine own stature, quality and years,
well-behaued, but somewhat hot and choleric, came running in upon me, and
held my arm so fast, that I was not able to move a finger to do them any
hurt; yet did he deal so honestly with me, as to take part with me against
them all, and to defend me against this their rage and fury, drawing in two or
three other of his friends, that came along in his Company, making resistance
both in deeds, and in words, against those Hobber-de-hoyes, which like so many
Hob-gobblins, or little Devils, did haunt me up and down from street to
street, and from house to house. And having now quieted and laid these unruly
sprites, he took me by the hand, bringing me himself alone home to my
lodging, leaving his Companions behind to keep back the boys.

When he had brought me thus home, I would feign have had him to stay with me,
that I might have fastened some kindness upon him, and have done him all the
courtesy and honor the house could afford: But could by no means get him to
accept thereof.

Then did I entreat him, that he would tell me his name, as also where was
his lodging, that I might come to kiss his hands, and give him thanks for the
vn-deserued kindness I had received from him; but he would neither acquaint
me with the one, nor the other; promising to return some other time to visit
me. Only he told me, that he did bear particular affection as well to my
person, as my Country; for that I was a Spaniard, and that he was as sensible
of this disgrace of mine, as if it were his own. And with this we took leave
each of other. I came home with my color so changed, my eyes so inflamed, and
my understanding so confounded, that (not considering well what I did) coming
just in the nick, when dinner was a serving up, I would needs go up with the
rest of the Pages to wait at his Lordships table. But when I was come into the
dining room, and found what Gentlemen were there attending on his Excellency,
I then saw my Guzmans indiscretion.
simplicity, and saw how egregiously I had played the fool; and would feign
have help my self, by getting forth from amongst them: but it was too late;
for my Master had already perceived by my countenance what I ayled, and
(without casting my water) that all was not well with me, and that I was
inwardly much troubled. Whereupon he demanded of me, what was the cause of
this my perturbation? I being taken thus on a sudden, having no leisure to
fall then a coining, and having never a new lie in store, went plainly to
work, and told him all the whole truth of the business, and every particular
passage thereof; which was all out, before I was aware, telling that, which I
was not willing to utter. And this was the first Wine, that came out of my
Tavern without water, and the first truth that ever I told in my life. My
Master said nothing to it: but those that waited at the board, not being able
to forbear laughing, The first truth, that ever Guzman told.
one claps me the cover of the Cup that he held in his hand before his face,
another the Plate that he held between his Thumbs, a third the Napkin
wherewith he served as Seruer, and those that were empty-handed; laying one
hand on their face, and with the other stopping their mouth; their hearts being
ready to burst in their bellies, hy'de them (for fear of blurting in my Lords
face) as fast out of the room, as their legs would carry them. And they past
so far therein beyond the bounds of modesty, that his Excellency was
somewhat moved thereat, and called out aloud unto them to be quiet, rebuking
them with sharper words then ever heretofore he was wont to do, reprehending
them for this their ouer-boldnesse in his presence. Wherewith I was so
ashamed, and so quite altered from that I was before, as if I had been sensible
of the terms of honor, or had some signs thereof still remaining in me.

O how many things does Rigor correct, which Love is not able to effect! It is
good sometimes to fall into an error, that man may learn thereby to take
better ^eed hereafter.
O, how much does it import oftentimes, for to take a good fall, that a man may
the better learn to look to his feet hereafter, and to know how to walk more
steddily, and more surely! Then did I take notice of mine own deformity, in
that glass did I see every spot that I had about me; and was so quite dashed
out of countenance, and so confounded in my self, that for all the Masters,
and women that were in the world, I would never more take upon me to treat of
their Loue-matters, nor be a Broker in that kind for the greatest Prince in
Christendom. O, what a brave resolution was this, if it would have held!

The storm being now laid, my Master remained very sad, leaning his cheek on
his hand, and his elbow on the board, holding his Pick-tooth in his mouth
between his teeth, being much discontented, that these things of mine should
run on in that manner, that he must be forced to do that, which he never
thought to have done; how-beit it was requisite for him so to do, for the
avoiding of a greater mischief; seeing himself now so far engaged, that he
should give some notable touch to his Reputation, if he should declare
himself in my defense; especially, considering that men's servants are the
real and true mark of what goodness and finenesse is their Masters cloth. He
willed me to get me down to dinner; And from that time forward, neither I, nor
any of my fellows did for many days together, see his countenance so
cheerful, nor find his tongue so affable, as heretofore it was wont to be.

Now I durst not go (as before) out of doors, but by night. So that all day
long I kept my self close in my Chamber, spending my time, either in reading
good books, or playing upon some Instrument, or talking with my friends.
Insomuch, that this retiring of my self, wrought in those of the house a new
respect; and in those abroad, silence; and in my self, another course of life,
differing from that which I led before.

Now every man's tongue was still, and now by absenting my self from their
sight, all these my businesses were forgotten, as if they had never been. The
Young man came often to visit me, that had taken my part, when I was so vilely
mocked and abused by the Boys. He made me many offers of his Purse and his
Person; he acquainted me with his Country, his Name, and the cause of his
coming to Rome, which was to get a Dispensation of his Holiness, and that he
had spent therein a great deal of money and time, and yet was as far from
effecting his business, as the first hour that heeset foot in that City. I
held my self bound to do him all the good offices that I could to further
this his pretension, giving credit to all that he told me. And because I did
desire, that some fair occasion might be offered, whereby I might repay part
of that debt, wherein I stood bound unto him; I entreated him, that he would
acquaint me with his business, and I would petition my Lord Ambassador in his
behalf, and negociate it with all the speed I could. He returned me many
thanks for this my kind offer, and told me that he had now hit into the
right path, wherein he was to walk, and that he had now very good and assured
hopes to bring his purpose to pass. But in case this course should fail him,
whereinto he had now put himself, he would then intertaine that courtesy
whereof I had made him so willing a tender. And thus we past the time a while
in complement, giving and taking by turns some Ceremonies of Court-ship, till
at last he asked me, whether I would take the pains to walk along with him
to the Palace? I excused my self unto him, and told him the cause why I had
retired my self, and how well it sped with me; for by my not going abroad,
mine own mind was now quieted, and the noise and hurry of the Town very well
allayd.

This young fellow was as very a Wagge as my self, much of my age, and his
Beard (like mine) newly budding forth; he presently caught hold of these words,
as those, which he most desired to hear to come from me; and when I had herein
satisfied his longing, he said thus unto me:

Sen^or Guzman, you have carried your self with that discretion, as is proper
unto you, and may truly be termed your own. And I hold this for as good and
sure a remedy, as I find it difficult for you to put it in practice, and to
make continual use of it; For sometimes such necessary occasions represent
themselves unto us, that men are enforced, whether they will or no, to break
these their firm purposes, and religious resolutions. If I, Sir, were in your
case, rather then I would be thus mewed up, and for so long a time, I would
wear out this disgrace by traveling abroad, rounding all Italy, before I
would return. In which your travel, you shall not only take singular
content, but you shall likewise obtain your intended end, and with more
advantage, then you can possibly pretend, by this your private shutting Travel
yields much delight.
up of your self in your Lords house. For Time and Absence, wear out all
things, and are the best Physicians that can be found for such kind of
diseases as these.

He went likewise leading me along with the relation of diverse and sundry
curiosities, presenting unto me the great excellencies of Florence, the beauty
of Genoa, and the incomparable government of Uenice, and other things of great
delight, which did so dispose me to undergo this course, which (after that
he had taken his leave of me) wrought so upon me all that night, that I
could not take any rest, nor think upon any other thing. Me thought, that I
had already plucked on my Boots, and put on my Spurs, and that I was now
onward on my way. Whereupon I got me up as soon as it was day, and brought my
Lord his clothes; to whom, while he was making him ready, I gave an account
of this my resolution. He liked very well of it, holding it a commendable, and
an honest course, that it would make much for my good, and stop all those
mouths, that were now so clamorous against me. He then told me, what others A
loving Master, what manner of man he it.
had said of me; and that, which he sat musing on at board, when he showed
himself so sad how he was then beating his brains about my good and how much
he did desire to see me well accommodated, for the great affection that he bare
unto me, and that he had set his wits aworke for me; but seeing that mine own
invention had hit so well; he told me, that if I had a mind to go into
France, I should have Letters of recommendation to his friends there in my
favor; or if that I should make any other choice to my better liking, he would
not be wanting unto me, but deal well and worthily with me, as one that had
done him true and faithful service.

I had a great desire to have gone into France, for the great state and
Majesty that I had often heard of that Kingdom, but much more of that their
noble and renowned King; But things were not then in that case that I could
conveniently execute my longing. I kissed his hands, and thank't his Excellency
for these his favors toward me; and told him, that (if it might stand with
his good leave and liking) I was very desirous to travel first through all
Italy, and especially see Florence, whereof I had heard such large
commendations; and from thence go to Siena, where Pompeyo did then reside, one
that was my especial good friend, and well known to his Lordship, for we did
ordinarily converse together by our Letters, though we had never seen one
another. Which correspondence had knit a strict knot of friendship between us.

My Master was very glad of this motion; and from that day forward, began to
set things in order for my journey. Purposing with my self to make hereafter a
new Book, washing away by my virtues, those spots, which Vice had stained me
with all.

CHAPTER VIII.
Guzman de Alfarache, discourses of Deceit. He departs from Rome. He desires
to see Siena, where certain thieves meet with his Trunkes, which he had sent
away before, and rob him of all that he had.

THat most famous Philosopher Seneca treating of Deceit, Seneca's saying,
touching deceit.
(whereof we have said somewhat already in the third Chapter of this book,
though all that shall be spoken thereof, will be too little) in one of his
Epistles says; That there is a deceitful kind of promise, which is made to
the Fowls of the air, the Beasts of the field, the Fishes in the waters, and
men themselves upon earth. Deceit comes unto us in that submissiue kind of
manner, in solowly, and so humble a fashion, that they that do not know her,
may be condemned of ingratitude and inciuilitie, if they do not set wide-open
the gates of their soul, and run out to receive her with open both arms and
heart. And for that the art thereof, which is now a days The nature of deceit.
professed, the studies, the watchings, and the diligences, which are used
therein, are all done with a double mind, and set themselves a-worke with a
false intent; by how much the more the thing that is treated of, is in it is
nature of that quality, that we may therein easily commit many errors, that
may turn much to our prejudice, by so much the more secret subtilties, crastie
Counter-minings, cunning Stratagems, strong Artillery, and warlike munition,
she fortifies her self, furnishing her self with all necessary provision,
when she means to come into the field. And therefore we It is better to be
deceived, then to deceive.
need not so much to wonder, that we are now and then, but that we are not
always deceived. And the case standing so, I hold it a less evil, to be
deceived by others, then to be the Authors of so sacrilegious a sin.

Amongst other things which King Don Alonso would (who was surnamed the Wise)
in-discreetly reform in nature, this was one amongst the rest; that he did
blame her, that she had not made a Window in man's breast; that we might see
that, which he was plotting in his heart, and whether his manner of proceeding
were fair and sincere, or whether his words were feigned, or whether (like
Ianus) he had two faces under one hood? And the cause of all this, is
Necessity; for if a man find himself laden with obligations, and Necessity
makes men bold.
knows not how to ease himself of them, he goes about to seek all the helps
and means he can, to lighten himself of this load, and to come off as
handsomely as he can. Necessity teaches us the way to all this, and makes the
hardest and most untrodden paths, to appear even, and easy to be hit. It will
break through the thickest Briers, and clamber up the roughest and steepest
Rocks. It is in its own nature (as is before mentioned in our first chapter)
full of daringnesse, and of Lying. And for this cause, even your simplest Birds
and Beasts secke to deceive.
and most innocent Birds have their tricks and their subtilties. The Dove flies
with a strong and swift wing, seeking food for her tender young ones, whilst
another of her own kind, from the highest top of some one Oak or other,
calsher, and inuites her, that she will intertaine her self there awhile to
ease and refresh her self, and only to the end, that the cunning Fowler may
come the more conveniently to make his shoot, and kill her. The poor
harmless Nightingale, in a wild and careless fashion, goes through the Woods
sweetly thrilling forth her loue-sicke complaints, when lo, another Bird of the
same feather, that is clapped into a Cage, awaking new iealousies, deceiues her
with a false call, and brings her into the Net, by means whereof, she becomes
a perpetual prisoner during her life.

Auianus the Philosopher tells us in one of his Fables, that even your Asses The
tale of an Ass, that sought to deceive.
have also a mind to deceive, and he makes mention of one, that had put on a
Lions skin, to make all the rest of the beasts of the Forest afraid; who
being sought after by his Master, when he saw him in that kind of clothing,
not being able therewith to hide his huge long ears, he presently knew this
his Ass, and soundly basting his back and sides with a good cudgel, and
stripping him of his counterfeit skin, he remained as very an Ass as he was
before.

Of all creatures living, there is scarce any one, but will, for the effecting
All use deceit.
of his purpose, use some deceit against him, who is careless thereof, and
thinks not on it; As is expressed in that Impresse, of a Snake that lay
asleep, An Impresse of the Snake, and the Spider.
and a Spider, that came secretly down for to nip him by the head, and strike
his poison into him, and so work his death; whose Motto speaks thus: No ay
prudencia, que resista al engan^o. No wisdom can withstand deceit. It is folly
for any man to think, that a wise man can foresee, and prevent those deceits,
which like so many Traps and Gins, are laid in his way. I was not so
circumspect, as I should have been, I suspected no treachery, I received good
The qualities of a cunning thief.
deeds, I heard good words, I saw a man in an honest and fashionable habit, who
sought to give me good counsel, and seemed to favor me, who had put his life
in danger, to save mine, who visited me (as I thought) without any hope of
interest, or particular profit to himself, not being able to fasten upon him
(so unwilling did he ever seem to receive any courtesy from me) so much as a
Cup of cold water. He told me, that he was my Countryman, an Andaluzian, borne
in the City of Seuill, a principal Gentleman of the house of the Sayauedras,
and one of the noblest, the ancientest, and best qualified Sayauedra, a notable
thief.
of all that Family; and who, from one of such a quality, would have
suspected such deceit? But all were lies that he told me; for he was of
Ualencia, whose name, for some just causes I conceal; but he spoke the
Language of Castile excellent well, and had the true tone thereof, that it was
not possible to discern him to be other. He was a handsome well-fauoured
young man, well spoken, of a fair behavior, and a fine Companion in his
conversation; Who would have once suspected, that he should have proved such a
Conny-catching Rascal, and that with such ceremonious and feigned friendship,
he should thus deceive me? But all this cuning carriage of his, was but like a
Peacocks dressing, making this so fair a show, that thereby he might the better
deceive me, and that he might have the freer access into my Lords house, and
into my Chamber, to filch from thence whatsoever he could handsomely finger. I
had no mistrust of him in the world, but rather held him so honest a man, that
I durst have pawned my life for his truth.

He came the other day to visit me, and finding that I had altered my habit,
Sayauedra visits Guzman, only that he might rob him of that he had.
and put my self into another kind of fashion of clothes, differing from my
wonted wear, he startled and stood afterward as one amazed, not knowing what
he might think of it, or what might be the cause of this change. At last he
asked me the reason of this sudden alteration? I told him, that I had taken his
counsel, and that I was resolved to go to Siena, where I should meet with
Pompeyo, a great and entire friend of mine, and from thence to pass for
Florence, and so afterward to visit all Italy.

When he heard me say so, he began to take fresh breath, and seemed to be very
glad thereof, much commending this my resolution, and altring withal his own
determination: for if his design until then, were only to seek out some fit
occasion to steal thence an odd suit of clothes, some trifling Jewels, or
some odd pieces of Gold, not worth the talking of; having now heard this news
of my sudden departure, no less would now content him, then my whole store.
He was very diligent in observing how I did make up my Trunkes, putting his
helping hand thereunto. He marked where I had laid a set of Gold Buttons, a
Chain, and other Jewels that I had; and above three hundred Spanish Pistolets
that I carried along with me. For my Lord Ambassadors house, being I did not
now use to play, but to hoord up what Igot, yielded me, in the space of some
four years that I served him, good store of money, what in gifts; what for
good lucks sake, Gamesters bestowd upon me, when they had a good hand; what by
Cards, which I was ever ready to furnish them withal, and what with other
Presents, that now and then came unlooked for unto me.

When I had locked, and maled up my Trunkes, I laid the Keys upon my Beds-head,
whereon Sayauedra had set his heart; for then did he desire nothing more, then
to meet with some fit occasion, how he might come to the fingring of them, and
find means to falsify them. And it fell out just, The Spanish phrase is, A
que quieres boca, That is, Darle todo lo que quiere, y quanto pidiere. Couarr*
Verb Boca.
as he would have it. For, as he and I were talking of my journey, and
telling him that I purposed to send away my Trunkes before, and that I would
stay some six or seven days in Rome, to take leave of my friends, by which
time they would be at Siena, where I should find them ready for me, when I
came thither; in that very instant there came one of my Lords feruants unto
me, and told me, that there were some beneath did inquire for me, and did much
desire to speak with me. And because my Chamber was out of order, unswept, and
not fit, by reason it was so foul, to receive any visit, I went down to see
who they were.

In the Interim, Sayauedra had opportunity to take the print of all my keys
in certain pieces of some Wax Candles ends that lay about the Sayauedras
croft inccozening Guzman.
Chamber, if he had not purposely brought some along with him in his pocket.
Those that sought for me, were certain Muleters, or Carriers, which came for
my luggage; they came up, I delivered it unto them, and they carried it away.

This business dispatched, my friend and I continued talking together: and
because he did not offer to go away, I thought he did it out of courtesy,
and the friendship that was between us, and that it was out of his love to
keep me company, for that little while that I was to stay. Whereas indeed he
only stayed in Town, till these counterfetted keys were fashioned by the
Smithes hand, and to make me to break my sleeps, as by and by I shall tell
you.

He continued his Visits with me for three or four days together: and when
he thought he had made all cock-sure, and that the Bird could not now escape
his hand; he came one evening unto my Chamber, where he had not sat long,
but that his face changed color, and began to put on that feigned hiew,
which he was willing to give it, hanging his head in his bosom, making show
as if he had been taken with a great pain in his head, an extreme Ach in his
shoulders, a strange kind of sowrenesse or bitterness of his mouth and
palate, and above all, with a wonderful heaviness in his eyes, that he was
scarce able to hold them up. He seemed to be as it were in a Lethargy, or
the like drowzie disease; complaining, that he was scarce able to stand upon
his legs, desiring me that I would give him leave to go home to his
lodging. I was very sorry, and held it as a great unhappiness, that my
Chamber was not fitted for to lodge him, and to give him that friendly
intertainment, as my heart desired: Entreating him, (when I saw he would needs
be gone) that he would acquaint me with his lodging, that I might come and
visit him, and send him some physical curiosities, fit for sick folks, to
relish his taste, and comfort his stomach, or that I might serve him in any
thing else, wherein I might be useful unto him. He told me, that he
lodged in the house of a certain Gentlewoman, that lived very secret and
private; but in case this his sickness should not suddenly leave him, or that
he should chance to grow worse and worse, that then he would advise me
thereof, that I might come and visit him. And so taking his leave of me,
Sayauedra rides Post to Syena, and finely robs Guzman of his T^kes.
that very day he took Post, and rode toward Siena, where he found his
Companions, that went along with the Muleters, that they might see where, and
to whom these Trunkes were consigned.

When he was come to Siena, the people seeing a Gentleman come in that good
equipage by Post, took him to be some principal Spantard. He alighted at
the chiefest Inn that was in all the City, where presently his Companions
came about him, who had there attended his coming, and giving it out that they
were his servants, they waited diligently upon him.

That very day, as soon as he was arrived, he sent one of them to Po^peyo, to
give him to understand, that he was newly come to Town. And when my friend
had received this message, and knew that I was in the Town, he was so
ouer-ioyed, that going to put on his Cloak, it was a good while, ere he
could find the way to unfold it, and to set it right upon his shoulders. And
he himself afterward told me, that he first threw it one way, and then
another; one while with the wrong side outward, another with the cape doubled
in, and out of order, and in the end, when he could not hit the right, through
his too much joy, he carelessely flung it only upon one shoulder, and in this
unmannerly kind of manner, he came from home in all haste, stumbling and
tripping in the streets, and sometimes ready to fall upon his nose, through
his too much haste, and the longing desire that he had to see me.

Being come to the Inn, where Sayauedra had put on my person, he took it
very unkindly, complaining much, that I should make him such a stranger, and
deal so unfriendly with him, as not to alight at his house, which I might
command as freely as mine own. Which Sayauedra having excused as well as he
could; they afterward fell into discourse, talking of his journey, and some
other things of Rome, until it was night.

At which time Pompeyo, for the present, taking his leave of him, that he
might leave him to his rest: Sayauedra gave (in his presence) the key of one of
his Trunkes, to one of his servants, saying unto him vvithall; Do you hear,
Sirrah? Go you along with S^n^or Pompeyo, and take me out such a suit, which
you shall find in such a part, for I will put on that to morrow.

They went away together, and his servant punctually performed that, which his
Master had commanded him; vn-cording, in the presence of Pompeyo, the very
selfsame Trunk, whereunto he was directed, and taking forth the foresaid
suit of clothes, he locks me the Trunk, and putting up the key in his
pocket, he comes his way. That night Pompeyo sent him a very good supper, a
neat collation of Comfits, and sweet meats, and admirable rich Wines:
Wherewith when Sayauedra and his fellows had supt, and had eat and drunk
their fill, they got them to bed, where they so soundly slept, that they did
not wake till the next day.

That morning Pompeyo came somewhat early to visit him; but his servants
entreated him to hold their Master excused; for he had not taken any rest all
that night, and was now newly fallen asleep. He told them, he was very sorry
he had so ill a night of it; he would not therefore now trouble him, but
would go his way and come again anon. But they would by no means give way to
that, telling him, that their Master would be very angry with them, when he
should know that he had been there, and that none of them had either so much
wit, or manners to tell him of it. Whereupon, they went presently up into his
Chamber, and signified unto him, that Sen^or Pompeyo was come to see him. He
was very glad of it, and commanding one of them to set ready a Chair for him,
sent down another to intteat him to come up.

Pompeyo, as soon as he came in, asked him how he did, and what was the
cause of his last nights indisposition? He told him, that for want of use, he
was so weary with riding Post, that he found himsslfe somewhat distempered,
his body being ouer-heated, and that he had a purpose to be let blood.

Pompeyo was very earnest with him, that he would change his lodging, and take
his house for his Inn. Sayauedra excused himself, telling him, that his
servants were unruly, and given to disorder, and that he was resolved to put
them away, and to take new within these eight or nine days, and that then he
would promise him to receive this courtesy at his hands, which he had so
kindly offered unto him: Entreating him in the mean while, that he would do
him the kindness, as to send his Trunkes by one of his own servants, because
he had no great trust in any of his own; and fearing, that giving them the
Keys to fetch such things as he needed, they might put some trick upon him.

Pompeyo liked well of it, and thought that he did therein very wisely and
discreetly, only he seemed not to be so well pleased, that he should treat
of taking Physic in an Inn. But resting contented with the promise that he
had made him, he performed what he desired, and was no sooner come to his
lodging, but he laded certain Porters with his Trunkes, and sending one of
his servants along with them, he saw them safely delivered to Sayauedra. He
sent him that day a very dainty dinner; and those two friends having taken
leave of each other for that night, that they might go to bed in a good hour,
Sayauedra and his Companions conuayed secretly into another house that which
they had brought thither, and taking Post, departed presently for Florence;
whither, when they were Sayauedra and his companions Post away to Florence,
where they divide the Spo^e.
come, they divided the spoil amongst them.

These copartners with Sayauedra, were their crafts-Masters, subtle fellows,
and stout Rogues; and the principal plotter and contriuer of all these
pilfring proiects, was a Bolonian borne, he was a great Scholar, and a very
learned Doctor in this kind of Art; his name was Alexandro Bentiuoglio, the
son of a Doctor in that University, who was a rich man, and a great
proiector, but of no extraordinary Discourse, but one that did build Castles
in the air, and frame in his imagination mighty matters, and things of great
intertainment.

This man had two sons, in condition quite opposite, and contrary one to the
other. The elder was called Uicencio, an ignorant young fellow, a silly Ass,
the laughter of the people, with whom your Noblemen and Gentlemen made sport;
he would bolt you out the famousest fooleries that could be devised: One
while, he would boast his Nobility, another while his Valor; sometimes he
would take upon him to be a great Musician, and then falling off from that, he
would brag of his Horsemanship, and his Poetry; and above all, he would
profess himself to be the only Enamorado, and perfectest Loue-proficient in
all the Country. So that of him, it might be said, Dexalas Dexalas penen, is
some phrase tending to that purpose, as I turn it; or some catch of a Song. I
would be glad to be better informed.
penen. Suffer such to dye in their folly.

The other was this Alexander, a notable Thief, nimble fingered, and of a
strong and able body. Who, though he were well borne, yet was he ill bred, and
for want of good education, became an excellent Vagabond, and a notorious
Rogue, by keeping of evil company. This man's Companions, were other such like
ruffianly fellows as himself. For like will to like; and all sorts of things
have recourse to their proper center.

Now, because he was their Ringleader, and the only principal man amongst
them, and that did all in all, he made Sayauedra content himself Ill company
hurtful.
with a little, giving him some, but the worser sort of my clothes. And
thinking that he could not remain there in safety, he got him into the Popes
territories, where his father was Alcalde. So that he posted to Bologna,
carrying away with him the Buttons, the Jewels, and the Pistolets, retiring
himself home to his fathers house. And the rest of his fellows, that shared
with him, fled to Trent, as they afterward told me in Bologna, and there they
dispersed themselves.

When Pompeyo returned to visit me, not finding my Statua there, nor any of
his fellows, he asked mine Host of the house what was become of them? He told
him, that the night before, they went away from thence with their Trunkes, but
whether they knew not. He took this for an ill sign; and suspecting what
this might chance to prove in the end, used great and extraordinary diligences
in the search of them; and having notice that they rode Post by the way of
Florence, he sent Hue and Cry after them, with a warrant to apprehend them.
But leaving them to this their business: let me return now unto my self,
and God grant, that in the mean while, they may have the good luck to meet
with these Thieves, and recover my lost goods.

Those few days that I afterward stayed in Rome, I was iocund and merry, and
did not so much as once dream of any such roguerie intended against me. And
out of a great desire that I had, to know how my sick friend did, whether he
had recovered his health, or were in worse case, then when he left me; I staid
four days waiting for him, but seeing he came not at me, nor sent unto me, I
continued four days longer in Town, making inquiry after him amongst some
of his Countrymen, giving them all the marks and signs, whereby they might
know, or at least guess at the man, but this was to ask for Preguntar por
Entunes en Portugal. Where there is no such thing to be found. Guzma^ is
sorry that he cannot see Sayauedra before his departure.
Entunes in Portugal, or to look to hear a Magnificat Pr^erb.
at Mattens, or to seek after the man in the Moon, for there was no such
kind of thing to be heard of. All the diligences that I could use, were to no
purpose. I did verily believe that he was very sick, if not dead. I likewise
thought with my self, that since he had concealed his lodging from me, that
the reason thereof was, because he had not a convenient Chamber to receive the
visits of his friends. I did as much as lay in me to look him out: but when I
saw it was all lost labor, and that I could not possibly hear any news of
him, I left a large recommendation of my love unto him in my Lords house, and
so taking leave of my Lord Ambassador, I resolved the next day following to
begin my journey.

My Lord grieved much for my departure, clapped both his hands upon my The
Ambassadors kind usage of Guzman at his departure.
shoulders, and taking a chain of Gold from off his neck, which he did
usually wear, and putting it on mine, he told me, while he was doing me this
honor; Guzman, I bestow this upon thee, that thou may, as often as thou
look upon it, have me in thy remembrance, as one that wishes thee all good.
He gave me also, besides that which I had of mine own, good store of Crowns,
which would serve conveniently to defray my charges for some reasonable while
very well, and plentifully, that I needed not to want any thing that was
needful and fitting for me.

When he had thus furnished me, he laid his Command upon me, that How a
servant should behave himself, to be beloved of his fellows.
where-soeuer I should hap to be, I should from time to time give him an
account of my health, and how things did succeed with me, assuring me, that
none should rejoice more in my well-doing, then himself; hoping, when I had
made an end of my travel, to see me again in his house, whither I should
always be most welcome.

These his words and kind usage of me, favored of so much love, and the
advice and counsel which he gave me at this my farewell, was so sweet and so
sound, and delivered with that tenderness, exhorting me to good and virtuous
courses, that I could no longer hold from bathing my eyes with tears. I kissed
his hand, kneeling on the ground; he bestowd his blessing upon me, and with it
a good highway Nag. This done, down I went, got up, bid my fellows farewell,
and rode my way, making use of this Nagge in all my travel, which did never
fail me.

My Lord and his servants were ready to melt for the sorrow they had conceived
of my departure. He, because he loved me, and saw he must now lose me, and
would doubtless find a want of me for such services as I could best do him,
and himself took most content in: And they, because, albeit my actions were
ill for my self, and turned much to mine own hurt, yet were they never
prejudicial to my fellows: and when occasion served (if they had been put to
the trial) I dare swear they would have hazarded their lives in defense of my
person, rather then they would have seen me take any wrong. I was always
their good friend, never did them ill offices, told no tales of them, never
nourisht any quarrels amongst them, never crossed their pretensions with my Lord,
or hindered them in those their suites, wherein they were interessed, but did
further them all that I could; so that I was generally well beloved of them
all. For by doing them these real courtesies, and in that free and friendly
fashion, I could not but gain the greater love thereby, if not profit. For
they were reckned of by my Lord but as servants; but I was unto him, as if I
had been his son: So that I received from them the commendation of a good
brother, and from my Master, of a faithful servant. Insomuch, that neither my
seruise dis-merited with my Lord, nor their friendship failed me at my need.

And if that public fame which was spread abroad of me, touching that which so
unfortunately befell me in Fabia's house, had not been diuulged abroad by that
Aspine-leau'd tongue of Nicoleta, who to as many gossips, and friends as she
had in Rome, babbled forth the jest, which was put upon me by her Mistress in
the back Court of her house, I had never forsaken that commodity, which I
found in my Lords house, nor his Lordship have lost so good a servant, who had
so well and faithfully served him. See what mischief a wicked woman's tongue
can work; who, without doing her self Much mischief in an evil woman's
tongue.
any good (playing the tattling huswife) discredited her Masters house, and
disordred ours.

Let no man trust a woman with a secret, no (if it were possible) not the wife
of his own bosom. For upon every light offense, that she may be revenged of
thee, to pluck out one of thy eyes, she will be content to lose both her own;
making of a little bracke a great hole, and working thee much trouble upon
small occasion.

I went out of Rome like a Prince, well entreated, and better provided, having
store of Crowns to spend abroad, till the dirt I had taken should become dry,
and be rubbed out. For when such unlucky chances as these do light upon us,
there is no such remedy for them, as Time and Travel to wear them out. Mingo
never went abroad with more contentment, then I did now; I was gallant, rich,
out of the gunshot of ill tongues; with a full resolution, never to return
the same man I went forth, but like a new Phoenix, receiving fresh life from
these my old ashes.

I was now on my way toward my friend Pompeyo, who looked for me every hour,
having provided for me a neat lodging, with a handsome bed, and Table, and all
other furniture fitting thereunto. I came at last to Siena, and inquiring after
him, they directed me to his house; thither I came: I found him within, he
received me. I cannot say whether more cheerfully, or more heavily, sometimes
showing a joyful, sometimes a troubled countenance; not knowing either what to
do, or what to say, concerning the forepassed ill success of my Trunkes. He
was inwardly very sad, as well for the value of that I had lost, as also for
the trick that was put upon him, and the ill account that he should make me of
those my goods, which I had consigned unto him. He said never a word to me
touching my Trunkes, and would feign have kept it from me; but it was not
possible. For I had purposed with my self, to show all my bravery the next
day, and like the Peacocke, proudly to jot it up and down the streets of
Siena, and for that purpose, requested him to help me to my Trunkes, that I
might change my clothes.

Hereupon he was enforced to open all the whole business unto me, putting me
in good hope, that there were such diligences used, and that good course
already taken, that he did not doubt but that I should have all again, and
lose nothing of that which they had thus cunningly stolen from me. I was
struck with this blow to the very heart; and was thereupon so sad, as thou thy
self would have been, had thou been in my case, being thus stripped of
all that thou had in a strange Country, far from thy friends, and forced
to seek new, having but little store of money in thy Purse, and no more but
Proucrb.
one suit of clothes to thy back, and two Shirts in thy Port-manteau. God
deliver us from the hands of thieves and robbers, and from the frauds and
deceits of wicked men. It was now too late to look after them; the harm was
already done, but no remedy to be had. Que for coso lo aueys D^rsela (...)
beuer. 1. dor dis gusto, y dar un mal trago. Nadie diga, desta agua no beuer^.
Couarru Verb Beuer.
de beuer, y no lo aueys de verter. Whether I would or no, I was constrained to
drink of this cup; there was no avoiding of it.

Well, when I saw how the world went, and that there was no help for it; I
plucked up my spirits, set a good face on the matter, and drew strength out of
weakness. For, if I should in public have expressed my grief, and made open
show thereof, I might, in private men's opinions, been held baseminded, and a
man of no metal; and might thereby have hazarded Pompeyos friendship. Nor, had
I kept never such stir, never such a coil and ado about it, should I
thereby have repaired my losses, or done my self any good by it.

And therefore sound was that counsel; that we should encounter adversities
Adversities stoutly to be withstood.
with a cheerful countenance. For thereby our enemies are overcome, and our
friends recover breath.

CHAPTER IX.
Guzman de Alfarache, not recovering his lost goods, shrewdly complains of the
small punishment that is laid upon thieves. Wherein he delivers many things
worthy the noting.

THree days (according to the common saying) I continued booted and spurd,
expecting what news I could hear from those, that had these thieves in chase,
and whether they had had the good luck to find the track of their footing,
and so follow them upon the heat of that sent, till they had them in view, and
should come to ouer-take them.

While my friend and I were sitting at table, anon after we had din'de, as we
were talking of this mis fortune of mine, and the cunning carriage of these
thieves that had thus robbed me, I might hear a great trampling of the servants
of the house and some others, who making haste up the stairs, came in and told
us; We have him, we have him, the principal thief is taken, and the theft
confessed.

This put new courage into me, quickened my blood, and the tokens of my The joy
of the heart, cannot but express it self in our looks.
inward content, showed themselves in my face. For it is not possible, that any
man's heart should dissemble a sudden joy. Though it sometimes so happens, that
excess of joy, does suffocate the natural heat, and deprive it of it is life.
You might now have lighted a Candle at mine eyes, they did so sparkle, and were
grown so quick; me thought then I was giving Albricias to as many as demanded
it o^ me, and that I ran with open arms to receive this welcome news. We
rose up from the table, (where we sat talking before on this business) to go
and meet and salute this Officer, that had been imployd in this service, who
(as if he had been no less affected therewith then my self) came toward me
with his mouth full of joy, and having kindly embraced one another, I asked him
how the world went? He told me, it was like to go well. Then I farther
demanded of him, In what manner? He replyde, that one of the thieves was
taken, the rest he could not meet with, but that this would discover all.

Thou have happily observed, that when store of water has been suddenly What
the effects of sorrow are likened unto.
thrown upon quick burning coals, there has risen up at that very instant a
thick and sowltrie hot smoke, yielding almost such a steame of heat, as the
coals themselves gave before they were quenched. Even in the like case did
these his words leave me. For all those manifest signs of joy, which had
before diffused themselves thorow-out my whole body, were quite quenched with
the water of this bad news, and at that very instant, there was stirred up in
me an infernal smoke of choler, which I had much ado to suppress; but
because I knew it would not help me, I dissembled it the best that I could.

Pompeyo called for his cloak, and went presently to the Judge of the Court,
to entreat him, that he would use therein the best diligences he could, (which
was no more then was fitting to be done.) But all this did me no good. For, he
neither denied the theft, nor confessed that he was in the fault. He said that
the others had committed it, and that he was but their servant, and that they
had only bestowed upon him one poor suit of clothes, which he sold and spent
partly in Florence, and partly upon the way in his return to Siena.

And this is the common course of such kind of wicked people; They The
condition of wicked people.
further, and favor each others evil works and counsels, but when they have
wrought their purpose, and effected their intent, they forsake one another,
leaving every man to shift for himself, some going one way, and some another.

Upon this Confession, (because it was the first theft that ever he had been
taken with, together with that which he had alleged in his own defense, and
for those other considerations, which offered themselves unto the Judge) he was
sentenced to public shame, and afterward to remain a banished man from that
City for a certain time.

Now while this business was a handling, one of Pompeyos servants stood
diligently waiting there, expecting the issue of this business, that he might
come and advise me thereof. And when he had his Sentence given him, as if he
had brought my Trunkes along with him, he came running up in all haste to my
Chamber, laughing all the way as he came, and as iocund as a Pie, crying out
aloud unto me; O Sen^or Guzman, laugh and be merry; the Thief that help to
rob you, is condemned to open shame, I saw him up on the Asses back, before I
came away: if you will see him, hye you to the window, and look out quickly,
for it cannot be longere he come. O, how much would I have given, that this
Fool, this Block-head, this Coxcombe had been mine own servant, and in mine
own house, or in some other place, where I might have had my will of him, that
I might have pumeld him about the pate, bob'd him about the nose, struck out
the teeth of him, and beaten the iaw-bones of this Ass so sore, that he
should not have been able for a month after to fall to his feeding. I was
mightily out of patience at these his foolish words. O thou Traitor, (said I to
my self) see thou iu what poor case I am, and in a manner quite undone, and
do thou go about to comfort me with such a poor satisfaction as this? I
was ready almost to burst with choler; but even then, when it was in its
greatest force, there did offer it self unto my remembrance just such another
comfort as this; which was told me for a truth had passed in Scuill; which
made my sides to tickle again with laughing, the very thought whereof, had
made me quite forget my former anger. And this it was:

A Judge of that City, by especial Order from the supreme Council, Guzman
tells a tale of a stout Judge, as a soobsh Attorney.
took a delinquent, that had been a famous falsifier of Deeds, had often
counterfetted his Majesty's hand, and fained many false Patents, by means
whereof, he got a great deal of money in diverse parts, and at diverse times;
for the which he was by the said Judge, condemned to be hanged;
notwithstanding that this Offender did allege for himself, that he was de
Euangelio, a kind of Churchman, and therefore did appeal from his Sentence,
challenging his privilege of being tryde by the Ecclesiastical Power, as by
his competent Judge. But the Judge being resolved, not to reuerse his Sentence,
being persuaded, that he likewise falsifide these his Orders, stood to his
tackling, and hastened the execution thereof, vvilling him forthwith to be
led to the Gallows, commanding those that were to see the sentence executed,
to hang him out of hand; charging them to let this be first done de facto, and
he would answer the matter afterward as well as he might.

The Ecclesiastical Ordinary, was not in the mean while wanting on his part,
using all the power that he had, to save this man from death, aggravating and
heaping his Censures upon the Judge, threatening him, that in case he proceeded
therein, that there should Excommunications go out, and that in the Churches
there should be Cessatio a Diuinis. But being not able therewith, nor all
that he could do, to hinder the Sentence; the Delinquent was brought to the
Gallows, and when he was up upon the Ladder, and had the Rope about his
neck, there came a certain Notary to the foot of the Ladder, who had
solicited his business, and laying his hand upon his breast, said unto him;

Sir, you see, all possible diligence has been used, and not any one
essential thing left out, that might make for you; but this (you see) will not
hold water, nor do us that good we thought it would have done; For, as you
may perceive, the Judge (out of a wilful humor) has proceeded de facto with
you. But I vow and swear unto you (by that my Place and Credit, which I hold
in the world) that he has done you therein a most notorious wrong, and
contrary to all Law and Justice; but seeing it cannot now be otherwise, and
that for the present there is no help for it, I shall wish you, Sir, to arm
your self with patience, and to take your hanging quietly: And put your trust
in me: for I will stay with you to the last, I will not leave you till I see
you hanged. And leave it to me, to right the wrong he has done you.

Consider now, I pray, and tell me, what comfort can it be to those men that
are to suffer death, to hear such idle and foolish words as these to come from
a man's mouth? What pleasure can that miserable wretch, that is forthwith to be
hanged, take, that he has left a good Sollicitour behind him, to follow his
business, when he is dead and gone? Me thinks, this poor Clyent that
suffered, might very well have said to his Attorney, I should like it much
better (Sir) that you would come up here and take my place, and give me leave
to go and follow mine own business.

To such a one as I, who was robbed of all that I had, and left so poor as I
was, what credit or comfort could I take in it, to see a Thief ride upon an
Ass, to have his hands bound, and his back whipped, and to be put to this open
shame? Will his disgrace do me any honor? Or will the repeating either of
the case, or his punishment, procure me means to live, or furnish me with
those necessaries that I want? I got me out of that, into another Chamber,
thinking upon the ignorance of these men, and the loss that I had sustained by
those that robbed me; for that was the thorn that did so sorely prick and
grieve me. And as I was thus discoursing with my self of diverse and sundry
things, one while of this, another while of that: And amongst many other
things, that I went examining with my self, one (amongst the rest) was: Of
what small importance, and how light were these kind of punishments! For what
shame Thieves knew not what shame u.
can either be put into, or taken from a Thief, who has no shame at all, nor
makes any reckoning of it? And who, before that he begins to play the thief,
does resolve with himself to receive that punishment for his theft, whereunto
he shall be condemned, and shall (by the Laws of the Land) be inflicted upon
him? A thief (forsooth) shall rob a private house; and all his punishment
must be, to walk his public Stations up and down the Town. A pretty piece
of Justice. For mine own part, I have no great store of wit, and less
judgment, and therefore I know not well what to say against those Laws; which
before they were made, I make no question, but they were well weighed and
thought upon; and with sound and mature counsel ratified and confirmed. And
that before their publication, they were thoroughly scanned, and approved by the
general opinion of those, To carry a Felon through a City, riding on an Ass,
and to whip him, and banish him the Town, is no fit punishment for him, but
rather an encouragement to return to his former roguery.
that were learned in the Laws; yet notwithstanding it will not sink into my
head, that this is a sufficient punishment for a Thief to lead him only
through the City, for to do him shame, by making him a public spectacle to
the people, or to banish him from thence. But it seems unto me, to be
rather praemium, then poena, a reward, then a punishment. For thereby, in my
judgment, they do nothing else, but secretly say unto him; My friend, you
have hitherto made your benefit of our goods, and have made your self merry at
our cost. You shall now do well to get your living elsewhere, I pray
therefore get you gone, leave off to do us any more harm, and go rob some
other of our neighbors. I cannot be persuaded, that this mischief lies in
the Laws, but in those that execute them; for that they are either ill
understood, or not well executed. Wherefore banishment was first invented.


A Judge ought to understand and know, as well the man, as the matter for which
he condemns him. For banishments were not made for thieves that were
strangers, but for the Citizens of the said City, the natural Inhabitants,
and such as were noble, and well borne, whose persons were not to suffer any
public punishment, nor affronts. And to the end that the faults which they
committed, should not be exempted from punishment, therefore your Divine Laws
did ordain these your banishments, which without doubt, was the greatest
punishment of all other, that could be inflicted upon such kind of persons.
For thereby they are enforced to forgo their friends, their Parents, their
Kinsfolk, their Houses, their Lands, their ancient acquaintance, their Wives,
and their Children, their pleasures, and delights, and their businesses both
private, and public; being to go, they know not themselves whither, and to
live and converse with they know not whom. Which was certainly a great
punishment, and no less then death itself.

And it was the permis^ion of Heaven, and will of God, that he that made The
first inuenter of banishment, banished himself.
this Law, and was the first Inuenter thereof, should be paid home with the
same punishment that he had ordained for others, being banished himself by
his own Countrymen the Athenians. Many were much grieved thereat, and endured
a great deal of sorrow, accompanied with infinite inconveniences, and peril of
their persons; and many of them likewise did take it no less heavily, then if
they had suffered the bitter pangs of death.

It is reported of Demosthenes, that famous Grecian Orator, and Prince
Demosthenes banished to his great grief.
of Eloquence, being banished by his Citizens, left his Country like a man in
desperation, shedding many a sorrowful tear; and the more in regard that his
fellow Citizens had so cruelly proceeded against him, considering that he had
always protected, favored, and defended them, both with his head, and his
hand; his wit, and his strength; and therefore he did the more risent it,
making these his troubles and afflictions to seem the more intolerable to be
endured.

And as he was wandering abroad in the world, it was his hap to come to a
place, where he lighted by chance upon some of the greatest and mortallest
Demosthenes cherished by his enemies.
enemies that he had: Who then made no other reckoning with himself, but
that they would surely kill him; but they did not only give him his life, and
pardon all former injuries, but seeing him in this miserable and afflicted
state, taking pity of him, they comforted him the best they could, treating
him with all courtesy and kindness, and furnishing him with such things as
were necessary for him in this his banishment. Which was, as it were, a
throwing of oil into the flame; and the means of augmenting his sorrow, to
see that he should be more kindly used by his enemies, then his friends, as
did plainly appear, when being comforted by them in this his banishment, he
returne^ them this answer:

How would you have me to carry my self; how bear my banishment Demos^henes
his answer to his friends.
with patience; how not complain of my hard fortune, having so great cause, as
I have to bemone my mis-hap? Being that I am banished from that City, wherein
I was borne and bred and am forced by you to seek my fortune in foreign
Countries, where I meet with such enemies, that I doubt to find (and I shall
account it a great happiness unto me, that I have made so good a purchase) the
like friends elsewhere. They likewise banished Themistocles, Themistocles
banished, and his saying.
who being graced more in Persia, then in Greece, told some private friends of
his; Perijssemus, si non perijssemus. We had been undone, if we had not been
undone.

The Romans banished Cicero, induced thereunto by his enemy Clodius, Cicero
banished. Publius Rutilius banished. He is recalled, but will not come home.
anon after that he had freed his Country from ruin. They did likewise banish
Publius Rutilius, who was so valiant, and of that stoutnesse of courage, that
afterward, when those of Syllas faction (who were the cause of his exile)
would have reuersed his banishment, he would not accept of this their fair
offer, but said; I will make them blush for shame, by neglecting this their
kindness; for by this means, they shall come to see their own error, and
to acknowledge the wrong they have done me, by this their unjust persecution.
They also banished Scipio Nasica, in requital of those benefits Scipio
banished.
and good services that he had done them, in delivering them from the tyranny
of the Gracchi. Hannibal the Carthaginian died in Exile. Camillus the Camillus
banished.
Romance, a man of that worth and valor, that it was said of him, that he was
a second Founder of Rome, for that he had freed it from it is enemies, when the
whole State lay at stake to be won or lost; yet notwithstanding this
meritorious Act of his, he was banished his Country.

The Lacedaemonians banished their Licurgus, though a grave and wise Licurgus
banished; b^aten out with stones, and his eye shooken out. Solon and
Thrasibulus banished.
man; and one that had made them very wholesome Laws for the good of that
Commonwealth. Nor did they rest contented with this wrong they had already
done him, but they threw stones at him, and struck out one of his eyes. The
Athenians very impudently and unjustly banished their Solon, and confined him
to the Island of Cyprus; as they did likewise their great Captain Thrasibulus.
These, and infinite other the like were banished; and anciently they inflicted
this punishment upon the noblest and principallest persons, as one of the
greatest and grieuousest punishments which they could impose upon them.

I my self have known a thief, who because he was under years, and not A
just punishment inflicted on a little young thief.
capable of greater punishment, having been oftentimes banished, but never
went forth of his Country to finish this his Exile, and his thefts likewise
being of no higher nature then matter of victuals, for his greater punishment,
the Justice commanded, that he should have a collar of Iron clapped close about
his neck, which should be riueted so fast with an Iron pin, that it should
not possibly be taken off, hanging thereat a little Bell, to the end that the
ringing thereof, as often as he did stir or move, might give the people warning
to take heed of him. This may truly be called a just, and a wittyconceited
punishment.

Now, by this that has been said, thou may know, how grievous a punishment
banishment is to the good, and how ridiculous a thing to the bad: To whom all
the world is their common Country; and who account that to be their Country,
where they can best filch and steal. For wheresoever a thief comes, he enters
into that place, as a new Commer, and unknown; Which is no small advantage for
him, for the better exercising of his Office, the people not thinking any harm
of him, nor suspecting him to be such a one as he is. I know not, how they
understand this, who do punish them thus. It were the lesser evil of the two,
to let them go among the people with the foresaid Collar and Bell, that men
might beware of them; and not to send one thus abroad, where he is unknown,
with letters as it were of credence, to rob all the world. No, no, this is no
good course, it is not profitable for the Commonwealth, nor is there any
policy at all in it, to do thieves so great a favor. But for every light
theft, it is fit they should be soundly punished: As to condemn them to the
Galleys, to confine them to some Garrison Towns, and there to serve, and to
inflict other the like punishments upon them, for longer or less time,
according to the nature and quality of the offense. And in case they shall be
of an inferior kind, and not deserving the weight of your heauiest sentence,
I would have them branded, as the use is in other Countries, with a hot Iron in
the shoulder, that may leave the print of the mark behind; whereby, upon the
second theft they be taken with, it will plainly appear, what lewd livers
they be. By this course they bear not only the mark about them, but the cause
thereof. This will be accusation enough, to give in evidence against them, both
what they are, as also their course of life. And I would have this
re-incidencie and relapse of theirs to be severely punished. And many (I make
no question,) this course being taken and duly executed, will for fear, turn
over a new leaf, and that this their first correction will keep them in a
great deal the more awe, lest the continuance of their lewd courses, might
chance to bring them to the Gallows. This, and only this (I say) is justice;
all the rest is Frutaregalada, delicious Fruits, and minister only occasion to
your Escriuanos, to be as arrant thieves as they; and I know not whether I may
be so bold to say, that they are willing to set them free, that they may go
abroad, and steal afresh, whereby they may afterward have occasion to take
that from them, which they have stolen: and so of the two, prove the greater
thieves. But I will hold my peace, and harp no more upon that string. For I am
a man, and may err, and I have been already under their hands, and have
suffered too much through their false dealing, and I know not whether I may
chance to come again under their lash, and then they will use their pleasure
upon me, and revenge themselves on me without controlement: for I know not who
can hinder them, when they are disposed to work their will. My thief was
freed, he had confessed, who were the principal Offenders, and which way they
went; for which cause, as also that he had rounded the City on an Ass, and
had been put to open shame, he was set at liberty; leaving me (poor man) in
the wretched prison of poverty: Where I must now take my leave of you, and bid
you all Good night. To morrow morning, if you be desirous of the rest, and
would feign know, what in the end was the issue of this business; you shall
have it with all my heart, which I shall truly and faithfully deliver unto you.

FINIS.
THE ROGVE: OR, THE SECOND PART OF THE LIFE OF GUZMAN DE ALFARACHE. THE SECOND
BOOK.
Wherein Guzman de Alfarache, treats of that which befell him in Italy, till
he returned into Spain.
CHAPTER I.
Guzman de Alfarache, leaves Siena, and goes for Florence. He meets with
Sayavedra, whom he takes into his service. And before he comes to Florence, he
recounts unto him on the way, many admirable things concerning that (...). And
when he was arrived there, he shows him all, that was worth the seeing.

PHOCION (a famous Philosopher in his time) Phocion, and his poverty.
was so poor, that though he took a great deal of pains, he could hardly
get wherewithal to hold life and soul together. Whereupon, as often as any in
the presence of Dionysius the Tyrant, Dionyfius the Tyrant.
and his mortal enemy, made mention either of himself, or of the manner and
course of his life, he made a scoff and a jest both at it, and him, flouting
at his poverty, and deriding his misery, thinking with himself, that he
could not do him any greater disgrace, nor iniure him more, then to mock at
the meannesse of his fortunes. As if he would have inferred thereupon, that if
he had been a man of that great learning, as the world held him to be, he
might therewith have gained bread to put in his mouth, and not needed to live
in that want, as now he did.

When this came to the Philosophers ear, he was not only not grieved Phocions
censure of Dionysius.
thereat, but laughing at this his folly, he answered him, that reported this
unto him; It is true sir, that Dionysius says of me, in terming me poor, for
I am truly so; but, I must tell you withal, that he is much poorer, then my
self, and has a great deal more reason to be ashamed of himself, if he
shall but consider his own wretched estate and condition. For though I lack
money, I want not friends: I abound in the more, and fail in the less. But as
for Friends are the greatest treasure.
him, though he be rich in money, he is poor of friends. For I know not any
one that he has. This Philosopher could not satisfy himself better, nor with
a righter or fuller blow hit out his eyes, then by stiling him, hominem sine
amicis; A man, that had not so much as one friend in the world, that he could
truly say, was his friend. And albeit, it oftentimes so falls out, that they
are How friend* are often got, and kept.
purchased with money, and that this is a principal means to win and wedge
them unto us, yet this Tyrant had never yet the wit either to get or keep
them. And it is no wonder, that he should, of all other, want them. For he,
that says friend, says (in that one word) Goodness, and Virtue;
comprehending in that all the good, that speech, or thought, can reach unto.
Whosoever therefore shall desire to conserve friendship, and to continue in his
friends love, and that the bond of amity be not broken between them, must
have a care, that his works correspond with his words. But Dionysius, being
tyranny it self, and of too ill a digestion to keep friendship long, and his
conversation being worse then his concoction; and for that friends are not so
much gotten out of the greatness of our fortune, as our virtue; wanting that,
he wanted them.

For mine own part, ever since I had the use of reason, and knew what
discretion He that has friends, has all things.
was, I made it my chiefest study, to get me friends, though at never so dear
a rate, thinking no cost too much, to purchase so great a treasure. They
seeming unto me (as indeed they are) our greatest helps and comfort, as well in
prosperous, as a duerse fortune. Who does enjoy the content of contents, but he
that has true friends? What does so much lengthen and preserve our peace, our
life, our honor, and our wealth, as to see our friends to joy with us in our
prosperity? And in adversity, from whom, but from them, can we find any
refuge, kindness, comfort, help, and a fellow-feeling of our miseries, as if
they were their own? A wise man, ought to want all whatsoever goods, rather
then good friends. For they are better then our nearest kinsmen, or our Friends
better (...) or others.
own natural brothers.

Of the qualities, and conditions of friendship, many have spoken much (and one
day, God willing, we shall say something thereof:) but in my opinion, where
friendship is professed, there must be all true and plain dealing, and such a
fair and even carriage, that it neither lean to alteration, nor give any
offense, nor cause any trouble, nor to adventure (through our rasn and
inconsiderate actions) the loosing of a friend. Two friends ought so to love
one another, as each of them does severally love himself. For that I, and my
friend, are as it were all one. And as you see, how quicksilver deals with
True friends what they are like.
gold, how close it adheres unto it, how it works it self into the very
entrails and bowels of it, and being two diverse metals, are so incorporated,
that they become but one mass or lump, nothing in the world being able to
sunder and divide them but the pure fire of the furnace, wherein the
quicksilver is consumed: So a true friend, who is now become another man's
self, and by an intermixture of their hearts and minds made as it were one
selfsame thing, nothing ought, nor can indeed dissolve this union, but death,
which is the Chrysoll, wherein we must at last be all melted one after another.

Man ought to make the same choice of their friends, as they do of good
books. For their happiness consists not neither in the greatness of their
How to make choice of our friends.
number, nor the curiousness of their binding, but rather to have a few, and
those good and approved Authors. For oftentimes, it so falls out, that many
friends are rather a hinderance, then a help to true friendship: For he is a
friend to none, that is a friend to all. Nor are we to choose a friend for our
entertainment only, and merrily to spend the time withal, but to make choice
of such a one, as may benefit both our soul, and our body: one that without
respect of humane interest, will advise him to observe the divine precepts. Not
only to represent them unto him, but to speak to the purpose, to admonish him
to the observation of them, and to instruct him in the true knowledge of them.
And if he be called a true friend, who merely out of friendship, tells his
friend the naked truth without masking or disguising it, not as to a third
person, but as to one, that is properly his own, and as freely as if he should
treat of any thing belonging to himself, or that he himself would desire, his
friend should say the same to him, on the same occasion, of which sort of
friends, that carry that sincerity and plainness with them, few are now a
days to be found, in whom a man may have that assured confidence, and entire
satisfaction.

Then questionless (and that with very good reason) a good book is a Books,
true friends.
good friend; nay I dare boldly say, there cannot be a better. For from thence,
we may draw that vtile and necessarium, that good and necessary counsel,
which we stand in need of, without incurring the shame, of that vain and idle
humor, which is too common now a days, to be rather content to continue still
in ignorance, then by asking the question, to seem to doubt of any thing. But
to books, we may boldly put the question, and never need to be afraid, that
they will bewray our ignorance: And besides, we shall receive this satisfaction
from them, that they will faithfully, without flattery, deliver us their
opinion. And this one advantage (and it is a notable one) books have of
friends: That our friends, dare not always tell us what they think, and know;
for fear of particular interest, or out of tenderness to offend (as we shall
by and by briefly tell you) their friends. So soft a hand has Love, when it
comes to touch, where it loves. Whereas on the contrary, the counsel that is
given thee in books, is downright and plain, and stands before thee
starke-naked, as bestript of all manner of vice. And therefore (these things
considered) it has ever been held one of the hardest and difficultest things
in the world, to find out a true and faithful friend.

Of which sort, many are spoken of in ancient stories, and we find a great
number of them recorded of old, and painted forth unto us in your feigned
fables; but that there either now are, or have been such heretofore as are
there decyphered unto us, I doubt it very much, at least I am fully persuaded,
they were very rare and few. One only friend have I found to be true, and is
One only friend. And what that friend is.
of the same nature and condition, as we are. And this friend of ours, is the
best, the bountifullest, the truest, and the faithfullest of all other; for
this is never wanting to it is friend, but continues firm and constant for
ever, nor is at any time weary of giving: And this good friend of ours, (that I
may not hold you any longer in suspense) is the Earth.

This affords us precious stones, gold, silver, and diverse other metals,
whereof we stand in need, and so earnestly thirst after. It brings forth
grass, and A commendation of the Earth, and i^ faithful love, and true
friendship.
all sorts of herbs, wherewith are not only fed our flocks of sheep, our
cattle, and other beasts for the use and service of man, but those medicinable
simples, which conserve our health, free us from diseases, and if we fall into
sickness, set us upright again, preserving this life of ours, in a sound and
perfect state of health. It yields us all sorts of fruits, that are either
sauourie to the taste, or nourishable to the body. It gives us wool, and
flax, and by consequence, all kind of wouen stuffes, wherewith we cloth, and
adorn, this naked flesh of ours. It opens its own veins of its own accord,
whilst from its f^ll breasts, sprout forth those sweet and delicate waters,
which we drink; those brooks and rivers, which get the fields with child,
and make them fruitful, and not only that, but does facilitate commerce, and
make an easy way for traffic, bringing the strangest and remotest parts of
the world to shake hands, and to communicate their commodities one with
another, and to live in a league of love and friendship together. Nay more, it
is so good, and so sweet a friend, that it suffers, and willingly consents
to all that we will our selves. Be she well or ill used by us, all is one to
her, so as we be pleased. She is like a sheep, from whom you shall hear no
other language, but Omnia been: All is well. Lead her forth to feed, or bring
her to the waters to drink; shut, and pen her up, or let her loose; take her
lambkin from her, her milk, her wool, nay her very life, to all she always
answers bien: all is well. And all that bien, or good that we have on earth,
the Earth gives it us. And for an vpshot of all, when we are now dead, and lie
stinking above ground, when there is neither wife, father, son, kinsman, nor
friend, that will abide and endure our company any longer, but do all of them
utterly forsake us, and fly from us; then, even then, does not she refuse us,
but huggs us, and makes much of us, and opening her own womb, takes us in
unto her, where we quietly lie, as it were in deposito, till she render
afterward a faithful account of what she has received, and delivers us up
to a new and eternal life. And amongst many her other excellencies, one of the
worthiest things in her, and deserving most commendation, is; That she doing
so much for us, as she does, and that so continually and without ceasing,
being so generous, and so franke-hearted, that she is never tired out, never
grows weary, yet does she not look for any requital, she neither asks,
nor expects any return of kindness, nor does she talk and tell of it,
nortwit thee in the teeth with it; which some kind of friends, more usually,
then commendably, do.

Amongst so many friends, as I had, and did daily converse withal, I found
very few, who had not an eye to the north-starre of their own proper interest,
and shaped their course by the Compass of their own private ends; having only
a desire to deceive, not having any respect at all to the friendship they
professed, being devoide of all love, truth, and shame: I was of an easy and
tractable nature, my condition was facile and ^pt to be misled, their tongue
was all honey, but their heart was very gall it self: whose bitterness, I had
too often tasted to my cost.

Considering therefore the falsehood that now adays is used in friendship, and
men's crafty and subtle carriage, we are not so much to wonder that we are; as,
that we are not deceived. For I find them, as liberal in promising, as
niggardly in performing; as facile in their words, as difficile in their deeds.
There are now no more Pilades, nor Orestes; they are dead and gone; and with
them, almost the remembrance, that there were ever any such kind of men. I
only speak this for my Pompeyos sake; whom I therefore condemn the more, for
that I loved him more then any other, and took him to be my especial friend.
For, most of my friends, I gained by my words, but this man, I presumed I had
purchased by my deeds. When I was in my prosperity, I had many friends, all men
did desire my love, made much of me, feasted me, and did offer their service
unto me: But my moneys failing, they also failed; so that their friendship, and
my money had an end at once. The greatest misery that can befall man in this
life.


And as there is no misfortune, that touches us so near, as to call to mind
the happy estate, wherein heretofore we did live; so there is not any sorrow,
that equals that, of being forsaken by those friends, whose love and friendship
we did ever desire to conserve. That little wealth that I had, was stolen from
me, which was my undoing. I continued some days (though but a few) in my
friends house, how beit he thought them too many; in which short time, he fell
off from me by degrees, by a little and a little vnwedging himself from me,
and unloosing those knots, which had knit us in friendship together; finding at
last, that I had but a slipperie eele in my hand, who when I thought A feigned
friend, compared to an Ecle.
I had surest hold of him, slipped when he saw his time from me, leaving my hand
empty. He was a Cordouese, in the freeness of his offers; and would say unto
me after that we had dined; Sir, is there any thing else, that you would be
pleased to command? If there be, I pray Sir make as bold of any thing this
house affords, as if it were your own. But these were but general words, and
matter of complement; for he went not upon certainties, nor promised me any
thing, that I might trust unto, but did rather seem to proffer this his
kindness doubtfully and fearfully, lest I might chance to take him at his
word. And that little courtesy, which he showed me, was not so much out of any
hearty good will, that he had to do it, as for fear lest I should seek to
recover my lost goods of him, by course ofLaw.

I read his thoughts in his looks: And as mine were always noble, so on the
contrary, his were base and vile. And as often as he spoke of my loss, if he
used any complement with me, it was all dissimulation, and counterset stuff.
Well, whatsoever it were, either better or worse, I was much offended at it,
and thought that he did me therein a great deal of wrong, and did seriously
risent this his double dealing, and these fair but false shows of his love.
But he, on the other side, did as earnestly persist in the pursuit of his
simulations, as if he had meant nothing less, then to play upon me, and abuse
me; or as if they had some ground of truth with them: And because I stoutly
stood to it, and bore out this business as well as I could, that he might not
perceive any deiectednesse in me, he took heart thereupon, and made sleight of
it, as a matter of little, or no importance. For the loss was mine, and not
his; and therefore he made the less reckoning of it.

Wherefore, that I might not give him farther trouble, perceiving how much
perplexed he was, and how willing to be rid of me, I resolved with my self to
free him of that fear, and to go for Florence. I imparted this my purpose
unto him, telling him, that I much desired to see that City, for the great
commendation, that I had heard of it, and those famous sights that were there
to be seen. And because this my determination suited with his desire, he took
hold on this occasion, relating unto me many memorable things, worthy my sight,
wherewith my will was the more inflamed, and the desire which I had to see it,
much increased. But he did not do this so much, to commend it unto me, or out
of any good desire, that he had, that I should see it, but only that he might
see me no more in his house; and for that he is an unwelcome Es tr^ste hu^ped,
el de por fuerca.
guest, Proverb
that is a man's guest against his will. After that I had thus broken my mind
unto him, he began to blow the wind afresh of his kind usage of me, that he
might oblige me thereby to get me the sooner out of his house, and to depart
from thence peaceably and quietly; for he was not a little afraid of me. He
Proverb.
then signified unto me, how sorry he was that I would needs be gone; but used
no entreaties, nor any the least resistance, to have me to stay. He demanded of
me, when I was minded to begin my journey, but never asked, what I wanted;
which he might have done out of good manners, though he had no meaning to
pleasure me. Which proffer, had he made it me, it should not have been
performed by him so much out of complement and ceremony, as that he might
thereby learn, how long, or how little a while I meant to stay with him, not
knowing as yet the hour, when I me^nt to be gone. It is an easy Facil cosa
es, el ver; y mas lo es, el hablar; pero muy dificultoso es proveer. - No
conocen todos los, que miran, m^los que hablan, hazen. Manymake reckning of
their friend, no longer then they have need of him. And when he can serve his
turn no longer, he turns him off.
thing, to see; more easy, to speak; but it is a hard thing to foresee. For
all that see, do not know; and all that speak, do not do. And for that he
now saw, that he should have no farther need of me, for that I like a fool,
told him ere I was aware, that I was not minded to return any more to Rome, he
began to cast with himself, What good can this cocks-combe do me now? or of
what use and profit will this fool be unto me hereafter? And so from that time
forward, he used me accordingly, which was no worse, then mine own
indiscretion deserved. Then did I learn to my cost, how a man may come to know
a generous and noble mind; which is seen in nothing more then in a thankful
acknowledgment of benefits already received.

In this alteration of fortune, there were set before mine eyes a thousand
dangers, that I never dreamed of. But because I had as yet so much spirit left
me, as was able to put me forward, I was not utterly dismayed, nor quite
dishartned. I studied to forget that, which I could not help; making my
means, the thinking on my journey. And because novelty, and things of a
strange nature, do draw the minds of men after them, out of the desire that
they have to know them, I made all the haste I could to get me gone from Siena,
as well out of this respect, as also that I might leave Pompeyo well pleased
therewith; who, I knew, would never think himself well at ease, till he were
well eased of me. For albeit men commonly say to their guests; I pray fall to
your meat, and be merry, for I assure you, you are heartily welcome; yet
whether you be merry, or not merry, welcome, or not welcome, they think you
are bound unto them for a meals meat, and put every morsel to account, that
goes down thy threat.

This hoggishnesse of his, this his uncivil carriage, this dissembled care of
his, and this his great fear that he had, that I would continue longer with
him, did much trouble me. Well, I took my leave of him; and because I was
still the same man, as I was wont to be, as also in regard of that love and
friendship, which I truly bore unto him, at the time of this our departure each
from other, I did so grieve thereat, that I was not able to speak a word, no
not so much as to bid him, farewell; yet could not this my inward sorrow, draw
so much as one tear into his eyes, or to make any the least show of grief.
And so all alone, I set forward on my journey, but more then well accompanied
with Guzman leaves Siena, and goes to Florence.
a world of melancholy thoughts, nor slightly attended by a multitude of cares,
wherewith I was so ouer-laden, that my horse was ready to sink under me, as
unable to bear so great a burden. And therefore I rode plotting and devising
with my self, how I might make them lighter, and so case both my self and my
horse of them.

I had not gone thus musing many miles, but it was my hap to light on
Sayavedra, Guzman meets with Sayavedra.
who had left Siena to cumply with his banishment. Whom I no sooner saw, but my
kind heart began to melt, and I could not choose but take compassion of him,
and withal I must needs salute him; placing my eyes, not upon the hurt, which
he had done me, but on the harm, from which he once had freed me. Esteeming
more of that kindness I then received from him, then Courtesies are to be
returned with advantage.
of all that, that he had robbed me of. And he is a bad play master, and does ill
deserve a courtesy, who does not with advantage requite a received kindness.
Besides; Liberality, supposes a generous and noble spirit, and is of that
high esteem, for that it is originally descended from heaven, that it is
always found in those minds, that are destinated thereunto. I could not for
my life refrain from speaking lovingly unto him, nor he abstain from
receiving me with tears, which guttring down his cheeks, dropped down upon my
feet, as he bowed himself to kiss my stirrup, whereof he taking fast hold,
fell down on Sayavedra asks Guzman forgiveness.
his knees, craving pardon for this his error, humbly and earnestly beseeching
me, that I would be pleased to forgive him; rendering me likewise thanks, that
during the time of his imprisonment, I never offered to accuse him; excusing
himself also, that he had not, as soon as he was set at liberty, come to
visit me, laying the fault thereof, in his lack of boldness, and the
largeness of his offense. Yet, for to make satisfaction and payment of this
his debt, he would become my slave, and do me faithful service all the days
of his life; I, who ever knew him to be a man, that had both a strong brain,
and a nimble wit, which d^ him rather hurt, then good, because he did not well
employ them; yet, for that these did adapt him, and make him fit for any
employment whatsoever, I was the more willing to accept of his offer. And so
taking him into Guzman entertaines Sayavedra for his servant.
my service, we ioggd on along by little and little like a couple of good
fellows, talking of diverse things on the way.

And albeit I was not ignorant, that he was a notorious thief, and a notable
cunning rogue, yet I held it the lesser inconvenience of the two, to have a
knave, then a fool, to my man. For foolishness did never yet but walk hand
Better to have a ^naue, then a fo^c, to ones servant.
in hand with wickedness. And both of them being joined together, are
sufficient to undo not only a private house, but a whole Commonwealth. For
the simple, or foolish man, cannot keep counsel, nor knows when and where to
hold his peace; nor the wicked and malicious man, to judge of things a^ght; and
if either of them, utters what he thinks, (for commonly their tongue
blabbeth, what their heart conceiueth) scandals, and troubles are already
entered within the doors of our house, and like impudent rogues, stick not to
press into our priuatest rooms, to see what they can get from thence. I
thought with my self, if I would have any one to serve me, (good servants
being so few, and so hard to be got) that this would be less b^d then any
other, because by those his cunning tricks, that he had played with me already,
he made me the more wary of him, and taught me (^s if I had been some
Lacedemonian) Proverb.
to throw my beard Tract la barba (...) el hombro Viv^ recatado, v con re^e o,
como hazen los que ^enen euenugos, que van bolviendo el rostro, a un lado, y a
o to. de onde, nacio el re^n. Couarr. verb. Barba.
over my shoulder: that is, to have an eye unto him, and to be the more
circumspect and wary of him, and to take the better heed, looking still
behind me, as those do that have enemies, turning their head one while this
way, another while that, that they may not be set upon vn-awares. And therefore
knowing him so well as I did, I thought it as good, if not better, to
entertain a knave that I knew, as a knave, that I knew not. For I knew well
enough, that I must look narrowly to his water, and watch him at every turn,
wherein I meant not to be negligent: Whereas, in taking of another, that should
seem to bear the face of an honest man, and make show of being faithful and
trusty unto me, I might happily grow careless out of the confidence that I have
in him, and by this my credulity be coozened of all that I had, and afterward
be left to look after moone-shine in the water.

As well in this respect, as also for that I had not much now to lose, nor was
my condition or quality such, that I should stand so nicely upon these points,
I admitted him into my service. He asked me (as soon as I had entertained him)
which way I meant to take? I told him, I was for Florence, led thither out of a
desire that I had to satisfy my longing, by seeing that City, whereof I had
heard ^o much. Whereunto my servant replied, and said; Sir, whatsoever you have
heard thereof, I make no question, when you come there, but your self will
confess, report has been too short with you. For I assure you, there are so
many admirable things therein to be seen, that they cannot sufficiently be
commended. For the naked relations of things, that are curious and good indeed,
never fill the vacuitie and emptiness of our desires. I have lived there some
time, yet all the while as I remained there, as if I had been but come that
very day to town, wheresoever I went, new things were still offered to my
view: and I would never with my good will have left that Town, if my friends
had not forced me from thence.

I began to ask him some questions, touching the foundation of that City, and
whence it had its first beginning? Sir (said he) seeing we have day enough
before us, and that we may talk and walk fair and softly, and that the
relation, which I am to make you is but short; I shall, for the better
satisfying of vour desire, acquaint you, and that truly, with all those
curiosities, that did then offer themselves unto my knowledge.

Then did he forth with begin to discourse of those civil wars, which were
Sayavedra discourses of F^orence.
occasioned by Catiline, between those of Fiesole, and Florence; the
o^erthrowes, which one while those of the Roman faction received, another
while their enemy, Bela Totile. How in the time of Pope Leo the third, the
Emperor Leo 3. Pope.
Charles the Great, sent a great Army against the Fiesolani, leaving Florence
reedified in the hands of the Florentines, till that Pope Clement the seventh,
and C^olus Magnus Emperor. Clem^ 7. Pope. Charles 5. Emperor.
the Emperor Charles the fifth recovered the same, for to restore it to its
ancient possession, from which the house of the Medics had been put out. Which
succeeded in the year of our Lord, 1529. Ever since which time, the
Florentines have always been governed by one sole Prince; which, though it
seemed somewhat harsh unto them at the first, yet now they see their error, and
find now at length how much more quietly they live under the protection of
their own Prince, and with how much more safety, both of their lives and
goods. It is said, that the first Prince, that ever they had, was Alessandro de
Medici; who, for his sweetness of nature, his magnanimity, and valor, though
violently he Alessandro de Medici.
lost that principality in the very flower of his youth, yet might he justly
be termed Alessandro. After him, succeeded, that wise, and worthy Cosimo, great
Duke of Tuscanie, whose memorial, for his heroical actions, and great
virtues, Cosimo, great Duke of Tuscanie.
as also for his courteous behavior, his religion, and good government, shall
live eternally in the minds of the living. This Prince was succeeded by
Francesco, who, for that he died without issue, the Crown came to that famous
Francesco 2. Duke of Florence. Ferdinando 3. ^eat Duke.
Ferdinando his brother, the lively image, and true picture of his father
Cosimo, being as well heir to his Virtues, as his Estate. Who governed so
worthily, and so wisely, that I do not know any other, with whom I may equal
him, for the love that his subjects bare him.

If the relation, he then made me, had been a little longer, he must of force
have deferred it till the next day; but it seemed, that he had measured it out
just with the time: for we were come as near night, as we were to our Inne^
whereinto we went to lodge. And having there well rested and refresht our
selves, we got up betimes in the morning, and that we might the sooner get into
Florence, we did set the best foot before, and made a little more haste, then
otherwise we would have done. But when we came within sight of it, I was The
beauty of Florence.
so ouer-ioyed, that I am not able to express it, so fair and so beautiful
did it a far of present it self unto me. For though I could not take a full
view of it, yet from the one end to the other, and from almost the bottom to
the top, I might reasonably well discern it; and a more pleasing sight, did
mine eyes never see. I did examine the pleasantness of its situation, I beheld
the beauty of many great and goodly buildings, the inexpugnable strength of its
stately walls, the majesty, and firmness of its high, and well formed Towers.
In a word, the whole pile thereof, seemed such unto me, that I stood amazed at
it, and could not (me thought) too much admire it. I would not willingly, have
moved out of the place where I stood, nor have drawn nearer to the Town, but
have kept my self at that very distance; as well, for that mine eye was
wonderful well pleased therewith, as also for that I would not wrong that
delight, which I now received, when I should draw nearer thereunto; if
peradventure (as it usually falls out with most things) it should lessen it
self, and fall short of that goodly prospect, which I did here enjoy.

But, when I did consider with my self, that all this glorious show, was, but
as it were the outward case of it, my judgment did then begin to instruct me,
that the jewels therein contained, must needs be richer, and fair more
glorious, as indeed they were. For, when I was entered thereinto, and saw the
spatiousnesse of the streets, how straight and level they were, how plain and
smooth, paued all with clean hewn stones of goodly fair marble, and their
houses built with beautiful stones, so costly, so curious, so nearly polished,
so artificially wrought, and with such a deal of skill and cunning, in the
architecture thereof, I was so confounded, that I could not tell what to think
of it. For I could not imagine with my self, that any other City in the
world, could have compared with Rome for beauty: But having well viewd this,
for its bigness, it goes far beyond it. For those buildings that are in
Rome, the best of them are gone to ruin, and few of them left standing; and
those that are now remaining, are but mere shadows, and the very ruins and
fragments of those, that were so famous in former times. But Florence, is the
flower of the world, all is therein so flourishing, so costly, and so well set
forth, that I said unto Sayavedra; Certainly, if the inhabitants of this City
be as curious in the tricking of their women, as they are in the adorning, and
beautifying of their houses, they are undoubtedly the happiest men in the
world. I was so stricken with admiration, that I was desirous to have dwelt a
long time in contemplating and beholding every particular piece of building;
but because night was now growing on, and that the day would not befriend us
any longer, I was feign to retire my self to my lodging. And we were not
slack in hastening to our Inn, whither when we were come, we were so neatly
and so daintily entertained, that I cannot so much indeare it, as it truly
deserves. Such plenty of provision, such cleanliness in their
lodging-chambers, such sweetness in their linen, such diligent attendance,
such affable language, and such good usage, did I never meet withal elsewhere
in all my life. I was so taken therewith, that it made me almost to forget that
which I most desired. I slept so soundly that night (thanks to the good bed,
that was under me) that it seemed unto me scarce half an hour, since my first
lying down.

When the morning was come, (though with a heart full of sorrow, for that was
then my Mount Tabor) I called to Sayauedra, to give me my clothes; and for that
he was so well acquainted with that City, I willed him to make himself ready
to go along with me, that he might show me all, whatsoever was of any note,
and held (as curiosities) to be worth the seeing. And that first of all he
should bring me to the chief Church, where having heard divine service, and
recommended our selves unto God, all things would prosper afterward the better
with us. Thither he led me, and having ended our devotion, I stood like one
amazed in beholding that most famous Temple and fabric del Zimborio, es el
hucco del chapitel.
Zimborio, which they there call A high Arche, or round vault of any high
Church or sleeple. The Cupuls of Florence what a curious piece of building it
is.
Cupula, which in my opinion, may be better termed Copula, for that it seemed
not only to my self, but as many as beheld it, that therein was copulated, and
joined as it were together, all that curious Architecture, which the writings
of the best and skilfullest professors, in that profession, either theoricke,
or practicke, have published to the world, so admirable a piece of workmanship,
such a deal of greatness, strength, and curiosity, (without any wrong or
injury to any other fabric of Europe) may justly challenge the name of the
eighth wonder of the world. Let him consider with himself, who has any
knowledge in Architecture, it being four hundred and twenty handfuls high,
besides the spire that is on the top of it, what Diame^o, of the Greek word
(...). Linea diemtiens, seu per medium secane, recta in longitudine ducta. It
is a Geometrical term. The Annoncits of Florence, wonderful worth the seeing.
diameter, this Cupula will require; and by this he may come to guess, what
manner of thing it is.

From thence I went to the Annunciata, a Church so called, to see the image,
that was painted there upon the wall, which might more properly be termed
Heaven; so admirable a piece of work, is that picture of the Incarnation of
the Son of God: Insomuch that it is held there for certain, that it was
drawn by one, that was no less excellent in his Art, then holy in his life.
For, when he had made an end of that which there you see painted, and that
there remained no more to be done, but to finish and make up the face of our
blessed Lady the Virgin; being wonderful timorous and fearful, much
misdoubting and musing with himself, whether or no, he should be able to give
it its true life, and to fit it every way in its age, in trueness of its
color, its complexion, in its honest and sober countenance, and in the demure
and modest posture of its eyes, in this confusion of his, and these his
distracted thoughts, not devising with himself, what he were best to do, he
laid himself down a while to sleep, and awaking anon after, and minding to
betake him to his pensill, and to put his hand (by the help of God) to the
piece of work, he found it made to his hand. And therefore, it needs not our
farther commendation, for it being to be presupposed, that it was there
miraculously wrought either by Gods own hand, or some one of his Angels, it
can be said to be no less, then an Angelical picture. And for this cause, the
rest of that piece being considered, which the Painter made, we may easily
conceive, what kind of spirit he had, who could find so much favor, as to
have the hands of heaven (as if for the time, they had been bound prentises to
his Trade) to help him to grind and mix his colors, and to make an end of
his work for him.

So many miracles does it daily work, such a concourse of people does
continually flock thither out of devotion, and so great are the alms, that
are there distributed and given to the poor, that I did much wonder, that all
the beggars were not wondrous rich; which put me in mind of that poor man,
who (as I was told, and you have heard) made in this City, that his famous
last Will and Testament, wherein he bequeathed his Asses pack-saddle to the
Great Duke; That seeming now unto me but a little small sum, in comparison of
that, which such a one as he, might very well have gained in that place. And
for that it is a known truth, Que el hijo de la gata, ratones mata: That the
son of a Cat, will kill his Rat. Or (as our English Proverb has it) Cat
will to his kind; a thousand, and a thousand times, did I bethink my self of
many things that I had done in my younger days, and did now as it were
plainly perceive; that if, as I went to Rome, it had been my good hap to have
lighted in this City, what with my roguish tricks, my counterfeit scurffs,
leprosies, and fore legs, I might have come to be a mayorazgo amongst them, and
to have purchased some great Lordship.

I did likewise observe, that few of these rogues, were curious, and cunning,
Guzman scoffs at the rogues and beggars in Florence.
or that they were their crafts-masters; but were, for the most part, fools,
mere block-heads, and had little or no wit at all, in comparison of those in
my time. And when I did perceive, what poor counterfeits they were, and how
sillily they did order their affairs, it was sport alone to me. I took a
great deal of pleasure in looking on them, and I did secretly wish to my
self, that I might have had the opportunity, to reform a thousand
imperfections, which I presently saw in them. Who did ever see, that an honest
poor beggar, that was a good proficient in his trade, nay, say he were never
so meanly bred to it, would when he had most, (unless he were a very
cocks-combe) have more then six, or seven Maranedis, or some such like trifle,
and not about, in his hat? nor to have such a sum of money lie open to the
peoples eye, that they may thereby be taught to tell him; you need no more, you
have as much there already, as will very well serve to supply your wants for
this day, and to put bread enough in your belly; and therefore, that he should
get him gone, and give way to other poor folks, that had more need, then he
had? When was it ever known, that there was ever seen any beggar, of that
poor understanding, though he were but a new beginner, that would beg, having
a loaf of bread under his arm? or to stand, as I saw another, with a
tooth-pick in his care? Which I no sooner saw, but I said to my self: O thou
poor silly thief, thou traitor to thy profession; Art thou such an Ass, as
to let every man know, that thou have eaten so much, that there are some
remnants yet left behind in thy teeth? I saw not one amongst them all, that
could play his game handsomely, nay scarce know how to set his men in their
right place, nor to take their due time for the hitting of a blot; I saw no
order, no decorum amongst them; they had no skill in this kind of music;
many of them could say their Gammoothe, (and that too they had learned by rote)
but knew not how to prove a note; others there were, that had a little paltry
skill in plaine-song, but would bawle it out so scuruily and so vntuneably,
that no care was able to endure it: And none of all this dunghill crew, that
like Chaunticleere, could chaunt it out lustily, descant and divide at
pleasure, and so to relish and melt their notes, as to make their hearts to
melt that hear them, and to move them to compassion of them.

There did I spy a young man, one of my old acquaintance, who was now a Guzman
spies one of his old acquaintance amongst the beggars in Florence.
pretty well-growne man; this was the only beggar (I mean compared with the
rest) that knew any thing amongst them. And would to God (thought I) that I
might be so happy, as to come once to set my hands, where he had set his heart.
For questionless, he could not choose but be rich. He was the son of such
parents, as were able to leave him much. His father was a notable cunning
rogue, and could his craft wonderful well. And this his son, was every way
like unto him. He was lean visag'd, lanke bellied, spindle-shank'd, and so
alike suited in all the rest, that a man might truly say of him; That, it was
fathers n'owne son. But because every thing has its time appointed, and
takes it course when it comes, and for that the Justice did not there permit,
the having of an Academie, for the trayning up of these fresh men, what through
want of exercise, and not trying of conclusions, and putting them in practice,
they may now throw away their caps, whilst themselves with their breviaticke
Art, may lie wallowing in the dirt. I knew him, but he did not know me: He
might well say unto me, Tal^e veo, que no te conosco: The world is so changed
Proverb.
with thee, that I do not know thee. O, what a terrible conflict had I with my
self, what a shrewd temptation, to go and speak to him: but I durst not. I
said to Sayavedra; See thou that poor fellow? That rogue is able to make me
rich. He then said unto me; Why does he then go a begging? I told him; Why
beggars cannot give over their lewd course of life.
When men have once begun to open their mouths to crave an alms, and have
shut their eyes to all shame, and bound their hands from all labor, and that
their feet are benumbed, and wax stiff from taking any pains, or care to live
in a lawful course, their disease is beyond all cure, and there is no remedy
to redress this evil.

The experience whereof I saw in a poor young wench in my time, who coming to
Rome poor and sick, fell a begging for Gods sake. And when she A notable
tale of a roguish wench.
was well recouer'd of her health, and as strong of her body, as any bull,
she still continued her trade of begging. They, whose alms she craved, told
her, it was shame for her to beg, she was young, and lusty, and was able to
serve, and work for her living. She answered; that she was often troubled
with a cruel pain and griping of the heart, which when the fit took her,
caused her to fall down to the ground in a swound, beating her feet and her
hands against the earth, renting and tearing all that she could lay hand on,
and kicking and spurning at those that came near her. In this sort, did she
cozen the world a long time, and spent many years in this lewd fashion, till
at last one of her own Countrymen being asked, whether he knew her father, and
her mother? Answered, He did; And that they were both dead, and had left her a
great deal of wealth. Whereunto (as lawful Inheretrix) she laid claim.
Whose estate was now such, and so great, that many principal men became Suitors
unto her, and sought to have her to wife, and some of them exceeding rich (for
there is no No ay hierr^ tan mal^, que no puede dorarse. Todo lo cubre, y tapa
el oro.
iron so foul, that it will not be gilded; gold hides and Proverb.
couers all, be it never so rustie) she was penny-white (as we say) and so was
married in the end to one of an honest condition, and well to live, and an
handsome man withal. But this wife of his, seeing she was now deprived of her
wonted liberty of begging, grew within a little while after desperately sick,
daily withering and wasting away, the Physicians not being able to search into
the nature of her disease. And thus she continued for a good while, till she
became her own physician, and cured her self, by playing the hypocrite,
making solemn profession, that merely out of humility, she would go a
begging, and eat not any thing, but what should be given her of alms,
wherewith she would sustain this sinful carcass of hers. And to this end,
would she go up and down her house amongst her servants, first to one, and
then to another, craving and begging some thing of them. And because all did
give her alms, and none deny her, that did not fully please her, but did much
trouble her; wherefore, oftentimes, she would steal up into a private room
that she had, and there shut her self in, where she had some pictures of
certain great persons, that were fairly hung up in frames, and even of these
(to satisfy this her ill habit, and to keep her self in ure) would she
likewise demand an alms.

Sayavedra, marvelled much at it; Who brought me from thence, to the outward
Court belonging to the Palace; in the midst whereof I might see a brave Prince,
mounted upon a beautiful horse of brass, so curiously cut to the life, and so
well proportioned in every part, that they both seemed to have life and motion.
My apprehension, could not discern, and therefore durst not presume to judge,
which of the two were better, either this, or that at Rome; yet inclined in the
end with that short understanding of mine, to give the praise to that which was
there present; not for that it was present, but because it did deserve it. I
asked of Sayavedra, whose statua that was? He told me, it was the great Dukes,
Cosimo de Medici. Of whom I went discoursing unto you upon the The Statua of
Cosimo 1. great Duke of Tuscanie.
way. And here, great Ferdinando, his son, (who lately was, but is not now
alive) caused it to be set up to perpetual memory. I would needs know out of
curiosity, of what height it might be, and not being able to reach thereunto
to take the measure of it, I was informed, that from the very bottom to the
top, was about some fifty handfuls high, little more, or less. Round about
the said place, were many other delicate pieces cast in brass, and some, of
substantial, yet very fine marble, so artificially wrought, that they did
drive the beholders into great admiration; leaving even the best judgments in
suspense, and staggering those wits most, that were most acute; excepting only
such, as had some inckling aforehand, what manner of things they were.

Afterward, we visited the Temple of S. John Baptist, as being most worthy S.
John Baptists Church in Florence.
our particular remembrance; for I may truly say of it, that there is scarce
the like in the world for all in all. Which glorious fabric, I then learned,
was founded in the time of Octauianus Augustus the Emperor, and consecrated to
Mars. There did I entertain my self in observing its antiquity, and
foundation, wherein I took much content; and the more, for that it is reported
of it, and received by tradition, as also grounded upon reason, (in regard of
its foundation) That it is to last and continue, to the final consummation and
end of the world. Which we may the rather be induced to believe, for that
neither length of time, nor those continual wars, accompanied with so many
calamities, have as yet had the power either to deface, or destroy it. All the
City besides being left desolate and laid level with the ground, only this
Temple remaining still untouched. The body of it, consists of eight angles, all
spacious, strong, and marvelous beautiful to behold; especially those its
three great doors, which are shut up with six half doors, all of brass,
cast in curious molds, and all of one entire piece, wrought with Histories of
embossed work, so daintily handled, so finely raised, and so proportionably
equal in every point, as may well be presumed from the Artizans of that City,
who bear away the bell from all the rest, in that kind, that are in the world.

This Temple has likewise another greatness belonging unto it, which is this;
That there being in Florence one and forty Parish Churches, two and The
Churches, and c^nts in Florence.
twenty Monasteries of Friars, forty and seven Nunneries, four Colleges or
Houses for those that are willing to retire themselves from the world, eight
and twenty Hospitals, and two bearing the name of JESUS; yet there is no
baptism used in any of these, save only in that of S. John, and in that
Church, are all the children of this City baptized, from the meanest amongst
the commons, to the principal Gentlemen, and the great Dukes own children.
For that time, that we stayed there, we visited all the Churches-one after
another, which were of that admirable workmanship, and set forth with such
singular and rare curiosities, that it is not possible to relate no not the
least part thereof, in regard of the muchnesse of them, (the number of them
being so infinite,) nor is the understanding capable of apprehending them, much
less our outward eye. For he that should go about to make a memorial of so
great a Machina, and such a mass of things, whose admirable parts are so
numberless, and every one of them accompanied with sundry pieces of such
singular Art, and exquisite workmanship, besides so many excellent pictures,
some in tables, and some engraven in brass, and other metals, had need to
make thereof a huge great Volume, and to seek out some other Chronicler, that
shall be better able then my self, to present these things to the eyes of the
Reader, and to give them their due commendation.

The great Duke, has a Palace in the City, which is called Il Palaggio de
Piti; whose excellencies, greatnesses, and curiosities, as well in gardens, as
The Dukes Palace.
fountains, mounts, groves, sports for hunting, and goodly rooms, may
(without indearing) be truly said to be a princely and royal seat; and such a
one, as may compare with any other whatsoever in all Europe.

I would not omit to know and see the circuit of this City, which contains
The circuit of Florence.
in it such store of wealth. And I found it to be much about five mile
compass: it has ten great Gates, and one and fifty Towers. The City is
seated all within the walls, and has no suburbs adjoining thereunto. Through
the midst of it passes the famous river of Arnus, upon which stand four most
stately bridges, all pau'd with stone, and very strongly built, being large and
spacious withal. And all these things, being thus done in perfection; the like
perfection is also to be found in their government, their behavior, and in the
general fashion, and carriage of that people. And therefore justly, and with a
great deal ^son, is this City called Florencia, as being flos florum, the
flower of flowers, and as it were the only nose-gay of all Italy. Wherein all
things, as in a curious garden, do flourish jointly together, but more
particularly these especial and singular good things; As the liberal Arts,
horsemanship, all kind of learning, military discipline, true dealing, fair
proceeding, sweet behavior, plainness and sincerity in their actions, and
above all I must recommend unto thee, their love and kindness toward
strangers. She like a true mother, embraces them in her bosom, huggs them,
makes much of them, and Florence a friend to strangers.
favors them more, then she does her own children; to whom, in respect of
them, she may be termed a mother in law.

The time, that I stayed there, I came to know the Causes by their Effects: to
wit, by knowing the nature and condition of the inhabitants, and the politic
laws, by which they were governed, and their due observation of them, not
erring a tittle from them. There they apply themselves truly to know and The
good government in Flor^e.
esteem every man's merits, rewarding them with just and due honors; to the
end that all may be encouraged to virtue. And let not Princes think it a small
glory unto them, for they ought to acknowledge it for one of the greatest, that
can be given them, when it is truly said of them, that their noble and renowned
actions, do iumpe and concur with those of their subjects.

I likewise knew that to be true, which Sayavedra had told me about the
factions in Court, and the crossing and thwarting one another. I saw somewhat
of that, which did exceed in other places, as Envy, and Flattery, whereof no
Envy, and Flattery, two great Courtiers.
Princes Court is free, which always reign there most, where is desire of
s^our, but more especially, when they labor to increase it, and to keep
themselves in grace with their Sovereign. Which oftentimes turn to the great
hurt of both the one and the other. They are fine and witty relators of other
men's actions, and subtle Mathematicians, for to delineate and measure out that
which other men can do, and sometime that, which others cannot. But let these
things rest, without farther entering into them. For having painted forth unto
you, in so great a perfection, this illustrious and noble City, it is not fit
that I should blemish it with so foul a blot, and dash as it were with a cole,
that fair commendation, that I have given it.

CHAP. II.
Guzman de Alfarache goes to Bologna in pursuit of Alexandro, who had stolen
his trunkes from him; Whither, when he was come, going about to imprison
Alexandro, himself was clapped up.

IN Florence, I did eat out that horse, which my Lord Ambassador Guzman sells
his horse, and breaks his fast with his old shoes.
had bestowed on me at my departure, and made me one mor^g a breakfast of his
shoes. I say; To the end I might ^ell him the better, I caused him to be new
shod, giving order to Sayavedra to make money of the old ones; whereof we made
our breakfast. If this heretic, Necessity, had not kicked me out of Town, and
thrust me out by head and shoulders, I should never while I lived, of mine own
accord, Guzman loath to leave Florence.
have gone from thence. And this thou may as certainly believe of me, as of
any one Article of thy Creed. For I had now well taken salt, and was thoroughly
seasoned, and had sounded that City to the very bottom, yet I know not, how
my mind might have altered, and what I should have done hereafter. For in
conclusion, todo lo nueuo, aplaze: See what is newest, that we still like best.
This rule, holding more especially in such as I was, who had Proverb.
spiritum ambulatorium, a wandering humor of mine own, and was a great lover
of novelties. But then I was of that opinion, for those many reasons I had on
my side. For it was my hap to come thither, when they were full of their sports
and pastimes; and other young fellows of the same years with my self, led me
to these their delightful pleasures along with them from house to The sports
and pastimes that are used in Florence.
house, from feast to feast, and from bridal to bridal.

In one house you might find them dancing; in another, playing upon
instruments; in a third, singing; and in a fourth, making merry with their
friends. All was delight, and more and more delight still; one sets up his rest
at Primera, another vyes his game at Tic-Tack: some at one game, some at
another. In a word, in all places of the City wheresoever we came, we met with
nothing, but laudable exercises, and honest recreations. There might a man see
many young gallants, pompous in apparel, and richly clad, and many fair
Ladies, and hansome Gentlewomen, who wanted no setting forth for curious and
costly dressings, with whom these young bloods did dance. Whose tyres on their
heads were so daintily adorned, their gowns on their backs so richly
imbroydered, and their Chapine^ ^o their feet, so plated with silver, and beset
Proverb.
with precious stones, that they did ravish both the eyes, and the souls of as
many as did look upon them. I leave it therefore to thee to consider, what
kind of dressings those were, that had so much power to move the beholders.
See how I have seasoned this dish, that I may not disgrace the goodness of the
meat. Tell me; has it not a good relish? is it not pleasing to thy palate?
Though I go not into a Tavern to drink, Sino beuo en la taberna, huelgome en
ella. Deue ser entretenimiento ver en la tabe^na vnas mona tristes, y ocras
alegres, ver cantar vnos, y llorar ocros; y todos con muy poca firmeza en los
pies, y gran modorra en la cabeca. Covarr. verb. Taberna.
yet I take delight to talk of it, and to look upon it, and to peep in at
the door as I pass by, and sometimes slip in, to make my self merry. No man
is wise on horseback; much less, in the unbridled years of his youth. In a
word, I was young. And as old age is cold, and dry, so on the contrary, youth,
is hot, and moist. Youth, has strength, and old age, wisdom. Thus are these
gifts divided, and yet every one has that which is fit, and necessary for
him. And though for the most part, we see that all old men turn to be young,
if not (as we say) become children again; yet it were a wonder, to see young
men grow old. And I say again, it were as great a wonder, to see a young man
in years, to be an old man in discretion, as to see a Pear tree, to bear
fruits in the heart of winter. But I speak this in Spanish, that some of other
Countries, whom I know, may not find fault with The Authors protestation,
me. And I would have all men take notice, that I always speak according to
the use and fashion of mine own Country: for I do not know after what manner
others dance in theirs.

But that I may return to my former discourse; it grieved me very much to
leave Florence, (yet did it much concern me to be gone) flying as it were from
my self, not knowing to what end, nor whither to go; nor yet knew I, why I
should stay any longer there, unless it were to spend that poor little store
of money, that I had yet left me, and that chain, which the Lord Ambassador my
master, gave me at my farewell as a token of his love, and to think upon him,
as often as I chanced to cast mine eyes upon (...) And I must truly confess unto
you, that he was never out of my mind, ^ensoeuer I did think upon that Guzman
begins to consider with himself.
hour, wherein I must ere long be forced to^rne it into money. And as it was
given me with a great deal of love, so did it exceedingly grieve me that I
must shortly part so unkindly with it. I would, if I could, have kept it rather
then my life, and never have parted from it; but there are some such occasions,
wherein parents may impawne their own children. Patience, (quoth I to my
self) I will do the best I can; and more, I can not. And therefore (my
masters) I pray pardon me; for he, that has no other means to help
himself, and is constrained thereunto out of mere necessity, is driven many
times to commit many a greater error, and that shall prove far more
prejudicial and hartfull. I had a great wrestling and struggling with my self;
and my thoughts had a cruel sharp war with themselves, as well touching
this, as other the like businesses. I considered with my self, what would now
become of me, and what course I were best to take, for to supply and relieve my
wants. God help me; How heavy is the heart, when the Apretado se halla un
coracon, quando nolo esta la bolsa. Money cheeres ^ns heart.
purse is light! And therefore we say; Proverb.
A heavy purse, makes a light heart. What little comfort do we take in the
world? And how faint and feeble, are the pleasures of this life to him, whose
purse strings are too weak? And more particularly, to one that is in a strange
Country, and that has put on a resolution with himself to forget his lewd
courses, and not to live, as he had done, by tricks and by shifts; yet not
knowing how to gain a penny, and wanting the means, how to come by money;
having no near acquaintance with any, to presume of such kindness from them,
being far from my friends, and farther from any the least intention or
purpose to cheat or cozen any man. For, if I would have run that course, and
set my mind unto it, I needed not to have taken such a deal of care and
trouble in the business. For I had my (...) about me; and a hand, that was
able to find me work all the year long; I could not want, (if I listed my
self) to pick out a living where-soeuer I should come. For (thanks be to God
for it) what I had once learned, it was mine own for ever: I never lost it, if
I once had it. Only, I might at first be a little to seek, for want of use,
but the tools of my trade were never out of my hand, but always carried them
with me, whither-soeuer I went. I departed from Rome with a full purpose to
become an honest man; and fall back, fall edge, come good, or come bad, all
welcome, as it pleased God; for I had a great mind to continue these my good
desires, and t^remaine firm in this so honest a resolution. But seeing, that
Hell is full of these, what good could my holy deliberations do me, if I did
not put them in execution? For f^ without works, is but a dead faith.

Now, I had gotten me a man to wait upon me; Where by the way, I pray He that
is used to command, will hardly be brought to obey.
let me ask you, what a good direction this was, to address me to a Master?
What a Letter of recommendation to be received into service? I had been now
accustomed to command; how would you then, that I should submit my self to
obey? I verily thought with my self (as perhaps many more do, for I do not
think that I am the only man of that mind in the world) that I Want, and
honesty, can hardly stand together.
should have been an honest man, if answerable to that glorious show that I
made, and the height whereat I lived, I had had wherewithal to spend
accordingly, and that I had not wanted means to uphold this great spirit of
mine, but had had money enough to maintain and enlarge my generous
disposition. But the sums (I fear me) which must have served to supply my
wants, must miraculously by some holy Saint or other, be subministred unto me:
for no other hand could do it. And certainly, I know not how it then fell out,
that I was so honest, as I was; I verily believe, that this also was a Miracle,
considering the condition of that present time, and mine own evil
inclination. I was A good discourse of Guzmans.
young, left to live at mine own liberty, suffered to do what I list, and
rather accustomed to seek occasions, to do then to shun ill; and I could
hardly by the help of my good desires, eith^ ^ose, or lay aside my bad
conditions.

Such a Lady, or such a Gentlewoman says (which is their ordinary kind of
language) I would feign be a good woman, I desire to lead an honest life, as no
woman more, if that necessity did not force me to do that, which I do. Indeed
Madame, by your leave, your Ladyship lies. For, that you do ill, it is only,
because you are willing to do ill. O what a poor excuse is this? I confess
that I offend thus and thus, but it is against my will; for I am not of my
self given to such, or such a sin, nor have any inclination thereunto in the
world. In good faith it is otherwise, for I read it in your eyes. And they
consenting unto sin, who can be said to be the cause thereof, but your
selves? For if you would but turn your eyes from your windows, and throw them
on your distaffe, or your cushionet, certainly necessity would not constrain
you to ill. Women's hands are not of that length, nor so quick and so nimble,
that they should suddenly reach so far, as to find you food, apparel, and
house-rent: yet are they long enough, to put themselves forth to service; and
they that set you a work, will bestow house-roome on you, and put meat in
your mouths, and money in your purse. But I expect you should say unto me;
Thou, that art a man, give me this counsel; Thou art loath to serve thy
self, and yet thou would have me to serve, that am a woman? Indeed, thou
have hit the nail on the head; And this is that, which I say; That your
Mistrisse-ship, and I, and this, or that other woman (be she what she will)
are all of us unwilling to do our selves good. We will put to no helping hand
of our own, but would, that what we stand in need of, should be put into our
mouths, and that it should miraculously be ministered unto us.

Twenty years of age, is a terrible beast: O how headstrong, and how wild
Youth, what a kind of thing it is.
it is. There is no battle so bloody, no skirmish so hot, and so hard to come
off clear, as that war, which we wage with our youth. For if it go about
to make its retreat from Vice, it has many fierce enemies that sharply set
upon it, never ceasing to assail it, galling it here, and wounding it there,
which will hardly be repelled, more hardly overcome, by reason of those many
occasions of advantage which offer themselves; it being besides a thing proper
unto youth, to stumble, if not to fall, at every step: Youth has not (believe
me) any strength in its legs, much less know they well how to go. It is an
untamed beast, it is full of fury, and void of patience; and if it entertain
any good motion, a hundred ill thoughts disband the same by and by, and put it
to route; not giving it so much leisure as to set foot to ground, nor to put
it in the ^rop, not to seat himself sure in the Saddle. Every one cannot get
up to it; and few that can bridle this beast. It will not be so soon
ouer-mastered, as some do think, nor be easily brought to go that way as a
man would have it. I was ever, like the Hog, up to the very eyes, nousling my
self in the mud of vice and wickedness, (for albeit I did not always
practice ill, yet I never lost the sight of it) and I was loath to kick and
fling against it, lest by my too much stirring, I might loosen my lading, and
cause it to fall to the ground; if not spraine, and hurt my self.

A Bullock, or young Steer, when he is to be tamed, they first halter his
legs, throwing him down on the ground, then they fall a shooing of him,
after that, they bind a rope or a cord to one of his horns, which they suffer
him to traile after him for some few days; and when they are minded to bring
his neck to the yoke, they yoke him with an old Ox, that has been long
used to the plough, and so by little and little disposing him thereunto, they
Instruction, necessary for youth.
teach him by these degrees to begin to draw handsomely, and in the end to be
as perfect as the best of them.

That young man therefore, that has a desire to be old, let him leave to
follow my steps, and let him strive to subdue his passions; let him prepare,
and dispose himself to labor, and in dispight of his own will, let him
strongly struggle and wrestle with his idle and foolish desires, and throw them
flat on their backs to the ground, that they may never rise up any more to
make resistance against him: And when he has thus gotten them down under him,
let him bind them fast with that double twisted cord of Patience, and
Humility; and let him traile after him, for some certain days, these his
strange and dangerous appetites, spending his time in virtuous exercises, and
many shall not pass over his head, before he be brought to bow his neck to
that holy yoke of repentance; and by yoaking himself with good company, he
shall quickly be inured to the plough, wherewith he shall break up the earth
of his evil inclinations; But let no man think, that he shall be able to
do this at the first dash; and that once trying what he can do, shall be
sufficient to make him grow perfect. Some (I know) will not stick to tell me;
I would do this, and I would do that, my will is to it, but etc. Let him
speak this to such another This same but, or Si non, is the cause of much
harm.
as himself, and to one that is of the like quality and condition, as he is.
For I know well enough already, that he is not willing to do this, nor to do
that; For they, that are willing indeed, use other more effectual means. And
nothing is hard to them, that will set themselves hard to it. Peradventure
such a one thinks, or expects, that God should open the heavens, and
miraculously strike him to the ground, as he did Saint Paul; But let him not
look to have the like course to be taken with him; lest he be accounted a
fool for his labor.

God threw him to the ground, and humbled him sufficiently, when he afflicted
him with sickness, when he laid troubles upon him, and when he suffered him to
be touched in his good name; if either then, or now, thou would accept of
grace, while it is offered thee, thou shall be sure to find it. But thou wast
never willing to entertain these good motions, much less to humble thy self
with Saint Paul, and to city out with him; Domine, quid vis, vt faciam? Lord,
what will thou, that I do? What is thy divine will and pleasure? Thou will not
like Paul be for God, and yet thou look that God should be for thee. And if
he dealt thus with Saint Paul, it was because God knew the earnest desire that
he had to know and search out the Truth: and that it was his zeal to the Law
that did thus ouersway him; the current whereof being turned another way, he
would be as fervent for the Gospel. And you can instance but in a few that
have been saved by a bare intention, without any good work. These ^o are to
concur in one, intention and action; I say, if we have any time left If we
will be saved, our good intentions, must be seconded by good actions.
unto us for action, or wherein we may do any good work. And then shall a ^me
intention of amendment of life, and a hearty sorrow for our sins past, be
accounted a good work, when the night of death shall suddenly overtake us, and
shut us up in darkness. But having day enough to work and labor in the Lords
Uineyard, both these ought to go together, I mean intention and action. For
neither the spade alone, nor the hand alone, can dig, and dress the ground;
but hand, and spade, must both work together.

But who has put me into this theme? Was not I in Florence even now to my
great content? Thither do I return again. I assure thee, that the more I
walked up and down that City, the more desirous I was to plant there my
Pillars, and not to seek for a Plus vltra. For it was even as I would have
wished it to be, all very beautiful and delightsome. And if therein resided
either flattery Envy, and flattery, hurtful to a Commonwealth.
or envy, I took no great heed thereof, but let it run to others account,
for I was none of those, that were comprehended in that Decree. I had nothing
to do (like Judas) with the alms of the poor; nor could any prejudice
thereby come unto me, being that I pretended nothing in Court. And if they
would any way have helped me, I had no need to use them. Or had I stood in need
of them, I would not have made any use of them; they evermore seeming unto me
the greatest means of mischief, that ever came yet within my knowledge. For
one only flatterer is sufficient alone of himself to overthrow a
Commonwealth, if not a whole Kingdom. Happy is that King, and fortunate that
Prince, whose Subjects serve him for love, and who out of his wisdom leaves
now and then an ear open to the peoples complaints, as also their advice; for
only by this means shall he come to know truths, whereby he may redress
those things, that are amiss, and keep off flatterers from abusing his ears.

There would I have lived all the days of my life, and have past away the
time, like a Duke, had I had wherewithal. But I was in a manner blown up, and
all my money was almost spent. I need not to confirm this unto you with an
oath, for you may very well (if you will) believe me on my bare word. The River
now began to grow dry, and my store to fail me; for, Del monton que Proverb.
sacau, y no ponen, presto lo descomponen. Pull from your heap, and put nothing
to it; you, or your heap (if not both) may rue it. So that my moneys still
going out, and none coming in, if I should have staid any longer there, I
should quickly have run my-selfe out at the heels, and it would have been a
great disreputation for me, to have come in a horseback, and to go out a
foot. I thought it good counsel to uphold mine honor, and to depart from
thence, both to my credit, and content, before that being forced thereunto by
necessity, I should come to discover my wants, and be bound to stay still
there, for lack of means to be gone. I acquainted Sayavedra with this my
purpose, and plainly opened my mind unto him; For by this time, I knew well
enough, that he was likely to be my only help at a pinch, my strong forte,
and the only trench whereunto I might with safety retire, and that I could not
have met with such another companion in all the world for my purpose. I went
preparing him by a little and a little, working and disposing him by degrees,
that he might not afterward think that he had seen strange visions, and
vain apparitions, and that whatsoever should hereafter befall me, might not
seem new unto him, or accounted as a nouelty.

When I had thus molded him, he said unto me; Sir, There is one remedy,
Sayavedras counsel to Guzman for the recovery of his stol^e goods.
that offers it self unto me now on the sudden, neither chargeable, nor hard,
but very easy to be effected, and that may make much for your profit. Seeing
there is no remedy, but we must be gone, it is not much material which gate
we go out at; for at any one of the ten, we may travail out on our ten toes,
to go abroad, and see the world. Let us (if you will be ruled by me) take the
way, that leads to Bologna; for besides, that it is near at hand, and that we
shall there see that famous University, we may chance likewise to have the
good luck to mere with Alexandro Bentivoglio, that Master of mine, who went
away with the most part of your goods. For if we hap to find him there, (as I
verily believe we shall,) It will be an easy matter for you to recover your
own. For, upon that information which was made of the theft in Siena, it is
not to be doubted, that though you get not what you lost again, yet he or his
father will at least be content to give you good satisfaction.

I took this to be no bad counsel, but was very well pleased therewith, not
thinking on any other thing then the force of Law, and the justness of my
cause; and let justice deal never so indirectly with me, I could not conceive
the least cause of doubt, in regard of the clear notice I could make of the
theft, which would, if not all, yet have allotted me the greater part of my
goods: persuading my self, that this party, who was principal in this theft,
knowing himself guilty thereof, would have come unto me upon his knees,
desiring my pardon, and that he would voluntarily have offered to make me
amends for the wrong he had done me, and to come upon any terms to agreement
with me; as well for that his parents, and kindred in that City, were persons
of principal note; as also, for that notwithstanding all the means they were
able to make to bolster out the matter, yet would they never permit, that so
foul a fact should come to public hearing, and be iudicially tryde, nor that
they, and their house, should be blotted and blurred with so foul a stain,
and dishonor, as this could not choose but prove, if it should once come to be
ripped up.

Will you hear a strange kind of humor in me? you shall then know it by
this. It is not long since you heard me say, what a delicate and delightsome
place Florence was, and what a deal of pleasure I took therein. And now upon
the sudden, I was grown out of love with it, the very name of it was grown so
hateful unto me, that it was ready out of a loathing that I had taken to it,
to turn up my stomach. It began now (me thought) to stink, I could not endure
the sent of it; every thing seemed so foul and so filthy to my sight, that I
did now long to be gone, and till then, every day was to me a thousand. You may
see (my masters) what wonders want of money can work! You will in a moment
hate those things, which you loved most, when you lack wherewithal to
maintain both your selves, and them. Now my mind gave me, that Guzman minds
to leave Florence, and to go to Bologna.
there was not such another City in the world, as Bologna; wherein I should no
sooner set my foot, but I should recover my stolen wares, and have wherewithal
to spend, and to keep company with your young Students, lads of the right
stamp, merry greeks, much of mine own size and mark, with whom I might play
three or four venewes, when I were so disposed, without any great disadvantage
of weapon. And the dice might happily have given me so lucky a chance, and have
hit so right, that I might have had the good fortune to have followed my
studies: for that learning, which my Lord Cardinal bestowed upon me, I had not
as yet forgot it, but was very ready and perfect in all that had been taught
me. And questionless, with that little learning, that I then had, I might very
well have proceeded Master, and made a shift to live by that profession, if
that kind of course had been fitting for me, or that my self had been
willing to apply my mind hereunto.

But stay a while Guzman, be not thou too hasty: Will thou offer to traile a
gown after thee, being so weak that thou can scarce hale a halter at thy
heels? Hold thy hand, this is not a task for thee to undertake. There is no
talking of commencing Doctor, till the bow of preferment be drawn home by the
strong arm of angels. What can thou hope for then, who art so poor, that
thou art scarce able to wagg the string.

I was now fully resolved to begin my journey, and to make all the haste I
could. And so in an instant I put this my intention in execution. Away goes
Sayavedra, and I together, making directly for Bologna. And because I had
flying thoughts in my head, I was willing to put wings to my horse: making such
good speed, that we came thither that night; but slept very little, for we
spent the most part of it in plotting and casting about how we should bear our
selves Guzman, and Sayavedra being come to Bologna, are puzzled, not well
knowing what course to take.
in this business; and whilst we were discoursing to and fro, what were best
to be done; Sayavedra (having looked well as it should seem on his own cards)
says unto me: Sir, I hold it not so fit, that I should be seen herein at all,
especially now at this my first flight, but rather to lie close awhile, till we
may see, where it will be best to give the wound; and when we shall come to
know, where the game lies, and that there is any hope of doing good, then let
us let fly, and strike it dead. For if Alexandro be in the town, and should
know that I am here, (which he cannot choose, if I stir abroad, being so well
known as I am,) he will question me, wherefore I am come hither, and with
whom? And that known, he will absent himself forthwith from the City, and
so we shall be defeated of our purpose. Or if he chance but to suspect, that I
had a finger in this business, and that I was the cause of this journey, and
his shame, there is no way but one with me, he will surely kill me; so that
neither of these two will advantage us any thing, nor is fitting for us to be
adventured on. Besides, if this web must come to be wouen in the Loome of
Justice, I must be the master-thred to be wrought upon, there is no avoiding
of it: And therefore you have no reason to suffer me (considering that I can
stand you in no stead, if I be taken and clapped by the heels) to receive any
farther harm, then what I have already endured. The best course then to be
taken, I conceive to be this; That to morrow morning you make inquiry after
him, and by one means or other (with the best secrecy you can) seek first to
know him, and to take particular notice of his person; That done, we will
consult thereof afresh, and govern our selves therein, according as occasion
and time shall serve.

I did not like amiss of this, me thought it was good wholesome counsel.
Well; as he had advised me I set my self to work, I walked up and down the
Town, and after the treading of some few steps, not being troubled (as fortune
would have it) to tire out my legs in the search of him, it was my good hap to
have him pointed out unto me with the finger, telling me; Guzman finds
Alexandro with his clothes on his back, that he had stolen from him.
Lo, that is the man. Which direction I needed not, for the clothes on his
back did speak what he was, and without others teaching, could tell me, This
is Alexandro. He was standing amongst other young men at the Church door; nor
do I believe, that his devotion was such, as to go in and out to hear Mass,
but I was rather of opinion, that he stood there registring those that went
in, offering great scandal, but showing small respect, to that sacred place.
An ill custom, that is too much used in many great Cities in the world.
Especially in Madrid, where to prevent this Church-courting, the men are to go
in and out at one door, and the women at another.
It is a foul shame, that this is so commonly used as it is in most parts of
the Christian world. I know what I speak; Would to God I knew as well how to
reform this abuse. Are there not store of streets, and other public places in
the town, for to make love in, which we scandal too much already with our
lewd steps, wanton looks, dishonest signs, and tokens, and perhaps other
things of a worse condition, to intimate our loose and lustful affections, but
that we must wrong Proverb.
Gods holy Temple with this our uncivil and beastly behavior.

But let us proceed in our former argument, that we may not leap from a
Mass, into a Sermon. It seemed unto me, that he stood not there with any
great devotion, for he talked The Spanish phrase is, Hablaua por la mano. That
is, he talked with his band. Now to talk with the band, is an ancient fashion
of speaking, by forming letters, and by putting your fingers in diverse and
sundry postures, whereby a man makes his mind known. Couar^ Verb: Mano. Guzman
in a great rage; and why?
apace with his hand, and now and then he would break out in a loud laughter.
He had at that time a doublet of mine on his back of cloth of silver, and a
ierkin dressed with Amber, and other rich perfumes, cut and slasht clean
through, and lined with the same cloth of silver, suitable to the doublet, and
richly laid with lace after the Seuillian fashion, and eight buttons of gold
wrought upon Amber, to make it sit the closer to the collar, all which a
Gentleman of Naples presented me withal, for a certain dispatch that I had
procured for him, by soliciting his business with my Lord Ambassador.

When I came to know mine own, and saw another man wear it before my face, I
could have found in my heart to have stabbed him, and to have presently stripped
him of it, so did it grieve and vex the very soul of me, that such dear
pledges as these of my friends love unto me, should thus fore against my will,
be in another man's possession. My blood rose against him, and I was often
tempted to have gone and stabbed him, but I held my hand, and said with my
self; No Guzman, no; This must not be so; Better it were, that this thy
thief, should be converted, and live. For if thou let him live, he may chance
to pay thee; but if thou kill him, thou art sure to pay for him. And of the
two, it is better to take, then to give. And safer it is for thee, that others
should be indebted to thee, then thou indebted to others. And it will be more
for Proverb.
thy ease, and more easily compast, to get in a Mas facil cobrar, que pagar.
debt, then to pay a debt. Make not thy self the defendant, if thou may be
the plaintiff. Go on fair and softly, be not so hasty, for there is no body
that runs after us. And if there be any order or Law in gaming, and if the dice
run true, if the cards be not packt, but are well shuffled and cut, and that
there be fair play, unless the devil be in it, or my luck exceeding bad,
all the world cannot win the game from me. For I have cards enough in mine
own hand to carry it. We are sure the bird cannot now get from us; which is
that which imports us most. Let us not fear the Chase, but hunt lively, for
the Bulls are safe enough; they cannot escape us. He is taken in the manner, the
theft found about him, he cannot possibly deny it. I swear I will put him to
his necke-verse, and see how well or ill he will come off, and make him to
confess upon the Rack, who put him into those fine clothes, or in what Fair
or Market he bought them. Proverb.


Having consulted thus with my self, I got me home to my lodging, acquainting
Sayavedra with what I had seen. He had provided me my dinner ready for me,
and had set it down on the table, as soon as he saw I was come; And when we
had dined, we pitched the hay wherewith we were to catch this Cony. We
discoursed one while of this course, another while of that, many designs we
had, many means propounded to come by our own; but Sayavedra (poor man) did
stagger at them, and was loath to give way unto them: He repented him now of
the counsel he had given me, fearing therein his own danger. But we concluded
in the end, that of all other means, Peace (if we could draw him to some
reasonable composition) were the best. For it is better to have one bird in the
hand, then two in the The Spanish proverb is, Mas valia paxaro en mano, que
Buey volando. Better a bird in hand, then a Vulture flying. Signifying thereby,
That what a man has safe and sure in his power, is much better then the
uncertain hopes of great matters, by reason of those many accidents that may
interhappen. Couarr Verb: Bueytre.
bush. And a bad De menor dan^o mal concierto que buen pleyto. The tyranny of
great persons.
Accord, is better then a good Plea: Less harm ever coming of agreeing, then
suing. So that at last, we grew to this conclusion, that I, by a third person,
should use some means, to have his father talked withal, making him acquainted
with the business, and the whole manner how it was carried, giving him a large
account of every particular thing, remitting my self to his good will and
pleasure, how he in his own discretion should think meet I deserved to be
dealt withal, and that he would not enforce me (considering my fair manner
of proceeding with him) to recover mine own by rigor of Law, being there
Proverb.
was Euidentia facti; besides many other pregnant proofs to be produced, that
these goods were mine. And so I did, as we had devised; having made choice of a
discreet person, who should secretly and with fitting language, deliver thus
much unto him. But because Power is commonly accompanied with Pride, and Pride
is still attended with Tyranny, he was so far from compounding the business,
that he made little reckoning of it, taking it ill at his hands that treated
with him about it, wishing him that he should speak no more of it, deeming it
as an affront done unto his honor, and a mere defamation. He feigned
himself to be greatly wronged, though he knew well enough that I was he, that
was injured; and without giving us either good hopes, or good words, he
dispatched my messenger.

When I received this answer, I hatched a thousand evil imaginations in my
heart. But because I would not return evil for evil, I resolved to talk
with some one Lawyer or other of that University, that should be recommended
unto me for the nimblenesse of his wit, and soundness of judgment; to whom I
opening my case (fearing the success thereof, for that my adversaries father
was so powerful) might crave his opinion, and that he would assist me with
his best advice and counsel, for the better prosecuting of his business. He
plainly told me; Sir, it is well enough known in this Town, what manner of
man Alexandro is, as also his lewd and idle courses, which in some other place,
would be a sufficient information against him. Besides, there is so much truth
in that, which you urge against him, that it is manifestly apparent to as many
as know him, or shall hear you. You have right on your side, a just and a good
cause, and therefore I would advise you to frame an information against him,
and to desire justice. All Bologna, has taken notice already of this theft of
his; for, as soon as he came hither with it, it was presently known, that
these clothes were none of his own; as well, because he caused them to be
altered, and fitted to his own body; as also, for that he carried hence with
him no lambs to sell, nor any other kind of merchandise, whereby he should
make so rich a return. Besides, another companion of his, in whom he put much
trust, stole a good part of these goods from him, that he might likewise gain
thereby a part of his Pardons, and Indulgences. You see now, what course you
must be feign to take, what lies in me to relieve you, you may be assured of
the best furtherance and the best counsel that I can give you, for the
countenancing of this your cause.

Whereupon, I being very desirous, that a bill should be exhibited against him,
he presently (according to my information) drew one out, which I forthwith
presented to the Auditore del Torrone, who is there the Judge in all Causes
Criminal. But, be it as it may be, whether it were immediately from the Judge
himself, or from the Notarie, I know not which, nor from whence, nor how it
came to pass, but sure I am, that this business of mine was instantly over
all the Town, and particular notice was given thereof unto Alexandro's father.
And for that he was a man of authority in that Town, and carried a great hand
there amongst them, he hyes him in all haste to the Judge, and there accusing
me for this my bold attempt, and inconsiderate rashness, (as it pleased him to
term it) he formed a complaint against me, that I had defamed, and dishonored
his house, and that therefore he was of purpose come unto him to desire his
lawful favor, and that he would be pleased to do him justice, to the end
that I might be severely punished for this my presumption. I know not how, but
the matter was so carried between them, that it had been better for me, to
have held my peace. He was a powerful man in that City, and the Judge (it
seemed) was very willing to pleasure him. I began now to fear, that occasions
of quarrel would be picked against me; mole-hils made mountains; and this my
loss, turn to my greater loss; making my undoing, an occasion of my farther
undoing. For Love, Interest, and Hatred, are ever maine enemies to the Truth.
And in many places, As a man is befriended, Truths enemies.
so his Cause is ended. But he that has both money and friends, is sure to
work out his ends. Money is of no great thickness, yet it dulls the double
What abales the ^dge of Justice?
edged sword of justice, if it but once offer to touch it. Gold, is a heavy
metal; and that makes the balance of Justice so light. I did spit as it were
against heaven, the driuell whereof fell upon my own face; I shot my arrows
up into the air, and they returned back again upon mine own bosom; the
innocent paying for the Pagan los iustos, por peccadotes.
nocent; and the just, for the unjust. Proverb.


Much Mucho dan^a, el mucho dinero.
money, does much harm; But much more, the evil intention of an evil man.
And therefore where an ill-minded man, and a great mass of money meet together
and shake hands, there is much need of help from heaven, to free an innocent
soul out of their cruel claws. Good Lord deliver us from out their clutches,
for they are more griping and tyrannous, then those of Tigers, or of Lions.
Their will is a law; what-soeuer they desire, that they do; right (when they
lift) shall be wrong; and wrong, right: And no man must control them for it;
nor dare to say, black is their eye; lest he chance to lose both his own, for
prying too near into the secrets of these earthly gods. O that there were men
of that goodness and courage, that would not stick to tell them, and plainly
give them to understand; that the money, they thus unlawfully take, shall last
with them but a while; but the fire, wherewith they shall be tormented for it,
shall continue for ever.

The Judge did limit me a prefixed time for my proofs, but so short, that it
was not possible for me to make my information according to that scantling. In
this you may see the injustice that he did me. Who did ever till now know a
Judge restrain the Plaintiff of lawful time to make his proofs, as he did
me, especially when I did allege for my self, that the information was to
come from Siena, where the theft was committed, whence I was to procure it, for
otherwise I could not have it. But to allege this, or not allege it, all was
one. I must be content, will I, nill I, to sit down with this loss. There was
no fence for it. And to this purpose, before I pass any farther, I will tell
you what happened in a little Village of Andaluzia.

There was a certain sessing to be set in a ratable proportion, upon the A
short tale of an Alcalde.
Towne-dwellers, and borderers there-about, for some public piece of work,
that was to go in hand; and the Collectors that were appointed to gather the
money, had put into their roll (to contribute thereunto) a Gentleman of as
ancient a house, as any in those parts; who taking himself therein to be
greatly wronged, made his complaint against the collectors. But for all that,
they did not strike his name out of the roll. Now, when the time was come for
the levying of these moneys, they went unto this Gentleman to demand so much
of him, as he was rated at in their note; He refused to pay it. Whereupon they
distrained on his goods, and paid themselves. The Gentleman being much offended
with this their proceeding, goes forthwith to his Lawyer, asks his counsel,
who (in conclusion) draws me a petition for him, grounded upon all both Law,
and Reason, wherein he lays open his ancient Gentry, and the nobleness of his
House, and that in regard thereof he was privileged from all manner of
sessings, and such other the like payments, and that therefore he did humbly
petition the Court, that they would be pleased to give present order, that what
the Collectors had forcibly taken from him, might again be restored, and be
delivered back unto him, as in all equity it ought. When this petition was by
them delivered unto the Alcalde, having read it, and heard what they could say
for themselves, he called to the Register, and said unto him; Mark well, what I
shall say unto you, and see you set it down in the very same words, as I shall
deliver it unto you. This Petitioner (then said he) as he is a Gentleman, I
will by no means debar him of his privilege, God forbid I should deny him
his just request; but as he is a poor man, his House grown now to decay, and
himself (as you see) in want, I hold it very fit, that he pay as others do.

That I had justice on my side, no man doubted it; it was so public a thing,
that all the world took notice of it. But I was poor and needy, and therefore
it was fit I should pay for all, and there was no reason (in that respect) that
they should do me justice. I presently smelt a rat; I saw this was a bad
sign, and was shrewdly afraid, that all my labor would be lost. But I could
not for all this persuade my self, nor could it sincke into my head, that I
should be that man, or whom it is said by way of proverb; Paciente, y
apaleado: That I must go away with the wrong, and the blows too. First be
made cuckold, and afterward Proverb.
knocked for my prating. Well; such was my hard fortune, that being Co^nudo, y
apalcado, (...) prouerbially spoken o^ those, who b^es the wrong they have
received are themselves condem^d (...). Covarr. ve^b. Apaleado.
not able to bring in my proofs in so short a time, it so fell out with me,
that my Bill of Complaints, was thrown out of the Court, and held as a thing
of no validity or force in Law, and that of the adverse part, took place
against me; declaring there in Court, that I by this my petition, had shamed an
infamous L^bell against his son, by means whereof his House, and h^ honor
was much defamed; adding and interferting, in maiorem cautelam, I know not what
a world of words, and what strange and intricate terms. That I did sp^te,
indubitate, etc. That I did it wittingly and willingly, impudently and
maliciously, aggravating the matter against me with all the odious terms they
could devise, that if I should set them down one by one, they would take up a
whole sheet of paper. Alleging farther against me, that forasmuch as his
son, was a quiet, honest, and peaceable Gentleman, and of a good both report,
and life, I did deserve I know not what exemplarie punishment, hanging,
burning, and drowning, all was too little, that I knew not what to make of it,
nor what a Gods name, they would do with me. Which things, w^n they were read
unto me, I said to my self; These men may have healthy bodies, but I am sure
they have sick souls; They may have good purses, but I find (to my cost)
they have bad consciences. I was careless, (as one that was confident of a
good cause) I never shrunk aside, and as I was afterward going about my
business, that my suit might not fall, for want of following, I was taken up
in the midst of the street by an Arrest, and presently carried away to prison,
without Guzman clapped in prison.
any other information against me, save only the putting up of my petition, and
acknowledging it to be mine.

There is no sword, that has so keen and sharp an edge, as Calumny, and
false Accusation: and then cuts deepest, when it is in the hand of a tyrannous
Judge; whose force and power is such, that it is able to overthrow, and lay
level with the ground, the best grounded Justice that is, though it have never
so sure, never so strong a foundation. Which it does then most, and most
easily, when a poor man's cause comes in his way, who suspects (poor
harmless soul) nothing less, then to receive hurt from him, to whom he
flies for help. My business was plain, no tricks, no giggs in it, I did only
set down the naked truth, but they made it I know not how, by their quillets
and devices, knotty and uneven, though there was not a man, neither within, nor
without the Town, that did not know, all was true, that I had delivered; and
all this did plainly appear to the Judge to be so, and that I had sufficient
information.

All this is very good; yet for all this (goodman Guzman) give me leave to tell
you, that you are a goose-cap. Thou art poor, thou want favor, and Little
reckning made of the poor.
friends; and therefore art neither to be heard, nor believed. These are not
Cases, that are to be brought before the Tribunals of men; but when thou have
occasion to have thy cause try de, go get thee to God, petition him, where the
truth shall appear face to face, without any need of the favor of thy friend,
nor an Advocate to plead thy cause, nor a Register to record it, nor a Judge to
wrest it. But here they made a sport of Justice, and like Iuglers played
leggerdemaine with me. They punished me, as an unmannerly man of my tongue, a
liar, and a lewd companion. I had spent my moneys, lost my goods, put in
prison, gyves clapped on my legs, treated with evil language, vpbraiding me
with many foul and uncivil reproaches, unworthy my person, without suffering
me to open my mouth in mine own defense. And when I would have answered their
objections, and given them satisfaction by writing, when they saw how the world
went with me, my Proctor forsook me, my Solicitor would not come at me, my
Advocate refused to plead for me, so that I only now remained in the power of
the public Notarie. The only comfort that I had, was the general voice of my
wrong, comforting me, that that terrible and fearful day, would one day come,
that the powerful shall for all his power, be condemned to Hell, and that
there, your potentes, potenter punientur, your mighty men shall be mightily
punished; for that they are accursed of God for perverting of Justice. And that
which he shall leave behind him, shall not continue to the third heir, though
he tie his land never so fast, nor make never so strong a conueyance, that it
shall not go from the house: For he cannot (though h^ would never so feign)
tie the inclinations of those that are to succeed him; nor is there any
prevention, that he can use, of that force as the least hair of his head, to
make any resistance against Gods divine will and pleasure. And it is to be
believed as an article of thy faith, that their lands and estates must be spent
and consumed, for that they are the grindings of the face of the poor, ungodly
gain, the blood of the innocent, gotten in rage, and maintained with lies.

But thou will say unto me; Trust them with so much more, till that day come,
and you shall see whether they will make any bones of either taking the one, or
thinking on the other. Where-unto I answer, that how slight a reckoning soever
thou make of it, and that it seems so long a day to thee, that it will never
come, I do not know what these kind of men may think of it; but I know very
well, that it will come, and that quickly, and sooner perhaps then thou art
aware. And then it shall seem so short unto thee, that thou will say; I am but
newly come forth with my feet from out my bed, and the night is already come,
and I must shut up my eyes in darkness.

But perhaps, thou will reply unto me; I pray how came thou by so many good
suits of clothes, so much money, and other things of value? Thou did not get
them by the spade, nor the plough, thou did not dig, nor delue for them.
What did thou make in that street, upon that occasion and accident you wot
of, when you served your Master the French Ambassador? Is this (quoth I) the
rod, you seek to beat me withal? Thou art caught in thine owne-trap; thine
own words do condemn thee. For thou would liken these goods of mine, to
those that are gotten by lewd women, whereas thou do not, but ought to
understand, that their gain is lawful, though the act be unlawful; and thou
art in conscience bound to recompense her, if thou have had thy desire of her,
and did make use of her for thine own interest. Besides, the case is not
alike. For it is publicly known to all the world; that though a corrupt Judge
commit never so many mischiefs, never so unjustly put men to death, never so
wrongfully rob a man of his goods, and undo him by his partial and corrupt
dealing, thou shall have little or no remedy against him, nor can thou take
that from him, which he has stolen from others. For thou art not his competent
Judge, nor of that power as to adiudge against his will that to others, which
he has taken from them. For though it be true, that he is culpable therein
toward others; thou shall be sure to be found culpable toward him. And
howsoever he escape, thou shall be sure to smart for it. Believe me, I tell thee
what is true, nay, I tell thee truth it self; truth upon truth.

But what good does this do me? My name is Pero Garzia, I am a kind of
Tom-Tell-Troth. A free Aruntius, that must utter my mind plainly, though
perhaps I may chance to smart for it. If we should all strive to hear truth,
and to make satisfaction for those wrongs we have done, we should see the
Hospitals to be quickly filled. And now in good sooth, I bethink my self,
that it is better to enter into Heaven with one eye, then into Hell with two.
And that S. Bartholmew, had rather have his skin pulled over his ears, then to
sleep (as they say) in a whole skin, and to go therewith to eternal torment.
And that S. Lawrence made the better choice, when he chose rather to be burned
here, then there. But (alas) we cannot be all S. Bartholmewes, nor S.
Lawrences, so as we be saved, that is sufficient. For mine own part, I should
be glad of the like good fortune. For he shall perform no small piece of
work, that shall work out his salvation. But to be saved, many things are
required. And it shall be impossible for thee to be saved, by keeping those
goods in thy hands which thou have stolen, when as thou art able (if thou will)
to make restitution. Whichthou art loath to do, or do not at al, that thou
may leave it to they heirs, dis-inheriting those, that are the true owners
thereof: And therefore do not thou seek to trouble either thy self, or us,
to excuse these thy robberies and unjust actions, by cunning shifts, to cozen
thine own soul, and by lessening and mincing of them, as though they were
matters of nothing, and therefore need not much to trouble thy conscience; for
this that I deliver unto thee is the Catholic faith; and those other thy
tricks and devices, the sleights and subtleties of Satan. Miserable, and most
wretched is that man, who for the maintaining of his pride and pomp in the
world, and that he may leave either his children, or his nephews great titles,
and rich revenues, has heaped up riches by indirect means, and has filled
his house up to the top with illgotten gain, contenting himself, so as he may
leave a name here behind him upon earth, to leave his soul, to live hereafter
for ever in hell. These (I assure you) are no jesting matters, they are not to
be made sport withal; for ere long, thou (to thine own cost) shall find that
to be too true, which I now tell thee. I call thee thine own self, to be a
witness of that which I have said; I desire no other. And let me tell thee
withal; That thou thy self do not know when thy days shall have an end,
or whether thou shall have so much time of life lent thee, as to read out
these good lessons, which I read unto thee, howsoever foolish they may seem
unto thee. But in that other world, thou will be of another mind. Nor do not
thou flatter thy self, That thou have built such a Chapel, and maintainest
so many Chaplains to pray for thy soul, but at mine, and other men's cost,
stripping one of his coat, another of his cloak, whereunto thou had no
right in the world. For Masses (though S. Gregory himself should say them)
cannot benefit the damned, there is no redemption, when the sentence is once
past.

O good God! When shall I make an end of troubling thee with these, and the
like discourses? For I know thou do not look for these Sermons from me, nor
any other kind of wholesome doctrine, but expectest only such things, as may
serve to entertain the time, or to bring thee asleep. I do not know how to
excuse this terrible temptation, that I have to talk in this fashion, save
only by telling thee, that it is with me, as it is with drunkards, who no
sooner get a penny, but they go, and spend it at the Tavern.

There is not any The Spanish word is, Ripio. Cerca de los canteros, son las
piedras menudas que saltan de las piecas que van labrando. o otto genero de
piedras menudas, para rehinchir las paredes. bezimo, meter vno mucho ripio,
quanden la meteria que va tratando, ingiere algunas cosas friuolas, a semejanca
del que haze paredes, que poniendo en las dos hazes piedras grandes, todo lo en
de medio hinche deste cascaxo y ripio. Covarr. verb. Ripio.
shauings, of metal, stone, or wood, that I can meet withal, good or bad,
one amongst another, but that I seek to make some use of it, and study to
serve my self with it, only that I may the better serve thee. And if that
which I have said, seem unto thee to be well said, it is well that I have said
it: but if it seem ill unto thee, read it not over any more, nor go therein
a jot farther. For it is all Todo es matas, y por rozar. id est, Todo es
trabajoso, y difficultoso. Ib. verb. Rozar.
mountaynous matter, rough and craggy, wherein perhaps, thou shall meet with
more pain, then profit, yet do thou but write the like, and I shall patiently
endure whatsoever thou shall say. But I will conclude this Chapter with telling
thee; That when misfortune shall follow a man, no diligence, nor good counsel
shall avail him; but shall, where he thinks to gather wool, go away with
his fleece shorn.

CHAP. III.
Guzman de Alfarache, discourses on the injustice, which some Judges do,
blinded by gain, or by passion.

I Came out of prison, as out of a prison. I need not to indeare it more unto
you. For, the least I can say of it, is; That it is a true and lively picture
of Hell it self. I got forth, out of a desire that I had to enjoy my former
liberty; and had I not (think you) great cause to desire it? For he, whom
they had so unjustly bereaved of it, had good cause to fear greater dangers to
ensue. For if so just and so fair a business, as this was, did fadge so ill
with me at the first, and that my Adversary had the better of the day of me,
when I thought my self surest of the victory; I might very well, and with a
great deal of reason persuade my self, that in negotiating the rest, I should
find much difficulty. Perhaps these men think, that God sleeps. But do
not withal consider, that even those, who had no knowledge of him, both did,
and do fear him.

Aesope asking Chilo, what God did: How he spent his time: And in what he did
busy and employ himself: Told him; In exalting the humble, and in God exalts
the humble, and humbles the proud.
bringing down the proud. I am a sinful man, a lewd liver, and a naughty
fellow; and sithence they did inflict punishment upon me, sure I must be in
some fault. For it is not to be supposed, that an honorable Judge, one that
professes knowledge, and holiness of life, will be won either by favor, by
gifts, or by fear, to pervert the course of Justice, or to lay so heavy a
burden on his tender conscience. Especially considering with themselves; That
every man shall be rewarded according to his works. But let them go as they
are. For the Judges of the earth must be judged; and therefore I will not judge
them, nor grind them any more with this stone. I had now been taught
experience to my cost, and sufficiently beaten with mine own rod, insomuch
that having been once scalded with hot water, I was now afraid of cold. That
from that day forward, I would neither pass by the Tyrrone, which was the
place of Justice, nor by the prison, nor scarce come within four streets where
they were. Not so much for my imprisonment, but for the wrong I received
therein, contrary to all Law, and reason. I did not see a hackney-man with a
wand in his hand, nor a Carrier with a cudgel under his arm, but I presently
thought upon the Vare, quasi Virga.
Vare, or rod of Justice. Ever after I resolved with my self, rather to sit
down with loss, then to go to trial of Law; at least to use all the means
that I could to the contrary, till I saw there was no other remedy, being
compelled thereunto rather by force, then necessity. The reason moving me
there-unto, is that counsel which I gave another in the time of my
imprisonment.

There was a certain fellow brought to prison, for that he had bought a
mandillion, which they said, was stolen, the owner whereof was my very good
friend. Who told me, that albeit he knew, that the party imprisoned, was a
person not to be suspected to be consenting to any such base kind of
pilfrings, yet at least, he would make him, to bring forth him, that sold it
him; for when that mandillion was stolen, be lost many other things with it,
and therefore, though he might have his mandillion restored unto him, he would
not rest so contented, but would either lose it, or recover the rest.

I told him; Sir, you are my friend; The Law is costly, and therefore let me
advise you not to enter into it; you are fairly offered, and therefore (if you
be wise) take your mandillion, lest you spend your cloak, to recover your
coat; No ^od comes of ^ng to Law.
you will get nothing in the end by the bargain; clo^ke, and coat, and
whatsoever else you pretend, will go all away in fees, so that the Lawyer at
last will have all, and your self nothing. He would not be ruled, and being
(as all selfe-will'd men are) strongly wedded to his own opinion, he flarly
told me he would go to a trial with him, and see what would come of it. For
he assured himself, that he had a great deal of reason on his side, and that
his Proctor, and his Advocate had told him, that he needed not to doubt of his
cause, and that it would surely pass on his side. In conclusion, he had spent
some fifteen days in following the suit against him; in all which time there
was no fault to be found against the prisoner; but proved himself in the end
to be an honest man; whereupon, he was presently freed out of prison; my friend
perceiving at length, how he had played the fool, repented himself of the
lost time and charges, which he had spent in the suit. So that he was forced to
sell his cloak, and was yet never a whit nearer the recovery of his
mandillion; and I doubt not, but the Lawyers stripped him to the very shut,
before they had done with him.

Let those therefore, that can excuse it, leave off to go to Law; for your
Law-sutes, are like unto your Mats; whereunto, they that make them, go adding
one by one, rush to rush, and never make an end, till they cut them off, The
nature of Law-sutes.
or clean rid their hands of them.

Law-sutes, belong properly to great persons, and for great and important
Law-sutes, for whom they are fittest.
causes; for they have wherewithal to hold plea, and are able to maintain it.
To these, the doors are set wide open, they are vsherd in by the officers of
the Court, all show respect unto them ^d if they spend their money, they have
money to spend. But as for thee, and me, we must for the recovering of five
Royals, spend fifteen, and lose a hundred more in the loss of our time,
besides a thousand troubles, and as many enemies, which we shall get thereby.
And worse will it go with us, if we shall chance to go to Law with one, that
is mightier then our selves; for, that a poor man, should go to Law with a
rich man, is all one, as if he should offer to wrestle and try his strength
with a Lion, or a Bear. It is true, some such there have been, that have
given them the foil, and sometimes quite overthrown them, but this has
seldom happened, and when it does, it is held so strange a thing, that it is
accounted as a wonder, or some rare miracle. Those iestes are unsavory No
sonbuenas burlas, l^ que salen a la cara.
, that turn to a Proverb.
man's hurt. It is no sporting with edge tools. Do thou not see, and know,
that these kind of men, will make the Sun to shine at midnight? And that
they cast out devils in the name of Beelzebub? But as for us, poor souls, La
lechona, nos pare gozqu^s; All things go cross with us; especially, in causes
Proverb.
criminal, where the street of Justice, is of that great breadth and length,
where the Judge may easily wind himself, whither, or which way he will, go
on this, or that side of the street, or to keep the middle way, as he himself
shall have most mind to. He can either lengthen, or shorten his arm, and
reach out his hand, either to help thee, or to hurt thee, according as it
shall have a feeling of the business.

And therefore, to him, that will not wilfully cast himself away, but desires
Good counsel, for those that go to Law.
to have a fair end of his business, my advice is; That he guild the Judges
books, and present the public Notary with a silver pen; So may he quietly lay
himself down to sleep, and take no farther thought for the matter, nor stand
in need of Doctor, or Proctor, to plead and solicit his cause. If that course
were taken in many Cities of Italy, which is used in diverse other Provinces,
yea also among the very Barbarians; with whom, when any one is absolved or
condemned, the Judge sets down in his sentence under his own hand, the cause
that moved him to give such sentence, and upon what grounds he did it; surely,
there would a great deal less evil come of it; for, if he could show good
reason for that which he did, he need not be ashamed who sees it, and the party
thereby, whom it concerns, shall remain well satisfied; But in case he shall
not have proceeded therein according unto Law, but has dealt unjustly in
sentencing the business, some other superior Judge shall be appointed to
rectify that wrong, and to amend the others error. And I knew a Judge my A
Judge on an ill condition, and a worse conscience.
self, to whom a Merchant paid a round sum to have him pass a sentence on
his side, thinking thereby so to affright the adverse party, that despayring of
any hope of good in his suit, he might draw him to what composition it pleased
him: Which a particular friend of his understanding, came unto the Judge, and
told him; I wonder, Sir, how you could sentence this cause in this manner,
being so contrary, as it is, to all Law and reason. To whom, the Judge
answered, That it made no great matter. For he was but a sub-alternall Judge,
and that there were other Judges, that were his superiors, who might (if they
would) reuerse that sentence, nor should the other lose any thing at all by
that, which he had given against him.

Such kind of men as these, will not stand much upon committing these and the
like errors, nor examine themselves, whether they do well or ill in it; for
with them it is not accounted a fault, though it may truly be called Error de
praesenti, an error in the Indicative Mood, a most foul fault: for in so
doing, he does rather deceive, then judge. But in my poor opinion, he is a
fool, that may, and will not shun Law-sutes; And in good Philosophy, Minus
est dam^, Wise is that man that auoides going to Law. Injuries to be borne
withal.
vnum sufferre, quam multos; It is less harm, to suffer at one then many men's
hands. When thy adversary does thee an injury, it is one alone, that does it;
and by him only do thou suffer. But if thou go about to revenge it, go
which or what way soever thou will to work, thou leap'st (as we say) out of
the Saltaste de la sarten al fuego.
drying pan into the fire; and secking to avoid one inconvenience, Proverb.
thou runst headlong into another; nay into many, one upon the neck of
another. Will thou see the truth of this? I will show thee the ways then,
wherein Your Tauerneros in Spain, are not of that credit as your Vintners with
us, being for the most part poor base rogues Into whose Tauernes, no man of
fashion will come, as holding it to be a discredit so to do. They have but one
poor lower room, and dress no meat.
thou must walk.

First of all; Thou may chance to light upon an Alguazil (who is a common
Catch-pole, or appreh ender of men's persons) a fellow, that has neither soul,
nor shame, who but the other day, was a Tauernero, a seller of wine, as his
father was before him, though happily now they keep no shop. And if the father
were a thief from the beginning, the son is now the greater of the two. Who
either bought that Vare, which he bears, to find him meat to put in his
mouth; or else has hired it of another, as a man does a mule; He is such a
kind of poor, yet insatiable creature, that he must either steal, or starve;
and does therefore steal, that he may satisfy his hungry maw. And under
pretense that he is the Kings officer, and carries the Kings white wand, or
Vare in his hand, throating it out, wheresoever he comes, Alguazil soy, traygo
la vara del Rey; I am an Alguazil, and carry the Kings staff: he neither
fears the King, nor keeps his Laws, but both against the King, against God,
and against all law, will he offer thee a hundred excesses, a hundred
indignities, both in deeds and in words, that he may move thy patience so
far, as to make thee ready to run Alguazils are to be avoided.
out into resistance of justice (which is the trap, he sets for thee) and bring
thy offense to be criminal; and though thou did not make any the least
stir, What kind of fellows they be.
nor had any such meaning, yet will he enforce it against thee, and persuade
others (all that he can) to believe it.

I knew an Alguazil in Granada, that had two teeth, that were false and
counterfaite, and fastened by art to those other that he had in his head. And in
a certain A Tale of an Alguazil of Granada.
broyle or quarrel that suddenly arose in the street, he coming in among
them, he secretly puts his fingers into his mouth, and cunningly pulling them
out, causing his gumes wherewithal to bleed; did not shame to say, that
coming in to make peace in the Kings name, they were there beaten out. And
albert this business did not succeed so well with him, as he could have wished
it, nor took its intended effect, for that the truth thereof came to be
known; yet did he not give it over for want of following, but used all the
diligences he could, to possess the Judges with this falsehood. It will lie in
his hands, if thou but speak a word, or wag but a finger, to prove that thou
did give him either ill language, or blows; and then will he presently
deliver thee over to his Corchetes Corchete, quasi curuac^ete, which signifies
a claspe, that fastens a garment, and shuts it close. And by allusio^, those
Ministers of Justice, which hang about a man, and hale him to prison, are
called Corchetes, because of their taking hold like hooke^. They are the same
with your Sergeants yeomen.
, with command to carry thee to prison. Behold now, what an honorable calling
this is, what a gentle craft, what honest men forsooth, are these your
Corchetes, your Sergeants Yeomen, infamous Villains, Traitors, Thieues,
Drunkards, shameless Rascals, nay impudency it self. Insomuch, that a witty
Lackay said of himself, when they had angered him; He that says the word
Lackay, says a vittailing house; he that says the word Lackay, says a
Tavern; he that says the word Lackay, says Cloaca^ immunditiae, all the
uncleanness that man can imagine. And that woman, that has taken the pains
to bring forth a son, that proves a Lackay, there is not that wickedness in
the world, which may not be presumed, to have proceeded from her. So do I
likewise say; that he, that says the word Corchete, (that is, Sergeant or
Sergeants Yeoman) there is not that vice, that villainy, that wickedness, The
wicked conditions of these kind of men.
which does not utter it self in that one word. For they have neither soul
nor conscience; And are the only true pictures, and most lively images, of the
Ministers of hell. So close do they cling unto thee, when thou fal'st into
their clutches; and if they do not drag thee by the collar, haling and tugging
thee as if they would pull out thy throat, (which thou must acknowledge for a
great and singular courtesy) yet at the least shall thou be so basely used by
them, that the Eagle will carry away the fearful Hare with a great deal more
clemency and mercy in her sharp tallons, then these Hell Hounds will thee.
They will punch thee, and kick thee, and elbow-beate thy back if thou go not
forward as they would have thee, and will revile thee with such base and bitter
terms, as if thou were as bad as they: And for no other cause in the world
do they use men thus scuruily and uncivilly, save only to please their
master, who they know likes well enough of it; as also for that it is a
butcherly and beastly custom that they have long kept, and therefore either
cannot, or are loath to leave it. Deeming themselves, both then, and at all
times, to be the only Lords and Masters of the world; not considering in the
mean while, that neither he, nor they, have any farther power, then to put
thee in safe custody, and that without offering thee any the least wrong or
injury in leading thee thither.

Just after this manner as I have told thee, will they violently (though thou
be never so willing to go quietly along with them) thrust thee this way, and
Prisons, and their keepers, what kind of things they be.
that way, never leaving off to trouble and torment thee, till they have
brought thee to prison. Now, will you that I shall tell you, what manner of
house this is, what the usage, what you are there to endure, and what kind of
life you must lead there? you shall meet with it hereafter in its proper
place; Let it suffice for the present, that if it shall one day be thy hap to
come thither, (which God forbid) after that they have treated thee ill upon the
way in bringing thee thither, and peradventure picked either thy purse, or thy
pocket, and robbed thee of such moneys as thou had about thee, they will put
thee into the hands of some churlish Iaylor, or some vnder-keeper of his, (as
dogged a rogue as his master) who, as if thou were his slave, will accommodate
thee in that ill favored filthy manner, as he himself shall think fit, nor
can thou hope for better, unless thou come off lively, and pay well for it.
Be it better or be it worse, thou must take all patiently, and pocket it with
silence; for thou art in his house, not in thine own; and in another bodies
power, etc. There, neither The hard condition of prisoners.
brauings, nor threatenings, great words, nor big looks, will stead thee any
thing at all; for they are such bug-beares themselves, that they awe all, but
fear none.

Then will they bring thee before the Alcayde, or his Deputy, or some such
like imperious officer or other, before whom thou must be feign to come with
cap in hand, crowching and creeping unto him, studying new inventions of doing
reverence and respect unto him; making new kind of legs, and other
unaccustomed courtsies and congies unto him; though I count this no such great
matter, being rather more troublesome, then hurtful. For I must truly confess
unto you, that there are some Alcaydes, that carry themselves as fathers
toward those that are brought before them; and for mine own part, I ever
found them so toward me, so that I cannot justly complain of them. True it
is, they will live by their Offices, as other men do, they have no other
means to maintain them, it is the trade, whereunto they must trust. Besides,
they come not gratis to these places of government. If they will come by them,
they must buy them. Wherefore they do thee a great favor, if they do thee
Judges do a great favor, if they do thee Justice.
justice; if by their means thou come to recover thine own, and if they give
way to thee, either to escape with life, or to sustain it, or quietly to order
thine own house, or to live settled in thy own estate without disturbance, or
to defend and make good thy plea. But in ^ne he is thy Alcayde, he that must
judge and censure, either thee, or thy cause; He may, or may not, wish thee
well; He has the Law in his own hands; thy liberty, or imprisonment lies in
his power. Well; when thou come to follow thy cause, thou must go adoring
thy Proctor, or thy Lawyer; but bear this in mind too I pray, that I now say
unto thee, that I say nothing of him; for that has its When, and its Where,
its time, and its place, as your Saualo. A known fish, and of a very good
relish. And may be called quasi Sapalo, a Sapore. In Latin they call it Alopa,
tri^a, clupea. It usually dies, when it comes into fresh water. Vid.
Rondelecius de Piscibus, lib. 7. cap. 15.
Savalo-pyes for the holy week; its week shall come to, when it shall be best
in season.

In brief, that I may not trouble my self twice with one subject, and one and
the selfsame kind of people; I plainly tell thee, that they will be thy
masters, and that thou must suffer them, and bear with them, and not only be a
slave unto thy Lawyer, but to thy Solicitour, the Notarie, the Master of the
Office, the Clarke of the Pleas, the keeper of the papers, and the boy, that is
to go with thy Plea to thy Lawyer. But in case, thou go home to his house, or
his office thy self, and thou find him retired into his chamber, or some
other private withdrawing room, dispatching of others, and thou stand
waiting, looking still when it will come to thy turn to be called in, like
those, that standing on the bancke of a River, expect a boat to come over unto
them from the other side, thou will be so tired out with knocking thy heels
against aforme, that thou would rather stay the coming forth of some furious
Bull, then of him. After all this, when thou have made a large relation of the
whole He that has to d^ with Lawy^, must dance attendance.
business unto him, and how the case stands, he will tell thee, that he will
burn his books, and give over the Law, if thy business go not with thee;
This is their common language toward all their Clients, but they neither
satisfy their expectation, nor perform their own promise; for I never saw
any of them, when their causes miscarried, either burn their books, or leave
their practice. And will have one thing or other to excuse themselves; As that
the business was not well followed, that diligence was not used therein, which
should have been, or that it was his Clerks fault, and none of his, who was
out of the way, when his business was to be done, being either gone, at that
very instant, with his children to School, or to wait on his Mistress to
Church, by whose default the opportunity was lost of drawing the Petition. Your
Advocate, has some smacke of the Law, but little of learning. He dictates, but
does not write; and the reason is, because they take them too soon from
School, that they may with as little loss of time as they can, apply them to
these studies, whether that they were sent thither somewhat of the latest by
their friends, being kept too long from School at first; or whether out of a
covetous desire that they had, to have them fall presently upon the The Books
of the Civil Law, which being in many huge Volumes, and scattered pieces,
Justinian the Emperor caused to be digested into a lesser number, and better
form; whence they were called Digests.
Digests, leaving the Principles indigested. As if good writing should not
presuppose good reading, and good reading, and good writing together, beget
good Orthography, and bring forth at last a good Latine-tongue, which like
linckes that belong to one chain, ought both to be learned, and joined
together.

But of this enough: Let us now pass on to some other Theme. For here, we do
but care out our cloakes, and spend our time to little purpose, and less
profit. Let us come to your ordinary Judge, of whom I have said something Your
ordinary Judge, what manner of fellow he is.
unto you already, nor know I well, what I should say more, save that he makes
open sale of Justice, hucking with you, to bring you up to their price, and if
you refuse to give them, what they require of you, they will plainly tell you,
you shall look for no Justice from them; for it is worth more then they ask,
and that such a one, that stands there by thee, paid a great deal more for it,
then he now demands of thee.

But say thou should appeal, and come to some superior Judge, which seldom
happens, in regard the fish dies here first, or is at least so starved in
this Your superior Judge, what manner of man he is
shallow brook, before it can recover that sea, that it comes thither without
any Spawne, poor, and unprofitable. Thy money is all gone, thou art needy, and
not able to wage Law, for want of means; There thou shall not find those
private interests, and particular profits which they make to themselves; but
thou shall meet perhaps with passions, which sometimes prove as bad. And as
their purses, have not paid for thy breeding, so what care they whether thou be
whipped or hanged. Six years, more or less, for which term thou art condemned
to the Galleyes, what is it to them? It hurts not them; They are not sensible
of it; they feel not that, which thou feel; nor suffer that, which thou
suffer. These, I tell thee, are the Gods upon earth, they go to their
goodly houses, where they are well attended; they pass through the streets,
where they are honored, and adored, and feared of the people. What care then
can thou think, or conceive with thy self, that they should take of such a
poor soul as thou art? It is in their hands, to save thee, or condemn thee;
and so they will deal with thee, as their own passions shall incline them to
thy good, or hurt; or as some great and powerful friends shall persuade with
them.

I knew a certain Judge in Sevill, who condemned a fellow in poena pecuniaria,
to pay such a sum of money by way of mulct for his offense that he had A
horrible sentence of a Judge of Sevill.
committed. Out of which he awarded two hundred ducats to be paid into the
Chamber of Sevill by way of fine: with this command or proviso in the sentence;
That not being able to pay in the said sum, he should be sent to serve in the
Galleyes for ten years, and to row at the Oar like a slave, of free cost,
without receiving one penny of pay. And when the term of those his ten years
were expired, he should be brought back again to prison to the said City of
Sevill, and from thence to the marketplace, where he was to be hanged on the
common gallows.

Had it been my case, before I would have given such a foolish sentence, I
should rather have ordered it thus; That he should have been hanged first, The
answer of a country Clown, to an ignorant Painter.
and afterward sent unto the Galleys; sure, the cart, in this case, should
have gone before the horse. Iumping for all the world with that which was said
to an ignorant and unskillful painter, who talking one day in company, that ere
long he would white his house, and afterward paint it; nay, said one of the
standers-by, you shall do much better, if you paint it first, and white it
afterward.

There are some Judges, whose tongues, so out-runne their discretion, that
whatsoever comes first to mouth, it must out, nay, and must stand for good,
though his own judgment upon its better consideration, chide his tongue for
being too forward. And if he that is Assessor with him, and is joined as his
fellow-Iudge in Commission with him, shall take upon him to moderate the
matter, and seem but the least way to cross what he has done, or shall but
abate the least tittle of what he has decreed, or in any manner at all to
mitigate the rigor of his sentence, it is as if you should take a thing from
the Altar; so sacred, do these unhallowed Judges, hold their own actions;
Taking it as an indignity, not to be endured. Look well into the business
then, and consider with thy self, how much the lesser evil it is of the two,
that he that has offended thee, should go away with this his insolency, and
thou thereby remain free from some great inconvenience. Which thou ought to
permit, not only (as has been said before) that thou may not be subject to
so many; but also, that thou may not hurt thy self, by putting thy house out
of order, and (by consequence) thy honor and person in peril, as also that of
thy wife, thy children, and thy whole estate.

But perhaps thou will say unto me: O, it is not fit, that this Villain, that
has thus wronged me, should carry it away so, and laugh at me when he has It
is a good thing in any man, to neglect (...).
done. I confess it is not fit, nor is there any reason, why it should be so:
yet, if thou must needs be laughed at, it were better but one should laugh at
thee, then many. For if thou will but hold thy peace, and seem not to be moved
at it, but to let it pass, and take no notice thereof, only he can laugh at
thee in his sleeue that has done thee this wrong; but if thou seek to right
thy self by Law, and be afterward overthrown, thousands will laugh at thee,
that thou should be such a fool, to cast away thy money so wilfully amongst
the Lawyers, having bought nothing therewith but mere smoke, and a little of
their unprofitable breath; and that Lawyer, will scoff and deride thee most,
that has put thee in most hope, because by that means he has most picked thy
purse.

Well, you will say, it may be so, I care not for all this; Let the worst come,
that can come, there are many Churches to fly unto for shelter, and the world
is wide enough for us all. Tell me (thou ignorant man) think thou to excuse
one error with another? Suppose the best that can befall thee in this case, it
is no more but temporis dilatio, a little gaining of time. Neither there (no
not in the Church) will thou be able to endure either the Priest, or his
Curate, or that worshipful master his Sexton. And what think thou, that thou
must suffer, that they may bear with thee, and give thee leave to stay amongst
them? Think thou, there is no more in it then so, to say, I will go to some
Church, or other, and there take Sanctuary? Thou will meet with more troubles
there, then thou art aware of. This incommodate accommodating of thy self,
will cost thee money, nor can thou continue there for ever. Think thou it
so small an inconvenience, to leave thine own home, and so to go seek thy
fortune in foreign Countries? If happily thou be a Spaniard, (as I my self am)
wheresoever thou shall come, thou art sure to be an unwelcome guest, thou shall
be ill received amongst them, how fair a show soever they make thee; for we
have this advantage of all other nations in the world, that we are more
abhorred The Spaniards hated in all places, and of all persons.
in all places, and of all persons, then any other people under the Sun; but
whose fault it is, I know not. Thou go wandering through deserts, from Inn
to Inn, from a private lodging, to a common vittayling house. Think thou,
that they are all honest people, that have for their Patron the good King, Don
Alonso? Inne-keepers, and Vittaylers, thou know not (poor silly soul) what
kind of vermin they are, and therefore thou set'st so light by them, and
seek'st not to fly from them.

Lastly, thou shall endure many inconveniences in these thy travels abroad;
suffering heats and colds, wind and rain, bad weather, and bad ways, and The
inconveniences that befall Travelers.
with it the distasteful company of diverse distinct Nations; one while it
raines, another while it snowes, the rivers rise, and thou can not pass,
night is near, and thy Inn far off, it grows dark as pitch, and the
clouds furiously discharge upon thee their lightning and thunder; and for that
thou art of an impatient spirit, thou had rather dye a thousand deaths, then
endure it.

Go to then; go thy ways at last; leave off these thy idle thoughts of going
to Law; sit down rather with loss, and live in peace. For it is better Good
counsel for those that will live (...) quiet.
that the world should say of thee, that thou art a patient wise man, then a
reuengefull fool. What have they either done, or said unto thee, that thou
keep'st such a coil, and that no man was ever so wronged, as thou art? If that
be true, which they have spoken of thee, it is thou that have given them cause
so to do; and if they lie, a lie is a lie, and he that lies, let him go like
a liar as he is. And therefore he did not thee so much wrong as himself, nor
have thou any reason to be revenged on another by indangering thy self.
Neglect him, and let him go for a knave, as he is; for thou can not take a
fuller revenge of him, nor punish him more, then to let him pass for an idle
fool, and follow thine own business. I have spoken enough of this, think
upon it, it may make much for thy good, if thou will well weigh, what I have
said unto thee. But I must return again into my old way, and now I am entering
into it.

CHAP. IV.
Guzman de Alfarache, being freed out of prison, falls to gaming, gets money;
Whereupon, he resolves with himself to go to Millayne.

I Came out of prison, and got me to my lodging, being as sad and melancholy,
as I was poor and miserable; Guzman comes heavy and melancholy out of prison.
saying to Sayavedra; What do thou think of the good market, that we have
made in this fair? We may make merry with the gains we have got, this will
serve for once to keep us out of beggerie, we need no money now, let us spend,
and be lively. Consider now I pray with your self, upon what a sure ground
they go, who seek to recover their own by Law. He told me, Sir, I see how
things are carried, for I have been an eyewitness of all that has past; but
what remedy is there to be had, against the passions and private interests of
Judges, and the force and power of the potent? But that which touches me
nearest, and grieves me most, is; That you will find fault with me, and be
offended with me, that I have been the instrument of this your wrong, and more
particularly at this present by that counsel and advice, which I gave you, to
recover your goods. Which though it were done all for the best, has
unfortunately fallen out to the worst. Sed homo proponit, and Deus disponit.
Man proposes one thing, and God disposes another. Who would ever have
dreamed, that things would have fallen out as they do? What should him say
unto it? There is now no help for it. For as a man cannot avoid the stone,
which a fool throws by chance ou^ a house, and kills him therewith: So, much
less was it to be imagined, or once to be suspected by us, that such a
business as this, so fair, and so full of truth, should prove so
dis-proportionable, and so quite opposite to our understanding.

Whilst we were thus talking of this matter, there com's me a couple of guests
that were strangers into the Inn, challenged by a young man of that City, to
play at Cards. And in a little square room, that divided their chamber from
mine, they had set up a table, and to play they go. Now I walking up and down
that way, in my passing to and fro, seeing what past amongst them, I was
desirous (for to entertain the time, and to drive away melancholy) to draw
nearer unto them, and to look upon them. I did so, and pulling a stool unto
me, taking that which came first to hand, I sat me down, viewing one of their
hands for the sp^ce of some two hours, or more, in all which time there was
little or nothing lost on either part. The money went to and fro; losing one
while, and getting another; Fortune had showed her self so equal, that she
had made them in a manner all sauers; what was won, was not worth the
speaking of, there being no difference to be discerned in that they had drawn
before they began. Every man entertained himself with his own money which he
drew at first, expecting a lucky pull, whilst I in the mean while had a
shrewder pull in mine own bosom. They had not that griping themselves, yet
did they cause it in me, without any other why, or wherefore, The nature and
condition of those that stand by, looking upon Gamesters.
save only by my looking on his cards, by whom I sat, when either he lost
through want of good carding, or well-playing of his game.

O what a strange nature are we made of, which I speak not only of my self,
but of all in general; for no^ any one of these men being known unto me; nor
having ever seen them before in my life, (for this was the first flight I had
made of coming abroad since the time of my imprisonment) having never
conuersed with them heretofore, being all alike strangers unto me, yet me
thought I was much ioyed, and was glad with all my heart, when he did win, my
affection inclining to have fortune show her self more favorable unto him,
then the rest; and on the contrary was sorry, when I saw he lost. See what a
kind of sin this was in me; how unprofitable to my self? how foolish and
to no purpose, to desire that the other two might lose, that he might rise the
winner, and go away with their money, as if my self had been interessed
therein, or as if they had got it from me, or were bound to let me have it.

O, what an indiscretion, what an ignorance is it, to lay other men's burdens
on our own shoulders; which are neither of any moment in themselves, nor of
any benefit unto us! One stands peeping out at his window, and another
Needless curiosity.
with his head half out at his door, watching only to see, who went out of
his neighbors house before day, who came in at midnight, what they brought in,
and what they carried out, led only thereunto out of an idle and needless
curiosity; by reason whereof they run into a thousand suspicions, a thousand
iealousies of such things, which never were, nor could be, much less to be
gathered from them, or any way in the world to be imagined by them. Brother, or
Sister, who ere thou be, get thee gone, leave off thy prying into others
actions, God help us all; thou do not know, whether such a one Men ought
not to pry into other men's actions.
sins, or not sins; whether he does this, or that other thing, or does it
not: and it may be, that he does not sin, but I am sure that thou do sin
in doing as thou do. Tell me, what does his death, or his life, his going
in, or his coming out, concern thee? What good do thou get by it, or what
reward do they give thee, for that thy nights watching, so ill bestowed on thy
self, and others? What honor, shall thou reap by his dishonor? What
contentment can thou take therein? Say, by this diligence of thine, thou
may happily have occasion to do him some friendly office, and bestead him in
time of need. It may be so. But this is so contrary a thing, to men of such
base condition, that I assure my self, nay I dare to seal it with an oath,
that thou would not do it.

If thy neighbor, fearing some thieues would come that night to rob him,
should speak unto thee to take the pains to sit up and watch his house for
him, and should very earnestly entreat thee so to do, tell me, and lie not,
what would thou say unto him? what answer would thou make him? Certainly,
thou would tell him, That thou have enough to do, to look unto thine own,
that every man is bound to respect himself first; and that thou will not stand
freezing in the cold, nor endanger thine own health for to benefit another.
How comes it then to pass, that to do thy neighbor a good turn, and to
exercise thy charity toward him, thou will not watch a quarter of an hour
with him, and yet, that thou may bring his faults to light, and lay open his
Profitable counsel for curious obseruers of other men's faults.
spots to the S^nne, thou will thus play the fool to sit up a whole night to
see if thou can light upon any oblique action, that thou may lay in his
dish hereafter? Do thou not perceive by this time, how ill this does become
thee? See thou not, that I say the truth? Thou can not (if thou will but
examine thy self) but know, that it were better for thee, and would stand a
great deal more with thine own health, to get thee to bed betimes, and to
look how things go at home in thine own house, and to let those of thy
neighbor alone. Will thou, to do him a despite, charge thine own soul with
those sins, of which thy neighbor is free, whence his comes to be saved, and
thine to be damned? Such a one plays to win, and to increase his stock, and
it grieves me forsooth, that such a one should win, or such a one lose. Just so
it goes, and no otherwise. If thou take pleasure in looking on those that game,
M^n that look upon Gamesters must (...) fr^ passion.
look on (if thou can) without passion. But thou can not do it; for thou
art, as I am; and thou will do, as I do. Of the two, I should hold it the
lesser evil, that thou should play thy self, then look upon another game
with such like passion; For he that plays, it is well enough known, that he
desires to win; and this is a battle, that is fought between two wits, or
four. Thou, being confident of thy good fortune, do adventure thy money, at
least thou desire, that they may not carry it away from thee, thou seek'st to
defend thy self as well as thou can, and thou set thy self down to
play with that credence and belief, that thou may as well lose, as win, and
as well get theirs, as they get thine; In this thou seem to have some
reason, and deseruest to be excused. But that only by looking on, a man of
reason, and understanding, whom the business nothing concerns, should be so
blinded with passion, as to be affected, or disaffected in that violent
fashion, tell me if I do amiss, in styling him to be a man deprived of true
judgment, and whether I may not lawfully condemn him for it. But to return
to our purpose; Continuing their play, within a little while after, the Sea
began to swell, the The effects of game, and gamesters.
waves grew high, and the money began to swim from one side of the board to
the other, their bloods waxed hot, and their choler began to kindle, they were
now at their close fights, watching but advantage to board, or sinck each
other; they grapled hard for it on all sides, and the Cards likewise they played
their parts, and laid about them for life, bestirring themselves lustily, and
gave one of them such a blow on the head with his club, that he was stricken
over board, and he and all his money suncke, having lost in that fight above a
hundred Crowns. And this man, that had this great blow given him, was he in
whose hand I looked. Of whose loss I was as sensible, as if the case had been
mine own; thinking with myself, that I had brought him this ill luck, and
that I was the instrument of this his bad fortune. Which did grieve me so much
the more, for that I understood, that he was not worth in all the world so much
more, as he had then lost.

Gaming ought to be used for two manner of ends; either for mere gain,
Gaming, is used for two causes.
or to entertain the time. If for gain, I say nothing unto it, save that
those, who bend themselves that way, are like unto Pirates, that put
themselves forth to sea to purchase some prize. Capiat qui capere potest;
catch, he that can catch; Let every one arm his own ship, as well as he can,
and have an eye to the bullets that fly about his ears, and those other
warlike weapons which they use in such kind of fights. Who go scouring the
Seas a whole year, in hope to meet with one lucky day.

They that play for intertainment, should be only such, whom the Cards
themselves do mark and point out unto us; In them, shall we pick out some
learning; for if we shall but consider the Kings The Court-Cards are called in
Spain, Rey, Cauallo, y Sota. The first is the King, as with us; The second
signifies a Knight, which is all one with our Queen; And the third a Soldier,
which is the same with our Knave.
, the Queens, and the Knanes, that are there pictured and painted forth unto
us, from the uppermost of all the other, to the lowest, which is the Ace, you
shall not find any portraitures or shapes as in the former; giving us thereby
to understand, that none should play there-at but Kings, Queens, and Knanes. I
can assure you that in all the whole pack of Cards, you meet not with any
Merchants, Tradesmen, Lawyers, nor Divines, for they are not befitting their
professions. The very Aces, speak as much unto us; for from the Knave, or
rather Sota, which is the Soldier, down to the Ace, which is the least and
last Card, thou shall see nothing else but spots, admonishing us thereby, that
all (except the aforesaid) are but Asses, that shall offer to play at Cards.
And such another Ass was this my adoptiue son, in losing that, which perhaps
was none of his own, nor had wherewith to pay, at least could hardly spare it.

But I will not strain this string so hard, that I should quite debar men of
these noble entertainments; for I will not call him a gamester, who plays but
now and then for his recreation, once, or twice, half a dozen, or half a
score times in a year, for this cannot hurt him much; especially if he do not
play out of a greedy desire of gain, but only for sport and pastime. Howbeit
I hold it a thing impossible, that a man should set himself to play, without a
(...) gamesters desire to win.
desire to win, though it should be but for a pin, and that he play, with
his wife, or his son. For although a man do not stake money (and so cannot
be said to play for covetousness of the coin) yet the opinion of a man's
understanding and judgment, lies then at stake, and there is no man so mean
spirited, and of that weakness of nature, that would willingly be beaten by
another, if he could otherwise choose.

This my man, I told you of, was one of the guests to the house, where I lay,
the winnings were divided between his companion and the Citizen; the quarrel
ceased for that time, and a fresh challenge was made against after supper. And
so they brake off, the winners going each their way, as their several
occasions lay; and the loser, to look out more money. I doubt not but he used
all the diligence he could to get more (for gamesters soldome want money to
game, though scarce ever have any to pay their debts:) but because it is a
Money, hard to be got.
massy kind of metal, and waighes very heavy, it sinkes down still to the
bottom, and is long and hard a getting up again; he could not (it should
seem) get any money, yet he came thither, though without it; more offended
with those that would not lend it him, then with those who had got it from him.
He went walking and raging up and down the room, puffing Losers grow
impartent.
and blowing like a Bull; all the whole chamber was too little for him. One
while he walks athwart it, another, stalks along from one end to the other,
then again flings me from one corner to the other corner, huffing and chafing,
nothing could content him, all was vexation of spirit, he railes upon the
City, and upon that traitor, that was the cause of his coming thither, that
that was no Country for honest men to dwell in, but for thieues and cutthroats,
being that he had in that town, a hundred known friends, and all of them rich
and well moneyd men, yet could he not borrow one Royal (...) them all, and
began to swear that he would do this, and that, and I know not what, if it
should be his hap to meet with any of them in his own Country. I gave him the
hearing, and held my peace. And when he went into his chamber, I might hear
him sit down on his bedside, and might from mine, hear likewise the blows,
which he gave with his fist upon the table that stood by him.

I called Sayavedra aside, and told him; Occasion is now offered unto me, either
Guzman means to venture ad his money at play, and to make himself either a
man, or a mouse.
to get out of my troubles, or to get me to an Hospital. And seeing that small
store of money which is remaining unto me, is not so much, as to sustain us
any long time, let us sup well, or go to bed with a jar of water, all is one,
as good to day, as to morrow, for hold out much longer we cannot. What think
thou of this? tell me thy opinion, whether I shall play the fool, or the wise
man in doing that which I intend? Shall it not be well done, that after
supper, when the same company shall meet again together, wanting a third to
maintain the combat, I should come forth as a challenger into the lists,
aduenturing to run my Lance amongst the rest, putting my self upon fortune
either to lose, or win the honor of the day, by hazarding those few Crowns
that I have? Sayavedra made answer unto me, That I should have him ever ready
at hand upon all occasions, being that he had now set up his rest to do
Sayavedra offers to discover to Guzman the others games.
me service, and that he would carefully do whatsoever I would have him,
spoke I in earnest, or in jest, and were it good, or ill that I should
undergo, he would always stick close unto me, and be still at mine elbow, to
perform that which I should be pleased to command him. Yet norwithstanding,
that upon this occasion, I might not come off with dishonor (for we were then
driven very low, and almost brought to beggars bush) it were good to secure the
business. Wherefore he would marshall things in that manner, that both safely,
and subtlely, he would range all over the field, and evermore give me advice of
my adversaries forces, and how and where their strength lay, and when I was to
charge them home, as likewise to make my retreat; so that he keeping a true
account of their Cards, and the numbers wherewith they were to set upon me, it
was not possible that I should lose. When he had said thus much unto me, a man
might have pulled my skin over mine ears, and I should never have felt it, for
I was for very joy, ready to leap out of it my self; for my ability at play,
and the skill and cunning that I had in handling the Cards, being helped by his
advice, there was no doubt to be made, but that I might easily convert three
parts of their money to mine own use. Saying secretly to my self; No ay mal,
que no venga p^r bien: There is no ill, which does not turn to our Proverb.
good. And it may be that by this means, I might recover my self of those
losses, which I had so lately received. I did long my self to have told him as
much, but I did desire this base action, should proceed rather out of his
mouth, then mine. For I was willing in this to keep that decorum which
beseems Masters must keep a decorum with their servants.
a Master with his servant. For otherwise, if this trick should have been
played out of my hand, Sayavedra would happily have said to himself; See, what
a fine master I serve! I have rid my self of a thief, and have lighted upon a
cheater. What a tree have I taken, whereunto to lean? Had it not been better
for me to have gone and leaned against a wall? Yes certainly, for that would
not have thus deceived me. Stay, stay, (Sayavedra) for all you were my friend,
it was no part of my meaning, to open my mind unto you in that strain, do
you enter first, and you will, upon the point of my sword, and if you have a
mind to it, come on a Gods name when you please; for I promise you, you shall
first confess your self to me, before you have any confession from me; I
will have a pawn first from you, before you have any pledge from me. But when
we (...) once unmasked our selves, and cast off all disguises on either side,
let us come off freely, deal plainly one with another, I will speak what I
think, and thou shall speak what thou think; Let us iumpe as well in
breadth, as in length, and then there will be little ods and difference between
us in the rec^oning. There he and I were disputing a great while with our
selves, which ^gnes would ^e best, whereby we might come to know both the
others hands; And at last it was resolved on, that the best manner of doing it,
would be by Guzmans and Sayavedras drift.
the buttons of his ierking, or the joints of the fingers, according to the
art of the Gammuth, when we learn first to sing. And having made trial
thereof some three or four bouts, we grew so ready and so perfect therein,
that we now understood one another better by these our tokens, then our
tongues.

Now were the challengers entered the lists, whilst I was walking up and down
there in the room with my Rosario in my hand, like a Hermit, my servant being
in the mean while in my lodging. They began to talk of falling afresh to
play; whereupon, the third man told them what had passed, and that he could
not meet with those his friends that should have furnished him with money, but
if they would trust him upon his word, till the next day morning, see
whatsoever he should lose unto them upon the ticket, he would truly pay them.
The Citizen said, that he should be well content therewith for his part, but
told him withal, there was no heart in it, and that it was a kind of dull and
tedious sport, and that he had never any good luck, but did always lose, when
he played upon the Ticket. But the other would by no means give way thereunto.
Whereupon their gaming was at the best, the company was upon breaking off, and
every one going his way; but when I saw this good conversation was upon
dissoluing, leaving my Beads to keep their own reckoning, I stepe forth, and
said unto them; Since this Gentleman does not play, so as you will not play too
great play, but only for entertainment, and no more, but to pass away some
part of the night, and that so holy a work may not be left off for want of a
third, if it please you, I will put my self upon the Cards, and try for a
while how well they will deal with me. The other two, were very glad of this,
the motion pleased them passing well; for they took me to be some young Thrush,
that was new crept out of the shell, and had not my bill grown out, and was
not able to pecke at any thing. Making reckning, that all was their own, if
they got me in to play, and that my money was as sure theirs, as if they had
had it already in their purse. And for that they thought, if I should chance to
lose my money, I would also venture my chain (which I of purpose discovered
unto them by vnbuttoning my ierkin) and if I were once bitten, and began to
bleed, being a young man, as I was, I would not have the patience to give over,
but throw the pot-hookes after the pot, and the helue after the hatchet, and
lose all, that I was able to make.

Well, we were now set down, and ready to go to the business, whereupon The
cheating tricks that are vs'din gaming.
I called for Sayavedra, and said unto him; Go fetch me some money, if you
have any silver left, bring it me quickly. He presently drew out a hundred
royals, which I had given him before, that he might have them in readiness,
when I called for them. He abiding a while in my chamber, till our play grew a
little warm, and then calling him to snuff the candles, I said unto him,
seeming as if I had been angry with him; Are we to be used thus by thee? Have
you so much business to do in the chamber, or are you so drowsie-headed, that
you cannot stay here in the room, if we should at any time have occasion to
use you? He said never a word, but stood still, and held his peace, insomuch
that no man in the world would have once suspected any harm from him, for he
never offered so much as to cast but an eye upon me, nor did he at any time
remove his hand from his bosom, by which means he gave me true knowledge how
their games went. And howbeit, we understood one another well enough, I would
sometimes of purpose seem not to understand him, nor would I make use of his
wary advice, but when I had won two or three hands, I took pleasure now and
then to lose a little. I did suffer them now and then to draw my money, but
neither much, nor often, left when they had me on the lift, they might have
left off: I was content they should touch it, but not enter upon it; and
afterward I would charge them home, that I might, having once netled them, egg
them (...) the more. I did skirmish with them in that cunning manner, that I
made them still come on more and more eager upon my money. But when I began to
suspect, that they would give over the fight, and sound a retreat, and that
they were to leave the field, and be gone, I then thought fit to pursue them to
some purpose, and to follow the chase a little more hotly, till I saw them safe
in the net, and had them in my hands, to do what I would with them, and then
did I set roundly upon them and their money, bringing it all under my
subjection in a very short ^ace, few blows being stricken in the battle. I
had got of those two, all that they had gained of the other before. Whereof
they were so ashamed, and so stung withal, that they swore they would have
another bout with me the next day, challenging me again at the same game. I
willingly accepted of it. They came, we playde, and I was willing to let them
win some thirty Crowns of me, which they carried away with them, giving over
play for the ^ime; for, this loss, was but a bayte that I laid for them,
knowing that this would flesh them, and put them in heart anew, and make them
come on bravely at our next meeting. Yet one of them was willing to continue
longer, and said; Let us play greater game, for that the night grows late. Nay
(quoth 1) by the same reason, it were better that we go now to bed, and meet
again to morrow, which if you like of it, and be at leisure, we may come
together somewhat sooner, and taking the day before us, we may play at
pleasure, and as long as we lift. They were wondrous glad to hear me say so,
and that they had yet lost somewhat unto me, hoping in the end that they
should get more by me.

The next day they came, with their purses well armed with double pistolets,
well appointed for war, they threw down whole handfuls of them upon the
board, some being pieces of two, some of four, and some of ten, seeming to
make no more reckning of them, then if they had been so many pieces of copper
coin. Saying, as they flung them down; Coraggio, coraggio (Senor Soldado) see
you what here is, to be spent in your service? I told them; Although I am not
so rich, as to be able to do you service with so large a supply of money, yet
at least my good will shall not be wanting to attend upon you, as your servant.
I was about to tell them, that I did not doubt e^e long to see this fair
company of these glittering men at arms to come and march under my colors.
We began to play, and I went wearying of them out by little and little, giving
them line enough to run themselves out of breath, and when I saw, that I had
now brought them even with me, and that I might strike them both dead at once,
I let fly a whole volley of shot at them, and in a few hands, I saw in these
hands of mine above five hundred Crowns, which yielded themselves up to my
mercy, whom (out of the pittifulnesse o^ my nature) I took into my protection.
The maine battle being thus overthrown, my two Captains were feign to
forsake the field, after these their bravado's, and to try if they could levy
fresh men, and raise new forces to encounter me again the next day, promising
to bid me battle, if I durst abide it. I was not a little glad to hear them
say so, as well for that I had let them blood both alike; as also, for that my
heart was now pretty well at quiet; holding my self very well pleased with
that which I had gotten of them, being as well contented, as if I had won all
that they had been worth. For I had now enough to serve my turn, and what
should I desire more? But I cannot express unto you how glad I was, that they
should give over first; for it was a rule, which I ever observed in my play,
that I would not willingly g^ue any the least occasion of difference; and
therefore did evermore lea^e it to the losers own good liking, to play, or not
to play; referring it to his choice, as he himself had most mind to. They
went away in a good hour; and I fearing, that this Townes-man, might put a
Towne-tricke upon me, and that the stranger, being in need, and in want, might
do me some wrong (for I was lately, to my great cost, too well acquainted what
good justice a man was to look for in that City) I told Sayavedra, when we
were alone by our selves, that without any word speaking, or telling any body,
whither we intended to go, we would take horse betimes in the morning, and
post with all speed to Millayne. And so we did, leaving them full of sorrow,
but not so much as one cross of silver, wherewith to bless themselves.

CHAP. V.
Guzman de Alfarache, trauayling toward Millayne, Sayavedra upon the way,
recounts his own life unto him.

WE rode toward Millayne, with as great haste, as fear. For Bologna standing
so high as it does, it is to be disc^rned a great way of, the very shadow
whereof, did make my heart to tremble, fearing the danger, whereinto it had
lately put me. For I was ever of the mind, That there is no fault, but has
his punishment; no ill, but has his chastisement. Now did I wish, that horses
had been borne with wings, that mine might have flowne away with me. But
miserable wretch that I am, what good would that have done me? it had been all
one to me; for then others, would likewise have had the like horses, to have
ouer-taken me. What way so ever I took, I found it all full of thorns,
bushes, and brambles, which did scratch, and prick my The condition of fear,
and fearful men.
guilty conscience; which way soever I went, I was fearful of danger; and the
more slownesse, the more fear. And he never thinks he flies fast enough, that
seeks to fly from a mischief. I, accompanied with my thoughts, and Sayavedra
with his, went iogging on along, but both as mute as fishes; though his were
far different from mine. For my care only was, to see my self in some place
of safety; and Sayavedra was thinking with himself, how much of this money
would fall to his share.

We rode on a great while in this manner; at last, that I might bid fear
farewell, which thus troubled me, I sought to shake it off, and if I could,
quite to forget it, by entertayning some one thing or other, to turn the
stream another way; it seeming unto me, to be no less foolish, for a man, to
be too silent upon the way, then to babble and prate too much, in the street.
And therefore, that I might be the first to break the ice, I called to
Sayavedra, and said unto him; Come, let us talk of something or other, to
pass away the time; or do thou tell me some story upon the way, to give me
content; it will make our journey the shorter. He then, finding his bowl flung
in amongst the rest, and that he was not shut out for a bungler, seeing there
was occasion now offered unto him, to speak that, which he longed to utter, he
began to break his mind^, and said thus unto me.

I wish Sir, that I could tell you a tale, how glad I was, and what a deal of
good it did do me, to taste of the sweetness of your gains. But I am so
confident of the nobleness of your disposition, that this my coming to serve
you (seeing you have been pleased to entertain me for your servant) shall not
be only for satisfaction of that debt, wherein I stand bound unto you, but also
make much for my profit. I was glad to see this arrow fly forth of his quiver,
and that he had touched me upon that string; whereupon, I thus replied unto
him.

Friend Sayavedra; What is past, is past; and there is no more to be said of
it; for there is no man, so much man, and master of himself, which either
here, or there; this place, or that; this, or that time, does not slip in one
kind or other. We live all in the flesh; and all flesh is weak. Others, have
this weakness, All men, spotted w^ one Vice, or other.
some other ways: Every one commits his error, one in one sort; another,
in another. As thou have in this thing, wherein my self am likewise faulty.
God help me in my judgment; for I know not what will become of me. For I
find, I have as much cause, as he that has most, if not more, boldly to
undergo any desperate attempt whatsoever. And let him be who, or what ^e will,
(had he found himself in that grea want and misery, as we were) he ^ould have
done the like, as we have done: which was no better then plain theft, to cozen
these poor men, of that little which they had, which perhaps was all, that
they had wherewithal to live: Nor would I at that time, (being in that poor
case as I was) have spared any purse whatsoever, had it had a thousand Crowns
in it, though it had been of an Orphane, that had neither father, nor mother,
to help it.

And seeing, that we are fallen into this error, and for that I perceive thou
Guzmans craf^ie dealing.
have understanding and judgment to apprehend any thing, and to go through
with it, I persuade my self, thou do likewise comprehend, that I am no
Trader in the Indyes, nor any of your rich Fucaro's, but a poor young man, (as
thou art) robbed of his substance, and deprived of his necessaries, by such
means, as are best known to thy self; nor have I any greater or better
profession to live by, then that which thou have seen in me. Now, because I
would not do any thing, that might favor of baseness, or unlike my self,
and to bear the same port I did heretofore, I must endeavor to maintain my
self (at least) in some reasonable fashion, as every honest man ought to do,
not falling a lot from that state and condition of life, wherein my parents
left me, and whereunto my so tune had raised me. For albeit I served that Lord
of mine, the French Ambassador, and lived in house with him, it was out of that
love, which he bore unto me from a child, and upon the earnest entreaty, that
he made unto my friends, my father, and he, being of ancient acquaintance, and
having lived and conuersed long together in Paris. And so he begged me of him,
saying; he should take no farther care for me, and that he would one day make
me a man.

But since that things have so fallen out with me as they have, (as in part you
your self know) and that I have left his house, and am now come from him, I am
not minded to return thither any more, till I have seen somewhat of the
world, and that I may come home rich and in plenty, and be able to live in ease
and pleasure, all the rest of my life. Every place Donde quiera, se amasa buen
pan.
affords good bread; Proverb.
and that of Rome, agrees not with my stomach, for it does not digest very
well with me, but turns to rawnesse and crudities. And it is no maruayle, that
all men should seek out some means or other to live; especially, seeing they,
that have lesser abilities, endeavor the like. Every man would feign live.


Turn thine eye aside, and look upon as many men, as now live in the world;
view, and consider them well, and thou shall find, that they all go seeking
to increase their estates, to advantage themselves the best that they can; and
failing in those obligations, whereunto they are tide both in honor, and
honesty, by one device or other, this or that trick, every one seeks to
advance himself and his fortunes, as high as he can. The King, seeks to All
seek to make their best advantage.
augment his State, and enlarge his Kingdom; The Gentleman, to raise his
House; The Merchant, to increase his wealth, and to drive such a trade, as may
turn to his great profit; And the Tradesman, to gain by his Trade: And that
not always (by their leave) in that conscionable and lawful fashion as is
fitting they should. For it happens so with some of them, that first growing
knu^kle deep, and afterward up to the elbowes in ungodly gain, and unjust
dealing, they never leave off till they be up to the very eyes, nay over head
and ears (I will not say) in Hell, do thou say it for me, whose tongue is
bolder then mine, to lay this censure upon them. In conclusion, all the world
in this case, is as it were another Rochelle; Every man live for himself; get
he, that can get; Only they, that are unfortunate, as thou art, pay the
punishment of their sin. If thou had been a thief of the largest size, I
say one of those great ones, that should have gone away with three or four
thousand Ducats at a clap, thou might peradventure have made thy peace,
bought out favor and justice, and might have past well enough with them, and
have come off clear, as they often do: But those poor wretches, which know
not how to negociate, nor have any set rents, no receipts, nor Bills of
exchange, nor know how to get a great deal of money into their hands
(compounding afterward for a little) paying back a third part, and that
slowly, ill, or never; these poor rogues, I say, that neither have the wit to
invent, nor the power to aspire to any great booty, nor to undertake great
matters, are (as infamous thieues) sent to the Galleys, and sometimes hanged,
not for thieues (for thieues are not hanged) but because they did not well know
what did belong to their office, and were not their own crafts-masters. And I
will here by the way, tell thee what I heard of a Slave, that was a Negro,
enter bocaly ladino, one that was a nouice, and was better skilled in his own,
then the Country language wherein he lived, being scarce perfect in either;
which story will fall in here very fitly.

In Madrid, in the days of my childhood, where I resided some time, there
were adulterers led to execution; and although this sin be very common there, A
short tale.
and much used amongst them, yet it is seldom punished; for there are never
wanting good means, and good moneys; by means whereof these kind of crimes
are well accommodated: but at this time, and with this woman's husband, they
could work no good. A world of people went forth to see them, especially your
women, insomuch that the streets, and the windows were wholly taken up with
them, making great moan for that miserable and unfortunate woman. Now when her
husband had cut off her head, this Negro spoke The sayin^ of a Negro.
out aloud, and said; O God, how many here do behold this sad spectacle, who
with a great deal of reason might have the like measure!

We likewise, may very well say; How many, are there now adays, who condemn
others to the gallows, whereon they might better, and with more reason, be
hanged themselves. I wonder at nothing in this age, nor am I of that queazy
stomach, that any thing should offend me; I will dance to the sound of that
Pipe, after which I see others dance; let things last, as they may last; and
hold out as long as they can, and then there is an end of them; like unto
spoones made of a crust of b^ead, which we have no sooner supt up our pottage
with, but we send them presently packing the same way with the other. And since
thou say, that thou love my company, and take much contentment therein,
and that thou like so well of it, I hope, it shall neither be hurtful unto
thee, nor hard to brook it. For I am so good a fellow, and of so ingenious a
disposition, that I know how to value and make a true esteem of those
kindnesses which are done unto me; the thankful acknowledgement thereof, I
shall refer to my actions, which in their due time, shall testify, what I
now profess. But because reward is the spur, which puts virtue forward; and
the only whetstone, that sets an edge on men's affections; making them to go
on bravely and courageously in all that they undertake; And that it argues a
baseness of mind, not to reward, when from thence some glory, or benefit may
arise; And that a man does not cumply with his duty, when he does not take any
pains for his living; for to that end was he borne, and therewith is he to
sustain himself; it is fit, and no more then what is just, that every man
should have a proportionable and equal gain, according to the quality of his
adventure: And I am very well content to give way hereunto, making this the
first stone in this our building; and will treat farther hereafter of that,
which is to be ordered and set down between us, in these, or any other the
like occasions, that shall offer themselves unto us.

All that, which shall fall, or come unto our hands, as well those fruits
already fallen, as those that are to fall hereafter, shall be divided into
three equal parts; Guzman purposes to provide for a dear year, and show how
it may be done.
of all which thou shall have one part for thee, and another for me, and the
third shall g^e for to defray the charges of auerige, for it will not be
always fair weather; nor shall we still sail before the wind; nor make
evermore a speedy voyage; as it happens when men are becalmed at Sea; and when
we shall land and come ashore, it is not fit that we should want clothes, and
other necessaries, nor must we, if the enemy should set upon us, be
vn-prouided of munition to defend our selves, and offend him; nor, should we
chance by some, storm or other accident, to be cast upon some shelfe or
quick-sand, must we lack a boat to put out, wherein to save our lives,
though we lose our goods. This third part, we w^ll still lay apart by it self,
that shall be, as it were the Aerarium, and public Tre^surie, our common
purse, for to supply and relieve our necessities. For, if we go wisely and
discreetly to work, and be not rash and inconsiderate in our actions, seeing
we want not understanding, and have some skill in navigations, (at least are
both of us good Coasters,) I for my part will content my self with no less,
then some good place of command in my Country, and such good store of wealth,
that I may afterward live happily all the days of my life. And all this will
I bring about, before I be (...) years elder. Be therefore of good courage,
and take heart unto thee, for thou shall make the like purchase, wherewith thou
may return with credit to Valencia. I would not have thee busy thy self in
base thefts, nor be none of those ^eaking thieues, that steal Primers,
Horne-bookes, and Ballads; for from such kind of thefts, thou shall reap no
other profit, but infamy, and reproach. In a word, let us bravely resolve,
Morir ahorcados, o comer contrompetas; Either to Proverb.
hang together for company, or to have our dinners served in with Trumpets. Let
us dye like dogs, or live like men. For a man's life is ended in a day; but
poverty, is a daily death. And if we go on as we have begun, and use these,
and the like tricks, we shall with a little practice, grow to greater both
cunning, and wealth, and bid a fart in Fears teeth; For all months are alike,
be Proverb.
they fair or foul, every one has Todo los meses de a treynta dias.
his thirty days, and no more; Every man must live out his time, how happily,
or how miserably, I cannot say; every one must be content with his fortune: And
for as much, as in the dark, all Cats A escuras to dos los gatos, negros.
are black, and Ione is as fair as my Lady; we will so carry things in the
clouds, Proverb.
that we may not appear in our right colors. We two will join together,
keep counsel, and deal fairly one with another, dividing the spoil equally,
that there may be no falling out between us: For, as it is in the Proverb; Un
lobo, a otro, nunca se muerde; One Wolf, will not bite another. Lo here, if
thou will, thou shall presently, before we go any farther, have a third part
of what Proverb.
is already got; for it is not just nor honest, to debar any man of his
right, or to withold that from him, which is his. Much good may it do thee;
and thank God, that with so fortunate a foot, and so propitious a star, thou
have lighted thus happily into our company; desiring him, that we may not fall
into the hands of Pyrate^, who have an eye to nothing else, but to run away
with the meat, that others have dressed, to lick away the cream, that others
have labored for; and to skimme away all the fat from off the pottage, not
leaving us any (...) that good is.

With t^is kind of language, and my liberal carriage, dealing thus kindly and
boun^lly with him, I went securing his person unto me, that he might not
forsake me, b^t st^y, and live with me. For if I should have sought over all
the world for a Mariner, I could not have met with a better Mate for my Bark,
nor one, that would so well have suited for my purpose, as Sayavedra. Besides,
he being my equal, and every way as good a man as my self, was contented to
b^come my servant, and to acknowledge me for his master, it being no small
advantage to have the hand, in most games that you play at. He, upon these good
words of min^, was so overcome, that he rested no less contented, then
conquered by me. And so falling, in our future discourse, from one thing to
another, (as men use to do when they talk upon the way) I hapt at last to
ask him the cause, that moved him to rob me? Sir (said he) though I would, yet
I cannot now forbear, to acquaint you with the whole course of my life, and
truly and faithfully to deliver unto you every particular passage thereof, as
well for those favors which I have so liberally received already from your
Free and plain dealing, holds friends together.
hands, as also for that it is well enough known to the world, and therefore
requires no such secrecy; As likewise, for that with those with whom we keep
company, and are daily to converse and live withal, plain dealing must be
used, and all matters fairly laid open, without the concealing or hiding of any
thing: For, not only to our Confessors, our Lawyers, and our Physicians, are
we to tell the truth, but to those also that are of our own profession, birds
of the same feather; nor was this virtue ever yet wanting amongst us, which is
a powerful means for the maintaining of friendship, and the faster wedging of
one man unto another. But that I may at length cumply with those many
obligations, wherein I stand bound unto you; I shall give you (Sir) to
understand, That I am of Valencia, borne of honest parents, (whom report may
one day make known unto you) for they (God be praised) are now both dead;
Sayavedra discourses to Guzman of his course of life.
only, their fame lives. We were two brothers, and both unfortunate; whether
it were, because from children, conu^rsing continually together, we ran
courses alike, and did in all things sort and suit each with other; or whether
it were, that suffering our selves to be carried away with the fury of our
vain appetites, without striving to make due resistance, we did give way to
this temptation, by consenting thereunto, (or to say more truly) fell into this
weakness, not thinking on those future dangers, that were to follow thereupon,
but drawn along with those baytes, that for the present pleased our taste,
being now inured, and accustomed thereunto, we could not (though we would)
go back. My other brother, is somewhat elder then my self, and though both
of us were of a reasonable good capacity, and had (as they say) our wits and
judgments about us, and were not put (as other men are) to seek for them, yet
could not this understanding of ours, put a bridle upon our unruly affections;
such is, or was the force of our malignant star, and so great the power of
our evil inclination, that we could not avoid it. In so much, that laying
aside all respects of honor, and to apply our selves to any set course of life,
more out of a desire to see strange Countries, then to get some honest means,
whereby to live, we went out into the wide world to seek our fortunes. But
because things might not chance to fall out so luckily with us, as we did frame
to our selves, and that if we should come in trouble, we might not be known,
nor dishonor our house, we did agree between our selves, to change and alter
our names.

My brother being a good Latinist, and a fine Scholar, fetched his name, I know
not from whence; His own name being Iuan Marti, of Iuan, he made Luxan; and
of Marti, Mateo; and turning it by inuerting the words, he called himself Mateo
Luxan. In this manner, did he wander through the world; and the world says,
that it gave him the same payment, as it did me. But I, for that I had no
learning, and knew no more then a young Nouice in a Monastery, I would not
trouble my head with these curiosities, but going the down right way to work,
and knowing that the Sayavedra's were of principal note, and ancient Gentlemen
of Sevill, I styled my self to be of that City, and took their name upon me.
But I was never in Sevill, no^ know any more thereof, then what I have said
already.

Being thus new christened, we set forth both on one and the same day, and began
our travails together, but went each of us a several way. Some have told me,
who knew him by sight, that they have seen him in Castile, and in Andaluzia
very hardly used; and that from thence, he went to the Indyes, where it also
went ill with him. I shaped my course another way; for I got me to Barcelona,
where in the Galleys I past over into Italy: I had spent all that, which I had
brought along with me from home, and at last became exceeding poor. And
because Necessity, does oftentimes (as theys say) drive a man to do that,
which he never dreamed of, tossed thus up and down, and cruelly encountered with
hunger, I chanced in the end to arrive in the kingdom of Naples; where, I had
ever a desire to reside, for the great good which I had heard of that City.

I traueld all over that kingdom, spending that which I had not, till I came
to be a notable Picaro, and began at length to converse with as a^rant Rogues
as my self; and from one round to another I grew up by degrees, to be a fine
nimble-fingerd The Spanish p^rase is; Oficial de la carda. ^or trasl^cion
dezimos carcar a vno, quando le dan alguna fraterna, y es tratado asperamente
Covarr. verb. Card^.
Fuller, I could teazell clothes singular well, I could pick a pocket very
neatly, and cut a purse handsomely, and do many the like fine (...). I made my
self a Camerade with those that were the Masters of our Company, and had
recourse always unto them, that they might cover me under their wing in time
of adversity; I was but their servant, and one of those ordinary Soldiers as
it were, that fought under their Ensign. For my poverty was so great, that I
could never get me into a stock to put me into clothes, or to be able to set
up shop for my self. Nor was it an inability or insufficiency ^n me, that I
came no better forward in the world; for there was not such a c^nning sharker
amongst them all, as I was; my sheeres, would find an edge, when theirs could
not cut; they were all bunglers to me; I was able to have ^ead unto them all
those four cursory Lectures of thieuing; and those other two of cony-catching
and cheating, which I read for my degree, when I proceeded Batcheler in that
Art. For I was so well read in those roguish studies, and from the time that I
first learned them, had them all so perfect at my fingers ends, that I was not
to seek of any one of them. I was that singular Saker, that excellent
Ierfalcon, that never mist my prey, but took all that I flew at either in
City or Country. No game came amiss to me. None of them understood half so
well as I, the Art in cutting of a purse; nor to diue into a pocket, so deep,
as I could. I was dog at it, and could dispatch my business in a trice. My
eye, and my hand, went both together; they were here and there, and every
where, with a presto be gone. I was of all occupations; a mariner, a miller, a
baker, a scout, a crosse-biter, one of your vp-right men, a cheater, a cozener,
a fox, that was full of craft and subtletie; none of my standing, no nor six
years elder then I, but would strike sail to me, and acknowledge himself as
far inferior to me, as the foul is to the Falcon.

But by reason of their ancient standing, and the reputation they had got in
those former dunsicall times, they tyrannized and usurped on the name of famous
professors: These were the Caesar's; and we the poor rogues; whom they sent
abroad, from house to house, to scowre dishes, to cast an eye in every corner,
to make one excuse or other wheresoever we came; demanding in one place,
whether such a Gentleman were there or no; and in another, whether they wanted
a young youth, that was willing to serve them. Asking such a Gentlewoman,
whether she would buy a very fine pair of Twizes; which but a little before,
we had cut from another Gentlewomans girdle, and having new ground and whet
them, and made them very neat and clean, and fitted them with a new case, and
a new ribond, we sold them afterward away for new ware. Sometimes, we would
make show to go into some house to make water, and if we found, that there was
a stable there, or other by-roomes belonging unto it, in thither would we go,
where we should meet with a horse-cloath, a curry-combe, a syve, or the
horse-mans cloak; and when we could not come to finger any thing else, we
should evermore be sure of bridles, and collars, and stirrops, and the like
kind of tackling for their Mules and their Hackneys, and if by misfortune, any
one should come in, and see us there, loosing presently our cod-pisse point, we
would quat us down in a corner of the stable, as if we had been driven in
thither by necessity to do that service, which no body can do for us but our
selves. And in case they should say unto us (as now and then they would) you
rogue, you thief, what make you here? We would then presently rise up, and
pulling up our breeches to make them fast, and be gone, we would while we were
a trussing, mildly make answer; I pray Sir be not offended; take heed to whom,
and of what you speak; for here is no such kind of man, as you talk of, no
thief, no rogue, but one that is true and honest, and means you no harm; I
was ouer-taken in the street, and forced to come in upon mere necessity, and
therefore I hope you will hold me excused.

Some did believe us, and some not, but how-soeuer we past well enough with it.
Sometimes, we would press farther in, and rummage as it were all the whole
house, from one end to the other, till we found somewhat that we might finger,
and carry away; and if by chance we were spyde by any, we would come crowching
unto them with tears in our eyes, beseeching them for Gods sake, to give us an
alms, being even ready to starve for want of food. With these, and other the
like cunning shifts, there was not so much as a nail in any man's wall, which
we did not keep a reckning of, and took away when we saw our time. I was a
pretty little wagg, slender of growth, rather lean then otherwise, very witty,
full of invention, and above all, as nimble, and light-footed as a Bucke. I
always laid wait in the day time, how and where I should compass my exployts
in the night, never imbroyling my self in any business at unseasonable times,
for the better avoiding of all suspicion; and taking little sleep when I had
any thing to set my self about. In the day time, we did (like good
Christians) visit Churches, go to Mass, hear Sermons, frequent your
Indulgences, Iubiles, Feasts, and Processions. We were present at your
Play Houses, and Courts of Justice, at all Executions, and all other public
meetings and assemblies, where there was any concurse of people, any pressing
or thronging in the streets, striving to be always in the thickest of the
crowd, entering in and out amongst them, passing to and fro a thousand times.
For every bout afforded us work enough, making upon every return a good and
gainefull voyage. One while we brought away daggers, stolen from men's backs;
other-while handkerchers picked out of their pockets; purses, rosarios, twizes,
jewels worn by women; and such odd toys, as your children wear about their
necks. And when all failed, and that I could not make that purchase as I would,
with my sheeres (which I had ever ready in my hand) look where the best and
fairest cloak was in all the company, I did whip from behind, or the one
side of it (if by chance it slipped off from his shoulders in the throng) as much
as would make three or four pair of soles, or some such odd knack, or other.
Wherein, besides the profit, I took exceeding great pleasure, in seeing these
gallants afterward look like the picture of S. Martin, with little more then
half a cloak; which was a ridiculous thing to behold, and did often move me
to much laughter. And when they themselves had found it out, they began to
wind and turn it this way, and that way, putting the part offended, either
under or over their arm, as would make best for the hiding of that blemish;
and the people when they once began to perceive it, they straight way flockt
about them, who blushing to see their garment cut short to their waste,
discovering those parts which shame bids us hide, they went flinching away, and
got them home through by-lanes, and such places, as were least frequented.

And when this would not fadge with us, we would cunningly steal to your
silk, or cloth of gold hangings, for we never stood upon terms of courtesy,
or were more dainty with these, then the rest; for the greater was the value of
it, the greater was our gain; and from the lower part of these hangings, would
we snip off a piece or two, according as occasion, or time, would give us
leave; endeavoring ever to cut in the best and choicest place, and in the
turning of a hand, we made thereof either women's bodies, men's Montera, is a cap
made of stuff with little or no brims, to wear for ease within doores^ your
Clownes have them of cloth.
monteras, purses, pinpillowes, sleeves for little children, and a thousand
other the like fidling things; still ordering and husbanding it so, that we
would not lose the least thread, but did always contriue it in that manner, as
might make best for that use, whereunto we would put it.

By little and little, we came approaching nearer and nearer unto the City,
drawn thither upon the fame and report, that there was a new Uice-Roy already
come thither, or would be there very shortly. For at such solemn feasts as
these, where there is running of Bulls, bayting of Bears, and the like
pastimes, besides your great Fayres and markets, we will not stick, for a
need, to come a hundred miles off, that we may be present at them. Our expense
upon the way, was always very little; for we still made our provision, as we
went along, and what we got in one place, that we spent in another, taking up
hens here, capons there, in such a village chickens, and such a doue-house
pigeons, pigs, gammons of bacon, and any thing that was tame, and would come to
hand, never escapt our hands, furnishing our selves with all other necessary
implements, that might serve for the conueniencie of our journey, were it for
our diet, or our lodging. And as a man that desires to have a good lodging in
his Inn, must have a care to come there before the Sun be set: so in that
short time which we had to spend until it were toward night, and that the
hour was come, wherein we did usually retire our selves, we did run over all
the open places about the Country, and if we found any breach in any wall of a
house, we would pry what we could proule from thence, and seek to make our
entry; Which that we might do with the more conueniency, and lesser hazard of
our persons, we would begin to beg an alms, saying; That we were poor
Students, and being driven to great necessity, could not for want of means
return handsomely into our own Country. Which we did not so much demand of
them, to the end they should give us any thing, as thereby to seek occasion to
steal something from them, having an eye still toward the hen-roost, casting
with our selves how we might dis-people that house of its pullen.

Besides, for your Innes, and your Farmers back-sides, I carried always with
me a good angle-rod with a strong hook and line, baited with a crust of bread,
or some six grains of wheat, to catch therewith whatsoever came in my way,
and I seldom put in my rod, but I plucked out a fish as long as mine arm. But
when it fell out so unfortunately with us, that we could not get any booty, and
that (as it is in the Proverb) Se caya lacasa; the house was fallen dawne; and
that there was no victuals there to be found; yet come the worst, that
Proverb.
could come, we should be sure to meet with as good and fat a Calfe, as any
man need to eat, the world could not afford better Veale. As soon as we came
to Naples, at our first coming we drove for some few days, a very good trade,
and made very quick returns, with a great deal of profit to our purses, and
all things did succeed very well with us; we took great pains, and we reapt
great gains. I had put my self into such apparel, that my presence might
promise the reputation of an honest man; so that any man might very well be
cozned by this Card, (this outside I mean of mine) so fair did I color for
it. So that if the entrance which we made, like to our juego de can^as,
glittering in gold, and all kind of bravery, had not through my lack of
patience received in the end a foil, I might have continued there in very good
fashion. But I had work enough to do, to save my skin, from being plucked
over my ears, and to keep my bones from being broken. It was mine own fault,
that my eggs proved addle, and were not so well hatched as they might have
been. I may thank no body for it but my self. But God be thanked, that it
was no worse with me; for I might have received much more harm thereby, and
therewith did I comfort my self.

One of my Camerades was of that Country, servant to a Regent of t^
Collateral Council, whose father had also served him heretofore, he was
des^ous to make himself known unto him, whereupon he went to kiss his
hands, nor did his own return empty from him; But (being very glad to see
him) offered to do him any kindness that lay in his power; nor were they
Courtiers words, sprinkled with holy-vvater, for he did as well do, as
say; For seldom, and to few, does it happen in Court, to eat together in one
plate, and at one board; But when the mind is generous and noble, it evermore
takes Noble minds are ever liberal.
delight to give; and by so much the more is increased, by how much the more we
crave. For it has always been a peculiar property belonging to giving, to
make the doner famous and renowned to the world. And the more subjects they
light on to confer such courtesies, so much the more glory do they gain
unto themselves. Presently, without any more ado, he employed him in some
businesses, and those of some worth and moment, and well deserving a worthier
subject. Under his protection we went up and down the City, as if we had
been so many Vice-Kings of the Country, living without controlment, and no man
daring to meddle with us.

Being thus seated on the warm side of the hedge, presuming upon his favor
and countenance, we did lash out a little too much, in undertaking such and
such things, as were beyond the reach of our brains, and would require
stronger wits then we had any. He was the tongue, wherewith we spoke; he did
direct us, whither we were to go; and what we were to do; at what hours,
we might with most safety be abroad; where we might best make our entry; whom
we might best trust; and of whom we had most reason to be afraid. For (as we
shall tell you hereafter) they that commit the greatest robberies, and such
thefts, as are more famous then any other, more cunningly carried, of a higher
strain and nature then the rest, and of the greatest importance, are those
that are nearest in their attendance about the Ministers of Justice. For these
men, fear nothing, they are in favor with their Lord, necessity oppresses
Proverb.
them, occasion is offered; God bless every good man from such authentical
thieues, who think themselves authorized to steal, and that the Law either
cannot, or will not, take hold of them.

I went one day a wrestling a braco Luchar a braco partido es proceder y gu
almente sin ventaja de vno a otro. Covarr. verb. Braco.
partido (as they say) with my thoughts, that is to say, upon equal terms,
without any manner of advantage of my fellows, out of a desire that I had to
seek out something wherewithal to entertain my self; for it was almost
high-noone, and we had not yet threaded our needle, nor wrought one stitch o^
work. And to come home empty handed, that I would not; I scorned not to send
in my provision beforehand, as Proverb.
holding it a great disgrace unto me. For if my companions should chance to
have wrought their honey-combes, and that they were to be found at home in the
hiue, where we did all meet, if I should bring nothing in, b^t feed upon them
store, they would vpbraid me therewith calling me idle Drone; Titting and
flo^ting at me, that I should offer to sit down at board (...) a senta^ a la
mesa con sus manos lavad (...) ^zese d^l qu^ no ^a trabaj^do como los demas, y
a la hora de comer, no haviendo en zusiado sus manos, se viene con los demas a
la mesa, y come de mogollon. Covarr. verb. Lavar.
with clean hand. M^aning thereby, that I had not labored for my living as
the rest had done, no^ taken the pains to foul my hands, and yet must sit
down and eat at other men's cost. Holding him for a base minded fellow, that
would come to a well furnished table, and sit down to dinner, not having
beforehand provided some provision of his own, whereon to feed. I had cast
mine eye upon a very fair house, which at the first sight seemed unto me, to
belong to some honorable person, or principal Gentleman of that City. I
entered as boldly into it, as if the house had been mine own. For (as it is in
the Proverb) nunca el timido, fue buen cirujano; The fearful man, never makes
good Surgeon. Which Proverb.
kind of Phrase, your old women in Spain use to their children, when they go
sneakingly and fearfully about any business. Anda, anda, que parec^ que
Proverb.
vas a hurtar; Get thee gone, get thee gone, thou go logging and dreamingly
about it, as if thou wentest a filching. So that always, and in all places
whatsoever, or wheresoever I came, me thought I went into mine own house, or
that I did enter as it were by authority, with the Uare of Justice in my hand,
or the whole power of the Country.

I looked about on this side, and on that side, longing that mine eyes might
Sayavedras stealing of a Kirtle.
light one something or other, that I might lay my hands on. At last it was my
fortune to spy lying on the top of a little side-table, a fair black velvet
Kirtle, richly embroydered, which would very well serve to make three several
sorts of garments, cassocke, and hose, and something else besides; for there
were full fifteen yards in it, and might very well beseem the wearing of the
neatest and brauest Gallants in the Kingdom. I stood looking and pee^ng on
every side of me, if I might go cleanly away with this booty, that it might
not cost me the laying on, and escape without danger of being beaten for my
labor; and by good hap I did not meet with any to hinder me in this my
purpose; Whereupon I took it up, and clapping it under mine arm, fetching two
or three nimble friscals, my feet were presently upon the threshold of the
door, making their way to go forth into the street: But I was no sooner come
thither, but there I met full butt with the owner of the house, who was Master
Datario Datario, a great office in Rome, as also in other places.
, a man of great place and authority in that City, who seeing me come forth
with this fardle under mine arm, asked me what I was, what I made there, and
what was that I carried away with me? I being thus put to my shift, made a
virtue of necessity, and was not long in consulting with my my self for an
answer, and with an untroubled, or rather cheerful countenance, said unto
him; Sir, it is my Mistresses pleasure, that I should vntucke these pleats a
little, to make the folds fall a little handsomer, and that I should lessen it
a thought in the waste, for that it sits not well before; and has given me in
charge to dispatch it presently. Do so I pray (my friend) quoth he, see it be
done quickly, and let it be your own hand-working, that it may not be done
amiss, and make all the haste you can. I then said to my self; I have done
this with mine own hand, and I will make quick work with the rest. And with
that I hy'd me down the street, fetching more turnings and windings then a
Snake, sometimes this way, and sometimes that way, now here, and now there, and
all, that they might not find any footing of me, if he should chance to
uncouple his hounds, and send them after me to follow me upon hot sent.

Anon after (as ill luck would have it) he came to know how the world went,
for he was no sooner come into the house, but he found it all in an uproar,
some in the hall, some in the kitchen, some in one room, and some in another,
the maids of the house some unbraced, some their hair about their ears, some
with one sleeue off, and another on, some in one posture, and some in another,
but all in a combustion, brauling and calling one to another, give me the
Kirtle, give me the Kirtle, where is the Kirtle, what is become of the Kirtle?
but the Kirtle appears not: you took it from my mistress, (says one) I laid
it here, (says another) I left it here, (says a third.) Then falls the
Mistress of the house a chiding, asking who came in, or out? No body could
tell of any; Then (quoth she) it is likely, that some of the house must needs
have it, therefore look it me out, and that quickly too, or else you shall
soundly pay for it. There was such an outcry, such exclamations, such a
howling, such a bawling, and so hideous a noise, as if the whole house had
been fallen to the ground; in so much, that they could not one understand
another.

In this hurly-burly comes me in the Master of the house, acknowledging now the
error, that he had committed, in letting me go away in that fashion; and going
to pacify his wife, he told her that a thief had got into the house, and
carried away her Kirtle, recounting unto her, what had passed betwixt him and
my self, when he met me coming forth of doors. He presently made search
after me, but I so bestir'd my stumps, that he could not then find me out,
having by this time both secured my person, and the Kirtle.

That night, I got me to the house of the great Constable, out of a desire that
I had, to finish a piece of work, which some few days before, I had drawn
Sayavedras theft at the Constables house.
out; but my pen did so blur, that I did despair at that time to come off
cleanly with it, and though I had taken a great deal of pains that it might
be neatly and handsomely done, yet could I never compass (for want of a good
opportunity) to have it fall out fairly and fitly as I would till now. Many
Gentlemen, were there met together to play, who had ordinarily three or four
tables set ready for them, and a page or two appointed to sit up, and attend
upon them, till they gave over. Every table had his silk carpet, and two
silver candlesticks; I carried thither with me a couple that were counterfeit,
made of the purest Tin I could get, and just of the same fashion and
proportion, and so like in every respect, that you could not for their
finenesse, distinguish them from the other, iumping so truly, as well in the
color, as the making, provided of purpose, for the better effecting of what I
intended. I carried likewise two candles along with me, and using close
conueyance, that they might not be seen about me, I leaned against one of the
corners of the wall, as I had used to do heretofore, waiting for a fair
occasion to bring my project to pass, giving those that were there to
understand, that I was a servant to one of those Gentlemen that were at play.
Two, were playing at Cientos; a witty game at Cards, much used in Spain.
cientos, at one of those tables, they called for lights, there was not any
body there but one Page, and he so sleepy and so drousie, that having called
unto him twice, he did neither answer them, nor well mind what they said unto
him: I made presently in to them, and having my candles and candlestickes in a
readiness, which were not long a lighting, throwing one end of my cloak over
my shoulder, as if I had been one of the servants of the house: I shifted the
candlesticks, putting the lights into those that I had brought with me,
clapping those other of silver under mine arm; and so turning nimbly away from
them, walking as Cats do, softly and without any noise, I got me quietly to my
lodging, where I mixed them together with other pieces of plate, which I had in
the like manner at diverse times gathered together; And for to take away all
occasions of quarrelling and wrangling, and that I might not be asked whether
these are thine, or mine? Let me see the mark; Compare it with this or that
other piece, and the difference will soon be decided; How came you by it?
Where did you buy it? What was he that sold it you? To avoid these and the like
cauills, I thought good to make sure work with it; so I melted it (that it
might not be known by its care-marke) all into one mass, and putting it into
a fine earthen pot, I carried it to my Captain, that he out of the authority
and credit that he had abroad, might the better sell it for me.

He did so; and taking out a fifth part for himself, he gave me the rest in
very good Royals of plate, without defrauding me of one farthing, or the least
hair of my head. It was an order amongst us, that to him, as to our
Chieftaine, we should bring all whatsoever we got, whereof the fifth part was
his fee, which we truly and justly paid unto him, as a tribute that was as due
to him, as that of the Indies, is to his Catholic Majesty. No Prince in the
world had more punctual payment. And for this tax, tallage, impost, or
custom, (or whatsoever in that kind you shall be pleased to call it) we were
in all our dangers, protected and defended by him. Let no man think to chew
his Mascar a dos carrillos. i. Hazerse a amba^ parts contrarias con
dissimulacion. Covarr. verb. Mascar.
meat on Proverb.
both sides of his chaps at once; and to have all the water run through his
own mill, and none pass besides. For there is no dignity in this life
without a pension; and nothing that a man enioyes of his estate, but he must
part with some portion out of it. Every one has his double row of teeth,
together with his grinders, all would feign eat. Every poll, has his polling.
There are certain rights and duties to be raised out of all things whatsoever.
Imposts, and Interests, must pass to and fro in the world. One hand washes
Vna mano lava la otra, y entrambas la cara.
another, Proverb.
and both wash the face. If one give me a Capon, it is fit I should bestow the
brawne thereof upon him. And there is no money can be better imployd, then upon
such a good Angel as this to guard us. There are some kind of people so
cruel and unconscionable, that they think of nothing but deceit and cozenage,
Proverb.
scooping like shouels all to themselves; they will have all the Quieren el
pan, y las maseras.
bread, and the meat too; both a man's pains, and his profit; leaving us
nothing but the periculum, and the poenam, the peril, and the punishment, if
it be our misfortune to be caught. They will highly praise and commend us, that
they may encourage us on to greater matters, as Pizarro did his people in the
Indies. But when they give us most, and reward us best, they think they do us
a great favor, if they give us the scraps and fragments, and what themselves
know not well what to do withal, reserving the best and greatest part of the
profit to themselves; as Alexandro dealt with me. But afterward, when they see
us in distress, and that we have need of their help, they will not so much as
know us; they presently strike sail, and will not stir a foot to succor us.

But we, and this our Milanese (whom we made our Commander) kept very good
quarter; for he would by no means have any more of us then a fifth part, which
by agreement belonged unto him. And if at any time, he having need of money,
did entreat us that we would lend him some, and put it to account to be paid
out of his fifth part, as prizes came in; when we had furnished him, he would
presently set it down in his book, with an Item so much due unto such a one,
to be paid out of my next Vales, and when that debt was satisfied, he would
either cross it, or write repayd in the margent; so that there was evermore an
even reckning kept between us. No, no, he was none of these shuffling
companions, he was wonderful honest in sharing the spoil with us, leuelling
all accounts, and still keeping an even reckning with us; and so as we had the
fortune to make a good voyage, for the rest, we needed not to fear. My
fellows did not loyter but bestirred themselves lustily, and like good
husbands, never came home with their hands in their Con las manos en el seno.
bosoms, nor Proverb.
dragged out an empty net.

We were four of us in the whole; three adventurers, to enter upon all kind
of enterprises, and one Captain to fight in our defense. We would sometimes
take him along with us, and put him foremost, to the end that if any one of us
should be taken napping, and the theft found about us, he might serve to
mitigate the matter, when we were thus taken in the manne^, making us to
restore that which we had taken, (that I may not say stolen away) giving us two
or three boxes on the care, and as many kicks on the breech, dismissing us from
thence in a devils name, saying withal; Get you gone, you rogue, be packing I
say like an arrant rascal, and false thief as thou art, sirrah, let me see
your back, and I advise you let me never hear or see, that you fall any more
a filching, leave your stealing, and live honestly, else I swear unto thee by
the faith of an honest man, I will cause thee to be whipped, or sent to the
Galleys. Being thus curstly used by him, first kicked and beaten, and afterward
roundly rated, they that were present, taking him to be a good honest
Gentleman, and a merciful minded man, they were content to let us go, and so
did we escape that storm by his means, whereas otherwise we had been
overtaken therewith.

But some again, were such hard-hearted people, and of that stubborn and
perverse nature, that they did set upon us like fierce dragons, and were so
full of rage and choler, that nothing could pacify their wrath, but did still
press us more and more, and nothing would content them, but our imprisonment,
whipping, hanging, all was too little for us. They would first see us clapped up
safe, and afterward talk with us at leisure. To such rough-hewen natures, and
boisterous dispositions, our Captain would come to the parties, whom we had
wronged, and tell them; Do not foil your hands with such a filthy rogue as
this is, give him a hundred kicks, and let him go like a villain and thief
as he is, but do not cause him to be apprehended, you see he is a poor
rascal, and if you commit him to prison, there will he starve, and be eaten up
with lice; and what pleasure can you take in the destruction of such a ragged
snake, who in himself is so wretched a soul already? And with that, crying
out; Thou ungracious unlucky villain, they would give us such jobs, such
pushes, such shocks, and iustlings, and thrust us with that violence from them,
that they would make us to root up the earth with our noses, and only thereby
to free us out of their hands, who had us in hold.

But if any one should be so stiff, and so hard laced, that nothing could move
him to pity, nothing work our enlargement, we used our best endeavor to get
from them; if that would not serve the turn, we would stand upon our
justification, and not stick (and that stoutly too) to tell this or that other
to his teeth, tha^ he lyde in his throat, and tha^ ^e were as honest men as
he, or the b^st of them all: And vvhilest we were thus striving to be gone,
our Captain Proverb.
would interpose himself under color of pacifying the matter, and would
help to part us, by his coming in between us, and so free us from out their
clutches, and set us at liberty. And if need were, (when all this would not
serve the turn) he did throvv a Deromavan el poleo, says the Spanish phrase.
Lat: pulegium. Eng. penny royal. Quae herba ex^tat oues ad balatum.
bone amongst them, and would seek some occasion or other, provoking them by
words, to fall to blows, quieting the lesser tumult by the greater, and so
made a shift to scuffle away, and to dis-imbroyle our selves of this
troublesome business.

At other times, when we were running away with that which we had stolen,
and were hardly followed, even close at the heels of us, one of our fellows
would come athwart him that pursued us, and stepping our just before him,
would detain him for a while, asking him what was the matter, and what
troubled him, that he made such haste, who it was that had done him vvrong,
together with the nature of the injury, and so would not suffer him to pass
on, as if he had desired to make peace, and to pacify both parties. And albeit
he would not give him any answer, (for that his business required haste) yet
were it more, or less, that he thus entertained the time with him, every the
least delay, were it never so little, was enough to make us, to our great
advantage, gain ground of him; howbeit they that fly, have always the start
of them that follow; and fear, in such cases, does evermore clap wings to our
feet. Whereas they that run after others, do naturally grow quickly weary,
and beat themselves out of breath, partly being stifled with the heat of
passion, and partly out of the mind that they have to do another a shrewd
turn, which does much puzzell them, notwithstanding that they strive and
labor all that they can to overtake him: but it is impossible to strive
against nature, which does ever favor those, that desire to save themselves.
Thus by one means or other, they were still detayned, and mist of their
purpose.

Other-whiles, they would be bound for our forth-comming, give their words for
our truth and honesty, and though we had gone sheere away with that which we
had stolen, they would plead our innocence, especially, not being taken with
the theft; for by this time we had conuay'd it some three or four streets of,
where there was no more news to be heard of it. So that by their good words,
their intercessions, and their being bound for us body for body, we were
freed from that evil opinion, which before was conceived of us. So that by
hook, or by crook, this way, or that way, one or another, we went
through-stitch with our business, maugre all the world, or though spite should
have done her worst; for we had still one trick or other, when it came to a
dead lift, wherewithal to serve our turn.

But once, being more careless, then I ought to have been, I would needs go
forage alone by my self, without ever a skout to scour the coast, and though
I should have taken one along with me, I persuade my self, as the case then
stood with me, he would have steaded me little, or nothing at all. And thus it
was.

My sins (for it could be nothing else) had drawn me one day forth of
Sayavedra's stealing of shirts.
the City to walk abroad and take the air, and coming near unto a river
side, where in a meadow upon the grass were laid out a great many linen
clothes a drying, and the woman that looked unto them, sitting close, to shade
her-selfe from the heat of the Sun, in a little hollow cleft of an old wall,
that was not far off; me thought the linen needed no more drying, and
whether it did or no, it was all one to me, wet or dry, it made no great
matter, either way (so I might have what I looked for) would serve my turn
well enough. I had a months mind, to fold up two or three of the finest and
newest shirts, that were there, thinking with my self, that they would sit
well with my body, and so very easily and fairly I took them up; but fearing
lest any body should come in the mean while, and spy what I was a doing, I
lapt them up in haste, not being willing to stay to fold them there, but to
do that at more leisure, when I came to my lodging. The good woman did not see
what I did, for her back was all this while toward me; but there was not one
wanting, who shrewdly complaining of me, not running (to make me the more
secure) but walking a good round pace toward her, advised her thereof.

This poor woman, when since heard how the world went, sets me out a throat,
whose shrill sound did ascend as high as heaven. And leaving a little girl,
that she had there, to look unto the rest of the linen, she began to run
after me. So that I seeing my self in this strait, I dissembled the matter as
well as I could, and without either turning my face toward her, or mending my
pace, I walked soberly and demurely along, as if she had nothing to do with
me; letting (as I went along) my ware fall to the ground, going on still as I
did before, without any perturbation of countenance, or enlarging of my steps;
thinking with my self, that when this wicked woman had recovered that which
she lost, she would therewith have been contended, and rested quiet: but she
did not leave me so; for if she cryde out before, now she made such a noise,
and sent forth such a loud clamor, that the whole field did ring of the peale,
which that shrill clapper of hers made. And for that we were not far from the
Town, nor in a solitary place, that was free from company, the outcryes that
she made, were heard by many; insomuch that great store of all sorts of people
came running in, especially boys and little children, besides a great number
of dogs, barking and bawling, as if they had been mad, coming about me as
thick as bees; being confounded, and ready almost to have run out of my wits
with that tumultuous hurry, and horrible stir they made. And some young lads,
which fell in with these lesser beagles, to make the cry the fuller, when they
understood of the business, were ready to swallow me up alive, from whose
power (so violently were they bent against me) it was impossible for me to
escape. From that day forward, I began to stand in fear of this little frye,
which heretofore I was never afraid of. These little minowes, were they, that
by persecuting of me, did undo me.

When I heard Sayavedra say so, there presently came into my mind a famous
drunkard in Madrid, who being kicked and spurned, and mightily abused A short
tale of a drunkard.
by the Boys that had got about him; when he came to the end of the street,
he stoopes me down and takes up a couple of stones, and holding one in the
one hand, and the other in the other, leaning himself against a wall, he said
thus unto them: No more, no more (my good Boys) it is enough; stay here, stay
here (sweet Children) for it is not fit you should go any farther. And
therefore (my pretty hearts) let me entreat you to go back, and not trouble
me, or your selves any longer: for I am very well satisfied with those
courtesies I have already received from you; for the which I kindly thank you.
Otherwise, I have nothing to return you in requital, but these stones, which
I shall freely bestow upon you, though it cost me the laying on; so that some
of you, I believe, will be better paid for your pains then you expect.
Whereupon they seeing him thus resolute, they sneakt away one by one, and let
the poor man alone, who afterward went quietly along about his business. If
Sayavedra had taken the like course, he might peradventure have had the like
success.

But he, continuing his discourse went on and said; surely where this rude
rabble once bands and lincks it self together, no good man can do ought that
is good, nor any honest man pass in quiet for them. I sought now to fly from
them, as a man would fly from the gallows: and I was in a good way toward it,
and wanted little of coming thither. For, by seeking to fly from their hands
I fell into those of the Justice; who had now caught me in their net, whence
there was no hope to escape.

When I saw this misfortune was fallen upon me: I made no more ado, but sent
presently to my Captain, aduising him how the case stood with me, who as soon
as he understood of it, made all the haste he could unto me, was with me (as
they say) ere a man could say this; and well instructed me what I should both
say and do. That done, he went to the Notarie, telling him that he knew me
to be well descended, that I was honorably borne both by Father and Mother,
and of as ancient and noble a House as any was in Spain: and that it was not
possible, nor was it to be believed, that such a Gentleman as I was, would
commit so foul a fact.

But say (which cannot sink into my head) that it should be true, it is not a
thing so much to be wondered at; for that he might either do it out of
youthfulness (which is incident now and then to play such kind of idle
prankes) or out of want, lacking money, and being loath to beg or borrow, or
forced thereunto out of pure hunger; and therefore chose rather to hazard than
famish his person. Besides, it is a matter of no moment, a toy, a trifle, a
thing not to be made any reckoning of, as well in regard of its small value, as
also in respect of the Gentleman's quality, and the nobleness of his house.
What with these good words and something else that he did besides, within some
two hours after I was freed out of Prison: and (had God been pleased so to
have it) I could have wished I might not have come out then, nor three hours
after that; nay, not till dark night: but since it was his good will and
pleasure that it should succeed as it did with me, blessed be his name for
ever, good or ill must be welcome from his hand. Sin, that Catchpole of
Conscience, that churlish Porter that keeps account of our actions, and has an
eye to what we do, who had still persecuted me at the very thresholds of the
doors wherinto I entered, was not unmindful to do the like by me in that of the
Prison, when I was rea^y to come out: for even as I was putting my foot over
the threshold, who should I meet full butte, but Master Datario? who came
thither to free a Prisoner.

As soon as he saw me, he presently knew me, and withal pusht me so
violently back, that I fell flat upon my back to the ground; and then coming
fiercely upon me that he might hold me, while he had me at this advantage,
and calling to the Keeper, committed me anew, and followed the accusation so
hard against me, that neither entreaties nor any offers to make him
satisfaction for his kirtle, were able to make him to surcease his suit. He
was a powerful man, I used all possible diligences: but neither did my
pleading that I was a Gentleman, nor the tenderness of my years, prevail so
far, as to bring me fairly off. And, as if they had done me a deed of
charity, and bestowed an alms on me, by way of trans-action and agreement, as
if they had showed me all the favor in the world, they gave me such a heavy
sentence that I shall never forget it while I live. I went for shirts, and
they stripped me of mine from my shoulder to my waste, banishing me from
thence for ever. I had my payment, but the blockhead had not his Kirtle: see
how a vvilfull fool, such a one as this was, stood in his own light; being
more vvilling to do me a mischief then himself a pleasure; and to lose his
goods, rather then to let me loose: which he might easily have recovered of
me, if he would have suffered me to stay in that City.

Well, I was forced to forgo Naples, and with it, all my old friends and
acquaintance: I packt up all my trinkets together, and that poor pittance that
Proverb.
I had picked up by mine own industry, and departed from thence, vvandring up
and down Italy, till I came to Bologna, where Alessandro received me into his
service: who did usually go out of that City, to fetch in some booty or other;
and having sped well he returned home in safety. When we were in Rome, and
came in unto you, when you were in that thrust and throng of people, we did
not so much intend your good, as expect that some farther quarrel would have
growneth reupon, vvherby we might with the more safety have got some Cloakes
or Hats: but that occasion being taken away, missing thus of our purpose, we
began to plot how we might commit this theft, making me (as their ^anner was)
Cabeca de Lobo. That is, the occasion that a man takes to benefit himself. As
he that kills a Wolf, and carries the head to the Villages thereabout,
receiving something of every one by way of gratification, for the good ^ee has
done in killing so dangerous and hurtful a Beast. Couarr. Verb. Cabeca.
Cabeca de Lobo, the Wolfes head, the instrument of their profit; whilst they
kept their own fingers out of the fire, and would be sure to be out of the
danger of Gunshot. This Story was he telling me, when we were now come to
our iournies end. And so ceasing to talk any farther of it, we came into our
Inn, where we presently had that provided for us which was fitting for
travelers that were not to make any long stay.

CHAP. VI.
Sayavedra meets in Milan with a friend of his that served a Merchant; Guzman
de Alfarache lays a witty plot how to rob him.

WIth a great deal of attention and admiration, had Sayavedra all this journey
tied mine ears to his tongue. And during the rest of the way, till we
reached to Milan, we were never out of matter; but kept the ball still up;
he tossing one tale to me, and I returning another to him: so that our
Discourse never made a fault; but was (being both good Players) well
maintaind and kept up between us. But I had a great contradiction in my self,
and could hardly be brought to believe that men of noble birth, Sons of such
worthy Parents, should suffer themselves to be thus violently haled by their
Passions; that, forgetting the respect due to their blood and Gentry, (the
remembrance whereof should cause them to go on in an honorable and civil
course of life) do notwithstanding commit base and infamous actions, by
robbing others of their goods and honors: for in very truth, he Money make:
man to be esteemed. Men sooner see other men's faults then their own. The
sweetness and sowrenesse of war.
that lofeth his wealth, loses both the one and the other; for every man is
so far forth esteemed and honored, as he is rich and vvealthy. Whereupon I
said secretly to my self; surely if Sayavedras father left him so rich as he
himself reports he did, how comes it (quoth I) to pass, that he is turned
thief? and that he takes more pleasure to follow this lewd kind of life, and
to endure these shameful affronts, then to live in esteem and reputation in
his own Country? If we do ill, we therefore do it because it carries a
fair appearance with it, and shows unto us a certain shadow, or a kind of
resemblance of some goodness or other; but in suffering such indignities as
he has done, there is no hope thereof, no color at all for it. But I
presently recalled this rash censure, and suddenly taking up my self, I fell
to excusing of him, and began upon better deliberation to say with my self; It
may be he went from home being a child as I did. And so, considering the
relation that he had made unto me, mine own proper steps represented
themselves unto me, and those lewd courses that my self had run. But I
afterward came again to my self and said: But suppose all this to be true
which he has said: Why did he not turn over a new leaf when he had the
use of reason, and came to be a man, taking upon him the profession of a
Soldier? He might answer likewise for himself and say; Why did not I so to?
I see a more in another man's eye, and cannot behold the beam that is in mine
own.

Military Profession is a pleasing thing, and has many motives to draw a man's
affection thereunto. They have good pay, they pass well enough with it; it
teaches a man hardness, it makes him to forget his dainty fare at home, and
boldly to adventure his life to win honor, and to do his Country service.
But they pay dearly for it, they have too hard a bargain of i^, it is a kind
of taking up of money at extreme rates, and excessive interest, for to
satisfy a debt of lesser value. They must serve long before they can come to
any thing, rise betimes in the morning, watch all night, have his shoulders
pincht with the heavy weight of a Musket, stand Centinell for the space of
full four hours, and two at the least, when he is Dixese Centinela, a
Sc^tillando. Porque ha de estar con los ojos a^ieros, y viuos, como centellas.
Otros dizen, que esta corrompido el vocablo de centinela, a sentiendo. Por la
viueza que ha de teneren todos los sentidos; especialmente en la vista, y
^loydo. Centinela perdida, is he that is put out of a Castle, (...) out of
(...) Camp into the open field, where in case of necessity, be cannot be
conveniently relieved: and so be must stand to his adventure. The French style
him, Centinelle perdue. Covarr. Verb. Centinel^.
Centinela perdida, without budging or moving but a foot from that place where
they have once set him: let it rain, thunder or lighten never so fast; freze,
snow, or blow the winds never so hard, let the weather be as sharp as sharp
may be, all is one, he must stand to his tackling. And when he has done all
this, like a soldier and a brave fellow, when he shall return home safe to
his lodging (not reckoning those that miscarry by this means) he has not so
much as a Candle to light him to bed, nor fire to dry either his wet or frozen
carcass, nor bread to put in his mouth, nor wine to wash down those crummes,
being hungerstaru'd, all mire and dirt, all to be rent and torn, but not a
ragge of comfort. And therefore considering the hard life that a Soldier
leads, and how ill they are rewarded, hazarding their own lives to save other
men's, I do not much blame Sayavedra that he did not turn Soldier.

But for his elder Brother, Sen^or Iuan Marti, or Mateo Luxan (leaving him to
make choice of one of the two, as shall stand best with his Worships liking)
who was of age sufficient, when his father died, for to discern betwixt ill
and good, who had a good house to put his head in, and good means to maintain
it, and to have lived richly and plentifully, and in good reputation and credit
in his own Country, what a Devil moved him, or what hellish temptation came
into his mind, to neglect his own business, and so foolishly thrust himself
to intermeddle in other folks matters, and to fall at last to stealing of
cloakes. How much better would it have been for him to have employed his person
in some honorable entertainment or other? He was a good Gramarian, he had
studied the Laws, and might (if he would himself) have easily come to be a
Doctor.

But happily, these and the like do think, That there needs no more to make a
thief, then to say; I will be a thief. And that all shall succeed as happily
with them, as themselves could wish it. But in good sooth, I must beat them
out of this error, and plainly tell them; That there is more in it, then
Thieuing is a trade, that is full of trouble.
so. That it will cost them no small labor, and withal they must incur a
great deal of danger. Besides, I cannot well tell you, whether or no, there be
so many rules amongst the Lawyers, as he needs to have, who means to prove a
good thief indeed. For say, that there be two in a Town, that emulate one
another, and contend for the victory, and that the one after a great deal of
strife, and stiff standing out, will at last concur with the other, who has
gotten him the name and fame of all that perfection that belongs to your Terms
of Art amongst thieves and rogues. Germania, elaccento en la penultima, es el
lenguage de la rufianesca; dicho assi; o porque no los entendemos, o por la
hermandad que enter sitienen. A canting kind of language. Also taken for a
fraternity, or brotherhood amongst thieves. Covarr. verb. Germania. A tale of
a Country Alcalde.
Cocoquismo, and Germania, the true Art of filching and stealing, and has
showed himself an excellent Proficient in that Science, I can assure you, on
my credit, he had need carry a close hand, and look narrowly to his
business. For, to my seeming, if that be true, (as I think it was) which
Sayavedra delivered unto me; he was a poor unfortunate pilchard, a kind of
shotten Herring; and I, in comparison of him, a great goodly Wha^e. Yet for all
this, did not I dare, (fearing I should prove my self a dunce, when I came to
be examined by the masters of that faculty) to stand for my grace, nor pretend
the Cap and Hood, as doubting, how I should be able to answer for my degree, if
I were well canuast by those that should oppose me. Sayavedra, and his brother
(doubtless) did flatter themselves, and were truly persuaded, that with these
poor dry petty thefts, ill seasoned, without any good taste, sweet savor, or
any the least pleasant relish in the world, they might boldly go into the
Schools, and there read in the The Spanish word is; Catedra de prima.
Valetanto, como silla pu^sta en alto, qual es la de los Maestros que leen; con
obligacion de leer a tiempo senalado, etc. Covarr. verb. Catedra.
Regis professor his chair, their solemn Lectures for their Doctorship. They
did happily think with themselves, that there was no more in it, then what a
good plain Country-fellow said, that was a kind of poor silly Alcalde, in a
little Village, called Almonaci de Curita, is seated betwixt (...), and Zorita.
It is an Arabicke word corrupted, of Almunasi, which signifies a place of
oblivion: seeming to have its root, from the Hebrew word nasas, obliuisci. And
in that Town there is wine of that strength and goodness, that Travelers set
their iourneyes so, as they may lodge there at night, where some of them forget
themselves, like Ulysses soldiers, before they get thence. Otros dizen, que
vale tanto como, hu^rta del Rey. Vid. Covarr. page 56.
Almonacide Curita, in the kingdom of Toledo, who having made a watring place
for the town Cattle to drink at, when he had finished it, and made it
handsome, having fitted it with cesternes, and whatsoever else he in his
wisdom held to be necessary, he called the wisdom of the town together,
the whole body of the Council, where in their presence, he caused the conduit
pipes to be opened, and to let out the water, that they might give their
judgment and opinion, how they liked of it? One said, the trough stood too
high; another, too low. The Alcalde, seeing his work found fault withal, was
not half well pleased with it, but scorning to be dashed out of countenance,
and ouer-borne by his inferiors, he steps himself to the trough, and there
his worship drinks: And when he had done, stepping backward about some two
strides, or thereabouts, looking angerly, yet gravely enough upon them, he
first spits, then wipes his mouth, and lastly says unto them; Gods nigs, (my
masters) you need not find such fault with it, there is no more to be said in
this matter: for being that I can make a shift to drink at it, there is never
a beast but may do the like, if he have a mind to drink.

Even just so is it with your young thieues that are fresh-water-Souldiers, and
not well beaten to the business, who think all things easy, that they take
in hand, and when they hear of such a famous thief, and that he has done
wonders in that kind, will not stick to say; Tush, this is nothing: We can
do as much as this, and more too. But I promise you on my honest word, that
such as these, who have so good a conceit of themselves, that may be said of
them: which another Country fellow, not far from thence, dwelling in A tale
of three country fellows.
Mancha, said to two other fellows, who earnestly contended about the foale of
a Mare; One said, it was a Horse; No, said the other, it is a Mule: Then a
third person, that was in their company, drawing nearer and nearer, and
rounding about the beast, and viewing, and viewing him again, after he had
thoroughly marked his musle, and his ears, he cries out aloud; Gods-bores,
what a deal of do is here about nothing? You are a couple of coxe-combes both
of you; for I can assure you, this is as very an Ass, as my father. He that
will boast himself to be a thief, and desires to be listed in the roll of
those that have gotten greatest fame, let him endeavor to do things bravely,
let him be an honorable thief, and not of that baseness of mind, as to
stoop so low, as to rob an hearbe-wifes shop of a rope of onions, or Tops and
Gigs, and such other toys as little children use to play withal, which serve
but from hand to mouth, to feed other thieues withal; who will use thee no
otherwise, then men do their slaves: you must pay them daily tribute, or else
you must be packing; they will not care a pin for you. And yet for these petty
thefts (though thou think to escape with them, as things of nothing,) they may
chance to chain thee to the galleys, if not halter thee at the gallows. A man
should not (me thinks) so much undervalue his own worth, as to prostitute
his life to danger, and to lay open his shoulders to shame, for bables and
trifles; nor, is it fit, that for so little, a man should pay so much. That a
man should be such a fool, as to endanger his neck for a Kirtle, or a couple
of shirts) Quien ca^isas hurta, There is also (which the Iutice bestows on
rogues) jubon de acotes: porque se los ajustan alas espaldas. Covarr. 492.
jubon espera; He that steals a shirt, lives in hope to have a doublet too.
Let such a white-liuerd-whoreson, do that, which that valiant Captain Capin
Uitelo advises; Proverb.
Elmercader, que su trato no entiende, cierre la tienda; That Merchant, that
understands not his trade, let him shut up his shop.

But to let these thieues alone, and to come home to my self; what could I now
do, if I should come to be put to it? What Is become of all my cunning thefts?
I doubt me, I should be to seek, how, where, and which way to begin. The Art
of it, is gone from me, but not the fear. Every thing has its course, and its
time, it is now a great while ago since I fingered my fleame or lancent, or
that I did let any man blood, my hand is nothing so nimble as it was, it is
grown slow and dull, and knows not well where to prick the vein. Believe
it, There is no such Master as Practice. Use, and exercise, are excellent
things, Practice, a great matter.
to keep the hand in ure: Which when it is wanting, the understanding gathers
moss, waxes moldy, and grows rusty.

When we were come to Milan, we kept vacation for three or four days. Guzman
comes to Milan.
For I durst not as yet adventure to play. I was loath to have any thing to do
with your men of war, for they always play very warily. Your Soldiers are
subtle cunning gamesters, and above all, bear a most malicious mind against
a man's money. They are never quiet, till they have it. All, or the most part of
them, would seek to play upon some one advantage or other. I could not make
use of my tricks, nor would they permit me to put them upon them, yet I must,
whether I would or no, be forced to give way to theirs. Besides, of them I was
sure to get but little, but might be in election to lose much. I was not minded
to do any thing there, save only to round the City, to see what a manner of
thing it was, what their traffic, and such other greatnesses as it should
afford our sight, and so afterward to bid it farewell. And being thus
resolved, I went to walk all that day from shop to shop, where I saw so many
curiosities that I was taken with great admiration in the beholding of them, as
also in the great trade, that was there driven, even in lesser things, that
were of meaner value.

Standing one day in the midst of the Marketplace, there came to Sayavedra, a
handsome young youth, honestly clad, and well behau'd, and both in his garb
and fashion, a very fine Spaniard. But because his back was toward me, I
could not then discern, nor understand more of him, but that they went a
little a side off from me, where alone by themselves, they entertained talk a
good while: which put me in a great muse, thinking with my self, what might be
the cause, that these two should treat together with that secrecy, not having
(as I did imagine with my self) ever seen one another before.
Notwithstanding, that I might not break off their discourse, to the end that I
might see whither it tended, I stood still, and did not move from the place
wherein I was, having still an eye, lest they should get out of my sight,
observing their proceedings, and that if they should chance to go toward my
lodging, I might (taking the start of them,) be there before them. And ever and
anon, mine eye was upon them, but yet kept me still where I was, to the end
that they likewise might not shift a foot, and so slip from me.

For, I did consider with my self; if I should now call him unto me, and ask
him, what it was they talked of, Sayavedra might take occasion to make what
excuse he list himself, and might make me this answer; that by reason of my
calling him away, they had not finished their discourse, nor as yet entertained
talk to any purpose. Whereupon, for my better satisfaction, I thought it my
best course, to continue there a little longer, and to leave them a large
field, wherein to expatiate their minds, for I had no such earnest business
elsewhere, as might press me to be gone. Now when it was almost dinnertime,
this young youth took his leave, and went about his business; And I was
likewise willing to do the like; for all this while I was wonderful jealous,
and had a strong suspicion, that they had plotted together to put a trick upon
me. And Sayavedra, not saying a word to me, nor I to him, my fear was thereby
the more increased, and began more and more to doubt what their drift might be.
Watching him with no less care then a Cat would watch a Mouse. For Suspicion,
is a shrewd worm, which lies still gnawing at the heart; nor is The nature of
suspicion and jealousy.
it to be held a vice, when it setles it self upon a vicious man. For,
accordingly as the natures and conditions of men are, so have we reason to be
more, or less suspicious: Fearing every man so far forth, as his fashion and
carriage may occasion this fear. But for as much as the desire that we have
after this, or that other thing, makes us to rush violently on, and break
through the bars of all difficulties whatsoever, although I would feign have
held peace, and did strive all that I could to keep in this tongue of mine,
yet could I hold no longer, (no though my life had layen upon it) but I must
needs ask him; who that young man was, and what might be the subject of this
their long discourse? yet did I for bear for the present, making no words
thereof till I had dined, and then taking my time, calling Sayavedra unto me, I
said thus unto him; That young man, that was with you this morning, me thinks I
have (if I be not much mistaken) seen him heretofore in Rome. Is not his name
Mendoca?

No Sir, (said Sayavedra) his name is Aguilera; nor has he his name for
Aguilera, a famous thief.
naught: for he is an Eagle that will fly at any thing, nothing comes amiss
to him, he is still ready upon all occasions. He is a good fellow, and a fine
companion; he is likewise a brother of the Company, and such a one, as none of
them all can outstrip him, he has more tricks then a hundred of them, there
is more resort to his Lectures, then to all the other Readers beside, put them
all together.

O, this Aguilera has tickling tallons, and what he once seazes on, is sure
his own, he goes sheere away with it, and it is never heard of any more. He has
a quick apprehension, a nimble wit, a strong brain, a sound judgment, he is
an excellent penman, and such an Accomptant, either for the keeping of a
Merchants book, or summing up of any recknings whatsoever, that I know not his
fellow. We have known one another these many years, we have trauayled
together, and endured many particular troubles, and perils. And now he has
been at me, to put me upon one, which may turn to our exceeding either great
good, or hurt, it being with us, as with those that go to Sea, either a happy
voyage, or a miserable ship-wracke. For he that will go to Sea, must resolve
beforehand to encounter with dangers; especially, being that between our
death, and our life, there is no more then the springing of a planke, or the
slipping of a cord.

He gave me an account, how he came to this City, with a purpose to seek out
as well as he could some means whereby to live. But, because he would not
ingulphe himself, before he had first sounded the water, and that he might not
within two days after his arrival, be taken up for a vagabond, or some
masterlesse-hound, he had by good hap lighted upon an entertaynment, which
might quit cost without suspicion; for he had now placed himself with a
Merchant of this City, who had received him into his service for the goodness
of his hand, and has served him now a year, and somewhat more very faithfully
and truly, looking when he might play the jade with him, and give him a sound
kick with his heels, and get safe away from him, as your Mules use to do,
when they once come to be seven year old; who kick at those, that have kept
them.

He farther told me, that we should lay our heads together, and draw one or two
good fellows into our company, and join together, to knead such a cake, and
to make us such a swinging pastie, that we might feed our fills, and free our
selves from this poor and miserable kind of life, wherein now we live. But I
was loath to hearken thereunto, holding it not so convenient, for two respects.

First, because I found my self already so well fitted to my mind, that I did
not desire to lead any better life, then that I now did with you: And
secondly, for that a great deal of consideration is to be required, before a
man leap^ out of one course of life into another. A little (I knew) could not
content us; and to carry away much, it was impossible, wanting conueniencie of
means to do it. Here, we could not hide our selves out of the way, or keep
our selves secret above four days; nor could we secure our selves by flight,
but that we should be taken, before we had gone four steps out of Town, so
that we should either leave our necks there longer then the mark, or our
persons so racked and so tortured, that they would never after be useful unto
us. We gave, and took; he argued, I answered: In conclusion, he pressed me hard
unto it; but I stood off; so that we did not join issue, and all that had past
between us, was to no purpose. Many designs, many devices were tossed to and
fro between us; but I did not like of any one of his propositions. For when
the conclusion does not handsomely follow, the means thereunto are impertinent,
and the grounds naught. So for that time he left me, because his hour was
come, that he must hye him home; nor would he willingly be wanting, when his
master should have occasion to use him. Hastening perhaps his departure the
sooner, because he saw he could do no good upon me, and that all our talk was
to no end in the world.

This, that Sayavedra had told me, did neither secure my suspicion, nor work
an absolute unbelief in me, because I thought with my self, it was not a
thing unlikely. I called for my cloak, and out of doors we went, with a
purpose to walk abroad into the fields to recreate our selves. And albeit, the
most part of that evening, we talked of other things; this fear, was never out
of my head, but where-soeuer I went, or what-soeuer I did, I was still thinking
upon it, and it would never out of my mind; devising with my self, whether I
were best to believe him, or no; or whether trusting to his honesty, and
depending on the profession of his love unto me, he might play the Jack with
me, and strike me, like a The Spanish phrase is: y me diesse un cabe, que
passasse la raya. Cabe en el juego de la argolla, es la distancia que ay de
vna, a otro bola, que para serlo, porlo menos ha decaber en medio la paleta,
sin tocar aninguna de los dos, y de ayui tomo el nombre:y cabe de paleta es cl
que esta tan junto, que de vna bola a otra, no aymas tierra o suelo, del que
puede tomar la paleta tendida en medio, y errarle, es de ruynes jugad^res. y
paraser cabe, ha de hazer que la bola de (...) contrario, tocada con el golp^
de la suya, pass de la raya del juego, y vale dos piedras, o pedradas. This
Argolla, is an ordinary play in Spain. Co^arr. verb. Cabe. 161.
shouell-boord piece (being now a ledger) into the box, and himself remain
upon the board in my place. And if he should thus play the box with me, of whom
should I complain, but mine own folly? or whom can I justly blame but my
self? A man may bear with one slippery trick that is played him, and if he
pocket it with silence, or otherwise dissemble it, he may very well be excused;
but to be cozened twice one after another, and by one and the same party, he
deserves to have the Asses saddle clapped on his back. What assurance can I have
from this man, or how may I dare to trust him, since, (as it is in the
proverb) nunca buena vigase ^izo de buen cohombro; Tortusque per her^,
Cresceret in ventr^ cucumis. Virgil. 4. Georg.
a crooked Cucumber, never made straight rafter. He that is naturally given to
knauish tricks, will hardly, or never leave them. And were not this a fine one
above the rest, that he should put a full stoccado upon me, and go brag when
he had done, that he had beaten a master of defense at his own weapon? Did I
not deserve to be laughed at, if I should suffer him to carry away the bucklers
from me in this fashion? But as mine Si^e tune los ojos ^n la puerta.
eye was never off from the door; so my N^ me falt^ l^s m^ de la ru^a. Gu^
falls (...) (...) (...) the r^bbing of the (...) of Milan.
hand was still upon my distaffe. I was now become another Argos in mine own
business; and another Ulysses, to look to his water. Plotting with my self,
how (if that were true, which he told me) I might help them to come off safely
and cleanely with this business, in case it might be a matter of some moment
and consideration, and that I might be sure it would free them from beggary,
and make them for ever after to live like men. For, to bestow a great deal of
cost upon that, which will yield but little profit, were foolishness, if not
mere madness. There is no thrift, no good husbandry in it. The employing of
our pains, and our purse, ought to be answerable to the gains and profits,
that will come of it. For a man to limbeck his brains, a whole, nay, many
nights, for Moone-shine in the water, or such a poor commodity, as will
scarce pay for a meals meat, is such a foolery, as no wise man will trouble
his head Proverb.
about it. But because it might happily prove a rich voyage, and might happily
speed better then we were aware of, when we had done walking, and were now come
home to supper, seeing Sayavedra look somewhat sad and heavy, Proverb.
as if something did trouble him, I said unto him; Me thinks (Sayavedra) thou
robbest thy self of thy mirth, because thou can not rob others of their
money. This Merchants great wealth, does greatly disquiet thee. Is that which
thou musest upon (for I see thou art in a brown study) some rare plot, one of
Archimedes his quaint inventions? I can assure thee, I know a friend of mine,
that would make a third in this business, and a fellow I tell you, that will
not shrink in the wetting, so as it may be a good fat purchase indeed, none of
these lean carrion commodities, but one that may have some good tacke and
substance in it.

What tacke, what substance would you have, says Sayavedra? There is twenty
thousand ducats, and a better penny to be had, if we can handsomely light upon
it. There is cloth enough (Sir) to cut out, to content us all, if we will our
selves, which we may order and dispose, as we shall best think fit. Well
(quoth I) unto him; I pray God, it come not to be cut out for us into shrowds
(you know my meaning) and then all will be well. But I prithee tell me one
thing; seeing thou standst thus plodding, and musing on the matter, is it
possible that thou have not yet settled upon some one invention or other, that
may serve the turn, make the game sure, and strike it dead at thy foot?

No in good faith (Sir) not any, replies Sayavedra; I cannot hit upon the right
joint; I have now loytred so long, that I am as far to seek, as if I were
but newly entered into my A. B. C. I have taken my pleasure, and lived so much
at case of late, that through too much idleness, those spirits and blood, that
should quicken my understanding, and put life into it, are grown dull and
muddy; and my wits, for want of use, as rustie as old iron. A thousand times,
I seek to fall into my old trot, but I have scarce stricken two strokes, but I
grow resty and lazy, and am not able for my life to pace one true step, or to
bring my self to that perfection and readiness of hand, to wind you this
way, or that way (or whither-soeuer you would have me to go) as I was wont to
do. Many proiects proffer themselves unto me, but I pitch upon none, as
misliking all, proposing this and that, and the other course; but in conclusion,
none sorted to my liking.

When I heard him say so, I thus made answer thereunto. Since it is a business
of that importance as thou say, what share shall I have out of it, if I shall
rid you of this care, and bring you (like valiant conquerors) bravely off with
the victory?

Sir (said Sayavedra) my part, and my person are both at your disposal; but as
for Aguilera, you were best talk with him your self, and when you two are
agreed, I make account the business is as good as ended, and all shall be as
we would have it.

Go to then (said I) go and seek him out, and see if you can come to speak
with him, but with that secrecy, that you be sure you be not seen by any of
his masters house; and wish him (when his leisure will give him leave) that he
and I may talk a word together, and it shall not be long ere he and I be
better acquainted, being I know him (by your report) so well already.

He did so: sending a ticket secretly unto him; and when we were met, I began
to wyre-draw him, and to question him somewhat more particularly, touching his
masters disposition, his condition, and quality, what store of wealth he had,
in what commodities it did most consist; how, and where it lay; what moneys he
had in present cash, and under what keys? When I had done; he began to make
his relation unto me, in this manner, as I here deliver unto you.

Sir, I assure my self Sayavedra has sufficiently informed you of me; yet my
self shall give you to understand, that I am by my profession a The Spanish
word is, Calafate: That is to say; El que con maco y escoplo apriet a las
junturas delas tablas, de modo que no pueda calarlo el agua. It seems to be a
Flemish word. Becanus in his fourth book Hermathe^ae, page 74. says thus:
Caluatem, esse i would, qu^ vltimam manum navibus imponere, and efficere, ne aquam
per rimas vllas admittant. quod tamen vorbum, per excellentia^ navibus
tribuitur; cum alioquin ad quaevis vasa integra reddenda spectet, vbi ratio
ipsius requirat. etc. But by Becanus leave, how soever he would fetch this word
from the Flemings; I must be so bold as to affirm, that it is d^riued from the
Hebrew word, Caphar bituminare. And from thence, Cafatar, and Calafatar, by
interposing the letterd, whence it comes to be Calafare. Covar^. p. 172.
caulker of ships, and a reasonable good mariner, but as poor, as poor may
be. And albeit I am not ignorant, that thousands with a great deal less wit,
have grown to a great deal of wealth in the world, yet I have seen some
others more able, and more deserving, to have come to the gallows, my self
being none of those, that have least deserved it: for which escape, I render
infinite thanks to his divine Majesty. It is a year, and somewhat more (which
is the time of my abode in this City) that I have served a Merchant, and have
taken a great deal of pains in his service. And it is about some four
months since, that he has made me the keeper of his cash. All his books, are
in my hands, but his moneys, in his own. Am^ and timeo: I love, and yet I am
afraid; nor can I resolve with my self, how I may so handsomely rob him, that
I may not afterward come to cut capers in the air; and to venture a
stretching, for that which is not worth the catching, it were better for me to
continue still as I am. But where much is to be had, a man will hazard himself
much. Here is store of gold to be had, and he is worthy to wear it, that
winnes it. I have communicated my mind to Sayavedra; for it is more then one
man can do, to manage such a piece of business, as is this. He had need to
confer with some confident friend, or other, or more, whom he is assured he
may safely trust. For, as men's opinions are diverse; and so many heads, so many
minds; every one delivers (as his judgment shall direct him) which is the
best course he thinks to be taken. And sometimes it so falls out, Quod bonus
^ormitat H^merus: That the wisest man, does not always hit upon the right:
when as a shallower brain, does now and then wade, and that happily too,
through the deepest fords of humane affairs. And when, this last night, I
received Sayavedra's ticket, wherein he signified, that he was desirous to
speak with me, I thought it was no idle errand, that he went about, but that
there was something in the wind, what ever it were. For I have known him a
long time; and that it is not his fashion to put forth to Sea, but when he has
some good prize in chase. And I am verily persuaded, that if this matter be
wisely handled, and that we find good firm footing in the passage of this
fo^d, and through our own indiscretion, do not wilfully cast away ourselves,
we may bring this business bravely about, and make our selves men for ever.

Touching his wealth, I can truly affirm unto you, (as one that knows and
has often seen it) that those commodities, which he has now in cellerage and
other warehouses within his own doors, which to Gentlemen, and others that
want moneys, he The Spanish word (...), (...) that is; When the (...) upon
(...) at (...) an^ by (...) them afterward^ at (...) rates. M^a, is likewise,
when a man b^ye as ^for said, an^ sells cheap. They that are in wa^m for to
(...) some debt, ^e these (...) as. Some de^e ^t from the He ^rew word hater,
fodere. Others say, Mohatra, qua^ (...), from Mota^, to me ^e, or a^de. This
ill manner of buying and (...) forbid by the ^wes of Spain, and is se^erely
(...), being (...) (...). 29. (...). 4. lib. 3. de la nueua recopil. and Ley^
22. tit. (...). lib. 5. Covarr^ page 552.
sells upon credit at excessive dear rates, buying them afterward at easy
prizes by the help of his brokers, amount to more then twenty thousand ducats.
Whereof, oftentimes he delivers me the keys, out of the great trust and
confidence, that he has of mine honesty. Besides, he knows very well, that
those bales are too big for me to carry away, and therefore will spare the
labor to lade my ba^ke, with such unprofitable burdens as my weak shoulders
are unable to bear. That which he (...) cofered up in two iron chests, in
several sorts of coin, come to some fifteen thousand ducats, and better. And
in his Escritorto, or Tie, that he has in his shop, some twelve days since,
did he shut up a delicate d^pple gray Gato, is not only a ^at, but is also
taken for a purse full of money, which is made of a Cats skin. To a covetous
rich miser they use to say; Ata el gato. Covarr. verb. Gato.
Cat, as gentle, and as tame as my self, not with his eyes s^arkling, nor his
nails scratching, nor his teeth as sharp as any razor, but crammed full with
crowns, three thousand crowns, in good, dainty brave ruddocks, all good
double pistolets, some pieces of two, and some of four, not one single one
amongst them all. Which he has purposely laid aside for a certain Merchant,
who is to take them upon use for six months, which he will look to be well
paid for. There is not a man in all this Town that has so bad a name, or is
so ill beloved, as he is. There is no man, that wishes him good; nor any whom
he does not hurt. There is not a true word, that comes out of his mouth, he
has not one friend in all the world, he is counted one of the Caterpillars of
the Commonwealth, and such a one as would cozen his own father (were he
living) and negotia^es with none, whom one time or other, he does not deceive.
And well assured I am, that whatsoever loss should light upon him, it would be
(as they say) En h^, y en paz. Como si dixera, congusto de todos. Covarr. verb.
Haz page 463.
en haz, y en paz, with the good liking of all men. I know not one man that
would be sorry for it, but would laugh heartily at it, and make themselves
therewith exceeding merry.

He acquainted me likewise with his name, where he dwelt, in what place, and on
which hand the cab^net stood, as also the box, wherein the Cat lay. He made me
so good and perfect a relation of every particular, that I could have gone
thither blindfold, and have clapped my hand upon it. I asked him, whether there
would be any matter of difficulty in procuring the print of his keys. He told
me, that might easily be done; for that he had them all tide to one little
chain, as well those that belonged to the magazine of his merchandise, as
those that served to open his iron chests, which I ordinarily brought unto him;
when, having occasion to take out some thing that he was to use, he would call
unto me to fetch them. But being (as he is) a most covetous miserable wretch,
his suspicion and jealousy was such, that he would be sure (for fear of the
worst) that his eye should never be off from them, so loath was he to lose
their sight. I was glad when I heard that this might be done with that
facility, wherein I did imagine we should have found the greatest difficulty.
Whereupon, I said unto him; That then, which we must first of all begin with,
and must be the ground, whereon we must work, must be the getting of the print
of these keys in wax, to the end that I may see the fashion of them, and set
some Smith a work, to make them out of hand, just in every respect according
to that impression which shall be presented unto him in the wax.

I moreover mentioned unto him, that it were very fit, that we should agree
upon that which we should steal from him for the present, which I would have
to be carried in that discreet manner, that the muchnesse of it, should not so
amaze us, as that we should not well know, which way to turn our hands; nor
the meannesse, draw us on to adventure our persons for a trifle; where the
danger shall be great, and the profit small.

Neither must we forget, that it is worthy our consideration, to determine
beforehand, how the spoil shall be divided, that we may not afterward
differ, when we come to sharing. Well, this theft being resolved upon, say we
should come to finger this fine pretty pusse, this sweet cat, with a delicate
pudding of three thousand crowns in her belly, and so proportionably reckning
alike in the rest, be it more, or less, we will go so much, or so much a
piece, taking them out by the tale, as they use to do, that sell sheep. And
for this money, if we shall rob him smoothly of it, all of us running equally
the hazard either of the gallows, or the sword, in all natural reason, it
ought to be, that as the danger was equal, so the gain should be equal. And
so we being three of us, every one ought to have a third part. But in case we
shall play this game safely, and wade dry foot through this forde, and that you
shall not be able to lay any fault to my charge, nor receive any punishment by
my ill managing of the business, every one of us coming off with a good
reputation both of his life, and fame, his credit vncrackt, and the nut (as
they say) whole and sound, so good an Architect, or Surueyour of the work,
shall very well deserve some reasonable allowance over and above his
fellow laborers, for his good (...), and only for his cunning contriuing of
the building, without any relation to the rest of his pains, that he shall
take therein. And this mean I to carry away, as in reason I ought, as a due
that properly belongs unto me. So that if I enter upon this business, and
be the only proiector to bring it handsomely about, I will have one entire
third part, wholly to my self, you shall make no scruple of it, but let it
come fair and quietly to me, and the other two thirds that remain, shall be
equally divided into three parts, whereof you shall have one; Sayavedra,
another; and my self, the third. So that in this, we will all share alike.

This was controuerted to and fro, and much ado there was about it. But
because I had the mayor part of voices on my side, to wit, mine own, and that
of my servant Sayavedra, who was well contented therewith, and for that the
goods which we strove about, was not any lawful partition of a father amongst
his children, we quickly agreed on the matter. Well, I had the print of them
(...) unto me in wax, and caused the keys to be made out of hand, and
Aguilera instructed us in the mean while, which were which; to the end that
we being thoroughly informed, which were for the shop, which for the cabinet,
and which for one thing, and which for another, we might know the better how
to use them, when we should come to put this our enterprise in execution. I
afterward told Aguilera, that I would come the next morning, and speak with
his Master, and that he should diligently observe all, that I did either say,
or do, for the better advancing of our future designs, and that every night
we should see one another, and lay our heads together for the better ordering
and finishing of that task, which we had now taken in hand. He said it should
be done, as I would have it; and so he went his ways.

On the morrow I went to this Merchants Shop, and in the presence of his
Scruant Aguilera, after that we had complemented a little together, and
saluted each other, I said unto him; Sir, I am a Gentleman, that am but lately
come to this Town, with a purpose to buy some rarities and curiosities, which
this City affords, as well for mine own use as to gratify my friends,
because I am shortly to be married in mine own Country; and have for that
end brought along with me a matter of three thousand Ducats, and somewhat
more, which are now at my Lodging: I have no acquaintance here in this Town;
nor do I know the fashion of this people; nor what their manner of proceeding
and dealing is: Money you know is a dangerous commodity, and runs many
hazards; especially, when a man has it not in that sure and safe custody as
he desires. I know not what this or that other man is: I lie in a Lodging,
where many other lodge as well as my self; no less then a hundred go daily
in and out; and though they have given me a key to my Chamber; yet am I half
afraid they may have a fellow unto it, and that some incon^nience may thereby
happen unto me.

I have been informed of your quality, as also of the worthiness of your
disposition, of your plain and honest dealing with all men; and therefore upon
the good report that I hear of you, I am imboldened to come unto you, to
entreat you that you would be pleased to do me that kindness as to keep them
for me some few days, til I have made choice and bought such things as shall
serve my turn, and I shall return you many thanks, and shall be ready upon any
occasion that shall offer it self, to express my thankfulness unto you; I am
a Gentleman, and know what belongs to the acknowledgement of a received
courtesy.

My Merchant thought he had this money already in his possession; and I do
still strongly suspect, that he and I did iumpe both upon one thing; he, to
make my money his; and I, to steal his, and make it mine. He made proffer unto
me both of his person and his house, and that I should as freely command it as
if it were mine own; and that he should be glad to serve me in this or any
thing else: he bid me bring it when I would, promising to keep it carefully
for me, and that I should have it as often, when, how, and in what manner my
self should demand it of him, as my occasions required: so for the present we
took leave each of other; ^ee, with a resolution to keep them; and I, with a
promise to bring them thither: but I never came to him again, till such time
as we were to execute our exploit.

When Sayavedra and I were come home, he stood stock still like an Ass, or
like a ma^'d man that had been garred out of his sleep, and dreamingly draws
me out his words, asking me where this money was to be had, that he was to
have in his keeping? I fell a laughing, and said unto him; Did not thou carry
it him even now? With that he laughed. Laughest thou, quoth I? Is this a matter
to b^e laughed at? I know that in the Car, and the Cabinet, they are kept safe
enough for me. Tell your friend Agutlera, that we must needs see him about an
eight days hence, and will him to bring along with him his Masters Borrador,
el paper donde (...) se (...) o dibuxa (...); y dixo^ assi, potque ^ndando, le
^n quitando, y poniendo, ^assise borra.
Borra^, o^ book o^ remembrance, wherein he sets down his Solutes and his
debts, what he is to receive and what to pay. In the interim, while we were
tar ying for a good tide, and waiting for a fit time for the effecting of our
purpose, Sayaveara having me one (...) to bed, finding when I had laid my self
down, no great desire to sleep; for the working of my brains (thinking upon
old businesses) kept me waking: I called to my servant, who coming unto me, I
spoke thus unto him.

Sayavedra; I have a tale to tell thee, which though it be but short, yet it
is worth your hearing. I shall give thee therefore to understand, that once
upon A (...) tale of an Ass that made his Will.
a time the Ass (that poor silly creature) fell sick, and finding himself
much oppressed and weakened with his disease, growing every day worse then
other, insomuch that he was now almost brought to deaths door; at the instance
of his Kinsfolk, and the earnest entreaty of his Children, which were very
many, he was moved to make his last will and testament; and each of them
striving who should be best left, and go away with the greatest portion of
their fathers goods, the lawfully begotten, and his bastard Children went
together by the cares about it. But their honest and well-meaning Father,
desiring to leave them in peace, and for avoiding of further wrangling, that
every one should know his own, and what he should trust to after his death,
was content in the end (for quietness sake) to make his Will, dividing his
goods amongst them in this manner following.

My Will and intent is, that my Tongue (when I am dead and gone) be bestowed
The Asses Legacics.
amongst such my Children as are Flatterers and Backbiters: to those other my
children that are angry and choleric, I bequeath my Tail for a cooler: my
Eyes, I leave to the lascivious; my Brains, to Alchimists and iudic^y
Astrologers; my Heart, to the covetous; my Ears, to the seditious and sowers
of discord; my Snout, to Epicures, Gluttons, and Drunkards; my Bones, to the
floathfull; my Loins, to the proud; my chyne, to the obstinate: Let my hinder
Legs, be given to the Lawyers; my Fore-feete, to the Judges; and my Head, to
your Scriueners and Notaries. Lastly, I bequeath my Flesh, to the poor; and my
Skin, to be divided amongst my Bastard-Children.

I would not for any thing, that Aguilera, bearing us in hand that we should
rob his Master, should come to strip us of all that we have, and leave us so
naked, that we should be forced to cover our selves with the skin of this
our Testator. And I assure you, if he should chance to put such a trick upon
us, he should show himself a very wise and subtle fellow: and how we should
be afterward able to help our selves, God he knows; for I do not. I speak
this unto thee, for that for the better prosecution of our intent, and that it
may go well with us, that our of those Dobloues of ten, which I have here, we
give him some ten of them, which will amount to a hundred Crowns; which being
no small engagement, may much further our affairs. But I would not in any
hand, that giving us a back blow, and showing us a fair pair of heels, he
should slip his neck out of the collar, and by little and little fall off from
us.

Sayavedra, perceiving the doubts that I began to cast with my self; to free
True (...) amongst thievs.
me of this suspicion, made me this answer, Sir, if we should put all the
five hundred into his hands; nay, say they were five hundred thousand: yet,
forasmuch as it is a custom amongst us, and a rule that we never break, to
use all faith and fidelity amongst our selves, and never to be false one to
another, in a thousand years they will not deceive you of so much as one poor
mite; but you shall have your own again to a farthing. And therefore fear
you nothing; let me run the hazard of it, and put it to my account: for I
shall be content to stand to any loss that you shall suffer thereby.

CHAP. VII.
The robbing of the Merchant of Milan, falls out as luckily as Guzman de
Alfarache could have wished it. Aguilera shares so much with him as of right
belonged unto him: And he and his servant Sayavedra go for Genoa.

FOrasmuch as Hope does not assure us of a true and r^all possession, it
evermore makes us carry about us Of (...).
a troubled and unquiet mind, our thoughts never taking rest, out of the great
fear that we have, lest we should fail of that which we so earnestly
desire: Only, it is Solatium miseris, the sole comfort that afflicted souls
have; and that safe harbor whereon they rely; being that from it, a certain
shadow (as it were) of shelter and refuge, whereby those cares and troubles are
eased and lightened, which our hopes delay, does lay upon us. And as that hope
which is secure and certain does dilate and extend our hearts to an assured
affiance of that which we expect; so there is not any pain affords greater
tonment, then that which we endure when we once come to lose it. And little
less is our grief, when it defers its comfort.

How many and how various thoughts did distract in this short time my two
stipendary Pensioners: For, having not given them any more light, then what I
have already told you, of my design; I had only sweetened their lips, and left
them (as it is in the Proverb) (...).
Co^ la miel on la boca, with a smatch of some honey in their mouth; and
therefore they could not choose but reele this way and that way, staggering and
wavering with their thoughts, and in the several Maps of their inconstant
imaginations, one conceiving this, another that, hatch a thousand strange
inventions; chewing the cudde, as it were, and ruminating with themselves,
when (a Gods name) they should set themselves roundly to the business, what
the plot might be, and how to be effected, longing to see the issue of these
promised and hopeful ends, which made them almost at a stand; being (as it
should seem) somewhat doubtful whether it would go on or no: and if it did;
yet could they not devise with themselves how, and in what manner this
business was to be carried.

But when they saw the Sun of that day appear, no less by them, then my
(...) cunning plot, for to cozen the Merchant of Milan of his money.
self, desired; and that Aguilera had brought me that his shop-booke of
accounts, according as I had appointed him. I turned to one of the leafes
toward the latter end of the book, where I found some memorials booked eight
days before, and in a void place, or blanke, where nothing was written, I set
down this that follows: Left with me by Don Iuan Ossorio, three thousand
Crowns in gold, some being pieces of ten, but most of them, of two, and of
four. Over and above, he likewise left with me two thousand Royals, in good
Royals of plate. Afterward I drew a line upon what I had written, to show that
the book was crossed: And wrote in a different letter on the margent, ^euolos,
^euolos; which is as much to say; All this money is mine. Afterward I shut to
the book, and gave it him again, and together with it ten Doblones of ten;
willing him, that when he opened the Cabinet, he should take a hundred other
out of the Catt, and put those in their room. I likewise gave him two billets;
whereof the one said; These three thousand Crowns belong to Don Iuan Ossorio;
And the other said, Here are two thousand Royals in plate, whose true owner is
Don Iuan Ossorio. I did moreover advise him, that if there were any other bill,
or note, in the bag, he should take it forth, and leave mine only there. And
that of the two thousand Royals, he should clap it into another great bag,
wherein Aguilera had already told me, there were some seventeen thousand
more, or there-abouts, for he could not know the just number in regard they did
daily put in other fresh moneys amongst them. And that he should with all
remember, that this great bag of silver, lay in a great ch^st, next unto his
Cabinet, and that the bag was marked with a great spot of ink near unto the
mouth of it. With these instructions, Aguilera went his way, having taken order
with him, that he should that night without fail, put every thing in its right
place, according as I had given him direction. The day following, as soon as I
had dined, I walked leisurely along to the merchants shop, with my man at my
heels, as if I had known no such matter, dissembling the business very
handsomely. When I was come thither, and that his eye was upon me, as soon as
he saw me, he was wondrous glad; thinking I had brought that with me, which I
meant to demand of him. We did agree both in one, in respect of the purpose
that we had to deceive each other; but my plot was another kind of gambol, then
he was aware of. We had both one end, but the means were diverse. Now, when we
had saluted one anothe, I said unto him; Tomorrow, Sir, shall I send this my
servant unto you with a bag, and a ticket with it, desiring you that you will
be pleased to give a quick dispatch, and to send him back* unto me as soon as
you can, because I shall have occasion to use his service. My pooresilly
Merchant, whose mind was more ben^, how he should outstrip me by his
cunning, then fearful, that I should go beyond him, and prove in the end the
craftier knave of the two; thought that my meaning was, that the money should
be brought him the next morning; and so said unto me, Sir, your desire shall be
fulfilled: you shall have it when-soeuer you please to send for it.

With that, I got me out of doors, and had scarce gone twenty paces, but I
returned back again, and sud unto him; Sir, since I went from hence, I have
better bethought my self, and have present occasion to use this money, and
therefore (I pray) let me have it. The man's color began to change, and seeming
to be somewhat troubled, he said unto me; What money, Sir, is that you would
have of me? All, Sir, (said I) all, for I have occasion to use all or it.
Whereunto he replied; What all? What all, quoth I? All the gold and the
silver. He answered me, What gold, what silver? I told him, That silver and
gold Sir which you have here of mine. I, any gold, or silver of yours, No Sir,
(said he) I have no silver, nor gold of yours, nor do I know what y^ mean.
Sir, said I, (answering him somewhat roughly) do you make it so strange,
think you I do not know what I speak? I am neither mad nor drunk; this is
pretty fine dealing indeed: this trick will not serve your turn. No* yours
neither, Sir, said he; Me thinks yours is the prettier of the two, in
demanding that of me, which you never gave me; nor have I any thing of yours.
No Sir, quoth I, Take heed what you say. Let me wish you to be a little better
advised. Leave off your jesting, and come to earnest, for I c^n assure you,
this is no jesting matter* I must not be so answered, nor do I take it well at
your hands. Very good Sir, (said he) very good in faith: it is you Sir that are
disposed to jest, and to make your self merry with me. No more (good Si^) it
is enough, I pray be gone, I have something else to do, then to find you
talk. How S^, be gone? N^y, by your leave (quoth I) there is more in it then
so. I must not go hence without my money. Money, (said he) what money would
you have of me? What is your demand? Marry, I demand (said I) those Crowns and
Reyals which I left with you the other day. With me, (said he) you never left
any Crowns nor Royals with me: Go look your Crowns and Royals else-w^ere;
the devil a cross that I have of yours. Then said I unto him, Are you not
ashamed to avouch this before these Gentlemen, that are here present, who but
even now before them, when I told you that I would send my man tomorrow for
them; you answered me, he should have them; and now that I come to you for
them my self (having present use for them) do you deny me them with one and
the same breath? Deny you Sir, (said he) I deny you nothing; nor nothing shall
you have of me: for I received nothing of you; and nothing shall I return you.
How Sir, nothing? Did not I Sir, some eight days since bring you these moneys,
desiring you to keep them for me, and did not you your self receive them from
me? Give me therefore my moneys, and that presently, for I will not that you
keep them one minute of an hour longer in your hands. In my hands, (said he?)
I have not so much as one farthing of yours in my hands: and therefore God be
with you Sir, I have no more to say to you. It is the Devil that deceives us
all. I think so indeed (quoth I:) for sure the Devil did deceive me when I
trusted you with my money. And with that, my inflamed choler, having set my
whole face on fire, I angerly said unto him; What meanest thou by this, that
thou will not restore me my money? before thee and I part, I will make thee lay
it down here on this board, even to the uttermost farthing, or else I will
know why I shall not; Be wise therefore in time, and well advise with your
self (I would wish you) what you do, for fear of after-claps. The poor man
was so troubled, and struck into such a fear, when he saw I was so hot and
chollerick in the business, and so resolutely bent upon it, that he had not a
word to say; yet at last, with a kind of counterfaite smile, seeming to make a
jest of my words, he bid me be gone, one while in Gods name, another in the
de^s; saying, that he knew me not, nor who I was, nor what was my name, nor the
thing that I demanded of him. Whereupon, turning my self about to those (which
were many) that were there; Art thou so impudent (said I) as to say, Thou do
not know who, nor what I am, thinking thereby to o^t-face me, and to cozen me
of those moneys thou have of mine in thy han is? But I doubt not but I shall
find good justice in Milan, and that (though fullsore against his will) he
should be forced to make me peesent The Spanish (...), Un pie a la Francesa.
Vale, al instante. Covarr. verb. Pie.
payment. My man denies it more and more, telling me, I had much mistaken my
mark; and that I might happily have given it to some body else to keep: for
he stood stiffely unto it, that he neither had any money of mine, nor did owe
me the value of one farthing, though indeed (he said) he must thus far forth
confess the truth; That I came unto him, and that I told him, I would leave so
much money in his hands to keep for me, but that I never brought them unto
him, nor that he did either see or touch, one faithing of mine: And therefore,
if I had a mind so to do, I might go a Gods name, and complain to the
Justice, and that if it should appear that he ought me any thing, he should
be very willing to give me satisfaction. When I saw he had armed himself
with this resolution, I did open the doors of my lips a little wider, foming
at the mouth for very anger, and straining my throat to a higher key, said unto
him, O thou false traitor, heavens justice ouer-take thee, and let all the
plagues light upon thee that the earth can afford, (vile and wicked man as
thou art) will thou thus then rob me of my moneys before my face, and thus
injuriously go about to undo me? I must have thy life, or my money. And
therefore make no more ado, but bring me hither presently my three thousand
Crowns: bring them I say, and quickly too; it shall not boore thee to deny
them; for I will either tear them out of thy throat, or make thee lay it down
here, in good gold and silver, as thou had it of me.

The house was all in an uproar, and those likewise, which were present there
from the beginning, that this difference happened between us. Upon this coil
and stir that was between them, there came in many into the shop, as they
past along the street, besides a great number of the neighbors, asking one
another, what was the matter? For now were we grown so loud, that we did not
well understand one another. All that were there, went enquiring, what was the
cause of all this noise, what we quarreld about, not so few as a hundred were
talking here and there, of it, and every one relating it each to other; some in
one manner, and some in another, whilst we within drowned all that the other
said, so earnest was the contesting that was between us. In the heat whereof
comes me in a Bargello, an officer of the same nature with our Alguazil in
Castile, a kind of Sergeant or Catchpole, but he bare no Vare or white rod in
his hand, as ours do, and making the people to give way, he came up where we
were, being both (through the heat of our choler) as hot, and as red as
coals. When I saw the Justice present (howbeit he was a stranger unto me, and
knew him no otherwise then as he was the Justice) I saw my suit at an end, and
that the cause was like to go with me. And here taking my Cu, I began in a
milder temper to speak thus unto those that were by: Gentlemen, you have seen
and heard that which has here passed between us, and how, and in what manner,
this naughty man has denied me mine own money; let his own man speak the
truth concerning this business, and if he (out of his respect to his Master)
shall refuse to deliver what he knows, let his own Book speak in my
behalf, wherein shall that appear to be set down, which he received of me,
and in what parcels, and in what manner of fashion I delivered the said moneys
unto him; to the end that it may be known unto you, which of us is the
honester man, and speaks the most truth. Should I be so shameless to ask a
man that, which I never gave him? Into a Cat-skin bag, that he has, he did put
into that Cabinet three thousand Crowns of mine, some of two, and others of
four, and for to make my proofs more plain and clear unto you, he has
intermixed amongst them, ten Crowns of ten, which in the whole make up just
the sum of three thousand Crowns. And in a bag, which he locked up within
that chest, (wherein he told me there were at that time I delivered him my
moneys, near (together with mine) about some seventeen thousand Royals) did
he put those two thousand, he had of me: And if this (which I tell you) be not
true, I am content to lose it all, and that you take my head from off my
shoulders, for the arrantest traitor that ever spoke with tongue; And if here
in your presence, before I stir a foot from hence, I do not make good unto
you all that I have said. Only (Gentlemen) let me entreat (though a stranger)
so much lawful favor from you, that there may present inquisition be made
concerning this business (considering how nearly it concerns me) that he may
not (by gaining of time) have opportunity to transport them to some other
place. And turning himself toward the Bargello, he said: See now (Sir,) I
beseech you Sir to see, which of us two, treats falsehood, which entends
deceit? The Merchant then said; I am content to stand to this motion, and to
put my self upon this trial, I shall bring forth my books, I care not who
see them, let them be perused, if any such thing be there to be found, you
shall likewise see all the money, that I have in the house, and if any such
thing shall appear as this man would make you believe, I will confess that he
says truth, and that I am in (...) wrong. Then said they, that were present;
This business is now ended, they are both agreed upon the point, and it will
straight be seen, which of these two are in the right.

The Merchant commanded his servant, that kept his Cash, that he should bring
him his great book of Accounts; He did so: but when he had brought it, I
excepted against it, and said; O thou cozening companion; this is not the
book, it is a lesser then this, a little kind of Manual, that a man may
easily hold in his hand. Then he willed him to fetch the Manual that was in
the Cashe, being a little thing of some four sheets of paper, like a note-book.
Which when he had likewise brought; No, no, (said I) what need so many tricks
and devices? why do you seek to deceive us thus with your book? this is not
that which I would have, you need not to beat so about the bush, the bird that
I look for is not here; I asked for your chalk, and you give me cheese; I
would see that, wherein you did set down those particular sums of money, you
received of me; it is a little long narrow book; you know well enough which I
mean, if you were disposed to bring it for. Then said Aguilera, It may be Sir
he means that wherein you write your Memorials, for so it should seem by the
description of it; for there is not any other besides of that fashion, to my
knowledge in the house. And bringing it before us, he turned himself toward
me, and said; Is this, Sir, the book that you would have? I answered, yes,
this is it, this is it, and none but this. Now (Gentlemen) I pray see whether I
say truth or no. This will decide the controversy, his cunning can no longer
cloak it self, and this will make his kn^ry plainly appear unto you. They
began then (having the book in their hands) to turn the leafes one by one,
and when I spied mine own hand, and what I had there set down, I said; I pray
(Gentlemen) will you be pleased to look upon this writing, and to see what it
says; Read I pray these parcels of moneys, which he has crossed and blotted
out, (though the sums are easy to be seen) and by that which I here
perceive, he has noted it in the margent to be paid. But this trick shall
not serve his turn, for I will have my money before I go from hence. They did
all look upon it, and might easily discern, those very sums, by me before
mentioned. Whereat the Merchant was so mad, and so transported with passion,
that he knew not what to say unto it, but began to curse and rail, and
swearing a thousand oaths, vowed that he did not know of it, nor how it came
there, nor who had written it. To clear that doubt, I answered; I wrote this
my self, this I confess to be my hand, but that in the margent is a different
letter, and the quotation as false as God is true; for he never returned me
one penny of it; and in that Cabinet that stands there, if he have not taken it
thence, there are my Crowns.

Hereupon, like a furious Bedlam, he began to rage and rave extremely, so that
the standers by did undoubtedly believe, that all I had said, was true. And
seeking to pacify me (for I seemed to be very angry with this foul dealing of
his,) they wished me to quiet my self, and to rest contented, for the crossing
of his book was not material, nor his writing in the margent, that he
returned me my moneys, if those things should fall (...) right (as I had said)
in the rest. What greater proof, (then said I) or what truer token can you have
of my truth and his falsehood, then his late protestations, that he never
received anyone penny of me, and yet you here see it set down, though having a
purpose to play the rogue with me, he afterward crossed it out. If he received
it, why does he deny it? If he did not receive it, how comes it here? I pray
you cause that Cabinet to be opened, where I doubt not but you may chance to
find my Doblones, where you shall light amongst them, upon ten Doblones of ten
Crowns a piece? At this, the Merchant fell (...) fun^ and a fretting, and
stamped for very anger, refusing to open the Cab^, and (...) ^ly striving
against it, as if they should have offered to rip up his belly, and (...) ^ut
his heart, vowing and auerring with sundry hideous oaths, and fearful
obsecrations, that all was roguery and villainy, and that there was ^ch matter
as I talked of; and for those Doblones of ten, he did there confidently a^ch
before them all, that he had not one, or not above one, (if he had that) in all
his house. Such ado there was, to get him to open the Cabinet, as was
wonderful; He denied to do it; The Bargello was as instant, as he was
stubborn, and said, he should do it. The latter insisted to have the keys;
The other resisted, and said, he should not have the keys. When the Bargello
saw this, he began to grow now as hot, as before he was jealous of his double
dealing: and swore a great oath, that if he would not fetch the keys, and open
the Cabinet by fair means, and that quickly too, he would take it out of his
house, and carry it away with him, and give particular notice of all the whole
business, to the Signor Capitan di gi^ia, (which is there with them of the same
quality and authority as a Corregidor in Castile) and there deposite it, that
the truth thereof might be known. At last (though sore against his will) he
gave him the keys; and when he had opened the Cabinet; Sir, (said I) there in
(...) a Box did he put them in a dapplegray Cat-skinne: They opened that
Box, and pulled out the Cat by the ears, and going to tell the money to see
if it were right or no, a piece of the Billet showed it self. When I saw that,
with somewhat a more cheerful countenance, I reard my self up and said: Let
this Paper, I pray, be read; for that scroll will declare how much there is in
the bag, and whose it is. They read it, the Contents expressing Don Iuan
Ossorio, to be their true owner. Well, they fell afterward to tellin^ (...)
them and found them to be just three thousand Crowns, with those ten of ten a
piece which I told you of.

Things being brought to this push, and falling out so pat as they did, my
Merchant was struck as dead as a herring, he was absolutely now gone, quite
overthrown horse and foot, without hope of recovery, he had not a word to
say for himself, nor knew not in the world what to allege in his own excuse:
it seeming unto him to be Opus Daemonii, that the Devil had a hand in it; for
he thought it was impossible that any man should be able to do it. Besides,
he considered with himself; that if I could find hands, to put these things
there, I might easier have found hands to carry them away.

He was quite beside himself, and cried out, that all was lies and nothing
but lies; that his goods were wrongfully taken from him; that this money was
his, and no bodies else, that the Devil had put those Doblones there, and not
he; that they should lay hold on me, for I had a familiar, and a great many
the like broken speeches.

Let them lay hold a Gods name on me (said I) so that I may have my money out
of thy fingers. I gave him very rough and harsh language, telling him; O thou
Impostor, thou cheating rascal, have thou yet a tongue to talk, seeing how
evident thy wicked dealing appears to all the world: open that chest too I
pray; for there lies my silver, I saw him put it in. There is no such thing
said he; for all the silver that is there is mine, and so are these three
thousand Crowns. How yours, I pray Sir being you did but now confess that you
had no Doblones of ten? It was Gods will to cause thee to forget that thou
had received them, that I might not lose my moneys. He that will deny
another man his own, had need of a good memory, as also a care to remember
what he says.

When I first came in hither, thou toldest me here before these Gentlemen,
that to morrow I should have them, sending my man for them, and now that I came
back again to demand them of thee, before the same Gentlemen, thou deniest to
have any such thing in thy keeping. Let that Chest therefore (I pray) be
opened, take out all that is in it, and then it shall be known which of us two
is the honester man, and (...) it is that lives by cozening others, either he
or I? They opened the Chest, and when I saw the bag, though there were diverse
other there, some of more, and some of lesser sums, reaching forth mine arm
I pointed out that wit^ ^y finger, saying; this with the black spot is it. In
conclusion, they found that to be true, which I had said. And this truth was
the more confirmed, when pouring out that bag for to count the moneys, they
met with the ^ther Billet, which said, That my two thousand Royals were in
there amongst the rest: then I began to be louder then ever I was before, and
cryde out unto him. Thou vile naughty man, thou false crafty Merchant, thou
common coozener, thou enemy to God, thou that have neither truth nor conscience
in thee: is this thy honest dealing? this thy fair proceeding? this thy good
usage of those that have to do with thee? No marvel thou be rich, if thou
take this course with others, as thou have done with me: and if thou had my
moneys (as is apparent to all the world) how did thou dare first to cross
and blot out what I had written; seeking thereby to defeat me of my due? And
then afterward so impudently to affirm that I had given thee nothing, and
that thou did not know whence I was, nor whither I would, and that you did
not so much as know either me, or my name? What can thou now allege for thy
self? Have thou any more false money to coin? any more lies to stamp? See
how thou art overtaken in thy mischief, how blinded by thine own wickedness,
that thou had not the wit (which was Gods just punishment upon thee) either
to take away these memorandums, or to hide the money? See how his divine
Majesty has been pleased to make good my innocence, and to protect my
simplicity, that downright plainness, wherewith I committed my moneys to
thy custody, presuming that I should have them again, when-soeuer I called
for them. But I now verily believe, that he, that did advise me that I should
trust thee with my moneys, was such another sharker as thy self; and one of
your proiectors for your profit, a blood-hound of your own making, to wind
out your commodity. All they that were present, with this that they had seen
and heard, were as much amazed, as offended, at the Merchants base and roguish
dealing, being now thoroughly satisfied, that I had a great deal of reason, and
justice on my side. The common voice was wholly in my favor, the proofs, and
evidences seen and allowed, and the ill report that ran of him before, did now
ring in all men's ears. Insomuch, that not a man of them, but said; Fie upon
him, do you not see how this greedy Cormorant would have swallowed this poor
Gentleman's moneys, which he had delivered unto him upon trust? But it is no
such news, that an usuring knave should like a Harpy, prey upon other men's
goods. And had he not used the better diligence, and had his wits about him, it
had been all utterly lost, and damned for ever. The Merchant, who with his
own ears heard not only these, and the like, but far worse words spoken of
him, had not so many mouths, or tongues, wherewith to satisfy so great a
number, as there railed against him; nor indeed was it possible for him (as
things were carried) to justify himself, but stood like one, that did not
well know, whether he were asleep, or awake. It seemed then unto me, that he
rubbed his hands and elbowes, to call himself to remembrance; or that he began
to think with himself, whether he had lost those two potentiall faculties of
his Understanding, and Memory, and that only his Will was remaining unto him,
considering what had past. He (as I told you before) had gotten himself a very
bad name, which made much for me, and was as good as half a proof for the
clearing of my business. And this punishment still lights upon them that lead
a lewd life, that slight proofs are sufficient to overthrow them, and makes
the cause go current against them. This only of it self, without any farther
ado, would have served the turn well enough to help me to my money again,
which was much strengthened by those that were there present at my first coming
thither, who there took their oath, That he said unto me, that if I should
send my servant unto him the next day following, I should not fail of my
money, and that within a little while after, I returning thither again, and
demanding it of him, he denied it unto me. His own servant likewise swore,
that I in his hearing (as being then present) did entreat his Master that he
would keep three thousand Crowns for me, and the aforesaid sum of Royalls,
but whether I did deliver them unto him or no, he could not answer to that, but
must refer it to his Masters book of Accounts, which did not always lie in
the shop, but was often carried in, and more he could not say concerning this
matter. My servant, he on the other side swore, that he told out the moneys
with his own hands, and delivered them unto the Merchant, in the presence of
diverse others, that were then in the shop, but knew not who they were, for he
was a stranger in that place, and therefore could not have any knowledge of
them. So that, what with the pregnant proofs of all that I had said, what with
seeing in what manner he had crossed the book, what with finding the sums of
money (by me mentioned) to fall out so just, both in their place, and number;
as also, that every bag had his particular billet, which told, whose the
money was; they all took part with me, and were mainely bent against him, not
suffering him to speak a word in his own defense, nor to hear any thing that
he could say, to excuse himself. He had spent all his breath in vain, and had
not now the spirit to talk any more; for, being stricken in years, and seeing
so strange, and unexpected an accident as this, which he did not so much as
once dream of, thinking it impossible that he should be thus ouer-reach't,
waxed thereupon so pale and so wanne, as if he had been a dying man,
continuing for a good space in a swound. All that were there, did verily
believe, that my Merchant was dead, and that it was a just punishment of God
upon him for his perjury and false dealing; but he afterward came again unto
himself, but so stupid and senseless, that I began to take compassion of him.
But in these his swounings, I did comfort my self, that if he should chance to
dye, I should have had less miss of him, then of his money.

In a word, there was not any one, of all that were there, which did not say,
Let the Gentleman have his money, give him his money. But I, knowing full well,
that it was not the voice of the vulgar (though I was beholding to their good
wishes) that could assign me my money; but that it must be awarded me by the
power and authority of the Judge, and by course of Law, I was very wary in
aduising with my self, how I might prevent all future mischiefs, and that the
end of this business might be answerable to its good beginning. And therefore
when they all with one unanimous consent, and voice, cryde out; The money is
his; give the Gentleman his money, give him his money; I answered very mildly,
and gently; No, not I; I will none of it, I will none of it; let it be
deposited, let it be deposited. So, for the better justification of this
business, the Bargello, that was there present, took away the money with him,
and deposited it in one of the neighbors hands, that was an honest man, and
vn-interessed on either side. Which, with a little suit, was within a few days
after by way of sentence, delivered unto me; My merchant being not only
cozened of his cash, but condemned in costs and charges of Court, besides the
general infamy, which by this means fell upon him.

When I saw so much money in these poor and sinful hands, I did often think
upon that theft, which Sayavedra had done upon me, which though it were not of
that great value, yet was it not so little, but that then it fell out to my
great hurt, albeit afterward, it turned to my greater good. For if that had
not been, I should not have known so much as I now do, nor come off so
cleanely with this theft. And therefore comforting up my self, I said; it was
Proverb.
the better for me, Si me quebre la pierna, quica por mejor.
that I broke my leg. It might have hapt worse with me, had it not hapt so
ill. My marring, was my making; my loss, my gain. So that all fell out to the
best. For from that time, ever since, have I lived in greater credit, and
better furnished with moneys, then before I was robbed. I was grown rich,
Sayavedra relieved, and Aguilera had well patcht up a broken estate. I carried
my moneys home with me, as merrily as the heart of man can possibly imagine. I
clapped it safe under lock and key, I looked charily unto it, and lapt it up
very warm, that it might not catch cold. And albeit all things succeeded thus
happily with me, yet Sayavedra, though he felt it, had it in his hands, and
touched it again and again, yet could he not believe it was there. It seemed
unto him as a dream, and thought it an impossibility, that this business
should prove so lucky. He fell a blessing of himself with both his hands, as
often as he thought upon my craft and subtletie. For albeit, when he was
acquainted with me in Rome, and knew my course of life, and did perceive by my
carriage, and manner of proceeding, that I had a subtle wit of mine own, yet
Proverb.
for all this did he not think, nor could be brought to believe, that I had so
much store, as he now found to be in me. Or that I had been so good an Archer
as I was, Matarlas en el Air. i. s^ un hombre muy agudo, y cortesano. Covarr.
verb. Matar.
to kill birds, as they were flying in the air. He supposed, I must have come
much short of himself; for he was many years my ancient, and might very well
(for his standing) have been my master, and I his apprentise some six years
at the least, to have learned the Trade. I said then unto him; Friend
Sayavedra; This is true knowledge, this is the right skill of it, this the Art,
and the cunning, to steal without danger, Hurtar, sin peligrar, y bien medrar.
and to live and thrive well by it. As for those things, which thou did
preach unto me upon the way, they were lessons of the Turkish Aleoran, mere
toys, and trifles to these. To steal a kirtle, and receive a hundred stripes
for it, every fool can do this. Your expenses, The Spanish phrase is; Mas es
la data, que elcargo.
exceed your receipts; and the gains, will not quit the cost. And therefore,
wheresoever I shall come, such as you may veil bonnet, strike sail, stooping
your standard to me, reuerencing me as your king and superior.

Some two days after, comes Aguilera for his share, stealing by night unto us.
And had it not been for Say^vedra, I had showed him Velez his trick, who
ran away with the bride, and the bride-cake too. The devil a penny he should
have had of me. But because I was willing to uphold my reputation with him, and
that he might not conceive an ill opinion of me, by leaving so foul an
impression of falsifying my word behind me, and that he might not take
occasion to say to himself; Surely, if this man deal so unjustly with
another, it is a thousand to one, he will use me in the same manner. I must
drink in the end of the same cup, as he has done; I would not hazard much, to
get a little. Aguilera told us, that his master was even ready to dye for very
grief, and almost mad with imagining how this was brought about, and that it
would not sink into his head, but that this was the devils doing, and that he,
and none but he, was able to bring such a thing to pass. I told him out a
hundred crowns, for those Doblones of ten, which he had received of me with
his Guzman shares the theft with Aguilera, and Sayavedra.
own hands, and gave him just to a hair, as much as his share came too.
Having dispatched him, I came to Sayavedra, and offered him his part, together
with the gains of the former five hundred crowns. But he told me, that he
knew he was sure enough of them, when-soeuer he should have occasion to use
them, and that not knowing well where to keep them, he was content they should
remain still in my hands, till he should find some fitter opportunity to
dispose of them.

We continued in Milan, some ten or twelve days after this, though not
altogether free from fear, lest the wind might chance to chop about; and
therefore we did agree to go from thence, and to get us to Genoa, making no
body living acquainted with our intended journey, nor spoke so much as one word
of it our selves, for fear of what might follow thereupon. But rather gave
out, that we were to go for some other place, far wide of that, faigning a
business, which did much concern us, to make all the haste we could.

It was my chance (before I went away) to walk through one of the streets in
Milan, wherein there was such choice and variety of wares, and in that
abundance, that I stood amazed at the sight of them; and by chance I espy de a
chain in a certain shop, which they had sold to a Soldier: which in my eye,
was one of the fairest that ever I saw. I had such a great good liking unto it,
and was so earnestly affected with it, that I was resolved either to buy it, in
case they had not already agreed upon the price, or to take order to have just
such another made me. Whereupon, I drew near unto the stall, and standing by,
began to look upon it, without giving them to understand that I had any mind
thereunto; but it pleased me so well, and I was so taken with it, that upon the
sudden, in that little scantling of time, taking it to be fine and pure gold,
I had presently plotted in my head, how I might have it along with me to Genoa,
and that without any great labor. I stood listening, while he was bargaining
for it, and while they were thus beating the price, the seller demanded very
little for it, which me thought was dog-cheape; whereupon I began to suspect,
that what he asked, was rather for the workmanship of the chain, then the
chain it self: but they, not agreeing on the price, I began presently to
pitch my hey; asking him what it might be vvorth, and what it weighed. I had
no sooner made him this question; but the Merchant casting up his head, looks
upon me, and falls withal a smiling, telling me; Sir, this is not to be
sold by the weight; but taking it altogether as it is, we sell it as
reasonably as we can afford it.

This word alone was enough; for by this I knew that it was false and
counterfeit: and holding it a great baseness for so slight a toy to hazard
much treasure, and that this plot of mine, which I had already cast in my head,
might stead me better hereafter, reserving it for some great occasion, and of
more importance then this could be; besides, being that no wise man will
adventure his person for nifles in a bag, I forbor^o execute my purpose;
wisely considering with my self, that if I should have gone on with this, and
miscarried therein, it would have been a sufficient proof against me, that I
had played the Impostor in my late business with my Merchant. I presently
therefore came to his price, and paid it him with as good a will as if it had
been a thing of great value: and I must tell you, that I made no small
reckoning of it, in regard of those designs for which I intended it; and
particularly in that, which (as it afterward fell out) turned to my exceeding
great good and benefit. For which purpose, (having the plot already in my pate)
I resolved with Guzman plotteth a new deceit.
my self to make me one of gold out of hand, just of the same making and
fashion as that was in every respect, that you should not be able to discern
which was which: so like would I have them to be the one to the other.

Whereupon I got me to a Goldsmiths, who made it according to my mind, showing
himself so good an Artizan, that should you have taken them both into your
hand, and compared them together, it was impossible to judge which was the true
one from the counterfeite, save only by the sound and the weight; for the false
one was somewhat lighter then the other, sounding more bell-like; whereas that
of gold was more massy, and had a more churlish kind of sound with it: it
cost me in the whole, about some six hundred and thirty Crowns, and I should
not have been sorry, if I had bestowed a thousand; for then that counterfeite
one should have yielded me as much: with them I bought likewise two little
curious boxes, as like as like might be, to lay up these chains in, each by
himself in his several box, which were fitted and fashioned as I could have
wished them.

And because all the joints of my body did still pain me very much,
conceiting Turn to the first Part of Guzman, the third Book, and the first
Chapter.
with my self that my ribs and my huckle bones were dislocated and slipped out
of their right places, ever since that nights kind entertainment, which my
worshipful Uncle gave me; which I have kept hitherto written in my soul, the
ink thereof being not as yet dry: and being now upon the way for Genoa, I
imparted some part of my mind to Sayavedra, not recounting unto him all the
whole Story of it; but only acquainting him, that when I past that way, being
but a child to speak of, some of my friends had done me an affront, and put
a jest upon me; because I was not either in such good clothes as might honor
and grace their company, or so flush of money, that they might get something by
me. And I was heart-angry with my self that I had told him so much; because
he should not take me in a lie, if he should chance to remember what I had
told him before.

But letting that pass, and dwelling no longer upon it, I went on in my
discourse, and said farther more unto him: if thou Sayavedra were that true
friend as thou professest thy self to be unto me, thou would ere this have
been He here texeth Mateo Luxan Sayavedra, the Author of the false second
Part, for his omission of a promised revenge, mentioned in the first part, by
our Author, Mateo Aleman.
at Genoa, and have revenged the wrong that I there received. But I must be
enforced to do it my self, supplying thy default, and neglect thereof, by
mine own industry. It will also well beseem me so to do, that I may cancel
that obligation, and pay this debt that I owe them, to the end that those good
turns which they did me, may be fully requited; and receive not only the
principal, but use for forbearance. But to remove all suspicion, we must do
that which you and your brother did, change both our apparel and our names. I
like very well of it (said Sayavedra) and further promise unto thee, that I
will inherit thy true name, that I may the better both imitate and serve thee.
From hence forward therefore I style my self Guzmande Alfarache: and I
(directing my speech to Sayavedra) will inuest my self with mine own proper
name, which I inherited from my Parents, and until now, have not hitherto
taken it upon me. For, a Don ought to be a gift which comes from the holy
Ghost; because it is admitted, and well received of others, or it must be
derived from the direct line, from father to son. For your Dons, that now
strut it up and down Italy, glorying more in this title, then the Peacocke in
his painted plumes, are nothing but infamy and shame. For there is not a
Spaniard in these parts, (though the son of a Cobbler) but goes adorning
himself with the name of Don, that he may be held a Gentleman. And if it go
there as it does here, a man may very well ask, without offense; who keeps
the Swine? Henceforth, I call my self Don Iuan de Guzman: and with this title
will I content my self. Then said Sayavedra, with a iocond heart and a
cheerful countenance; Don Iuan de Guzman, In Spain when a Comedian acts his
part exceeding well, the applaudite they there give him, is to cry, Vitor,
Vitor, Vitor, such a one, Pinedo, or Fernandez.
Uictor, Uictor, Uictor: which name can become no man better then your self;
so well it suits with your noble actions: confusion light upon that Trait or
that shall seek to spot it. He (my brave boy) that shall take it from thee,
my curses shall pursue him to death. I had furnished my self in Milan, with as
much rich silk Grogram, as would serve to make me a cloak, and a Sotana, a
g^rment much like our Clergie-mens Cassocks here, which reaches no farther
then the knee: which is the common wear of your Grandes, and other Noblemen
and Gentlemen in Spain. Dizesi Sotana, porque se trae soto el manteo. Covart.
Sotana; and so being provided of all things necessary, we began our journey
for Genoa.

CHAP. VIII.
Guzman de Alfarache comes to Genoa, where being known by his kindred, he is
feasted by them. He persuades every one to live virtuously; And shows the
hurt, which Murmurers, Hypocrites, and false Witnesses, bring to men's souls,
honors, and riches; He delivers the great profit, we shall gain, by
avoiding such venomous Basiliskes. And concludes with telling us, who are true
thieues indeed.

LOng will the vessel keep that his sent and savor, wherewith Quo semel
imbuta recens, etc
at first it has been fully seasoned. If the course of my life, the occasions
and the chances that befell me, Love, and Fear, had not opened the eyes of my
understanding; if these I say, could not awaken me, and rouse me up from the
sleep of my sins, and those vices, wherein I was full'd so fast asleep, I
cannot persuade my self, that any other humane forces are of power to do it.
And howbeit, with stratagems, inventions, devices, and diverse other means, it
might be brought otherwise to pass; yet not with that easiness and facility,
(as some may imagine.) For it will require a large Discourse, how, and in what
sort, a man ought to make his election, by distinguishing profit, from
dis-profit; just, from unjust; and good, from ill. And when it once comes to
this point, the business so stands then with him, That he that will be but
willing to put his own helping hand to get out of that mire of sin, wherein
he lies wallowing, The force of virtue.
and endeavor to free himself from that muddy sink of vice, those good
inspirations of heaven, shall never be wanting unto him, which favoring, and
furthering his virtuous actions, will add strength unto his weakness, and
raise him up from the death of sin, to the life of grace. To the end, that
knowing and acknowledging his fore-passed errors, he may learn to correct his
faults for the present, and for the future, grow up to perfection. But they
that are deuoid of reason, who like the Bull, shut their eyes, and bow Men
without reason, and who they be.
down their heads to give a blow, following their own wilful appetite,
seldom or never, shall come to the knowledge of their own misery. Because,
like they that are blind, they will not see; and like those that are deaf,
they will not hear: and out of a headstrong and wilful humor, will not give
way, that any should cross them in their lewd courses. They take great joy and
delight in walking in the path of their own lusts; it seeming so long unto
them, that it shall never have an end, or that this life of theirs shall ever
come to be cut off; whose happiness (they make account) does only consist in
this their vain and idle idolatry. These are men of a large life, but a far
larger conscience. They love the broad, better then the narrow way. They know
full well, that they do ill; and therefore do ill, because they have no mind
to do well. They feign themselves to be ignorant of that, which they are not
willing to understand; yet wot well enough, that the thread of their life, goes
daily wearing and wasting away; and that the string by which it holds, must
crack and break in sunder, in the end; and then their perpetual downe-fall,
will fearfully and with a great deal of terror, present it self unto them.

But because we see that Gods hands are nailed fast, that they stir not
against us, and that he is much grieved and afflicted for us; we think, it
would much vex him, that we should be vexed. Such fools as these, say to
themselves; The language of fools.
we feel no pain, nor have any aches, but are sound and lusty; we want no
money, but have the world at will; our house is well furnished, we have plenty
of provision; let us lie down and sleep, and take our ease, stretching our
selves on our yuorie beds; let us live as merry as the day is long, sport while
we may; we have time enough before us, we need not to make so much haste to go
unto God, shortning that life, (by lessening our pleasures) which God has
allotted unto us. They defer their doing of good, and put off their amendment
of life, from an hour, to a day; from a day, to a week; from a week, to a
month; from a month, to a year; and from one year, to many: so that hours,
days, weeks, months, and years, run posting along by us; but this quando,
this when, is not yet come; this time, that we should repent and amend our
sinful lives; And when it does come, it shall be happy for us, if it come not
too late. This is that debt which is said to be recovered at three several
payments; but if neither in our youth, our manhood, nor in our elder age, we
do satisfy this debt, the punishment that will light upon us for non payment,
will be certain, sharp, and sudden.

What means the Usurer, that he has not God in his mind, nor does once think
upon him, acknowledging no other God, but his ungodly gain? What An
exageration against the enemies of virtue.
the Wanton, who to please his lust, adoreth her, whom he ought rather to hate?
and places all his happiness in that, which he knows must turn to his
eternal torment? What the Epicure, or the proud man, that son of Lucifer,
who makes it his common practice, to martyr the innocent, being more cruel
therein, then Dioclesian, oppressing the righteous, and persecuting the
virtuous? What the unprofitable Murmurer, who hoping to make himself a
fortune, seeks to undo other men? Scraping, like the Escarua la gallina por
su mal.
hen, to her own hurt; whilst Proverb.
using diligences to prejudice others, they light upon that, which works their
own bane?

The man, that is honest, well able to live, and of a good life, and civil
conversation, does not rob, filch, nor steal; for he lives contented with
those favors which God has been pleased to bestow upon him; he maintains
himself with that, (be it more, or little) that he has, feeds his family,
and sustaines both himself, and others. And such as these, are wont, in their
contemplations, to lift up their eyes to heaven, and to breathe forth this
sweet and thankful meditation: O Lord, I have as much, as is needful for me,
and somewhat (I thank thee) to spare, to give unto others. And these good
Christians The honest Christian.
count it an happiness and honor unto them, when through Gods blessing, and
goodness toward them, they are able to say; that they have something yet
remaining of their store, to give unto the poor, and such as need their
relief.

The thief he steals, because it is his only maintenance, having no other
The Thief.
means to live. And when all is gone, and that he has nothing of his own, he
seeks to snatch from others, if he can but once come to lay his hands on it.
He that is a noble Gentleman, will ever so far forth respect his honor and
credit as is fitting for him, and seek to maintain his port, and to live like
himself, in a liberal and plentiful manner; but yet will not stick to
grace, and do good to others.

But on the contrary, the Murmurer maintains himself with the honor of
Murmurers.
his friend, and of his neighbor, robbing him of his good name, and lessening
his worth, as much as in him lies; for, if he rob not others of it, he thinks
he shall not have any for himself. It is as strange, as to be pitied, that
the sea, should breed fishes, that have no tongue; and the earth bring forth
men, that have too much: that the sea should afford us Soles; and the earth,
men that have no souls.

Your Hypocrites, who boast their letters of credit, which they have given
Hypocrite.
to the world; are like unto those that play at Tennis, who strike the ball
against the ground, that it may the better come to their hand, and tossing it
to and fro in the air, keep it up a good while, till it come to be either a
chase, or a loss. But of all other, most wretched, and most miserable are
those men, who make long prayers with their lips, and devour with their
mouths, the goods of the poor, the widow, and the fatherless. Wherefore God
will severely punish these holy offenders; holy in outward show, but not in
heart. An Hypocrite, is like unto a gun, that is charged; for every man does
not know, what is within it, or whether it be charged or no; but if you once
put fire to it, the least spark will send forth a bullet, that shall overthrow
a giant, and lay him on the ground: So, your Hypocrite, upon every little
occasion, how-soeuer he may seem for the present to have no harm in him,
will vent his malice, and be ready to do you a mischief; and when you least
think of it, give you such a blow, that your shall never be able to rise
again.

There are a certain sort of men, that are like unto your dry witherd
Pearetrees; Dissemblers.
lean, tall, and stooping; hanging their heads in their bosoms, as if they
would seem to be Saints, and go lapt up in a long threadbare cloak, as if
they were to accompany a Coarse to the grave, or were themselves to be
interred. These are fools of the first form; and will with this their
dissimulation and grave carriage, make us believe, that they are wonderful
wise, and of great understanding. These I say are principal fools; they will
steal you four or five sentences out of this, or that other Author, whereof
they make a Gallimafrie, serving them in, as a dish of their own making,
recommending it unto us as theirs. They feign their justice, to be equal with
that of Traianes; their sanctity, with that of Saint Paul; their wisdom,
with that of Solomon; their sincerity, with that of Saint Francis; yet under
this cloak, what shall you find? If you search it well, you shall find, an
hypocritical knave, a seeming Sanctificetur, but as arrant a villain, as ever
trod upon a shoe of leather. They carry a lean, and meager countenance, but
their works flourished over with painting; little breeches, but large
consciences; nothing but yes verily, and indeed, in their mouths; but their
heart is full of lies; a public kind of charity, but an insatiable secret
avarice; they manifest a kind of abstinence and fasting, as well from meats,
as temporal means; but their throats are so dry, and their thirst so great,
that they will swallow up the whole Sea, devour other men's estates, and yet be
so far from being satisfied therewith, that they remain as thristy as they
did before. They say, they have enough, and more then enough, and that much
less would serve their turn, and is more then they are worthy of; yet are
they so greedily given, that they are never contented, and nothing can fill
their hungry maw. They are like unto your Dates; soft and sweet without, but
hard and stony within. They carry hony-combes in their mouths, but wormwood
in their hearts. They have sweet tongues, but sour souls. Great pity is to
be taken of these men, for that they suffer so much, and enjoy so little; and
are finally condemned to Hell, for this one poor fading vanity, to be
esteemed honest and religious, when indeed they are nothing less. So that,
they neither cloth their backs, nor feed their bellies, according to their
own content and liking, but go up and down in a miserable kind of manner,
afflicted, hunger-staru'd, withered, pale, and wanne, denying themselves
ordinary necessaries for the use of this life, not being able truly to say,
that they have had one hour of content in this world, bearing always about
them a troubled body, and an unquiet mind, their corpse, and conscience
equally suffering. Now if this, which they thus, and in this manner suffer, as
they do it, and endure it, only for the worlds sake, and to seem outwardly
holy, that thereby they may gain a good opinion amongst men; if they would do
this, I say, for Gods sake, laying aside their dissimulation, and not debarring
themselves of those good blessings, which God has created for man's use and
comfort; questionless, in so doing, they might lead a happy life in this
world, and enjoy everlasting happiness in the world to come.

Let us say something of your false witness; whose punishment does give
satisfaction to the people, and is pleasing unto all men, taking pleasure in
their False witnesses.
chasticement, in regard of the heinousness of their offense. For, for a
matter of six Marauedis, a thing of nothing, you shall have them swear six
thousand falsehoods, and take away six hundred thousand men's credits, and
estates from them, which lies not afterward in their power to make restitution
thereof. And as your day-labourers, and other workmen, repair to certain
set-places, appointed for that purpose, to be hired by those that have occasion
to use them; so do these kind of men come to your Courts, your Consistories,
your places of public business, even to the very Offices where your Notaries
are a writing, to learn how things go there, and to offer their service to
those that have need of them. And if this were all, the matter were not great,
but it is worse then you think it is; for the very Officers of the Courts
themselves, do maintain and countenance these lewd fellows, that in those
causes that occur (as occasion shall serve,) they may make use of them for
their advantage, suborning them to bear false witness, for the proving of
such, or such a business, which they will not stick to testify upon oath.
This I assure you, that I now tell you, is no jest; nor do I therefore speak
it unto you, to make you believe that which is not so; nor do I lie one jot,
in all that I have said unto you. For there are false witnesses enough to be
found, if any man be disposed to buy them. And are as frequent in your Notaries
Office; as Conserues in an Apothecaries shop. Or like horse-leeches in a
glass, ready prepared for the business, when-soeuer you shall be pleased to
put them upon it. Let those that have a mind unto them, go to D. N. his
Office; I was about to name him, before I was aware, but it is all one; for I am
sure you all know him, or can give a shrewd guess whom I mean; there shall
you have these Knights of the Post, at all kind of prices, as you shall have
pies in a Cooks shop; some for eight Royals, some for four, some for two, and
some for half a Royal, as choosing rather to play small game, then wholly to
sit out.

But if it be a weighty cause indeed, there is also another sort of them, of a
higher rank, and at a higher rate, as we see there are pies for weddings, and
for great feasts, which will cost you somewhat more then ordinary; these are
those, that are Musket-proofe, and will (to strike the matter dead) not stick
to swear, that upon their own knowledge, for these foure-score years, they
remember such and such a conueyance was past thus and thus, such a piece of
land past over after this or that manner, and a hundred the like.

Like to that Country-clowne, who being a shallow braind coxe-combe, a A
Country fellows mistake: for ochenta an^os, he names ochocientos.
very lob-cocke, being brought into the Court by his Landlord, to witness a
thing in his behalf; and instructed by him, that when he should be asked how
old he was, should answer, he was eighty years old. The silly fellow, did not
well understand him, but being desirous (as it should seem) to do his
Landlord a pleasure, being demanded touching his age, took his oath, that he
was eight hundred years old. And albeit the Notary wondering at this so
inconsiderate and unadvised an oath, did advise him to take heed what he said;
he clownishly made answer, Do thou take heed how thou writest, and stand not a
sifting of other men's lives, but let every man be as old as he will
himself. Afterward, the Notary reading the report of this witness, when he
came to the point concerning his age, the Judge apprehended it to be the
Notaries error, and would have punished him for it; but he excused himself,
saying; That he did no more, then what did belong to his office, in setting
that down aright, which he received from the witness his own mouth; and that
although he had admonished him thereof, and bid him be better advised, yet he
stood stiffly in it, and ratified what he had said before, saying; That he was
of that age, and that he should so set it down. The Judges caused the witness
to make his personal appearance; and demanding of him, why he had sworn,
that he was eight hundred years old. Because (and it like your Lordships) it
was for the service of God, and the Conde, my master.

There are store of false witnesses every where, the streets are full of them,
they are to be hired for money, but he that will save his purse, and have them
for nothing, let him seek out some kinsman or other, that is his enemy, with
whom thou wagest law; for he to be revenged of him, will swear any thing
against the whole generation of thy adversary. But from these malicious minded
men, good Lord deliver us. For they do us the greatest hurt.

But let us leave these kind of men, and come to those of mine own
occupation, and to that our Company, or Brotherhood, which is the ancientest
and greatest that is in the world. For I would not have thee to tit me in the
teeth, that I have a pen for others, and let mine own stand idle in my
standish, or else cause it to run another way. I will not pass by this
door, without knocking at it, and that soundly too; I will not lie lazing in
the shade, nor making my self merry in the Tavern.

A thief, what will he not do, to steal? Which word Thief, I apply to Of
Thieves. Who be the brave thieves.
such poor sinful creatures as my self. As for your great rich theoues, such
as ride on their foot-clothes of velvet, that hang their houses with hangings
of tiss^e and costly arras, and cover the floores of their chambers with gold
and silk, and curious Turky-carpets, and often hang such poor snakes as we
are, I have nothing to say to them. For we are far inferior unto them, and
are those little fishes, which these great ones do devour. They live bravely,
vpheld by their reputation, graced by their power, and favored by flattery;
These, are of that strength, that they break the gallows; hemp was not sown
for them, nor for them were your Galleys built, except it be to bear command
in them. Of which command, it may be, that we shall remember to say something
in its proper time and place, if we hap to come thither, as I hope in God, we
shall. But let us now speak of those thieves, that are not fit to be left out,
such as my self, and my servant Say^vedra. We will not touch upon those that
rob Justice; for there are none such I trow that will do so, nor is it known,
who they be. And if peradventure there be any such, that have done so, we have
already spoken thereof at large in our first Part. Nor will we speak of your
Rulers, nor Governors, nor your Counselors of State, for we have likewise
created thereof heretofore; besides, their managing of these matters, is not of
any importance at all, or worth the talking of. For take them out of their
tracke, put them from their wholesale, and turn them to retayle, or remove
them from that pond, wherein they have lived, and they are to seek which way
to wind themselves; I will not give a button for the best of them.

But some perhaps will tax me, and say; That thou art, as they are; both birds
of a feather; seeing thou art so willing to smother their lies, their deceits,
and their falsehoods. For, if it should be demanded, what means has Master N?
The answer would be; Sir, He is a Regidor. What, is he no more then a Regidor?
How lives he then thus gallantly? How can his Office alone maintain this
bravery, having no set revenues, or other rents coming in besides, considering
what a port he carries, what a house he keeps, what store of servants, and
horses, that continually attend him? You say well Sir. But I perceive by you,
that you do not truly understand the mystery of it, nor rightly conceive, how
this may be brought about. True it is, that he has no rents, but he has his
renters, and none can execute that Office without his license, paying him so
much rent for it; whereof the greatest part comes to the Regidor, the rest
remains to the renter, to the end, that he also may live, and have
where-withall to discharge his rent. But why do thou not speak freely what
thou know concerning these men? I may not, nor I dare not; for if any man
should presume to speak of them, oppose himself, though never so little
against them, or but once offer to question either their life's, or their
actions, they will make him hold his peace with a pestilence, they will never
suffer him to live in quiet, but force him for his own ease to fly the
Country. For being (as they are) men of great place and power, they will
presently fall a feeling, to find a Buscan la paja (...) el oydo.
straw in thine ear; that is, they will seek a hole in thy coat, Proverb.
and pick some one quarrel or other against thee, and either by right, or by
wrong, they will overthrow thee, if not utterly undo thee. They are like unto
your Cupping-glasses; which (where they once fasten) sit close and hard to thy
skin, and never leave drawing and sucking, till they have haled from thee what
they would have, nor is there any taking of them off, till they be as full as
they can hold. I could also tell thee, that no man dares say; Black is their
eye; or go about to have them punished. For whosoever he be, that offers that,
it fares with him, as it usually does with your pipkins; which when they are
set full of water over the fire, they no sooner begin to boil, but the water
runs over, and puts out the fire that was the occasion thereof.

Understand you me now? Yes marry do I: And, it may be, they pass over these
things the better, by reason of their good Angels of guard, which free them
from those blows, that would otherwise fall upon them, and rid them out of all
their troubles. I could tell thee likewise somewhat which thou have left out,
that if these men, after they were hanged, should have their causes heard, and
see what they could say for themselves, even those very men would then plead
stiffely against them, who heretofore were in their favor; but now for the
fear, that they have of them, they are well content to eat their meat in
quiet, and to hold their tongues. I could tell thee besides, if I would unmask
these men, that they fare daintily at other men's cost, have what they will,
either for nothing, or dog-cheape, making the poor to pay for it, who must pay
most, and fare worst. But it is now time to make a full point, and to leave
them with their Agentes, and Consentientes, their instruments, and their
copartners to themselves: For in conclusion, they are, as thou art; and worse
then thou, and do much more hurt; for thou do but damnifie one house alone;
but these a whole Country.

O what good counsel do thou give me! But let me wish thee (my friend) to
make use of it thy self. Think thou perhaps to save thine own fingers from
burning, to take the Sacar las brasas, con la mano del gato.
Cat by the foot, and therewith to rake the Proverb.
coals out of the Oven? If thou know this to be true, or have any thing
else to say of them, speak it your self for me: for I have told thee all that
I know, and I would not willingly that they should deal with me, as thou say
est they deal with others: for I have no mind to come under their lash.
Suffice it thee, that contrary to that decorum that is fitting for the
greatness of their place and quality; I have enlarged my self in speaking
more already; then may well become me. Nor am I willing to oblige my self
anew, to sift their lives, nor diue into their doings, being there is no good
to be gotten by it, if things run along in this strain there in Italy, God
be thanked, that I am going for Spain, where no such robberies as these are
used. But because I am a Spaniard, thou will say, that all the world is my
Country; it is true; and in saying so, thou do not lie. But shall I tell
thee one thing? I know how all this may be remedied, and that very easily too,
to the great augmentation and good of the Commonwealth, and by the general
consent of all good subjects, to Gods good service, and the Kings great honor;
but for the better effecting thereof, I must be forced to follow the King,
presenting his Majesty with memorial upon memorial, Petition upon Petition:
and when I shall have brought the business to a good pass, and as it were to
the very vpshot, such a Favorite, or such a great Lord, Don B. buzzes him in
the ear, and tells him, that it is an idle and foolish Project, and unable to
take effect. For, it reflecting generally upon them all, they out of their
great power will trample me under foot, and crush me, that I shall never be
able to lift up my head any more, leaving me in far poorer taking, then I
was before. But I am afraid to wade too far in this deep water, for fear
of drowning. A shallower ford is safer, and fitter for me to dippe my foot in:
because I speak the truth, they count me a base and obscure fellow; and for
that I presume to give them wholesome counsel and sound advice, they call me
Rogue, brand me with the name of Picaro, and thrust me out of doors by head
and shoulders, scorning such a Iack-sauce, and downright rascal as I am. But
they shall not carry it away so. Let them take their course, and we will take
ours, treading in the steps of our noble Ancestors: and (God grant) that they
that come after, do no worse then we do, Only, I will be bold to tell you
thus much; that there are far more thieues then there are Physicians. Neither
need any man to make himself such a Saint, as to take offense when he hears
the name of a thief spoken of, showing himself queasie-stomack'd, and seeking
to disgrace him, till he ask this question of himself; whether, either here,
or there, he has not in his life time played thee thief himself? And to this
end, I would have him to know; that to steal, is no other thing then to
detain that which What stealing is.
is another man's, contrary to the will of its owner.

For mine own part, I would make no more reckning, that a man did not know
that I had any thing of his, then if he did know it, and had given it me with
his own hand, so as he be not able to hurt me, and have not the power to
take it away from me again by force. I learned this Lesson from my Childhood,
though I did not always put it in practice. I was like unto a tree, that is
cut down to the very root, which leaves some liue-sap still remaining, by
means whereof it grows in time to be a new Plant, and begins to bear the
same fruit it did before. And you shall see by and by, how quickly I return to
my old bias. While I left off stealing, I was like unto forc'dearth, I was out
of my proper Center; now, with a little use, I am come to the same lewd course
that I ran before. When I was a Lad, I was quick and nimble, I had a facility
in filching, and could lay hand on any thing, were it never so hard to come by.
But now that I am turned Man, me thought at the first, I was grown gowty, both
in my feet and hands; I found my self much slower, and duller then I was wont
to be: but in a very short time I recovered my former health.

I continued my accustomed thefts, and took such pleasure in them, as a
Soldier could not more in his arms; nor a Ginet in his trappings, and other
his rich furniture. When any doubts did arise, I did resolve them; if they were
to seek for Plots, I did invent them: and in all weighty businesses, I was
their safeguard and defense: they would hearken unto my advice, as to the
answers of some Oracle; there being no man that would contradict my rules, nor
withstand my laws, nor reply to any thing that I should once determine. Those
that were best practiced amongst them that frequented the Hospital of
Saragoca, and Guadalupe came short of me; though I used the trade but now and
then, like the intermissions of an Ague: for, when all things else failed me,
and that I knew not what shift to make, I had this, my five finger for a help,
this did never forsake me in the time of need: it was sure money in my purse,
and stuck as close to my neck, as my Lord Ambassadors chain did, which a
long time escaped many a fair danger. The trade of thieuing was as proper to
me, as laughing is proper to man; nay, I had almost said, that it was as a
Character not to be blotted out, such deep impression had it taken in my
soul. But when I did not exercise the same, it was not any want of good will;
for that was ever ready, and at hand.

I, and Sayavedra went out of Milan well lined, and better provided of all
things that were needful for our journey: so that there was no man but would
Guzman goes for Milan.
have taken me for a very rich man, and one of note and quality. But how many
Proverb.
be there that might very well have said, Sit down Come, mangas, que a
vosotras es la fiesta.
Gallants, and fall to; for this feast is provided for you. For, as a man's
apparel is, so ^gan a cada vno, como lo ven t^atado. Good clothes recommend a
man more then knowledge.
is his esteem: And they that know not a man otherwise, make their censure
according to Proverb.
his clothes. If thou were Cicero himself, and should go ill clad, thou
should be no longer Cicero, at least a scuruy Cicero, whom the world would
scorn, and count a mad man. For there is no other wisdom, nor learning in
the world, then the having of so much more wealth, and so much more land then
another man. And he that is not so, may like a dog, go shake his ears without
doors: he is like money that is not current; he passes not for any thing
where-soeuer he come. They will neither offer thee a chair to sit down, nor
give thee the upper hand, when they shall see thee without a feather, though
thou be rich apparelled with virtue and knowledge; but of such now a days,
there is little or no reckoning made. But if thou be gloriously set out, and
richly suited, though thou be never so base a Groom, every man's eye is upon
thee, every man's hat ready to honor thee. Be thou as base and vile as any
dunghill; yet if it be covered over with green grass, many will set
themselves down upon it, and there recreate and refresh themselves. But
Catulus was not of this Catulus his saying of Nonius.
mind; who when he saw Nonius riding in a triumphant Chariot, stickt not to
say, what a deal of dung does this Cart carry? Giving us thereby to
understand, that dignities do not grace the vicious. But there are now but few
Catuls, though there be many Nonii. Nay, were thou but good Alchimie, that
shall be adored in thee, because of its glorious and gaudy glittering. Men do
judge now more by the eye, then the ear; by what they see, then by what they
hear: the outside is more looked on, then the inside looked into: a rich
raiment sounds louder then a good report. No man considers what thy knowledge
is, but what thy wealth is: they talk not so much of thy virtue, as of thy
purse: and of thy purse, not what thou have in it, but what thou spendest out
of it. I was well appointed, well apparelled, and g own four inches thick,
with other folks The Spanish word is Enxundia Adeps porcinus, interior
pinguedo porci inueterata. Also; lo gordo, que las (...) tienen en la ouera.
fat.

When I came to Genoa, they knew not in my Lodging what cheer to make me, nor
how to please me in my diet, I was grown so dainty and so curious. I then
began to call to mind the first entrance that I made into that City, and
Guzman arriues a^ Genoa.
in how different a manner I was there received; and how I was forced from
thence, carrying my Cross upon my shoulders; and how now they receive me,
spreading their cloakes on the ground. We alighted, and fell to our victuals.
That day I was willing to take mine ease, and to rest my self after my
journey. The next morning I apparelled my self, a lo Romano, no Roman of them
all could wear a fairer Cloak, and Sotana, in which I walked up and down the
streets. All men's eyes were cast upon me, as well for that I was a stranger,
as likewise in regard I was well clad, and of a presence not to be despised.
They asked my servant, who I was? He told them, Don Iuan de Guzman, a Gentleman
of Seuilla: And when I heard them inquire after me, The effects of Pride and
Vainglory.
I would pop up my head, stretching out my neck, some what more then ordinary,
thinking with my self, that I had some ten pound weight of Bread more in my
Belly, then I had before: so Peacocke-like was I blown up with Pride, and such
store of this puffe-past of vainglory had I swallowed down my throat. He
told them that I was newly come from Rome. They demanded farther of him, if I
were rich; because they saw me come from thence in a differing fashion from the
rest: for they that go to the Court of Rome, and to other Princes Courts, are
like unto those that go to the vvarres, who think The fruits of following the
Court and Wars.
all the world must now be theirs, and that they have already finished what
they went for; with which vain hopes they using to flatter themselves; they
lash out into extraordinary expenses upon the way, as likewise in the Court;
till the Court leaves them so curtailed, that they have scarce ere a ragge left
them to cover their breech; returning home afterward, weary in their bodies,
poor in their purses, discontented in their minds, and driven to that
extreme want, that they must either almost starve or beg their bread. They
go thither fresh and lively, flush of money, and rich in clothes; whom I can
liken to nothing better, then to the fish called the Tunny; which, when it is
full of spawne, is also full of fish, fat and fair to see to, and is very good
meat; but when her Spawne is gone from her, she turns lanke, lean, and
unseasonable; proving as unprofitable to the stomach, as it is unpleasing to
the Palate.

They likewise enquired of him, whether I were to continue there for any long
time, or past only along as a Traveler, taking it in my way. To all which
questions, Sayavedra gave such answers, as I could my self have wished: Telling
them that I was the only son of a widow-gentle-woman, of very good quality,
being a wonderful wealthy dame, which was wife to a certain Gentleman of
Genoa, and that I was come thither to expect certain Letters and dispatches,
and then to return back again to Rome; and that in the interim, I would
recreate my self here in Genoa, taking much pleasure in the sight of this
stat^ly City; for that I knew not when I should make my return, nor for what
part, or whither I should ever have the like opportunity to see it again. The
Inn, where I lay, was the best in all the Town, and is commonly called,
L'Hosteria di santa Marta, whither the most part of your Noblemen, and
Gentlemen did usually resort. There we remained, making merry, and spending
our money, without doing our selves any The Spanish phrase (...), Sin besar, y
tocar, en cosa d^ prouecho.
good at all in point of profit, nor did we as yet go about it. And in keeping
thus our ground, we came to gain ground. The Clock does not always strike,
but stays till its hour comes, and when by a little and a little the time
creepes on, that is limited thereunto, why then it strikes. I played now and
then, but not for much money, with some other guests, that were in the house,
more for company sake, and to pass away the time, then any thing else, not
using any other help then mine own fortune, and skill in gaming; Sayavedra
had now no hand in the business, nor did I use to set his plough a work, save
in deep and fat grounds, where there was hope of a plentiful harvest; I kept
him for Holidayes, his attendance was, when there was a great feast, and a full
board; but for such poor pittances as these, not worth the sitting down for,
I was well content he should spare his labor. For, when the losings or the
gettings could not be much, the best course then (me thought) was to proceed
plainly and sincerely. Yet, The common course amongst gamesters.
when I played small game, I went along with a leaden foot, marking and
observing this, and that other Card; and if Fortune did not favor me, and that
my crosse-carding was such, that I could not light on a lucky encounter, I
would give off with a little loss: but if the wind blew fair, and that I
found good fortune was coming toward me, I never left following my good
luck, till I had swept unto me all the money on the board.

And it so fell out, that having one day won a matter of a hundred Crowns,
and somewhat more, it was a Captains hap, that had the command of a Gally, to
sit by me, who I perceived, liked very well of my manner of play, and was very
glad that I had got the money; and reading in his looks, that he had no great
store of Crowns in his purse, but was rather in extreme want and necessity, I
gave him six Doblones of two, which in that coniuncture, considering his
poverty, seemed unto him to be six thousand.

There is a time, when one single Royal, is more to a man then a hundred; nay
a thousand perhaps at another time, will not do him so much good. For the
which he made me such a thankful acknowledgement, as if the favor I had done
him, had been much more then it was, or some matter of greater moment. And
this fell out very happily for me; for having afterward understood from
himself, of what disease he was sick, and where his grief lay, at that
instant, was mine own remedy likewise represented unto me, and quickly found
out, that I was to make him the needle that must knit my net. In a word, I
effected what I desired. He spends nothing, who buys that he has need of. I
distributed likewise some few Crowns amongst the rest of the standers by, to
make them the better devoted, and affectioned toward me, and that I might
leave every man well pleased and contented. Insomuch, that by this my affable,
frank and bountiful carriage, I grew into that credit and good opinion
amongst them, that I had won their hearts, and got the good w^ll and love of
all men; and it is an old saying, That he that sowes Quien bien siemora, bien
coge.
well, Proverb.
reapes well. And I can assure you, that as many as conuersed with me, would
have hazarded their lives for me, if need had been. Wherewith I found my self
so iocond, my body so lightsome, my heart so comforted, my blood so clear, and
my spirits so quickened, that my cheeks were as fresh, and red as the Rose, and
mine eyes did sparkle, and looked so merrily, as if they had laughed for joy.

This Captain was called Fauelo; not that this was his proper name, but
because it was given him by a certain Mistress of his, whom he sometimes
served; which he was willing still to retain in remembrance of her beauty, and
his own misfortune; the whole story whereof, he at large related unto me; as
how dearly she loved him, how much she made of him, indearing the sweetness of
her disposition, her gentle behavior, and the gracefulness of her person; all
which commendable qualities, poisoned with some vain and false appearances,
were drowned in the end by a desperate torment of jealousy, and such other
beastly thoughts, as are still waiting upon it. And from that time forward, he
would never suffer me to be alone, but was for the most part continually with
me, and did embrace my friendship with the greatest love that could be.
Whereupon, I entreated him, that he would be pleased to make use of my person,
if I might be any way serviceable unto him, and to be my guest, and take such
fare as I had, and though I knew I did bid him to his loss, as keeping a
better Table of his own, yet for my sake, and the contentment I should take
therein, he ought in courtesy to accept of it. I omitted no means, for the
obliging of him unto me, and the continuing of him still to be my friend. He
had me along with him to his Galley, feasted me, and made me take my pleasure
in her, all along the coast, plowing daily such deep furrows for the better
taking root of this our new friendship and acquaintance, that if mine had gone
on in the true course of virtue, there it might have found a Haven wherein to
have harbourd it self. But I was made of nothing but fraud and deceit. Yet
would I be always laying a firm foundation, that might well have served for
the raising of a better building: but at last it came all to nothing; being
(like that foolish builder) who knew better how to begin, then to make an end
of his building. We did communicate many particular accidents and secrets each
to other, but he came not within my shirt, he had not pierced into my bosom,
Sayavedra only kept the key of that Cabinet, and none but he knew the secrets
of my soul.

This Favelo was of a good behavior, witty, discreet, valiant, patient, and
yet full of metal, qualities well befitting so valiant a Captain, and so
amorous a Soldier, by means whereof he lived always in want. And it is a
common misfortune that accompanies these good qualities, that they are still
waited on by poverty (or to speak more properly) by beggary. Now I, who was
not ignorant of his wants, sought in all that I could to relieve his
necessities, and to free him from these his extremities, that thereby I might
bind him the surer unto me. I carried my self so fairly and so cunningly, both
with him, and as many as I conuersed withal, that (like Hawks) I made them
all to stoop to my lure. And within a few days, my name and credit was so
good amongst them, that I could battle largely upon it, and might have received
any courtsie in that City, if I had been willing to make use thereof.
Whereupon, partly out of this, and partly the ancient desire that I had to know
something concerning my self, lest the not knowing of it, might make me take
thought, and so sicken, and dye of grief; considering with my self, that
being in that good state I now was in, a handsome young fellow, well clad, good
parts, and a good purse, no man whatsoever could hold it any disparagement unto
him, to acknowledge me for his kinsman; but that which did most sway with me,
Guzman begins to think upon the revenge he meant to take of his kinsman.
was the earnest desire that I had to be fully revenged of him, who had abused
me in that base manner. This did often trouble me; nor could I sleep in quiet,
as often as I thought upon it.

I had not staid long in town, but I found out a father and a mother, and came
to know all my kindred. Those, which before threw stones at me, as if I had
been some strange curre, whom they would chase out of their doors, did
begin now to quarrel, who should have me first home to his house, who make
me greatest cheer, who give me the noblest entertainment, one seeking to
out-vye another. The very first day that I made this enquiry, my kindred was
more (I imagine) then my credit, and might be better known then trusted
amongst them; for no man is ashamed to own a rich man for his kinsman, though
he be vicious and ill given; but all fly from a virtuous man, if they once
have him in the wind, and find that he stinkes of poverty, I need not to
indeare this point unto you, it is so common a thing.

Riches, is like unto fire, which albeit it belong to a different place, and is
Riches compared to fire.
only provided for one particular room, yet notwithstanding as many as come
near unto it, warm themselves, though they take not so much as a coal
Proverb.
from thence; and Mas fuego, mas calor.
the more fire, the more heat. How many shall you see warming themselves by
the fire in a rich man's hall? of whom, if you shall but ask what they make
there, or what is their business? They will answer you; No great business. Do
they perhaps give me any thing? Alas, what do thou get, by curring favor
with them, by soothing them up, by crowching and creeping unto them, by
assisting day and night in base and servile offices, misspending that time,
which thou might better bestow in gaining thy meat elsewhere? It is true
Sir, that I benefit my self here but little, yet can I not choose, but come
and warm my self at Sen^or N. house, as others do. You, and such others as
you be, tell me I pray, what you are? and be not angry with me, if I plainly
tell you, you are all fools.

But to return again into our way. Many of my kindred came unto me, every
one desiring to make himself better known unto me, and offering his service
in such complementall manner, as was befitting my fashion; and there was one
amongst the rest, who for to honor, and oblige me the more, did challenge
ancient kindred of me, even from our great grandfathers. I would, for
curiosities sake, feign know, what was become of that good old man, which put
that former trick upon me; and that I might do it without any the least
suspicion or jealousy in the world, I demanded of them, whether my father had
any more brothers? or if he had, whether any of them were yet alive, or no?
For, I was ever of the mind, that he that played the rogue with me, was my
Uncle. They told me, yes. That there were three of them in all, my Father, and
two more: and that the middle most was dead, but that the eldest of all was
living, and that he dwelt here in the City. They told me that he had lived a
bachelor all the days of his life, that he was a man of great means, and the
top of all our kindred, and gave such particular tokens of him, whereby I came
to know him. I said that I would go kiss his hands the next day: But when
this was told him, and that he understood of my quality, albeit he were very
old, he came trudg^ng with his st^ffe in his hand, as decrepit as he was, to
visit me, accompanied with some of the chiefest of our lineage. I knew him as
soon as ever I saw him, though he was now grown very lame and aged. I was
glad to see him, but sorry that he was so old, I could have wished him much
younger, that he might the longer have felt the smart of those ierkes, that I
was resolved to bestow on him. I count that man a fool, who to revenge
himself of his enemy, will take away his life; for that being ended, all his
pain is ended with it. When I would take a revenge, I would handle it so, as I
did with these my kinsmen, that they may not forget it as long as they live,
but bear the woeful remembrance of it with them to their graves. I desired to
be revenged of this man, and wished that he had been at least in the same
state as I left him, that I might in the same, have paid him the debt I owed
him: who had without any cause or reason in the world, used me so unworthily.
He made me many offers of his house; the very naming only whereof, made my
blood to boil in my breast.

Now (me thought) the Bats were fluttering about mine ears, that the Gnats
began to sting me, and that from underneath the bed, crept out those old
Hobgobblins, and fire-spitting devils, which tormented me heretofore. No, no;
once was enough of this jest; I would bite no more at this bait. The Cat has
Proverb.
Vna fue, y ^leuosela el gato. I cannot find whether this vna isr ser'd, and
therefore reserre it to others to find it out.
cozened me once, and is gone away with her prey, but she shall serve me so no
more. I shall take heed of her against another time. Marry, I said to my
self; Only Sayavedra, may put another trick upon me, but it will not be
much for his profit. But (excepting him) let any man else deceive me the
second time, and I will freely forgive him.

We talked of many things; and amongst diverse other questions, he demanded of
me, if I had been heretofore in Genoa? Are you thereabouts (thought I;) I
shall watch you well enough for that, you shall not catch me with thie trap, as
old and crafty as you be. So (lying at my close fights) I answered him, that I
had not; only I told him, that much about some three years since, that I past
this way, but could not (though I would) stay longer then one night, because I
was going in great haste to Rome, upon pretension of a certain benefice. This
Story you shall find, more a^ large, in the first Part, first Chapt. an the
third Book.
Then he told me, with a great deal of pause and deliberation, dreaming
perhaps that he had lighted on a story that should please me wonderful well,
Some seven years ago, little more or less, there came hither (my good Cozen)
to this town, a little roguish boy; whom none that saw him, but would have
taken him to be a thief, or at least a young disciple of theirs; who, that he
might the more easily rob me, came to my house, giving me some particular
signs and tokens of my brother, that is now in glory; as also of your mother;
telling me, that he was his son, and my nephew; This is true that I tell you
(Cozen) thus, and in this manner came he unto me: but he looked so like a
Rogue, and we had that suspicion of him, that not owning him for our kinsman,
lest his infamy might reflect upon our family, and turn to our disgrace, we
sought to make him leave this City, and so he did, by means of a pretty plot
which we had devised for him. I can assure you (Cozen) that he went flying
from hence, like a dog that has a bladder, with some few rattling pibles in
it, tide to his tail; we could never more set sight on him, nor do we know
whether he be dead or alive, as if the earth had then swallowed him up quick.
With the leualtos and high-bounding capers that he cut, flying finely in the
air, with no other help then a Couerlet, without the which, (you know) your
tumblers cannot handsomely do their feats of actiuity; I very well remember
that he left my bed, (whether out of fear, or what other accident I know not)
full of honey-combes. This jest proved a very good one; for fearing (if he
staid any longer here) to have a worse put upon him, he got him packing, and
so we were fairly rid of him. And I cannot choose but laugh, as often as I think
upon it: For questionless this Rogue had a purpose to deceive us. But I
believe he will remember this nights lodging (if he be yet alive) the longest
day that he has to live. And I have been often angry with my self, and have
beshrewd my fingers a thousand times over and over, that I used him no worse.

All that liad formerly past, he related unto me very solemnly, omitting no one
circumstance: As the contriuing of the plot, his making him go supperlesse to
bed (supposing that might have help to save his sheets) and which was worse
then all the rest, his tossing in a blanket.

I poor man, that was this little rogue that had suffered all this, and had
received such hard measure from them, apprehended it so feelingly, as if I had
been afraid I should have gone to this gear again: My flesh did break out
(me thought) into chops; and like the wound of a murtherd man, did open of it
self, and began to bleed afresh, (upon the hearing of this tale) as if the
murderer were present. And albeit, I sensibly perceived in my self, that the
color of my face did receive some alteration, having changed its natural hew,
yet did I dissemble it the best that I could; and then, even then at that very
instant, did I whet the razor of my revenge. Not so much moved thereunto, out
of my former hunger, that I had to do it; as this his present boasting, what
fine feats he had done; seeming to take a pride and a glory in doing an
undeserved mischief. For I hold it a greater sin (and doubtless so it is)
to boast an ill, then to do it. I did itch all the while this tale was on
foot, and knew not which way to look, nor what to say. At last I said unto
him; I can not call to mind, who this youth should be that did so earnestly
long to have honorable parents; yet are we beholding unto him, (if happily he be
alive, and have escaped with life from Roncesvalles) that of all other noble
Houses (whereof there are so many in the world) he would vouchsafe to make
choice of ours, to honor himself there withal. And if such another stripling
as he, should chance to come to my house, I would show him all the kindness I
could, till I had fally informed my self of the truth, and had assured
knowledge, whether he came unto me out of an evil, or good intent. For there
are some Cases, and so me such strange and unexpected casualties, whereunto
man's courses are incident, that even persons, of great, both worth and valor,
escape in that miraculous manner, and are by their misfortunes, brought to that
low ebb, that they are ashamed of themselves. But this wag, when I had sifted
and sounded him thoroughly, and found out his intent, I would have dealt with
him, as he would have dealt with me: For Poverty neither quits Virtue, nor
Riches give it. And in case it should not have fallen out as my suspicious
thoughts had suggested it, and that (for ought I saw) he had no evil intention
toward me, nor any purpose to do me any harm, I should have favored him all
that I could, and have secretly dismissed him from me. And in a word, though he
had not been my kinsman, yet for the good choice that he made, and the good
liking he had to our name, preferring it before any other, surely he should
not have fared the worse for that. And if I had not given him any money in his
purse, yet would I at least have used him ciuilly, and not sent him away
discontented, who (as it should seem by him) was not very well pleased with
his entertainment. Go to, go to, (Cozen) (said the oldman) had you seen him,
as I did, you would have told me another tale then now you do. And for mine own
part, (I must confess unto you) it did me good at the heart, that I had thus
firkt my young Rogue; and (as I told you before) I am very sorry that I did not
handle him worse, and give him that condign punishment, which the heynousnesse
of the offense did deserve. For you never saw such a tatterd Rascal as he was
in all your life; and being thus all to be rent and torn, and not a ragge
(saving your reverence) to cover his breech, yet this shake-rag, this young
impudent Rogue, did not stick to challenge kindred of us, and that he was
lineally descended of our house, and in so near a degree, as you have heard.
And because he brought not his wedding garment with him, but was thus poor and
basely clad, we gave him Jack Drums entertainment, and shut him out of doors,
having lapt him first in a blanket, where he was handsomely canuast; and with
this he went his way. Just about the same time (said I) was I with my mother in
Sevill. And it is not yet full three year since I left her. I was their only
son, nor had my parents any other children save my self. It was even at my
tongues end, and almost out of my mouth ere I was aware, that I had two
fathers; but quickly mending that fault, I went on, as follows: My father
left me well to live, being neither so much, as therewith to be able to spend
lauishly; nor yet so little, that with good government, I might not live
handsomely. I cannot boast my self to be rich, nor justly complain that I am
poor. Besides, my mother was always a prudent and provident woman, well
governed, a small waster, and a great huswife.

All they that were there present, were willing to give me the hearing, and
were wondrous glad of it, not well knowing in what Sanctuary they might place
me, nor how sufficiently to feast me, nor could they satisfy themselves in
point of good manners, if they did not give me the right hand, and being two,
if they did not put me in the The middle place esteemed in Spain, to be the
best.
midst between them both. Then did I softly say to my self; O vanity, whither
will thou? how do thou run after those that are fortunate, as long as they
sail with a fair wind. But when that fayles thee, how in a moment do thy
friends forsake thee, how many changes do thou find in an instant? And how
truly, did I now come to know that they are evermore favored and resp^cted,
from whom any hope may be had, that one way or other, they may be benefited by
them? and this is the reason why few do help the needy, and all run after
the rich.

We are the children of pride, and rather flatterers then friends. For if we
were true friends indeed, and were charitably minded, we would have recourse
to the contrary. Especially, we knowing how acceptable a thing it is in the
sight of God, that every one should be as sensible of his neighbors miseries,
as his own, seeking to do the same good unto him, as we would have to be done
unto our selves, were we in the same wretched case, as he is. I was now become
the idol of my kindred, so much was I adored by them. I had bought me at an A
public out cry: Or an open sale of goods at the second hand.
Almoneda, a fair Cupboord of plate, which cost me almost eight hundred
Ducats; and for no other end in the world, but to close up this my wound the
better, I invited all my kindred together, with some other of my friends one
day to dinner, I made them a great feast, bestowed a costly banquet upon them,
cheared them all up, made wonderful much of them, and gave them all the kind
entertainment I could possibly devise. After dinner, we go to play, I get the
money, but gave it almost all away in barato to the standers by. And with this
coniuring trick thus I carried them through the Air, I was able to do what I
would do with them. O that I could have then whispered them softly in the
ear, and have told them; Know (Gentlemen) that Proverb.
you feed upon your own flesh; that the En el hato, esta el lobo.
wolf is in the midst of your flocks; and that he, whom they make so much of,
is he, whom they so much wronged. O, if they did but know so much, how would
they bless them selves, what a world of crosses would they make in every
corner of their houses, that they might not be troubled with a double labor
all the days of their life after to do the same thing again, a thousand and
a thousand times over? For now their mattresses were a quilting, and their beds
a making, wherein they were like to take but little rest, and fetch more
friscalls in the air, then when they tossed me in the blanket; so that they
shall have as good cause to think upon me, as I upon them; and remember one
another the better as long as we live. But my pain was already past; and
theirs was now coming upon them. O, if they but knew, that he that is thus
with them in sheeps-cloathing, shall ere long break suddenly in upon them,
like a roaring and raging lion, how would they look one upon another? But it
is well as it is; for ere they and I part, we will quit scores, and make them
to know me a little better, and what it is to abuse one in that manner as they
did me, and to scorn and despise their own blood. It is a fine stale, or
call, to take a bird withal, to have a good eoram vobis, to spend bravely, to
go gallantly, and to be a Don Iuan de Guzman; but it had been better for
them, that I had been poor Guzman de Alfarache with his tatterd clothes,
then Don Iuan de Guzman in all his gallantry. They used me with a great deal
of courtesy, and gave me very kind entertainment, but because I had a queazy
stomach, and was troubled with many qualmes, like a woman that is a breeding,
out of that longing desire that I had to be revenged, nothing would down with
me, or if it did, it would make no stay, but I should presently puke it up
again. For in such cases, a man's thoughts are ever of a bad digestion; it
being the nature of injuries, not to be easily concocted. So that I did
continually beat my brains about it, plodding with my self how I should best
effect it; and in this virtuous exercise had I set my wits a working, and all
these my noble entertainments tended to no other end then this. For Inanis
potentia, quae non reducitur ad actum.
it had been great folly in me, to have made such great preparation to no
purpose. And unprofitable is that power, which is not reduced to act. I did but
Proverb.
wait for a happy coniuncture, for every thing has its Cada cosa, tiene su
quando.
quando, its when it should be done. For we cannot execute all things, at all
times. Besides there are some hours that are unlucky, some stars that are
cross, and some planets that are malignant; whose contagious breath we are to
fly from, and keep our selves aloof from their infectious air, lest they
chance to work our destruction.

Thus then did I leysurely stay, looking for a fit occasion, passing those
days that I remained there, in feasting and banqueting, and all other
delightful pleasures; one while walking down to the Seaside, to take the
fresh air; otherwhiles, going to recreate my self in their sweet and pleasant
Gardens, which are very curiously kept; and now and then visiting the fair
Dames of Genoa.

My Kinsmen, would faigne have made me to marry a Gentlewoman of Proverb.
very good quality, but of a small Dowry: but I durst not venture upon her, for
the reasons before recited: and being besides to steal away from thence very
shortly, our eggs A^s de dar con los hueuo^ en la ceniza.
must have been buried in the ashes; yet did I show my self very thankful
unto them for these their good vvishes toward me; neither accepting, nor
refusing their offer, that I might go entertaining and leading them along till
I had hit the mark that I aimed at. For, certain it is, that a man may then
easiliest knock out his enemies brains, when his adversary thinks there is
no such treachery intended against him, and rests most secure. And here will
we rest a while.

CHAP. IX.
Guzman de Alfarache robs his Uncle and Kinsmen in Genoa, and imbarkes him
self in the Galleys that were to go for Spain.

AN injury, never ought to be slighted; nor he sleep that does it. For
Revenge comes up from beneath the earth, lurking in the secret corners thereof,
Touching Revenge.
lying still in Ambush, watching but a fit time to Pro^erbe.
sally forth; and to do thee a mischief. The De donde no piens^n, ^uele
saltar laliebre.
hare oftentimes starts out of that bush, where we did least dream of his
sitting. Let not the rich man trust in his riches; nor the powerful man in the
greatness of his power; nor the strong man, in his strength; nor the valiant
man, in his courage: for Time alters the state of things, and turns them
topsie-turuy. A little hair in a Pen, makes a great blot; and a little stone
in the way, ouerturnes a great Waine. And when the Offender thinks himself
most secure; then the offended finds the better opportunity. I have told you
here-tofore, that Revenge Revenge a womanish affection.
is base Cowardice, which springs from a weak womanish mind; to which kind
of Creatures it is commonly competible, and suits best with them. And albeit I
have mentioned some, nay many unto you, that have made their names immortal,
by scorning and contemning of it; yet here I shall not omit to tell you a story
of a woman, wherein she well showed that she was a woman.

A Gentlewoman, that was young, fair, rich, and of a noble lineage, being A
Story how a wronged Gentlewoman revenged the injury that was done unto her.
married to a Gentleman, in every respect equal unto her self, chanced within
a short time after to become a widow: who discreetly considering the dangers,
whereinto by reason of her tender years, she was like to fall, and what
speeches the world is wont to cast out, through a too much aptness that men
have to whisper and murmur strange tales: for every man judges so of things as
they represent themselves to his imagination; and as he is instructed by his
private either fancy or affection; and taking notice of one only action of
this or that man or woman, it is a common practice amongst them, to varry their
opinions thereupon, and give their several censures. And yet not always do
these tongues of theirs speak the truth; nor their judgments hit upon the
right. She, holding it therefore very inconvenient to put these dear pledges
of hers, upon the tips of men's tongues, and to occasion her honor to come in
question; she resolved (as on the lesser evil) to marry. Two Gentlemen became
Suitors unto her, both equal in their pretension; but far unequal in their
deserving. The one, to his as much content, as his heart could desire, the
match being in a manner concluded; but the other rejected and quite cast off,
running a contrary fortune to his Corriuall. And besides, that he was not of
that rank and quality as the other, he had likewise some other defects, which
might very well excuse a woman of far meaner indowments, to admit him to be
her Companion. Now, the former being made sure to this Gentlewoman, and having
past their promises each to other; so that nothing was wanting but their going
to Church, and there to perform those Ceremonies, and Solemnities in that case
required. The second, seeing his hopes dashed, and his suit at an end, and that
there was no recovering of her; for that she was already betrothed to the
other: a devilish toy took him suddenly in the head, by perverse and indirect
means, to fetch such a leap, as should put himself forward, and cast the
other behind.

He resolved with himself to rise up one day very early in the morning,
which he did accordingly; and having hid himself in a secret place, where no
body could see him, there did he lie close, till such time as the servants of
the house had opened this betrothed Gentlewomans doors; and then presently
taking his time, without being heard or perceived by any, he steps me in, and
there stays me a pretty while behind the porch, till such time, as to his
seeming, the people were stirring in the streets, and all the rest of the
houses and shops were open. And then faigning to come out of the Gentlewomans
house, as if he had lain there all night, he stands strutting himself upon
the midst of the threshold before the door, with his sword clapped under his
arm, making show as if he were setting and ordering his Ruff, and buttoning
up the buttons of his Doublet; so that as many as past by and observed the
manner of his carriage, did verily believe, that he was espoused unto her, and
had now inioyed this Gentlewoman.

When this plot of his fell out thus handsomely, that for his purpose he could
not have wished it to have taken better effect: this business was whispered of
at first by a few; but afterward spread it self by degrees, and came to be
diuulged all over the street, till at last the noise thereof entered into her
own private chamber. This trick had he played twice over. And this business
was so publicly talked of, and the Gentlewoman grown thereby so infamous,
that it was the Table-talke of all the Town: every man admiring this her
inconstancy, and wondering at her indiscretion, that she should forgo her
first bargain, being so aduantageous for her own good, and make choice of
this other, whom she had formerly cast off, and not without cause. But when
this news was thus scattered every where abroad, and every man's mouth was full
of the manner of it; as that he was seen to come out half naked, all
undressed, and his points untrust: when this (I say) came to the knowledge of her
otner Suitor, he did so risent the wrong she had done him, was so ouercharged
with sorrow, and so inflamed with choler, that albeit he loved her before so
tenderly, that he desired nothing more then to make her his wife; now did he
cruelly hate her; flying now as fast from her, as before he sought after her:
and did not only abhor her: but all other women for her sake: it seeming
unto him; That since she, whom he so much esteemed, and so dearly loved,
accounting her so good, so chaste, and so reserved a creature, that she should
commit so foul a fact, there was little hope of faith to be found in the rest:
and if there were a^y left on whose loyalty men might trust and rely, they
were so few, that he despaired of meeting with that happiness. He weighed
their inconstancies, their delayings, their passions, and with them the
dangers, the troubles, and the cares wher^into men put them selves. And passing
from these to other discourses which he made with himself, inspired by God,
they wrought so upon him, that he changed the love of the creature, into that
of ^he Creator, resolving with himself to turn Friar. Which deliberation,
he putting in execution, suddenly entered into a religious Order. This came to
the Gentlewomans knowledge, and with it, the rep^rt that ^an other, as also the
occasion of it, who, when she saw how things stood, and that it was not
possible for her to repair her honor; nor to take away that foul blo^ which
the other had laid upon i^, she tooke-on like a mad woman: and how can you
blame her, that she should thus lose her self in her passions; having lost at
one blow, her honor, her Husband, her preferment, and her chiefest happiness?
hopeless for ever, either by this, or any other the like means, to receive
any future content, or to return to the former state wherein she stood, or to
recover her reputation, which was thus shamefully lost.

Whereupon she began to bethink her self, how she might salve this her
innocence by some exemplary punishment. And having summed and cast up these
reckonings with her self, she found her honesty so deeply engaged, that it
was impossible by any other course but this, to clear it: and that such a
treachery as this, could not be quitted, then with one on less treacherous,
though more cruel. Whereupon, she did put on so infernal a fury, and went on
in that violent rage, that she busied her thoughts in nothing else, save how
she might bring this business about. God be merciful unto us, and deliver us
from a wronged woman's revenge; for all of them are commonly such as she, who
here presents her-selfe unto us.

The first thing that she resolved on, was to use her best endeavor to become
a Nun; (and if she had stopped there, she had spunne a good thread) and
imparting a great part of her troubles to an especial friend of hers, that was
of that Monastery, whither she had determined to go, after she had broken her
mind unto her; she, with great secrecy, effected her desire. Then did she
convey into the Monastery, all the chierest of her household stuff, her Jewels,
and her moneys, annexing thereunto, by public conueyances and instruments
drawn and signed for that use, the greatest part of her wealth. This being
done, she stood daily expecting, that this Gentleman her enemy, should come and
renew his suite, and treat with her, touching their marriage; which (according
to her expectation) within some few days after, he did: alleging in his
excuse, the great love that he bare unto her; for which cause, being desperate
of his hopes, he used those subtle means, that he might obtain the end of
his wished desires. But now, acknowledging his fault, and that he had been
the cause of this error, that was voyced abroad, craving pardon for the same,
he was willing to solder up this flawe, by tendering himself to be her
husband. She, who desired nothing more, then that this his wicked intention
should come to light, and that her honor thereby mig^t recover its former
splendour, made answer unto him; That seeing there was now no other means left
unto her for the saluing of her credit, nor no better course to be taken for
the recovery of her lost reputation; she did willingly accept of his offer. But
told him withal, that she had made a vow, the performance whereof would be
accomplished within these two months, or little more, and until that time were
expired, she could not give him that satisfaction which he desired. But, if
he would be pleased to have the patience to stay till then, he should
obtain his suite. But, if he were so eagerly bent upon the business, that
impatient of so long an intermission of time, he longed to come sooner to this
his desired end, she would not stop him in this his journey; but would have
the business to be carried with all possible secrecy, till the term of the
aforesaid two months should be fully accomplished; and then afterward she
did not care (leaving that to his discretion) how soon this their marriage were
manifested to the world.

The Gentleman accepted of the condition, holding himself (therein) the
happiest man in the world. And having provided all that was fitting and
necessary for a business of this nature, they were secretly contracted
together, by virtue whereof, they were espoused each to other. They continued
together on these terms some few days, he entertaining himself with that
assured hope which he had of his absolute inioying of her, and she being no
less contented then he, with the wished end that she had to work her
revenge.

One night, after they had supt, her husband went to bed, she enters into the
chamber, and setting her self down near unto the bedside, feigning to be
busying her fingers about some trifling work or other, (as women are never
without a thousand such idle toys) she waited by him, till he was fallen
asleep, and when she saw that the soundness of his first sleep had seized
forcibly upon him, she softly puts her hand into the sleeue of her gown, and
taking out a keen cutting knife, as sharp as any raysour, to that first
sleep of his, she added the last minute of his life; for in an instant she had
cut his throat, and left him dead in the bed, wallowing in his own blood.
Afterward, telling the people of the house, that her husband had had a very
bad night of it, and that none should go in for fear of waking him, till he
himself were willing to call to them, or that her self should return from
Mass; she shut the door after her, and hy'd her as fast as she could, to the
Monastery, where she presently received the habit and was made a Nun, after
that she had thus washed away her infainy, with his blood, who had bespotted
it, giving a notorious token of her honesty, and a terrible demonstration of
her cruelty.

I will likewise tell you (because it suteth well to this purpose) that which A
tale of Fuctillos the soul.
Fuctillos said; a fool that went up and down Alcala de Henares; one whom I
afterward very well knew. This fool, a dog had bit by the leg, which
hurt, though he was afterward well healed of it, yet his heart was not at
quiet: for he had still a spite to that dog. Whom he finding one day by
chance lying all along before his door, sleeping in the Sun, he went to a
certain place near unto the Church of Santa Maria, and taking up a great
stone, as much as he could lift with both his hands, he came softly stealing
toward the dog, without being perceived by him, and lifting it up as high as
ever he could each, let it fall just upon the head of him. The poor Curre,
having received this cruel blow, being in extreme torment, and near unto his
death, began to make a most pitiful howling, and fell (his last pangs being
upon him) a bounding in the air. Fuctillos the fool, seeing in what case he
was, said unto him; Do you hear brother, do you hear? Proverb.
Quien enemigos tiene, no duerma: He does ill to sleep that has an enemy. I
remember I told you once before; That ill, is always ill; But of all ils, I
hold revenge to be the worst: For a Revenge, of all ills the worst.
reuengefull heart knows not how to be merciful. And he that shall not show
mercy, let him not look for mercy, neither from God, nor man. For every man
shall be meted with the same measure that he meteth unto others. And in the
Proverb.
same balance that thou weighest thy neighbor, in the same shall thou be Por
la medido, que midiere, ha de ser medido. Trust not a reconciled enemy.
weighed thy self. This, thou can not deny, but I must have thee also to
confess, That they are in an error, who knowing men's evil inclination, will
yet be so simple, as to trust them; especially those, whom we have formerly
injured; for few or none of your reconciled friend, but prove rotten at the
heart; and how fair a show soever they make, not one of them of a thousand
that is sound and good. He does offer a pleasing sacrifice unto God, who for
Gods sake only, remitteth the wrongs that he has received. Few miracles have
we seen in this case; Only I was an eyewitness of one my self in Florence,
which happened without the walls of the City, in the Church of San Miniato, that
stands within the Castle. Which because it is but a short one, and worthy your
memory, I will briefly relate it unto you. A Gentleman of Florence, called
Captain Giouanni A story of a miracle, wrought in San in ato, and upon what
occasion.
Gualberto, the son of a noble Knight, that was a Titulado, going to Florence
with his Company, well armed, and on horseback, he met upon the way with a
mortal enemy of his, who had killed his brother; who seeing the danger wherein he
was, giving himself for a lost man, (for that he knew not how to escape him)
humbled himself at his feet, and crossing his breast with his arms, besought
his pardon, and that for Jesus Christ's sake, that was crucified, he would be
pleased to spare him his life. Giouanni Gualberto, had these words in that
veneration, that pricked with a charitable compunction, taking pity of him,
he willingly pardoned this his enemy. And taking him along with him, he made
him to go back again with him to Florence, and brought him to San Miniatos
Church, to offer thanks unto God. And kneeling down before a Crucifex, which
was a very lively piece, Giouanni Gualberto, kneeling also on his knees,
desired of God, That he would so forgive him his trespasses, as he did freely
forgive this his enemy that had trespassed against him, in killing his brother.
Which words were no sooner uttered by him, but Christ bowed his head unto him,
Giouanni Gualberto, humbly acknowledging this great grace and favor there
shown unto him in the presence of all those that were there, presently entered
into a religious Order, in which holy profession, he continued to his dying
day. This image of Christ stands to this day, with his head bowing it self
down, even in the self same manner as it stood then: and is there reverenced
as a great relicke, not only by the Florentines, but all other Catholics.

And now (laying Miracles aside) let me truly tell you, That when a man does
pardon his enemy, but takes not this for his ground, it leaves some embers Of
revenge.
behind, some quick coals covered over with a few ashes, which being stirred
never so little, breaks forth again, inflaming the soul, and soliciting it
to revenge. And howbeit outwardly this fire seem to be dead; yet God keep us
from this still water; for many a time and often, this fire is only sprinkled
over with a little Court-holy-water, which is as good as nothing; or slightly
covered over with the ashes of a false forgiveness. But if you shall but offer
to blow it with Occasions bellows, though never so little, it soon discouers
it self, the coals kindle by and by, and the flames of their hatred break
forth afresh, and to as deep a revenge, as if there had never been any
atonement between them. And this I am able to justify unto you, as having
made experience thereof my self: For I was ever so mightily pricked on to
revenge, as if (like a beast) the spurs thereof lay still gagging at my
sides. And well may I say beast, for he is no less, that is thus
beastly-minded. I had still before mine eyes, that dis-ioynting and rattling of
my bones, when like the winnowing of wheat in a fan, they tossed me up on high,
and no sooner down, but hoist me up again, every bone of me seeming to
gingle like so many bells. What with this, and that delight and pleasure that
they took in the recounting of the jest, and the evil intent wherewithal
they did it, besides their telling of me, that nothing did so much grieve them,
as that they had not used me worse, I could not choose but bear it in mind,
and say to my self; O ye misbegotten rascals, ye villains, ye enemies to
goodness, ye dogs: I came to your gates, being poor and needy, and what a
fine refreshing did ye give me, that I might the better go forward on my
journey! This their course usage, had stirred up such store of choler in me,
that I did now desire nothing more, then to cry quittance with all those that
had a hand in this conspiracy. And not so much to be revenged of them, as that
old dog-bolt, who was the principal plotter, and actor, both of it, and my
hurt.

The time passed on, and with it I gained more friends, wedging them closer and
closer daily unto me, I knowing them, and they me. The proposed marriage was
hotly pursued by them, they all very earn^stly desiring to have me naturalized
amongst them. I visited them, and they me: my friends resorted to my lodging,
and I to theirs. Now, as if I had been a towne-borne child, I had free access
in all parts of the City, I went and played amongst them at their Ordinaries,
and public houses of gaming; and they likewise would come and meet at my
lodging; sometimes losing, and sometimes getting, till one night amongst the
rest, the Cards fell out so luckily, and showed themselves so favorable unto
me, that I carried home with me at one clap above seven thousand Royals:
wherewith my Gentlemen were so nettled, that the Proverb.
next night after, they were very desirous to play greater game. I misliked not
the motion; for the time of my reckning was now near at hand, if not past; my
nine Yo est^ fuera de cuenta^ o, en las nueve ^es.
months, (as the common saying is) that I had gone with child, looking to be
brought a-bed of this birth, begotten of mine own brain, were now fully
expired; and every moment I expected a happy hour. For Captain Favelo had
already told me, that the Galleys were now ready, and that he was fully
persuaded, they would very sho^tly go for Spain. This made me bestirre my
stumpes, and to get all things ready to go aboard, conce^uing they were now
The Spanish word is Lev^ termino nautico, y vale la partid^, y arrancada que
hazen las gale as del puerto, a levando.
hoysing sail, fitting their oars, and ready to launch, being resolved,
whither-soeuer they went, to go along with them; yet I durst not make it
known, till going out of the haven, they were to put forth to Sea. I accepted
that night their challenge, and continued play with them, but to no other end
in the world, b^t to entertain the time, that I might afterward be the better
provided, to give them a wipe for a farewell, and to tickle them with the
latter arrow, or (as they use to do in Portugal) darles de pancada.

That night I lost, but no more then I was willing; for now I did employ all my
skill, to bring my purpose to pass. I did float up and down with a side
wind, and got to winde-ward of them, still bestowing barato (howsoever the
world went) upon my old friend the Captain; because I knew he was to return
it back again in the end, to my greater aduantag^. Some few days after, I
perceived my Captain grew somewhat sad; I ask him what might be the cause of
this his melancholy, and that he was not so merry, as he was wont to be: He
told me, it was only the sorrow, that he had conceived, that he and I, ere
long must part; for that some ten days hence the Galleys were without fail to
go away, by express order given for their departure.

His words were pearls; and this language of his, as a voice from heaven, as
if I had heard it once more say unto me; Open this C^binet, unlock that chest,
and pull out that other Cat by the ears, and carry away with thee, what thou
list. So that now, I thought this business was in a manner quite ended. And so
taking my Captain aside, when I saw that he and I were all alone, I said unto
him; Sir, you have showed your self such a friend unto me, and I do so highly
esteem of your love and friendship, that I know not how either to indear^, or
require it. There is offe^ed now unto me by occasion of this your voyage, an
absolute remedy to all my desires, and a fit opportunity to effect, what I
have long since intended; and without your helping hand, wherein it chiefly
consist^, I utterly despair of obtaining my purpose. And if I have for-borne
till now to give you an account thereof (which I ought to have done, in regard
of that true affection, and faithful friendship, that is between us) it was
because I was loath, out of my love unto you, to cause any disquietnesse in you,
which the acquainting you therewith, must needs bring with it. I would have you
therefore to understand, that I came not hither, either out of any desire to
see this City, nor for that kind entertainments sake, or any other courte^e,
that I have here received; but only for to dis-oblige my self, and to revenge
a certain wrong, which my father being an elderly man, received at the hands
of a young Spaniard, that resideth herein this City: who was forced thereupon
to forsake his Country, as being ashamed of the affront that was done him. And
not being able (in regard he was an old man) to right himself as he should, he
held it his best course, to lessen it by his long absence; the grief whereof
continued with him to his dying day. And he that had no respect unto those
re^erend hayres of my aged father, cannot justly complain of me, if being his
son, I lose all respect toward him in the working of my revenge. And because
it may so fall out, that after I have satisfied my desire, that his friends,
either by the gr^ favor they shall find in this place, or by the strength of
their purse, which is no less preualent, shall go about to do me any
injury, that you afford me your b^st ^nce, by which good furtherance only of
yours, without any peril to your own person, you may by your secrecy secure
me, and bring me fairly off. Which friendly office shall bind me so fast unto
you, that (during life) I shall acknowledge my self to be your slave. For a
son has no more honor, then what he inherits from his father: And if my
father had none to leave me, this traiterous enemy of his, having taken it
from him, I likewise live without it, and must recover it my self by these
hands of mine, and by mine own proper industry. Which if my kinsmen have not
sought to repair, it was, for that they were not either willing to hazard
themselves, or their fortunes; or for that after my fathers absence, all was
buried, and not so much as a word spoken thereof, whereby the remembrance of
the wrong might have been revived. Holding it the lesser inconvenience of the
two, to let it sleep thus quietly as it did, then by awaking it, to give
occasion to the people to publish this his shame the more.

Favelo all this while hearkened very attentively to every word that I said, and
would that I should have remitted this business unto him, to the end that he
might make himself a party in this revenge, as became a true friend; not
doubting but that he should give me good satisfaction therein, and perform it
as well as I my self could wish. And albeit he was very earnest with me, using
many violent entreaties, that he might take this burden wholly upon him, yet
notwithstanding could he not bring me to give way unto it; Telling him, that it
was neither just, nor fitting; That the injury being mine, the revenge should
be another. And that only for this end, I was come out of my native country
of Spain, with a resolution never to return thither again, till that I my
self had given my enemy his payment, and in that coin, that he should know
from whom, and wherefore he received it. Adding withal, that he should do me
a great deal of wrong, to think that I wanted either strength or courage to
put my self upon such a business as this is, considering how nearly it
concerns me, and how it touches my soul to the very quick. When he heard
me say so (seeing me thus peremptorily bent) he grew so quiet, that he would
press that point no farther; and though he made no reply thereunto, yet he
told me; If I have any thing of worth in me, if I can do any thing, if my
whole estate, life, and honor, may import your service, I lay them down at
your feet, they are wholly yours to be disposed of. And if, for fear of the
worst (because a man knows not what may happen in such a case) you will (for
to make surer work) that I and my soldiers shall assist you, or (at least)
give us leave to stand at a gaze, to see how the world goes with you, command
us so fa^re forth as you please; your will shall be ours; and we will not be
wanting to the uttermost of our power, to afford you our best aid, and to give
you all the content we can. And I will promise you upon mine honest word, and
therefore put that to my account, that if you once but set your foot within the
Galley, all Italy (would they never so feign) shall not be able to fetch you
thence, and would rather run all dangers my self, though never so great,
then that you should suffer the least.

Noble Captain (said I) I believe you both in this, and the rest, and am very
confident that you profess no more, then what your true heart unto me, does
sincerely suggest. But I think, there needs not so much water to drive this
mill. First, because my enemy rests secure, and suspects not the revenge that
I shall take of him: And secondly, for that my self and Sayavedra, shall be
able well enough to go through with that which I pretend. Which being
accomplished, my desire is, the business may be so carried, that when his
friends would right themselves upon me, and should happily chance to pursue me,
or make some diligent search after me, they might by your favor, miss of
their purp^se, and come too late to lay hold upon me. That which presses, and
imports me most, and which I require at your hands, is; That I may know the set
day, when the Galleys are to depart, and when you mean to weigh auchor, that I
may not lose either time, or occasion. He promised me, I should: And so we were
agreed in the end, that by little and little, and that very secretly, I should
by Sayavedra convey my trunkes, and my clothes aboard the Galley, to the end
that I might not defer the doing thereof to the very last push, and have
nothing else to busy my self about, but only my imbarking.

I cannot tell you, how much Favelo ioyed, nor express unto you the great
content he took, when he knew that he should have me along with him;
whereupon, he made very good provision of diverse delicacies to entertain me
withal, as if I had been Admiral of the Galleys. I called my servant unto
me, and told him, what had past betwixt me and Captain Favelo, and that it was
Proverb.
now time to A^remangar los bracos hasta los codos. When a man set^ himself
roundly about a piece of business.
tucke up our sleeves to our elbowes, because we had much to knead, and a great
deal of dowe to mould, to make tarts: and therefore we must roundly set our
selves to work. I had scarce ended my discourse with him, but that he was
ready for joy to leap out of his skin, he was all a gogg with content, the
tindar had now taken fire, the Dear was roused, and he was set so hot on
following the game, that there was no holding of him back. Then presently did
we sit in council concerning the manner of the revenge, and having well
advised with my self, I said thus unto him: The best, the profitablest, and
the least dangerous to our selves, will consist in matter of money. This is
that which I desire (said Sayavedra) this chase will be better then fifteen,
if we look well to our play. Besides, the wounds that are given us on the
body, are quickly cured; but those that light upon our purse, are long a
healing, and pain us a great while after, if not all the days of our life.

Go to then (said I) that we may fall the more handsomely to work, the first
Guzman goes about his, lot that he had laid for the c^ning of his kinsmen.
thing that is to be done, is to buy four trunkes, two of which thou shall put
in that part of the Galley, which Favelo shall appoint for them. And the other
two, thou shall fill with stones, and letting no man know what there is in
them, thou shall cunningly and vn-espyde, secretly convey to my lodging, and
put them in my chamber. These stones shall thou wrap up close in some old rags,
that where-soeuer they be, or whither-soeuer they shall be carried, and tumbled
to and fro, they may not rattle, nor make any noise; charging him to have a
great care, that he leave not any one empty place, but with some trash or other
cramme them as close as he can for his life. As also to see, that they be not
heavier, then he, in his discretion, shall think it fitting, making each of
them to weigh some six arrobas a piece, which will come to about a hundred and
a half good weight. I also acquainted him with every particular thing, that he
was to do, leaving him well informed with those instructions that I had given
him.

When these wheels were thus set a going, I got me to Don Beltran's house,
that good old man, my Uncle, and being in conversation with him, I began to
fall into talk, how fearful I was to go abroad a-nights, in regard of the
trunkes that I had in my lodging, two of them especially being worth the
looking to, for that they were full of plate, jewels of good value, and good
store of crowns, and (to say the truth) all the little wealth that I had. This
is your own fault, Cozen, said he unto me; and if any harm come unto you,
blame no body but your self. For my house might very well (had it pleased you
to accept of it) have excused both your lodging, and your fear. For albeit,
that where you are be the best in all this Town; yet have you not any Inn,
(though you shall travail all the world over) where you shall find that
goodness and that honesty, as to keep any thing there in safety. You
(Cozen) are but a young man, and know not the world as I do; I am an old Lad,
and have What a Traveler must do, when he comes to his Inn.
a great deal of experience of these things, and therefore let me advise you,
that you never trust your trunkes, but with a sure and strong lock; and when
you are iourneying upon the way, carry along with you in your pocket, or your
port-manteau, some good pad-locke, to fasten to the staple of the chamber
door, where you lodge. For either your Host, or his wife, or his children, or
his servants, have two or three keys to all the chambers, and you shall no
sooner turn your back, but in the twinkling of an eye, you shall lose all
that you left there within, and hardly recover it again. And therefore be
sure, to make all sure. For if you shall call mine Host, or any of his in
question, and seek to recover your own by Law, they will answer to your sure,
and after a great deal of cost and trouble, they will allege for themselves,
that either you carried it away your self, or that you brought no such thing
thither, or at least, that they knew of no such thing, because you had not,
when you came in, consigned it unto them, and committed it to their charge; so
that what was thine Proverb.
before, they will by this means make it their own. Into an Inn, En la
posada, ^o ay cosa posada.
bring nothing in; for it is no sooner in, then lost, unless you look
narrowly unto it. But being a young Gallant, as you are, though it please you
not, out of your Iouiall disposition, and the love to good company, to take
this for your house, which is most freely yours, yet could I wish you to fetch
away your trunkes from thence, and to bring them hither, and not to leave any
more plate, or silver there, then what shall serve for your necessary use. For
here in my Eseritorio, all shall be kept safe for you, so that you shall not
need to be afraid thereof, as long as it remains here in my house. I thank't
him as much, as if my trunks had been worth a Million, and so I think he did
conceive as much, or little less. As well in regard that he had seen some of
my vessels of silver, as likewise my chain, my gold, and other things, that I
had brought thither with me: As also, for that I seemed to be so desirous to
have them secured in some place of safety.

From this talk, we fell into discourse touching my marriage: He telling me, Of
marriage.
that I was now of fit years for a wife, and that the longer I staid without,
if I had a purpose to settle my self and my estate, I did but lose so much
time; for that your elder marriages, were but a leaving of a man's children to be
fatherless, and to become poor miserable Orphans. And therefore, if I were
no^ minded to be a Churchman, and to admit my self into some one religious
Order or other, it were better for me to marry out of hand, as well in respect
of mine own comfort, as the husbanding of my estate. For servants, th^ugh they
be never so faithful, do not for the most part want conduit-pipes, to convey
away thy wealth, scattering it abro^d ^ike water, upon women, gaming, feast^ng,
^xcesse in apparel, and diverse other things, who seeing themselves (...), and
put to their shifts, to maintain these their idle expenses, rob their Masters
of all that they have, and afterward fly the Country. He laid before me the
manifold inconveniences of a single life, and on the n^ke of that, he comes
upon me, making a large relation unto me of the good parts of this
Gentlewoman, whom he wished me unto. Who (as I understood) was his kinswoman by
the mother-side, and more nobly, then richly descended. But that defect was
supplied by her beauty. I should have had likewise with her, but Ho-there, (as
I afterward came to discover the mystery) a young daughter, which she had by
a mischance, begotten on her by a young Citizen of Genoa, who had promised her
marriage, but afterward (cozen ng the poor wen^h) married with another. He
told me besides, that she had a mother, that was a very wealthy woman, and one
that would be a great stay and help unto me, especially in the government of
my house, and the bringing up of those children, that God should bless me
withal. And that I should find her no less loving unto me, then if she were
mine own natural mother. I did set a good face on the matter, and seemed to
like wondrous well of all that which he had said unto me; Telling him, that
what-soeuer came from him, could not but be good; and that his counsel should
be a guide to my actions, without farther consultation from my self, as
conueniencie should ^ffer it self. But that I might not lose a certain
Benefice, that wa^ bestowed upon me, for the making sure of that, I must
necessarily resign it to a Cozen-Germane of mine, my mothers-sisters-sonne,
who lives in Sevill. I threw out this bait unto him, to nibble upon,
wherewith I entertained him for that time, he seeming well contented with my
fair answer.

Whilst we were earnestly talking of this business, in comes Sayavedra unto
me, and rounding me in the ear, made show as if he had delivered me a very
long message. I then (seeing my time, speaking out aloud) said unto him; And
what answer did you make him? And he answering me in the same key, replyde;
What answer would you have me make him Sir, but that it should be done. Marry,
beshrew your fingers for it, (said I) you did not well, in saying so. Do not
thou know, that I am not now in Rome, nor Sevill; do thou not see how rash
and inconsiderate thou have been, in promising that for me, which I cannot
perform? Go, carry him the great chain, give it him, and tell him, that this
is all that I have, and that I can do no more then I can do: Excuse me unto
him, and signify withal, that I have straind my self as far for him, as my
ability can reach. You say well Sir (replyde Sayavedra) but how a Gods name,
shall I be able to lugg along by my side such a huge chain as this, that
weighs seven hundred crowns in good gold? I think I had need hyre a porter to
help me. I presently made answer; No more words; Do as I bid you. Get you to
some Goldsmiths shop or other, and take the chain along with you, and make
choice of some Jewel there, or what you shall think fit will serve the turn,
and leave the chain there, or some other pawn, which shall be worth more then
what you have of him, and pay him interest for the lone of it: and this, I take
it, will be the better course. And if the pawn fall out too short, make it out
in Crowns unto him. So shall thou dis-ingage thy self of the folly, whereinto
thou have run: For I know no other remedy but this.

My Uncle, who listened to all that I had said; What pawnes (said he) will you
give him, or for what? To whom I made answer; Sir, he that has foolish
servants, must whether he will or no incur many inconveniences, falling still
into a hundred thousand errors, and as many mischiefs, and sleepe-breaking
cares. There is a Gentlewoman here of Castile, that is treating a marriage with
a Gentleman of her own Country, they are both well known unto me, and of my
especial acquaintance, and to whom I owe some beholdingness. They have
requested me, that I would furnish them with apparel and jewels for their
wedding; which is now so near at hand, that I cannot give them that
satisfaction, that I would. You see Sir, what tree they trust unto, and what
shifts I am driven to, to cumply with them. And the grief of it is, that this
block-head my man, had not the wit to excuse me, being he knew, how hardly I
could do them this kindness. And I am half jealous, that he out of his own
kind heart invited them thereunto, and without making me privy unto it, has
promised them my best furtherance. For it cannot sink into my head, that a
woman of judgment, should of her self request such a courtesy as this. And
if it be his own act, why should not he make it good without me? But Sirrah
(said I to my man) seeing it is as it is, and it cannot now be otherwise, go
wait upon her, and do as she shall direct you.

The old man, seeing me so much moved, and that I seemed to be much offended
with my man, for his indiscretion, said unto me; Cozen, let not this trouble
you, it is not a thing worth the speaking of, and therefore let it not disquiet
you: you are come into a place, where you cannot want friends for so small a
matter as this. I know that very well Sir, (said I) and that my noble kinsmen
here, will do me any friendly office that lies in their power, and that as
long as they have it, I cannot lack. But because amongst all our kindred, I
know not any of those that are married, that can furnish me with such things as
she requires for this solemnity, I dare not entreat them in a matter so
troublesome as this cannot choose but be unto them. And yet on the other side,
being so earnestly requested to supply this Gentle-womans occasions, the very
demanding of such a courtesy, is a kind of commanding of it, and obliges me
(as I am a Gentleman) to make the best shift I can for her, and to try all my
friends, rather then fail her now at her need. And yet I know well enough,
that Jewels are not every where to be met withal, which in public assemblies,
and such solemn acts, as these are, can show their faces without blushing.
Cozen (said he) no more, it is enough; break not your sleep for this, nor
take you any farther care; For I, for my part, and other your kinsmen, on
theirs, will try amongst us, what we can do, and doubt not but we shall fit
her in that reasonable and convenient manner, as shall serve her turn, and
salve your credit. Nay (Cozen) I will not have you sit out for a little, if I
can help it. And as for your Trunkes, you may send them hither when you
please. I kissed his hands for this his double kindness, returning him both for
the one and the other, such condign thanks, as either my wit could invent, or
my words express, acknowledging the great and extraordinary favor that herein
he should do me: and so taking my leave of him, as soon as ever I came home
to my lodging, I took order, that the Trunkes, (each of them having three
keys a piece, being well and surely locked, and strongly plated with iron,)
should out of hand be carried thither without any more ado.

My Uncle, when he saw Sayavadra enter his house, and the Porters at the heels
of him, so heavy laden, that they were scarce able to creep along with them,
having well considered the strength of the locks and bars about them, and the
distrust that I had of mine Host, together with the weight and heaft of them,
he did certainly assure himself, that they were full of treasure. Whereupon he
asked Sayavedra what was within those Trunkes, that they weighed so heavy?
Whereunto he answered; Sir, though my master has many things in them of great
value, yet that which is worth more then all the rest, is a parcel of stones,
which he has gathered together from all parts of Italy, the choicest he could
light upon, wheresoever he came, but for whom they are, or whither he will
carry them, I know not. The old man arched up his eie-brows, and wiped his
eyes, wondering to see such great store of wealth, and putting them with his
own hands in safe custody, under the keeping (as they say) of Proverb. (...)
de siete slaves: (...) a muy buen cobro.
seven keys, the Trunkes remained with him, and Sayavedra returned home. And
there (like Pigeons, when they court and woo one another, and have done
billing, and murmured our their amarous passions) we two loving companions fell
likewise a crookling, and gathering straw, for to build our nest. We spent all
that night in devising new plots, and in plotting new devices, how we might
fetch off another kinsman of mine, that was young, rich, and of great credit
amongst them, resolving to go home to his house, and there to pitch another
net for him, to the end that whilst others should complain of the harm I had
done them, he should not stand by and laugh, whilst others wept, and applaud
his wit, that he escaped my fingers. And therefore I was minded to inuest him
likewise with this new order of a second St. Iago. And so I did: For the Sun
was scarce up, and got out of his bed, when Sayavedra taking Another plot of
Guzmans.
with him the two chains, in those two boxes that were so like one another,
gilded equally on every side, neatly closed with your Dutch cla^pes, with alike
vises, or springs, that would shut of them selves, bearing them closely under
his cloak, home we came unto him; where we found him newly up, and making
himself ready. But not thinking that a fit time, I was willing to have
deferred my seeing of him, ti^l after dinner. But when it was told him that I
was there, he took it ill, and seemed some what ashamed withal, accusing me
of strangeness, that I would be so dainty with him, as to make scruple of
coming up unto him, as soon as I came within the house. I told him I did not
do it out of any niceness, but that I was loath to disquiet him, for that I
understood he was taking his rest. With these, and the like complements, we
past the time a while, questioning each other of our healths, and discoursing
of some things (whilst he was dressing and fitting his clothes) about the
City, at last he brought me down into a closet, or pretty little
counting house, that he had beneath stayres, and sitting down, after a short
pausing, he demanded of me, what wind had blown me thither so early? Sir
(said I) none, save only that I may give a good morrow to the day, to the end,
that it may thrive the better with me: For the night has not been my friend.

The business Sir, that I come unto you about, is to entreat you, that if you
have any servant of yours in the house, that is an honest discreet fellow,
that you would be pleased to call him hither. Which I had no sooner said, but
he presently rings me a bell, the sound whereof was no sooner heard, but two
or three came hastily running in. And having beckned to one amongst the rest,
to come unto him; he said unto him; here is my servant Steffanello, who shall
do what-soeuer you shall be pleased to command him. That then (quoth I) which
I shall entreat at his hands, is, That he will take the pains, to go along
with my servant Sayavedra to some Goldsmiths, to take the aloy, weight, and
value of a chain that I have here. Sayavedra thereupon presently delivered me
the little box, wherein was that which I had caused to be made of pure gold;
and taking it out, I snew'd it unto him; my kinsman was much pleased with the
sight thereof, and was never weary with locking upon it, so handsome a one it
was, so beautiful, so massy, and of that extraordinary curious workmanship.
Insomuch, that it seemed unto him, that he had never seen the like; for it was
all of dainty delicate fine linkes, smoothly polished, without any stones, or
inammelling at all. When he had taken his fill in viewing of it, I returned it
back again to my servant, and they two went together to dispatch this
business, whilst we in the mean while continued talking sometimes of one
thing, sometimes another, the better to pass the time. A little while after,
they both came back again, bringing with them a little scrole of paper, with
the Goldsmiths hand to it, wherein it was there set down, That the chain of
gold, was in finenesse two and twenty Carats, and that it was (according to its
weight) worth six hundred and three and fifty Spanish Crowns, and somewhat
more. Then I called to Sayavedra, and willed him to give it me, who delivered
me the counterfaite one, first opening the box wherein it lay, where once
more taking it forth, we fell afresh to looking upon it. And putting it anon
after into its box, which I still kept open, I said unto him; Sir, that which
I am farther to entreat at your hand, is that which follows; Some few nights
since, I have been bitten at play by some Gentlemen of this City, but they
themselves worse; for that I have gotten of them a matter of five thousand
Royals: they have challenged me to play greater game, and I am very willing to
follow my good fortune, while it lasts, and to make trial of my good luck;
and it may be, that I may venture little, and get much. But because all kind of
gaming does wholly in a manner consist in the handsome carriage of the
business, and that we that are gamesters, may as well lose as win, I would
not find my self so limited and stinted in play, that if I should chance to
lose, and run out of my moneys, that I should not be able to come again upon
them with fresh supplies, to recover what I lost, and (if luck serve) to get
upon them. And albeit (I thank God) I lack no money, having at home in my
Uncles house some five thousand Crowns, yet I may not meddle with them, for as
soon as certain Letters shall come hither to my hands, which I daily expect
from Sevill, I cannot, no not for an hour, prolong either their payment, or
mine own departure to Rome, for the settling of a good Benefice either upon my
self, or a Cozen-germane of mine, as it shall stand best with my Uncles
liking, submitting my self to his direction, who may dispose of me as he in
his discretion shall think fit; so that it is neither just nor convenient,
that I should once break, or offer but to touch that sum, lest I might then
want it, when I had most occasion to use it; which I may so much the rather
forbear to do, because (if need be) I can make use of my Jewels, and my
Plate, which like a dead commodity lie by me, and are good for nothing, but to
lay to pawn at a dead lift; and yet for all this, unless some urgent
occasion, or extreme want, should force me thereunto, I should be very loath
to part with them, much less to put them away to loss, as many too often do.
You have here this chain, you have seen and viewed it, and you know what it
is worth, all that I shall now desire of you, is that with all secrecy (for I
would not willingly incur the censure of an unthrift, nor if men should talk
of it, be forced to give them an account of such trifling toys as these) you
would be pleased to furnish me with six hundred Crowns upon this Chain,
paying interest for that short term that I shall use them; assuring your
self, that whether I win or lose, you shall not fail to be paid at your due
time. Wherein, if I should chance to fail you, you may pay your self out of
the chain, for which end I shall leave it with you, that howsoever the world
go, you may be a gainer, though I a loser. I likewise told him, how upon the
like occasion I had once pawned a certain piece of new Plate, richly gilt, but
he that had it of me, had used it in that ill manner, that when he returned it
unto me, it was not fit to be served in at any honest man's board, so that I
was forced to sell it, having not one penny allowed me for the fashion. And
therefore for the avoiding of such another loss, I entreated him to do me the
favor, that the chain might remain still in his own hands, without being
posted over from one to another.

He made show that he did not take it half well at my hands, that for so
small a courtesy as this, I should offer him a pawn. But I clapping down the
cover of the box, shut it suddenly too, and so consigned it over unto him,
forcing it into his hand; vowing and protesting, that I would by no means
receive this kindness from him, if he refused to accept of the chain. For,
besides that I did not use to wear it often, because it was too massy and heavy
for me, he should do me a courtesy to keep it for me; for as long as it was
with him, I was sure it would be both safe and well used. Adding further
withal, That being we are all mortal, and that many things might occur unto
me, being a stranger, it was fit and convenient, that he should therein
satisfy my desire. Upon these words, and the earnest instance that I made with
him, he accepted of it in the end, and promised me, that the first thing that
he would do, should (as soon as he put his foot out of doors) be his
procuring of these moneys for me: wherein he was as good as his word. For the
very same day, whilst I was sitting at dinner, in comes Steffanello with the
six hundred Crowns. I thankt him for his pains, and entreated him to
recommend my service to his master; he staid not with me scarce a Paternoster
while, and was but even new gone, but presently in comes his master, and makes
directly toward my lodging. Which sudden approach of his did so trouble me,
that I had not one drop of blood in all my whole body, nor could the best
Barber of them all, have found any such thing in my veins. Here I lost my
stirrops, and knew not what to do. For having but then, even newly then
received the Crowns, and the master following so close at the servants heels,
I did undoubtedly believe, that they had opened the box, and had found out the
false chain, and that he had made this haste, to hinder his man from
delivering the money unto me. But this doubt was soon resolved, and I was
quickly rid of this fear, for he came toward me with a cheerful countenance,
making many offers of his love and service unto me, and that if I had occasion
to use him in any thing else, I would be pleased to command him; for whatsoever
he had, it was wholly at my devotion: And that those moneys he had borrowed
of a friend of his upon interest, but that it would come to a matter of nothing
in the reckning. Then said I to my self, (considering more the future, then
the time present) I believe this nothing will be something to you in the end;
and how light you make of it, will light heauilier upon you; then you are
aware. But burying my thoughts within my own bosom, I told him, that was not
much material, for the pawn was worth more then the use of the money could
come to.

But he had not long staid a talking with me, when lo, vvhilest he was
there with me, my Gentlemen gamesters enter the room, and calling to Sayavedra
for cards, there was a well-ordered battle begun between us. My kinsman
perceiving that we meant to fight it out, and to set close to it, took his
leave, and went his way. I was so safely intrencht in my moneys, having
Sayavedra then in my favor (for being upon our departure, it was no time now
to stand with our hands under our girdle, nor to gather flowers, but to reap
the fruits of our labors, and to hoyse sail, and away) I sallyed safely out
upon them, beating them so shamefully, that I put them to flight, leaving
behind as a prey unto me above fifteen thousand Royals in good gold. I gave
barato to those that were present, and to the Captain who came thither anon
after this field was fought, I closely clapped fifty Crowns in his fiste, which
was all one, as if with them I had bought me a slave, and purchased me such a
servant as should stick to me upon all occasions.

This quarrel being ended, and the Gamesters gone, my Captain took me aside,
and we two being all alone, he advised me, that on Sunday night following,
being some four days hence, the Galleys were to depart. Whereupon, seeing my
self thus straightened by time, I began to strike up my drum, to muster ^y
forces together, and sending abroad my tickets, this way, and that way, first
to one party, and then to another, aduertising my friends, that the wedding was
to be solemnized the Monday following, and that they would be pleased to make
me beholding unto them for their promised favor. The Ants do not come so
laden with corn in August, which they gather abroad in the fields, and bring
home into their granaries, as they came tumbling into my lodging with jewels,
every one striving, who should send me the most, and the best. Which in a word,
were so many, and so rich, that I was even almost ashamed to receive them. But
I set a good face on the matter, because me thought they were not dear. My
Uncle sent me in a C^llar to grace the Brides shoulders, and a girdle suitable
unto it, and a feather to adorn her head-dressing, which being all of gold,
and set thick with pearls, and precious stones, the three pieces were valued
at more then three thousand Crowns. The rest did furnish me with rich
brooches, buttons, bodkins, bracelets, pendents, ^are-rings, tablets,
carcanets, vayles, coyfes, and rings, all very curious, rich, and of great
value. All which things, as fast as they came in, the Captain unwitting
thereof, I clapped up closely within my trunks, which stood in a by-corner out of
sight. The next three days that were left me, I spent in visiting my kindred,
thanking them for the undeserved grace and favor they had done me.

When Sunday was come, knowing that the Galleys were to weigh anchor a Monday
morning betimes, and to put forth to Sea, I said to mine Host: Mine Host, I
shall be abroad this night at play, at a friends house, where some Gentlemen
have appointed to meet, and if peradventure it shall be somewhat late before we
give over play, I think I shall not only sup, but lie there too, if we chance
to break off before it be day. And therefore (good mine Host) have a care to
the chamber, till we return, though it may be, I shall send Sayavedra home
unto you. And so having the night to friend, I went out of my Inn, leaving
mine Host two trunks, to pay for my diet, and my lodging, during the time I
stayed in Genoa. True it is, that by reason of the great haste we had to be
gone, I left them both full, but of fine little pibbles that I had caused to be
fetched from the Seaside; being in show, not much unlike to your craggy
Crystal of the mountain, which did weigh some twenty pound weight a piece.

All things being done and dispatched as I would have it, I went aboard the
Galley, and cabbin'd with my friend Captain Favelo. I want words to express
unto you, the great entertainment, the Captain (that night I came out of
Genoa) made me, the costly supper, that he had provided for me, and what a good
bed I lay in. He demanded of me, how I had sped in my business. I told him, to
mine own good contentment and satisfaction; and that hereafter, I should give
him a more particular account thereof. With this answer he rested satisfied,
and questioned me no farther about it. We sup, we sleep, but I for my part not
very quietly, for though I came clear off, and had not any the least rub, but
things ran as fairly and smoothly, as in such a case I could have wished it,
yet I had a little thing within, that checked me, and told me in mine ear, that
I had not done well, which did much trouble me for the time. I past over that
night, as well as I could; and when the Sun was up, having not Guzman leaves
Genoa, and carries away with him his kinsmens goods.
all this while perceived the Galley so much as to wagg, nor hearing any
beating of the oars, nor any the least noise in the world, as if I had been
in the greatest solitude that the mind of man could imagine; being now fully
awakened, and going about to put on my clothes; my Captain comes into my
Cabin, and tells me, that we had doubled the Cape of Noli. So far we had as
fair a wind, and as fine weather, as heart could wish, but it did not still
continue thus favorable unto us, but much contrary, and full in the teeth of
us, as you shall hear hereafter. For Fortune is not always prosperous; but
with the Moon, has her Crescents, and her Waynings, and by how much the more
pleasing are her smiles, by so much the more sour are her frowns, when she
changes the copy of her countenance. Only I had a desire, whilst we Guzmans
conceit of his kinsmen in Genoa.
were making our voyage, to know what mine Host thought on, when he saw I
returned not the first night to my lodging. And what the second, when the rest
could hear no news of me, thinking with my self, what lamentation they would
make for me. How many cold shaking fits of an Ague they would have, for want of
a warm blanket; how many couerlets would they cast upon them, yet give none to
the Hospital; what diligent search they would make after me; what several
conjectures, what should become of me; disputing with themselves, whether some
body had not murdered me, to make themselves masters of my wealth; or whether
I had been wounded in some quarrel. But I imagined with my self, that they
conceived, (and they were in the right) that I was gone along with the Galleys.
And then being clean out of hope of any humane remedy, I began to think with
my self, how shrewdly the fleas would trouble them for many a fair night
after.

Now did I begin to consider, what haste they made to unrip my trunkes, that
they might by them save themselves harmless, every one first alleging the
antelation of time, and prioritie of his debt, and so by the ordinary course
of Law in those parts, pretend as he was the first Creditor, that he might be
first paid. Me thought I did likewise see, how mine Host did hugg himself,
how he did laugh and chucke for joy, to think how rich I had left him, by
leaving him these two trunkes, which being valued according to their weight,
might very well have contented him, for a far longer and larger allowance,
then I could possible spend in so short a time. But the worth did not answer
the weight: For there was nothing in them, but stones, which if he were minded
to hang himself, might serve for his sepulcher. And what say you to my old
Uncle, do not you think that he was well provided for, with those precious
stones, which Sayavedra acquainted him withal? But that other kinsman of mine,
who went away with the chain, who doubts it, but that he did laugh in his
sleeue at the rest of his fellows, when he saw he had such a sure pawn in his
hands, all pure linkes of gold, that he might very well pay both the
Principal, and the Interest. But when he found it was not Gold, but Alchymie,
light and false Latten, being no better (taking away its guilding, and fashion)
then base brass, course copper, or such metal, as you make your
candlesticks, what man can imagine, what strange mouths and faces he made? How
he hanged down his head, fixing his eyes on the ground, then lifting it up
again, turn up the white of his eyes toward heaven, not out of any desire
that he had to bless him, that had made him to shine and glitter thus
gloriously, but to curse my mothers womb, for bringing forth such a Picaro,
such a base rascal, and arrant thief as I was. In this pickle I left them,
and so we parted. A man might then have said that of them, which one blind man
said to another in Toledo, who being to part company, and to go each to his
own house, when they took their leaves, said each to other; Good night
(Gossip) till we see one another again.

CHAP. X.
Guzman de Alfarache sailing toward Spain, Sayavedra by reason of a great
storm, grows Sea-sicke. He falls into a Calenture, or burning fever. He waxes
lightheaded, and loses his wits. He cries out, that he is Guzman de
Alfarache, and growing mad, throws himself into the Sea, where he is drowned.

WE had such fair weather when we set forth of Genoa, that the Tuesday
following, by Sunne-rising, we had (as I told you before) doubled the Cape of
Noli. And till we came to the The word poma, is used for a woman's paps or dug^,
and by way of similitude may be taken for some Premontorie ietting out into the
Sea, resembling the form and fashion of a woman's breasts. If I miss of my
aim, I leave it to those that have been in those parts to determine the true
signification thereof.
Pomas de Marsella, we had as favorable and prosperous a wind, as we could
wish. There did we expect that the wind should still blow fair, having all
this while showed it self so friendly and loving unto us. For we had a fresh
gale from the East, which help us so well, that the next day toward the
Evening, we discovered, to our general joy, the coast of Spain. But fortune,
having not the strength to stand firm, nor being always one and the same; but
weak and various, began to manifest unto us the small confidence that we ought
to have of her; whereof, too soon to our great hurt, we had sufficient trial.
And now, hearing the Mariners call one to another in those terms and language,
which is usual with them in such cases, Heaven was covered all over toward
the North-west, with dark and thick clouds, which guttered down upon us huge
and great drops of rain. Our good wind had bid us farewell, and our hearts
began to be so sad, and so heavy, as if all that same darksome blackness had
quite ouer-cast them, such a cloud of sorrow, had like a curtain, ouer-spred
those late lightsome faculties of our souls. Which being foreseen by the
Pilots, and those other watry-Counsellors at Sea, they held a Council in the
poope, debating to and fro, what course was fittest to be taken, to prevent
such fearful threatenings. Every one spoke his opinion, delivering what he in
his judgment deemed best to be done. But seeing the wind begin to lay lustily
about him, bearing his brazen wings against our wooden sides, and his forces
increasing more and more, without any other resolution, before their
consultation could come to a conclusion, they were instantly, without any more
ado, enforced to let fall their maine sail, which when they had ruffled, and
laid as low as the deck would give them leave, they took out another lesser
one, which they call Ma^buto. (as they do the other, la Borda) which is a
kind of triangulary sail, cut out into three corners, after the manner of a
woman's kerchiefe; (This they call la Latina) and this they set up about the
middle of the maste, which stood at the end of the last bank of oars, fitting
themselves afterward with those other things, that were needful on such an
occasion. They fastened their oars to the upper deck: The passengers, and their
soldiers, they commanded (sore against their wills) to keep themselves under
hatches: They fell a caulking of the Galley, from the prowe to the poope, nor
were they wanting in any one of those diligences, that were necessary for the
saving of our life's.

Whilst they were thus busy, the night grew on, and a pitchy darkness had
(like a pauillion) pitched it self round about us, all was clouds, Egyptian
clouds, black and dark as Hell; so that having lost the comfort of the light,
we lost likewise with it all hope of safety; especially when we saw that the
storm was no whit allayd, but rather more and more increased upon us.
Wherefore for the better avoiding of so many dangers, whereinto by reason of
this tempest, they were like to run, they gave present order to hang out the
lantern, that they might the better see what they did. The Sea, now began to
swell, and lifted one while its waves as high as heaven, and by and by aga ne,
abasing that their pride, they tumbled down so low, that they opened the
bosom of the Sea so wide, that you might see the sand that lay in the bottom.
They were feign to appoint another to assist at the helm, that was an expert
Pilot indeed, and knew how to guide the Rudder to a hair. The Masters-mate
they caused to be tide fast in a chair to the post near unto the poope, as
being resolved either to dye in that place without removing from thence, or to
keep the Galley alive, and set her in safety.

Whilst this skillful Mariner was laboring to put this his deliberation in
execution, we often demanded of him, if we were in any great danger; and much
more often then he was willing to hear. See how blind-sighted we were, that
we would rather give credit to that which had proceeded from his mouth, then
that which we saw with our own eyes, which represented nothing but death unto
us. But his lying tongue, seemed to afford us like comfort, as does that of the
Physician to the sorrowful and afflicted father, who questions him touching
the health, and life of his son, and whether he be likely to dye of this
disease, or whether he be dead already: Who tells him, That (God be thanked) he
is on the mending hand. In like manner, the Masters-mate, making answer unto
us, for to cheer us up, and to put us in heart, would bawle out aloud unto us,
Que todo eranada. Tush, all this was nothing. And therefore be of good comfort
(my Hearts.) And indeed, in telling us so, he told us but the truth. For all
this was nothing, to that which came after. For the wind had torn our sails
to fitters, there was not one whole piece, all was rents, and rags, and it grew
higher and higher still, so that we were forced to clap on our Treo, which is a
kind of round sail, which they make use of in storms. Fortunes hand did not
yet grow weary with whipping us; but as if she had not punished us sufficiently
already, it was our hap to have an ill guided Galley to fall foul upon us,
which striking us with her prowe on the poope, made her ducke her head into the
Sea, and had well-nigh ouer-turn'd her; and to make this encounter the more
unlucky, the blow, and the loss of our Rudder (whereon did depend the hope of
our safety) happened both at one and the same instant. When efore seeing our
selves now deprived both of our hope, and helm, wanting a Rudder wherewith to
steare, yielding our selves to the mercy of the Seas, as men despayring of any
remedy to repair this loss, yet that they might not desist to use all the
means they could, which they thought might make best for our good, (making a
virtue of necessity) they made as good shift as they could, by clapping a
couple of oars in the place, guiding therewith the Galley (besides the danger)
with a great deal of toil, and labor.

And how shall I here be able to express but the half, nay the least part of
that unto you, which these eyes saw, and these ears heard? I do not know the
tongue that can speak it. But say I should light on such a tongue; yet, I am
sure, I shall hardly meet with those men that will believe it. O, how many
vows did they then make I How many Inuocations to Saints, every one calling on
that, which was the greatest and famousest in his own Country? What various
devotions, what a general recourse to their prayers? And some were so childish
and so foolish, that you should hear no other word come from them, but, O my
mother, o sweet mother! How many abuses, and how many absurdities, were
committed amongst them! Confessing themselves one to another, as if they could
be their ghostly fathers, and had power to absolve them. Others in a loud voice
made confession of those sins unto God, wherein they had offended him; and as
if they thought that God were deaf and thick of hearing, they would stretch
out their throats as high as heaven, persuading themselves perhaps, by the
force of this their breath, to send their souls packing in that very instant
up unto heaven.

In this desperate, and woeful manner, did our poor weather-beaten Galley
endure this misery, together with those that were in her, till the next day
following, when as with the brightness of the Sun, and the clearing of the
sky, we began to recover breath, so that now all was joy, and our sorrow was
turned into mirth, cheering, and hartning up one another. Certainly, it cannot
be denied, That of all those dangers, that attend upon death, that is always
most feared, which is still nearest unto us. For from those other, we think
we may well escape. But I did not so much fear this storm, nor so sensibly
apprehend the danger thereof, as I stood in fear by a contrary wind, and the
new rigging up of our Galley, to be carried back again to Genoa. It was not
the Sea, but the shame, that wrought upon me. This was it, that made me to say
to my self, when I saw how the winds blew, and the Seas raged, that all the
rest did fare the worse for my sake, and that I was that Jonas, for whom this
tempest was raised, that it might raise me up to repentance.

Sayavedra became so Sea-sicke, that he fell into a shrewd burning fever, and
Sayavedra falls sick of a fever, and runs mad.
shortly after grew besides himself. It would have grieved a man's heart, and
moved much compassion, to see the things that he did, and the fooleries which
he uttered; and sometimes, when the storm was greatest, and the danger most,
while others were a confessing their sins, he would cry out in a loud voice;
I am Guzman de Alfaraches ghost, I am that ghost of his, which goes thus
wandering up and down the world; whereat he made me often both laugh, and
fear. But though he should have vented some thing unhappily, they all saw that
he was mad, and so regarded not what he said. Yet for all this, he would not
leave his talking, but by flashes would fall a ripping up of my life, and bolte
out by fits, all that which I had formerly recounted unto him concerning the
courses I had taken, composing a thousand extrauagancies. And if by chance he
heard any man talk of promising to perform a pilgrimage to Monserrate,
thither would he lead me; telling, at what stations, and weddings he had been
there with me. He did dress me (like a French Cook) a thousand several
ways. But that which was most to be laughed at, (though it much pitied me to
see him in that state) and wherein I took most pleasure, was; That he spoke
all these things of himself, as if he had been true Guzman indeed.

In brief, we being all shrewdly beaten, and grown extreme weary with our
late storm, the night following we went in a good hour to take our rest, to
see if we could recover that old debt of our former lost sleep. We were all of
us so weary, and so drowsy, and our Galley so batterd, and torn about the
poope, that Sayavedra rising up in his frantic fit, lept at that open place
where our rudder was split from us, into the Sea, on whom we could never after
Sayavedra drownes himself.
set eye; though the Mariner that kept watch, as soon as he heard the flownce
of the fall, presently cryde out, Hombre a la mar; There is some body fallen
into the water. Whereupon we began presently to conjecture, that it must needs
be he; and upon inquiry finding him wanting, we sought to recover him, but it
would not be. And so poor Sayavedra was buried in the Sea; all of them much
lamenting his misfortune, and seeking all that they could, to comfort me. I
made show, as if I had been exceeding sorry for him, but God he knows how
true it was. The next day I got me up betimes in the morning, which I wholly
spent in receiving the condolings, which they made unto me, which were done in
that doleful fashion, as if he had been a brother, a kinsman, or the nearest
and dearest friend that I had in the world, bewayling the great loss that I
had sustained in him; or as if, when he threw himself into the Sea, he had
carried away my trunkes likewise with him. God bless me from that mischance
(said I to my self) as for any other misfortune, I doubt not but I shall very
easily ouer-passe it. They knew not how (more then this) to comfort me, nor
what they should ente taine me withal to divert my grief; for they did verily
believe, that I was wonderful sorry for him, because I had put on a seeming
heaviness. And the more they sought to bring me out of it, the more I feigned
to be in it; at last they called to one that had been condemned to the
Galleys, who was very studious, and a great lover of curiosities, that he
should come where I was, and bring a certain book along with him, which he
had written with his own hand, which the Captain taking from him, and turning
over the leafes in a careless kind of fashion, he lighted by chance upon a
notable story which happened in Sevill; and returning back the book to the
owner, he willed him to read it unto me. He thereupon required their
attention; which being granted unto him, he began to read as follows;
recommending it first unto them, as well for its strangeness, as its truth.

There was in Sevill (the famousest City in all Spain, and the Metropolis of
A true and strange story of a merchant in Sevill.
Andaluzia) a Merchant that was a stranger, well borne, rich, and honest, whose
name was Micer Iacobo. He had two sons, and one daughter by a noble Gentlewoman
of that City. They being carefully trained up in virtue, in good manners, and
in all kind of learning appertayning to the liberal Arts: And she bred up to
her needle, wherein for curious workmanship, she did excel, (all the
Gentlewomen in those parts, being mere bunglers unto her.) And there was some
reason, why she should be so exquisite, and singular the ein, for that from
her childhood, she had been bred up in a Monastery of Nuns, by reason that
her mother did in childbed, when she was borne.

Now in regard that the goods of fortune, are mutable and uncertain, and more
in Merchants then other men, who carry their wealth in other men's purses, and
commit their estates to the disposition of the wind and the weather, there
being not half a foot difference betwixt their making and their marring, their
enriching or undoing. It so fell out, that his two sons returning home from
the Indies, and bringing along with them good store of gold and silver, when
they were now come within sight of the bar of San Lucar, and thinking them
selves as safe, as if they had been (as they say) within the doors of th^i
own house, there arises a huge storm on the sudden, and the Sea enraged with
the boisterous blustrings of the winds, begins to swell, and lo^ke big upon
them with its billows; insomuch, that this poor unfortunate ship, set upon by
two such fierce and cruel enemies, was miserably tossed to and fro, and so
violently carried out of its course, that at last unable any longer to resist
the rage of this terrible tempest, she desperately ran her self upon a
rock, the terriblenesse of which blow, did not only open her womb, and cleave
it clean in the midst, but did split all the ribs of her in a thousand pieces;
so that both men and goods were all cast away, and utterly lost, and never
after either seen, or heard of.

When the heavy news of so great a loss (whose nimblenesse lies only in its
wing) came flying to the fathers care, such a deep melancholy suddenly seized
on all his vital parts, that with the grief thereof, within a few days
after, he also dyed. His daughter that remained in the Covent, having lost all
her wealth, her father, her mother, and both her brothers, remaining thus
abandoned, and left to shift for her self, was wonderfully sensible of this
her woeful estate (which might likewise have much troubled any man whatsoever,
though never so wise) when she saw, that in so short a time, which might in a
manner run in the reckoning (as it were) of one day, she had lost so many
real comforts, and with them, that hope of remedy to allay her miseries, (for
she much desired to become a Nun) she wept so bitterly, and took on so
pitifully, that it would have grieved any man's heart, to see the sorrowful
lamentation that she made. Here ceased her designs, and here began her
sorrows; Here ceased her plenty, and here began her want; Here ceased her
Regalo, is a word of a large extent, and signifies any thing that may give a
woman content, be it in meat, drink, clothes, sports, or whatsoever else that
may delight her.
regalos, and here began her troubles. Which went daily so increasing upon her,
that she knew not in the world what to do, nor how to be able to maintain
herself in the Nunnerie. And albeit all the Nuns there wished her exceeding
well, and bare her great love and affection for the nobleness of her condition
and quality, her affability, civility, goodness of nature, sweetness of
behavior, and other commendable parts, condoling very much this her present
necessity, and poverty; and were very desirous that she should continue
still amongst them, yet could they not possibly bring it to pass. For their
wills being subordinate to that of their Superior, it being in their Prelates,
and not their own choice, neither could they effect what they desired, nor
she continue any longer amongst them. For very shortly after it was notified
unto her, that she should either leave the house, or if she had a mind to
stay, forthwith to assign her dowry. But she not being able (for want of
means) to cumply with the second condition, she was forced to entertain the
former. This poor distressed maid was so cunning at her needle, and had such a
curious hand in all kind of works, white or black, in silk or gold, and in
ordering her colors, to give true life and perfection to whatsoever she took
in hand, that the fame thereof was spread over all the City.

To this sum, I must add the virtues of her soul, and the beauty of her
face, both which were in that height of excellency, (the parts of her body,
being answerable to those of her mind) that he that had but once seen her,
would verily have thought, nay almost sworn, that two most cunning and
exquisite Artizans, had in emulation one to the other, spent all their spirits,
and imployde the utmost of their skill, in framing such a singular creature as
she was, being such a perfect piece of beauty, and goodness, that she might
draw off the beholders eyes from all other objects (though not unworthy the
looking on) and attract them to her self. Yet all this put together, being in
that (if the word do not exceed) excess, was nothing, being compared with her
retiredness of life, her mortification of the flesh, her fasts, prayers, and
penance. She, not unwitting, that she was now thrust out into the wide world,
that she had no more any Nunnerie to shelter, but lay open to the venues of
Fortune, if she did not the better stand upon her guard, fearing the worlds
murmuring, and those occasions, which might bring some scandal upon her
reputation, as one that was wonderful tender and jealous of her honor, she
had got her a lodging, where she had the company of diverse other virtuous and
religious young maidens; and there, without any suspicion, or least shadow of
any ill intention, having no other help or means to live, save the sweat of
her brows, and the labor of her fingers ends, she lived there very frugally,
keeping her-selfe within her bounds, and giving a good example of her virtue to
all the young damsels of her time.

The Archbishop of that City, had a great desire to have some curiosities made
for him, as certain wrought Chalice-cloathes, The Spanish word, is,
Corporales; which though they signify those things that belong to the body:
yet are they more strictly taken for those linen clothes which are laid upon
the Altar, whereupon in their Masses, they place the body of our Savior Jesus
Christ under the forms of bread and wine; and represent unto us, that Sindone
or fine linen sheet, wherein they wrapped the sacred body of our blessed
Savior when they ^d him in his sepulcher. Vide Stephanum Durandum de ritibus
Ecclesiae, lib. 1. c. 22.
neat towels, handsome napkins, dainty handkerchers, and the like, to wrap the
Host in, bordered about with some historical work, as should best fit with
the use whereunto ^hey served, and to have them done as near to the life as
Art could attain unto. After much inquiry made, there being none to be found,
that could do these things half so well as Dorotea (for so was this
Gentlewoman called) upon the good report they had heard of her, they sought
her out, and recommended this work unto her care, promising she should be
well paid for her pains. She considered with her-selfe, that for such a
curious piece of work as this was to be, she must make choice of the best,
the purest, the brightest, and the finest gold thread that she could get for
money, whatsoever it cost. And because they that know best how to bestow it,
know best how to buy it, she her-selfe, taking some of her neighbors and
friends along with her, went to seek out this ware amongst the Gold-beaters
shops, who in Sevill both make and sell these kind of commodities. It was
their hap to come to a young man's shop, that was a handsome fellow, and well
behau'd, who had but newly set up for himself, and to get him the better
custom, strove to have his shop well furnished, and indeed, had better and more
choice then the rest of his neighbors, that traded in that kind. Of this youg
man, she was willing to buy all the gold, that she had occasion to use about
this work (as well because she found it was fit for her turn, as likewise to
excuse her-selfe a labor of going too often out of doors) if she had had so
much money, as would have done the deed: but having no more store, then that
little which they had given her to begin the work withal, she told the
Master of the shop, that she would bestow a little money with him now, but
she would come again for more, as her work went on, and her moneys came in.
This young Occupyer, when he had beheld the beauty, and composed countenance of
this young maiden, and had well observed her manner of speech, her honest
carriage, and modest behavior, he fell into that good liking of her, and was so
far in love with her, that the least that he could have found in his heart to
have given her, was all the gold that she had occasion to use, which was no
great matter, being that at that very instant, he had delivered up his soul
unto her. And perceiving, that she forbore to buy so much, as otherwise she
would willingly have done, for that she wanted money, embracing the occasion,
which he had now in his hands, not so much to gain her farther custom, as to
express the affection that he bare unto her, and to draw her into a good
opinion of him, not suffering her to part upon those terms, he said unto her;
Mistress, if the gold be good, and such as you look after, and that it be for
your turn, pick and choose where you like, and carry away with you as much as
you have use for, or what you please, and pay me now what you can well spare,
as for the rest you shall pay me by little and little, as you shall receive it
from their hands that set you a work. The young man seemed to them all, to be
very kind and courteous, and for the ware, they could find no fault with it,
being as good, as themselves could wish or desire. Dorotea made him present
payment of as much as she had, and having made choice of as much gold, as she
thought good and needful for her, she carried it away with her, leaving with
him the name of the street, whither he should either come or send for that
which was remaining behind. That done, they presently went their way, the
poor young man being so loue-strucken after their departure, and so pitifully
wounded with this amorous arrow, that he was as far from himself, as from
all rest, being tossed to and fro with various thoughts, having his brains
beaten with many troublesome and unquiet imaginations. Love had almost burst
the very heart of him; He did neither eat, nor drink, nor any thing else, that
might seem to bear the name of life: so altogether was his soul occupied in
the contemplation of that rare and incomparable beauty, and that mirror of all
virtue, that this his troublesome life, was to him as bad as death, not knowing
in the world what to do. At last, it seeming unto him, that she was a poor
young maiden, and that by means of marriage, his chafte desires might arrive in
the end to some happy port, he resolved to inform himself what she was, as
also of what life, behavior, and birth.

The reports which were given of her, were such, that he was now more
perplexed, and less confident then before. Despairing in a manner with
himself, that he should ever be able to enjoy so rich a jewel, holding
himself full more and more unworthy of so great a happiness, as to obtain
her to be his Spouse. He was now quite out of heart, as knowing himself too
mean for her worth: But because it was not possible for him now to go back,
nor did it lie in his hands (if he would) to have done it; and for that the
passions of the soul, are no less preualent in the poor, then the powerful,
and that all are all alike subject thereunto, and equally affected with them;
howbeit he found himself cast so far behind-hand, yet did he never leave
striving to try if he could get before, perseuering still in his honest
purpose, for that he put himself into Gods hands, who does always favor
our good intentions, and knows how to accommodate those things, that tend to
his service, according to his divine will and pleasure; presenting evermore in
his prayers and supplications unto him, that his desire was no other, then to
get him a companion, with whom he might be the better enabled to serve him, and
more particularly, that he might be linked in lawful marriage with this so
virtuous a creature, and one that was so much to his hearts-liking and
content; yet not that his, but Gods will should be done, where-unto he should
most willingly submit himself, and that he should so far grant his request
(and no farther) as it should seem best to his Majesty, and make most for his
service.

He went likewise discoursing with himself; and amongst many other, this one
presented it self to his imagination; That peradventure her great poverty, her
wary discretion, and vigilant foresight, would force her thereunto,
considering the solitary kind of life she now led, and the remedy thereof, and
laying aside those vain points of honor, not measuring her self by what she
was, but what she is, she would happily accommodate her self to the condition
of her present fortune; and that, when his honest desire to serve her, should
be truly represented unto her, she may chance to yield to my fair request.
Intertaining himself with these thoughts and cares, he was minded to call
upon her for the money which she ought him, but not with purpose to press her
therewith, nor to be troublesome therein unto her, but taking occasion rather
one while to see this her curious work, another while, that passing that way,
he was of purpose come thither to know whether she needed any more gold, and
if she did, that she should not want it, whilst he had any that was fit for
her; and so fetching many a walk thither, excusing himself in the best
mannerthat he could, and as he thought would make most for the performing of
these his frequent visites, and the procuring of her good will and
acquaintance, for that time he pretended nothing else; to the end, that this
being first obtained, he might the better play his game hereafter, and in the
interim mitigate some part of that sorrow which her absence did continually
torment him withal. In this, the young man showed himself as discreet, as
solicitous; and as solicitous, as truly loving. Going on in those good and
honest terms, that in a short time he gained the good wills of all those that
conuersed and were companions to Dorotea. Being so far from disliking his
often visites, that they rather received them as favors and courtesies.
Amongst the rest, that lived there together, there were four Sisters, to one
of which, as being the grauest and reuerendest of the company, they did all
show a kind of respect, as well for her temper and wisdom, as also for her
priority of years. With this grave Matron, our young man seeks to enter into
a stricter kind of friendship, by reuerencing her, and observing her, and by
presenting her with some such tokens and remembrances, as might su^e best with
the respect (more then love) that he bare unto her. So that in the end, time
bringing forth occasion, by degrees he discovered himself unto her, making
her acquainted with his desires, not omitting any thing that might make her
fully to understand the greatness of his affection, and the fairness of his
pretension. Earnestly entreating her withal, that by interposing her power and
authority, she would be a means, that his hopes should not return home empty,
and unrewarded, her worth, and wisdom, putting him in good assurance of the
contrary. And that therefore she would be pleased to continue her good favor
toward him; and as occasion should offer, that she should go working and
disposing this pe^ce of wax, to receive the impression of his affection;
leaving it to her, to imprint it in her to the life, that seeing the trueness
of the stamp, she might be the sooner molded to entertain the motion: But in
case she should not find her pliable, but tough and hard to be wrought upon,
she would seek to mollify her by her meek and gentle persuasions, and
remove all those difficulties, which on her part might be a hinderance to these
his honest desires; for on his part, he vowed and protested unto her, that
nothing should be able to cross it, but that with open arms he would run to
embrace her, submitting himself to be in all things ordered, if not ouer-ruled
by them. Good means, seconded by good intentions, and which, without any
humane respects, treat of honest things (carrying a sound heart in their
breasts, and a true tongue in their heads) have always such force and power
with them, that they easily persuade, because truly believed.

This Gentlewoman, so wrought with Dorotea, sometimes this way, and sometimes
that, now using the one, then the other means, till at last, she brought the
business so about, that she being convinced by reason, began to yield to her
persuasions, and to condescend to the motion that she made unto her; and
obeying her in all things, as if she had been her own natural mother, she
kissed her hands, in acknowledgment of her thankfulness, putting her-selfe
wholly into her hands. In conclusion, the match was made up between them to
both their good likings, but more especially on Bonifacio his part (for so was
her husband called) for that he was fully persuaded, that in meeting with this
jewel, no man was more happy, more fortunate, and more rich then himself;
having now got him such a w^e, as his own heart could not have wished a better,
being greater in her condition and quality, then he deserved, and such a good
creature besides, that he could lead a secure and honest course of life with
her, without fear or trouble of any iellous thoughts, nor of any other thing
that might cause his disquiet. They lived very contentedly together, making
exceeding much of each other, and wonderfully well satisfied of that chaste and
true love, which they bare one to another. He did ordinarily attend his shop,
busying himself (for both their benefits) in the exercise of his Trade, and
she abiding above in her chamber, either playing the good huswife, in those
things that appertained to the good government of the house; or following her
needle, spending part of that gold thread which her husband sold, in working
goodly borders, garnishing them with curious flowers in their true and natural
colors, and other the like neat and dainty pieces, wherein she did excel.
Their gains were great, and to make this their happiness the fuller, there
was that conformity in their love, and such an equal retribution in their
affections, that no two in the world could live more honestly, and more
lovingly together then they did.

But the Devil, who is still waking, and never sleeps, but still watches most
how he may break the bond of peace, and breed brawles in love, against this
loving Couple, these who agreed so well together, that there was never yet any
the least difference between them, prepares his pit-falls, sets up his traps,
and spreads his nets with all secrecy, and all the skill and cunning he could
devise, to do them all the mischief he could, and if it were possible, to
throw this uniform frame, and strong piece of building to the ground. He
followed this poor soul close at the heels, watching advantage how he might
trip her up, and overthrow her, and in case he could not do that, yet at least
to give her a foil, or make her to stumble. Insomuch, that at her Visites,
when she was at Mass, or at Sermon, yea in her greatest devotion, when she
was receiving the Sacrament, he did still seek to trouble her, presenting her
with the instruments of his malice and wickedness, young Gallants, discreet in
their carriage, neat in their clothes, and sweet in their perfumes, who fell a
courting her, when she came forth, following and soliciting her whither-soeuer
she went: but all these tricks would not serve the Devils turn, he did not
reap the fruit he hoped for; for this chaste woman, standing stiffely to her
tackling, and giving her enemy no ground, did evermore with-stand these
lightnesses, by opposing against them a constant chaste mind, and a settled,
and well resolved honesty. And howbeit, for to avoid all occasion, she did
forbear, as much as she possibly could to go abroad, and when she did, it
was very seldom, and when she was of necessity enforced thereunto, at which
time she was likewise haunted and persecuted by them. They did round her door
night and day, they sought inventions, and used all the means that might be
for to see her; neither did this also profit them any thing.

Amongst those Gallants, that desired to serve her (for all of them were young
Gentlemen, of very good fashion, and the chiefest in Sevill) there was one,
hat was Teniente, is one that is substitute to another in an Office. A
Lieutenant. A tenendo. As having the charge and keeping of some Forts or
Castle, which he faithfully keeps and maintains. Covatr. verb. Teniente.
Teniente of the Town, a young man, unmarried, and rich. This Gentleman lived
right against the house where she dwelt, where he had very fair and goodly
rooms, being especial and principal lodgings, and of so many stories high,
and those goodly open galleries, that they did ouer-top and look into those
lower ones of Dorotea, notwithstanding that they were distanced by a whole
street, that interposed it self between their houses. So that from his
Turrets, his Terraces, and his high windows, he might ouer-looke her, and see
what she did; and that so plainly, that neither her husband, nor her-selfe,
could scarce rise up in the morning to make them ready, or at night get them to
bed, without being seen and espied by him; especially they being careless,
and heeding no such matter, and the other with extraordinary diligence,
watching and prying what they did. This Teniente then, making use of this
occasion, with all carfulness and vigilancie, accompanied with insupportable
passions, and sorrows, did labor (as if his life had layen upon it) how he
might come to have some speech with her, or receive any favor from her hands.
But finding in the end, that he lost his labor, and spent his time in vain,
he was forced, as the rest of his fellows were, to give over his The Spanish
word is; Bolver al pucsto con la can^a. To pitch down his standard. To proceed
no farther.
suit, set up his rest, and turn back the same way he came, without obtaining
any the least look, or favor from her, not being able to perceive in her any
shadow of hope, that either now or hereafter (though never so small) she was
likely to grant him. For this chaste woman did live in that sober and discreet
fashion, and did so well and wisely govern her-selfe, that she put him quite
off from any suspicion, which might encourage him to pretend any kindness from
her, or but wash off one hairs breadth of gold from this good creatures credit;
though it is not to be doubted, he used all the Art he could, to have made her
some few grains lighter then she was.

There went likewise along in the same dance with the rest, another
Penitentiarie, that was of the same brotherhood and company of these foolish
Disciplinantes, are they that lash themselves to do penance.
Disciplinantes, and selfe-afflicting lovers. This was a Gentleman of Burgos,
gallant, young, discreet, and rich. Which good parts, favored by his frank,
and bountiful disposition, might (a man would have thought) have dug down
mountains, and laid them level with the lowest earth. But the chaste Dorotea,
neither by this Gentleman's good parts, nor the Teniente's great power, nor all
the passions of other her Lovers, could be moved one ^ot from her honorable
resolution, not having any sense or feeling thereof in the world, as if she
had been no woman of this world, or had minded any such matter. Against all
these assaults, she showed her-selfe a strong Tower, an inexpugnable rock,
against which the continual beatings of those furious waves of their raging
lust and froathy appetite (not being able to prevail) were broken and dashed in
pieces. And it is not to be doubted, but that her honesty, continually keeping
watch, like the Crane, that with the stone of Gods love, raising her-selfe from
the ground, and her foot standing fast and firm on the steedy affection that
she bare to her husband, did free her from these birds of rapine, these Eagles
of Caucasus, that sought to make a prey of her. And it had been impossible to
have wounded either her, or her honesty, if the cunning and crafty Fowler had
not spread his net, covering and shadowing it over with the green grass of
holiness, and simulated sanctity, to entrap this simple, harmless, and
innocent Dove. This Burgalese (whose name was Claudio) had to his servant a
dainty fine shee-slaue, not swarfe and tawney (as others commonly be) but fair
and well-fauour'd, of a good presence, a good garb, and graceful behavior,
borne in Spain of a Moorish slave of Barbary. She was so cunning, so subtle,
so nimble witted, so dextrous in her tricks and devices, such a worker of
her-selfe into all folks loves and affections (were it for her own ends, or
others) so curious in visiting Churchyards, so charitable in accompanying
those that were to be hanged, that she was able to make When they will note
out a Watch, or the sorceries of an old Hagg, the Spaniards indeare it with
this phrase, Que ha^a nacerberios en cima de la cama. That they will make
watercresses to grow on the top of a bed. that is; she will do strange
things, or work wonders. Covarr. verb. Berros.
watercresses to grow on the top of a bed. She was such a one, as for such
like affairs, her fellow was not to be found. Her Master one day called her
unto him, and giving her account of this his Loue-torment, he craved her
counsel, how he might come to compass his pretension. This his good slave,
after that she had been well informed of the business, and knew how the case
stood with him, as if she had been in jest, smilingly said unto him; Why how
now (my good Master) what mountains have you to remove? What Seas to dry up?
What dead to raise unto life? What great difficulty is there in that which
does thus afflict thee? Or why do thou so indeare it unto me? Sir, Are not
these things that I am well seen in? Little oil, and less labor, will serve
to bring this wheel about, then thou think for. Thou may now make
reckoning that she is thine own, and that thou have her already in thy hands.
Let not this therefore trouble thee any farther, but be of good cheer, and
pluck up thy heart; for within these few days, I will deliver this Hare into
thy lap. And if I do not, let me lose my name for ever, and call me no more
Sabina, the daughter of Haja. From that time forward, she took this business
to task, and began from that very instant, like a cunning Chesse-player, so to
order and marshall her men, designing with her-selfe how to make her draughts,
and within how many remoues, to give first the check, and then the check-mate.
Now does she set her-selfe roundly to her play, and begins this her game,
moving first one of her pawnes, reserving her best men for the last push, if
the meaner should miscarry in this battle.

First of all therefore, she makes me a fine delicate little basket, of the
green sprigs of Mirtles, Pome-citrons, and Oranges, adorning and setting it
forth with Gally-flowres, Geeimines, Muske-roses, and other sweet flowers,
bound in with small tender bull-rushes, which were composed and set together in
most dainty and curious manner. This basket she takes along with her, and
bears it to the Gold-beater; Telling him, that she was servant to a certain
Gentlewoman that was a Nun in that City, and Lady-Abbesse of a Covent; who
having notice of the goodness of his ware, and having necessary use of some of
his best gold, for to flourish over certain things, which were to serve for
some ornament that were to adorn that Monastery against Midsommer day, which
was a great Festival with them, she had sent him that little basket for a
token, entreating him, to send her two pound of his purest and finest gold,
that she might make proof of it, and that if it should be found to be so
good, as to her it had been commended, and that she found it fit for her
purpose, she would pay him well for it, and he should from henceforth have
her custom for all the gold that should be spent in her House, sending weekly
for so much as they had occasion to use. Besides, she would be very thankful
unto him, if he served her well, and bestow now and then upon him such dainties
and curiosities, as those religious places usually afford. B^facio was much
gladded with this new occasion of fresh gains, and no less with his little
basket of flowers, which he made much reckoning of, being so neatly and
ar^ficially wrought, as indeed it was. Which he had no sooner received (having
first dispatched the slave away with the gold) but he presently carries it up to
his wife, putding it in her lap with great joy, which was by her with no less
received She asked him, of whom he had bought it: And then he told her all
that had passed. Then did she esteem it much more then before, because it
brought to her remembrance the time of her childhood, when with other girls of
her years, and the Nuns of the Covent, she did busy her-selfe in the like
exercises. Whereupon, she entreated her husband, that when she came to him
again, he would send her up unto her, for she would gladly be acquainted with
her.

The next week following, being some six days after, Sabina returns very
iocondly, boasting how good the gold was, and that she was come for as much
more of the same; bringing with her a large message in the behalf of her
Mistress the L^dy-Abbesse, and presenting him from her, with a little image of
the rind of Limmons, and a Rosario suitable to the same, so cariously cut out,
that it was well worthy much estimation. As soon as he saw it, he would not
himself receive it of her, but entreated her, that she with her own hands
would deliver it to Dorotea his wife. Now the Cayo la sopa en la miel.
sop was fallen into the honeypot. Proverb.
Now had she what she would have. This fell out as pat for her as a pudding for
a Fiyars mouth. But making strange of this news, and as though she had known
no such matter, she said unto him. Ah, thou naughty man, do thou speak in
carnest? Art thou married indeed? I do not believe it. Thou art bought and
sold with us for a single man, we took thee to be a Batchclour, and my
Mistress talked of marrying thee with a pretty Lay-mayd^ that we have in our
House, as fine and as fresh as the flowers in May, and is both beautiful, and
rich. Bonifacio replyde; I have one already as rich and as beautiful, as you
there can give me any, and with whom I live most contentedly. And if you will
not believe me, go up, and see. Sabina then said unto him; In faith no, not I,
you shall not get me up stayres, I am afraid you will play the wagg with me,
and that you do but jest. I assure you, I do not jest (said Bonifacio) and
therefore (friend Sabina) you may boldly go up. Up she goes, and having
entered the room where she was, she no sooner saw Dorotea, but she runs
with open arms toward her, and throws her-selfe down at her feet, making a
thousand ducks and reuerences unto her after the Moorish fashion, admiring much
her rare and singular beauty, which though she had heard it much spoken of
before, yet this work of nature, went far beyond the words that were uttered
of it. For it was such an admirable piece, that report was not able to express
it to the lise, but must needs fall short in the praising of it. But she stood
like one astonished, when she beheld the frames, and those loomes of rich
embroyderies, and other the like works, wherein she spent her time, wondering
at their perfection and curiosity, saying unto her; How is it possible, that
my Mistress should not have the happiness to enjoy such excellent good things
as these? No, no, it shall not be long (by the grace of God) ere you two know
one another, and be better acquainted, and enter into a strict league of
friendship. O sweet Jesus! When I shall tell my Lady-Abbesse, what I have
seen, o how will she envy my good fortune? What a longing desire will she
have, till she see that face of yours, and be made so happy as to enjoy your
good company? By the life of her, that left me here behind her, and as her
soul is there, where those eternal tapers continually burn, let the pocks
consume my iaw-bones, if I be not a Bawd to these your loves, because I have a
great mind to bring you together, and that ye should dearly love each other.
I will not fail hereafter to visit you oftener, you are a pearl of that
price, that I cannot choose but love you, make much of you, and desire to serve
you. After these words, and many other, full of ceremony and complement, she
took her leave, and went away with her gold. And from that time forward, every
second or third day, she made one errand or other thither, one while for gold;
another, saying that she past that way, telling Bonifacio, that she should be
guilty to her self of neglect, and that she should commit treason to her own
heart, if she should pass that way, and not perform a visit to that good
Angel of his, being the only Saint of her sex, to whose shrine she did owe
all respect and reverence. At other times, she would excuse her coming, by
bringing her some rarity or other, and whilst she was talking with her, go
disposing and preparing of her, that she would of her own accord go one day
and make merry at the Monastery.

Now, when she had molded things to her mind, and thought that this fine piece
of gold was fit for the hammering, she took a walk thither on Monday morning,
carrying along with her two pretty little baskets, the one having in it some
Conserues, and the like toys; the other, some fruits of that season, the first
and the best that were to be found upon their first coming. Which she
presented her withal, telling her, because they were fruits of their own
garden, and the first they had gathered, her Lady Abbess thought they could
not be better bestowed on any, then her self. And that withal she had a
double request unto her; The first, that the next ensuing Monday, being the
feast of the glorious Saint John Baptist, and the Sunday before it, their first
Vespers, she would be pleased to do her the favor to stay those two days
with her in the Monastery, doing penance there with her; which she might the
more conveniently do, in regard that she had no occasion of business during
those two Holy Days; and besides, the Nuns, after they had ended their
feasts, were amongst themselves to represent a Comedy; And that the Abbess
would take no pleasure nor contentment in it, if she would not do her this
favor, to come and see it acted; and that other principal Gentle-women, that
were of kin to the Nuns, were likewise to come thither, and that they
should go all along together, bearing each other company: The other, that she
might have three pound of her best and finest gold, to make tufts and tassels
for a rich cloth that was to be used before the Altar; desiring her, if it
were possible, that she might have the choicest and the finest for that
purpose, that was to be got. To this of the gold, Dorotea made answer, she
could, and would do that for her with a very good will; for this (quoth she)
is in my power to perform; I could likewise be content to cumply with
whatsoever my Lady Abbess shall be pleased to command me, but this is not in
mine but my husbands hands. You know (Sister Sabina) that I am not Mistress of
my self, I am under another command, and therefore in this, you must ask my
good-mans leave; it is he that can give you an I, or a No, whether I shall go
or stay. To whose will I must, and ever shall conform my self. This were fine
in good faith (said then Sabina) if your husband should deny us so small and so
fair a request as this? Let me never thrive, if I go out of doors these
eight days, unless he give you leave: Say your self, does it stand with
reason (to omit the mentioning of common ciuility, and good manners) that one
only request which my Mistress makes unto you, being (besides the first that
ever she made unto you) so earnest a one, and so just, that you should lose all
respect toward her person and her kindness, as to deny her so slight a
courtesy, desiring (as she does her salvation) to enjoy such a paradise as
your self? Fie Sabina, hold thy peace (said Dorotea) be not so profane, nor
do not flout your poor friend, for I am old. Old, (said Sabina) yes, yes, you
be very old indeed; Let me die of your disease. You might as well have told
me, that the Spring is the end of the year, and that Lent is Christmas. But
let us leave off jesting; As old as you are, God grant your husband may long
enjoy you, and give you the fruit of his blessings. And therefore without any
more ado, I pray grant our request; for I mean to go away with this good
bargain, that my mistress may con me thank for it. O how much will she make
of this pretty little Rogue? Bonifacio and Dorotea, fell a laughing to see her
so pleasant; while he (with a Proverb.
cheerful countenance) not seeing the La cusebra esta enter la yerva.
Snake that lay lurking in the grass, nor the ambush that was laid for him,
suspecting no harm, and the less, in regard of the great confidence that he
had in his wife, said: Well followed in good faith; Now (by my life) Sabina
has pleaded hard in this cause, and has handsomely bestirred her-selfe; she
must not be denied for this once, especially being it is my Lady-Abbesses
pleasure to have it so. And therefore I prithee (sweet Heart) go and recreate
thy self there those two days, for I know thou will be well pleased
therewith, and it shall be no small contentment to me, because it shall
content thee. And therefore (Sabina) you may tell her Ladyship that her will
shall be fulfilled as well in this, as in any thing else, wherein I may serve
her. And when these Gentle-women that you speak of go unto the Monastery, I
pray so order the matter, that they may pass this way, and take my wife along
with them. Sabina, being a wellspoken woman, returned them thanks in excellent
good language, using such sitting phrase as best suited with the accomplishment
of her desire. She hy'de her home, so well contented, and so proud of this
rich purchase that she had made, that the steps she set forward, seemed to
go back again, and that she should never come time enough to her Masters
lodging. Her heart was ready to have burst in her body, it was so ouer-swolne
with joy; and would (had it been lawful for her so to do) have found in her
heart, to have cryde it out at the high Cross. A man might have seen her
mirth in her looks, her blood boiled within her, and her eyes did seem to
dance in her face for very joy; you would have thought, that through them, and
her mouth, she would have uttered the cause of this her (more then can be
expressed) content. When she came into the house, no ground could hold her,
she fell presently to plucking off her chapines, to undoing of her mantle,
flinging it with all the haste she could over her head, leaving it trayling at
her tail, and holding up the fore-skirts in her hands, lest they might hinder
her speed, she runs me, as fast as her legs would carry her (like one that
had been fraid out of her wits) into her Masters chamber, who attended her
coming. And out of mere haste, that she might tell him all at once, all hung
between her teeth and her tongue, that she was not able to speak one ready
word. She would one while be in the Active, another while in the Passive:
Well, or ill, as well as she could, she delivered her message in that manner,
that those eight days never had an end, she in telling him of them, and he in
asking her of them, a least a thousand times apeece over and over. Every moment
they returned to treat anew of one and the same thing, re-iterating the same,
I know not how many times over, and fell to make Comments thereupon,
discoursing how it could be possible, that this business should take effect:
It seemed unto them, that that whereof they talked, had fully contented them,
and gone for good payment, their belief never coming to an end, never being
able to persuade themselves, that the news of so great a desired good, could
be certain, or that ever they should come to see so happy a day.

Dorotea and Sabina, being thus agreed upon the point, that this business
might be the more cleanely carried, Claudio took order, that certain women
should be provided and fitted up, that were of his good acquaintance, and
friends and well-wishers to his house, such as he might safely communicate any
secret unto, to the end, that by their good care and diligence, they might
help to bring this his purpose to pass.

Sunday (the appointed day) being come, some of them, apparrelling themselves
like married wives, others, being in the habit of maidens, and others after the
fashion of grave The Spanish word is, Duen^a, and signifies an ancient.
Gentlewoman that is a widow: now ta^ commonly for those that wear large
vayles like your Nuns, to difference them from maids. And in the Kings
Court, they call those Duen^as de honor, that are principal persons, and
become widows, and your Queens and great Princesses have them still attending
upon them. Covarr. verb. Duen^a.
and matron-like Gentle-women, went along with Sabina to go fetch Dorotea.
They come to her house, they knock at the door, her husband comes forth, who
staid at home looking for them: Who seeing such a worthy train of women,
opinionating them to be principal persons, presently called to his wife, that
she should make haste, and come down, that the company might not stay for
her. Down comes Dorotea, no less innocent, then contented. All of them did
very lovingly salute her, bestowing many kind words, and ceremonious
complements upon her. And her husband, having consigned her over unto them,
they placed her in the midst between them, and so with great joy they set
forward on their voyage. And as they were walking toward the Monastery, one
of them, that had a veil on her head, and of more reverend aspect and speech
then the rest, makes a stop, and suddenly cries out; Ay me, forgetful wretch
that I am, how has it slipped our remembrance, that we forgot to go for Don^a
Beatriz the new married Bride, who stays at home expecting our coming, who
also is invited to the Nunnerie? Then another of them made answer, By the bones
of my father, you say true. As God help me, I did no more think upon her,
then I remember the first No me acordaua mas della, que de la primera camisa,
que me vesti.
smock that was put on my back. We can by no means go without her, we must
needs have her along with us, and therefore let us turn down here, for it is
not much out of the way, and we shall be there by and by. Then one of those,
which was to the rest, as the bell-weather, that goes before the flock,
ruffling between her legs a large sided kirtle, and having a Rosario hanging
at her neck, which served in steed of a bell, leads the way unto them,
Proverb.
whom all of them follow, till she had brought them to Claudio his house. They
called at the door; A slave, putting her head out at the window, asks, who
was there, and what they would have. One of them made answer; Run in quickly,
and tell your Mistress, that she would be pleased to make haste, and come
down, for we stay here for her. She made as if she had gone in to deliver
her the message, and anon after comes forth again with this answer, That her
Mistress would entreat them to have the patience to stay a little, till she
had but fastened a pin or two to her head-dressing, and had put on her mantle,
which would not be long a doing, desirng them in the mean while to come in,
and rest themselves in the Hall. Whereupon, they entered through a fair Court
into a goodly spacious Hall, very well furnished, where the rest of the women
remained, only two of them past forward with Dorotea, into a midling square
room, which was hung with cloth of silver, and watchet damask, with a bed
suitable thereunto, full of imbossed work of gold, the chaires, and cushions,
and carpets corresponding with the rest. Adjoining close to the bed was a
curious Estrado is a place raised half a foot from the ground, covered over
with carpets, where Ladies and Gentle-women sit upon cushions, and receive
their Visites. Lat^ Stratus, ab stemendo: sed pouus a Graec. (...). Covarr.
verb. Estrado.
Estrado, where these three sat them down, and had scarce warmed their
cushions, when the two, that were with her, began to complain, and cry out;
Good God, what does this new Bride Don^a Beatriz mean to make us stay here so
long? Fie, what a tedious thing is this? I care not (says the one to the
other) if I go in, and see what she is a doing, I dare pawn my life, she is
not yet out of her bed. I prithee, Sister, (if thou be a good wench) go
with me, that we may know, when we shall get hence. Which word was no sooner
spoken, but they both went presently out of the room, leaving Dorotea all
alone. In conclusion, they were all vanish^d, and not any body living to be
heard about the house.

When all was hush, Claudio comes in, and sitting down upon one of the
cushions, that was next to Dorotea, he began to make her many fair offers,
discovering unto her the plot that he had laid to get her thither, excusing
this his manner of proceeding, with the great torments that for her sake he
endured. When she heard him speak in this language, and now (too lat^)
perceived how she was betrayed; poor Dorotea was not a little troubled; for
she knew him by sight, and was not ignorant of his pretensions. She saw
her-selfe taken in the trap, she knew not what to do, nor how to defend
her-selfe, and therefore began with tears and prayers, entreating him with all
the Rhetoric those two good Orators could use, that he would not spot her
honor, nor offer her husband that wrong, by committing so grievous a sin,
and so heinous an offense against God. But all would not serve the turn. To
cry out, was to no purpose; for there was no body there to take her part. But
say her sh^ikes might have disturbed Claudio, and have drawn the people in the
street to come in, whosoever should have found her there, would questionless
have condemned her for her coming thither, giving no credit to this trick
that was put upon her, though she should have sworn out her heart to the
contrary. She defended her-selfe (poor soul) as well as she could; but
Claudio cou^ting her one while with many fair and kind words, and when they
would not prevail, breaking forth another while into actions of violence, with
a great deal of resistance, and against her will, he plucked from her by force
such fruits as he could reach to, but not those that he desired; entertayning
himself, and tyring out her, in this his rude wrestling with her. But in the
end, when she saw that she could no longer hold out against him, and that her
breath and strength did both fail her, and that the battle would be lost on
her side, Claudio still getting more and more ground upon her person, she
yielded up the Fort unto him, for want of succors in convenient time, having
fought it out (as they say) to the last man, and keeping out the enemies as
long as she could. They two, were all alone; the door fast locked; the term
long, (no less then two days) Claudio, his friends about him, she a
lone-woman; he strong, and she weak; and none can do more then they can do.
This might have very well been said to have been a sportfull contention, and
an amorous combat, befitting S. John's feast, if the heaven of their pastime had
not been ouer-cast with a sudden and unexpected cloud. They fared daintily,
did dine, sup, and sleep together. But this their pleasure lasted but a while,
short was their content, and their rest suddenly and unexpectedly Proverb.
interrupted. For the El diablo nunca hizo empanada, de que no quisiesse comer
la meyor part.
Devil never yet made that pie, whereof himself did not eat the better part.
It is a usual thing with him, when he makes any such kind of meeting, to set
up a tent, or pauillion, inuiting them to go into it, that there they may
cover, and hide themselves, and none may know of their doings, laying a charge
of secrecy and silence on their present actions; but afterward, when they are
closely shut up, and kept hid from the open eye of the world, in this their
greatest, and ill-conceiued security, he sets the doors wid^ open, (...), and
throws these pauillions down to the ground, manifesting in public, their
concealed sins; and beating up his drum, and ringing out his Alarum-bell,
he calls the people together, that they may come and see what they are a doing,
leaving them ashamed and sad, making himself very merry to see them thus
caught in his snare, and laughing and flouting at them, he mak^s himself a
Holy Day in Hell, ioying and triumphing in his new-gotten victory. Who would
once have thought, that so subtle an invention as this was, so well ordered,
and in so short a time, and by so strange a means brought about, should come
to be discovered? Who, from such happy beginnings, and means, would ever have
expected such adue^se, and Tragical ends? But I say ill, and therefore correct
my self: For we could look for no other, considering the dance, and who he
was that led it; and heaven cannot but openly ^unish such wickedness, and
violence. And though the punishment was not eq^all to the offense, yet the blow
was such that was given them, that thereby every good Discoursist might come to
the knowledge of the fault, and repent himself thereof.

Now whilst they were thus in their mirth and iollitie, all that day passed so
without account, and order, that there was no heed taken of any thing: The
servants in their quarter, filled their bellies, took away the wrinckles from
off their guts, by glutting themselves full, and pulling the faucets out of
the hogs-heads, they did eat and drink so lustily, that they were feign at
last to creep to their beds, as a Cat does Yr^as camas gateando.
up a wall, upon all four; or as a ship-boy Proverb.
up to the top of the maste; leaving the chimney full of fire, and a great
deal of dry wood standing by it; The fire takes me hold of the brands, and
other dry clefts, and they being tinded, did communicate their flames to their
fellows that stood by them, so that toward midnight, all that quarter of the
house was burnt, and not one body in all the house that did perceive it, so
fast were they all a-sleepe. It was the Vespers of S. John, and that night the
Teniente (to see good order) uses to round the Town, and by the great
splendour that the flames did cast a far off, he saw what a light it gave, and
suspected (which was so indeed) that some house was on fire. And so following
the clearenesse of this light, the brightness thereof brought them to Claudio
his house. They called out aloud, and knocked hard at the gate; for the house
was great, and the people that were within, some were weary, some drunk, and
others burnt, but none that did answer. There was a great noise and outcry
amongst the neighbors, every one seeking to prevent the threatened danger, and
to provide as well as they could to save their goods and persons, many people
of all sorts, and all parts of the City, came hastening and running thither,
who by maine force brake down the gate, and laid it level with the ground,
and entered the house, supposing all those that were in it, to have been
consumed with the fire, or at least choked and stifled with the smoke,
because they could see no body stirring in it. The noise and clamor was such,
that Claudio awaked, and startled with this so great a rumor, and confused a
sound, not knowing what the matter might be, hastening with his sword in his
hand, (he and Dorotea being both naked) he opened his chamber-doore, and when
he saw the fire, he returned back, that he might throw some thing upon him,
and save himself by flight. The Teniente thought that the people that were
without, had broke open that door, that they might rifle the room; hasting
thither with all diligence, that he might save it from the spoil and
ransacking of the more unruly route, he found these two lovers running about
the chamber, from one corner to another, to seek out their clothes, and
having them in their hands, neither of them had their own, interchanging them,
through their more haste, then good speed. Now you may imagine in what taking
they were, and what they might think, seeing themselves thus naked, the house
full of people, and her greatest enemy, the Teniente; who had thus taken them
napping. But that we may come to him, who straight way knew Dorotea; whereat he
was so amazed, that of all those three, you could not tell for your life, which
of them was most astonished. For the Teniente, had any body told him of such a
thing, he would never have been persuaded to believe it; and though he had now
his own eyes to be his witnesses, yet did he seem to doubt of it. So troubled
were his thoughts, so his heart inflamed with iealousies, and disdaynes, so mad
and desperately bent, that to be revenged on them both, without any farther
consideration, he commanded them to be carried away to prison; his spleen
being more against Dorotea, then Claudio, for that she had rejected him, and
admitted of another, and therefore was resolved to do her a disgrace, and to
defame her all that he could, devising with himself, how he might likewise
pick an occasion to commit her husband. For he thought it a thing impossible,
that this should be done without her husbands priuitie, and that he had been
witting and consenting to this business, and had given his wife leave to
bestow a nights lodging upon this young Gallant, upon some particular interest,
that might make much for his profit. Nor is it so strange, that the Teniente
should take this indirect course: For a Loue-passion, or passionate fit of
Love, blindes the understanding, and makes the mind of man turn cruel and
tyrannical. They carried her away, her face being covered over with her
mantle, having given express order, that she should not be seen, or made
known to any, till information should be made against her. And Claudio, he
likewise was committed. And howbeit he had used all the means he could, to
hinder this his harsh proceeding, alleging in excuse the great and many harms
that might happen thereupon, yet neither reasons, entreaties, nor
all-perswading Crowns, could allay the rage of this incensed Judge, so bigg
was his heart swollen with malice and revenge. They remained in prison, and the
Judge fomed at the mouth, till the fire was assuaged, and quite put out; but
that of his heart did burn apace. It was now past midnight, and he had endured
a great deal of trouble, but much more anger and choler. He got him to bed,
and would have slept if he could; but in him was that proverb verified, which
says, Assi tengays el suen^o.
Assi tengays el suen^o: Proverb.
So let him sleep, that troubles another man's rest. He could not sleep in
quiet, nor is it to be believed, that he should; but rather it is to be
supposed, and true it was, that transported with rage, his head was plotting of
revenge, dressing this his rancorous dish of poison a thousand several ways,
that they might not escape his hands, at least not come off, with the saving of
their honor. But he reckoned without his H. zo la cuenta sin la huespeda.
Host. For his feet were scarce warm in his bed, when Dorotea was out of his
reach. Sabina lay in Proverb.
an inner chamber next unto her Masters, to the end, that if he should need any
thing in the night, she might be ready at hand, when-soeuer he should call.
And for that she had diligently listened to all that had passed, she presently
bethought her-selfe of a remedy for this disease. For your women, upon the
sudden, are more quick, and nimble witted, then your men; nor must you give
them leave to advise any thing long with themselves, if you mean to have it
succeed well and happily. She takes me out of her lodging a good fat Capon,
which was left untouched at supper, and a good piece of a gammon of bacon, which
being of a wild Bore, was held to be a dainty dish, a good flagon of rich
wine, a loaf or two of bread, and money in her purse, and clapping a bed,
sheets, and a couerlet on her head, and bearing a little basket, wherein she
had put her commodities, upon her arm, away she trugs along to the prison.
She entreated the Iaylour, that he would give her leave to carry in that her
bed and supper for one of her Masters maids, who because she had showed
her-selfe too slow and negligent, upon so urgent an occasion, in bringing a
bucket to draw water for the quenching of the fire, the Teniente in his heat
had committed her to prison. With this slight excuse, and four Royals of
four, which she clapped in his hand, he opens the door, and lets her in,
making him a hundred cursies; howbeit by reason of the luggage which she had
on her head, he could not come to see her face. In this manner, in she goes to
Dorotea, whom she found rather dead then ali^e: They two stood talking alone
together, for the rest of the women-prisoners were all asleep, and taking hold
on this so fair an opportunity, it so fell out, that Dorotea was transformed
into Sabina, by putting on a green kirtle that she wore, who called to the
Porter, that kept the prison door, and giving him the supper, that was
provided for that end, told him, that the may de would neither eat any meat,
nor come in any bed, until she were released. He was so ioyed therewith,
that he thought he had seen the heavens opened, and when he had tasted of the
bacon, and found what a tarte yet pleasant relish it had with it, he takes the
flagon of wine in his hands, and gives it a good swigg, reserving the remainder
against the next day. Whilst the Porter was making himself merry with his
good cheer, Dorotea heaues up the bed upon her head, and so goes out of the
prison, leaving Sabina there in her place, and with those two women that bare
her company the day before, and staid waiting for her coming forth, she was
conducted by them back again to Claudio his house, where she continued till
the next morning, and then accompanied with them, and some other women, she
returned home to her own house, faining that she was not half well, and
therefore made the speedyer return. The Teniente growing now proud upon the
matter, thinking the next morning, which was Tuesday, to execute this his
revenge, Claudio in the mean while was not wanting, (being advised before hand
that his Mistress was now out of his danger, and safely arrived at her wished
haven) entreated a Gentleman, a friend of his, to take the pains to go and
speak with the The principal Magistrate, and chief Commander in Sevill, is
called there by the name of Assistence.
Assistente of Sevill, and to crave so much lawful favor of him, that he
would be pleased to come in person to the Court, and free him of that injury
and wrong, which was so unjustly done unto him. The Teniente likewise, when he
was going to sit down to dinner in his own house, going aside to the window,
and looking with a deuilish jealousy on those of Dorotea, he had her presently
in his eye, and knew it was she, and might plainly perceive, how her husband
and she sat very lovingly together eating of their dinner. He was almost
beside himself, and ready to run mad, wondering with himself, how this
might be. Hereupon, he presently dispatches one away to the prison, to know who
had freed the woman, that he had sent thither over night. Answer was made; that
she was there. Then did he beat his feet against the ground, and stamped for
despite and anger, and did verily persuade himself, that he was not well in
his wits, unless the other had been a dream. So that day past on, till the
next came, when (at the accustomed hour) comes me thither the Assistente
himself in person attended with his two Tenientes, and when he was sat in
the seat of Justice, he willed that Claudio should be called forth, and the
woman which was imprisoned with him. Who, when they were brought before him,
and had (according to their own confession, as also the Keepers) approved
themselves to be the same, there was no man there but knew Sabina was his
slave, and so finding nothing to be said against them, they were set at
liberty. Yet were they not so freed, but that Claudio paid soundly for it; for
when he came home, he found the greatest part of his house, and his goods
burnt, and together with them a sister of his, one of those honest ones, that
accompanied Dorotea from her house, who was found dead in the same bed with his
Despensero, besides some three other of his servants. This affront to his
honor (for that it was generally published throughout the whole City) did so
afflict his mind, and did in that manner oppress his heart, that with the
strong apprehension thereof he fell grievously sick. And not desiring his
health, that he might take any worldly comfort in it, but only that he might
live to do penance for this heinous sin that he had committed, by
corrupting so good a creature, he recovered of his sickness, and without
making any one acquainted therewith, he retired himself to the top of a
mountain in a desert place, where in a holy course of life he ended his
days, betaking himself to the Religious Order of Saint Francis. Dorotea
remained with her husband in the same peace and love as before, and the
Teniente, like a filthy fellow as he was, without Doblones, for ought that they
gave him; and without revenge, for ought that he could take of them. And
Bonifacio (honest man) untouched in his honor. For Sabina, and most of them
that knew the affront that was done him, dyed within a few days after. So just
is God in all his works, and so well does he know how to punish those wrongs,
that are offered to the innocent.

With this Story, and other entertainments, to pass away the time, we were
brought by a fair wind to Spain, which I had not a little longed for, for
having lost our Anchors, our Ordnance, our Oars, our Helm carried away, our
sails rent, and all our tackling torn, having nothing left which the Sea had
not swallowed up, only I was left alive, who ought more justly to have
perished. We did dis-imbarke in Barcelona, where telling my friend Captain
Favelo, that I had made a vow, while we were in this storm, that I would not
stay three nights in any part of Spain, till I should come to Sevill, and
visit the Image of our Lady del Valle, to whom I had offered up my devotions,
and made a certain promise to consecrate some thing unto her, if I should be
so happy as to escape that tempest. It grieved him to the very soul, that he
should lose my company, but I could not do otherwise; for I feared lest they
of Genoa would come in pursuit of me in some Skiffe, or the like vessel. I
bought three beasts for to carry my self and my trunkes, I entertained a
servant, and giving out, that I was to go my journey (no man knowing the
contrary) we took our leave for ever.

The end of the second Book of the second Part of Guzman de Alfarache.
THE ROGVE: OR, THE SECOND PART OF THE LIFE OF GUZMAN DE ALFARACHE. THE THIRD
BOOK.
Wherein he relates all the rest of his lewd and roguish life, from the time
that he returned into Spain, till he was condemned to the Galleys, where we
must leave him.
CHAPTER I.
Guzman de Alfarache, having taken his leave of Captain Favelo, telling him,
that he was to go for Sevill, makes for Saragoca, where he peruses the
statutes of Gotam College, otherwise called, The Hospital of Fools.

WHEN a man (out of some particular end known to himself) has a mind to
grace a lie, for to How men use to grace their lies.
bring forth witnesses to credit his falsehoods, he seeks out a fountain, a
lake, a stone, some metal, tree, or herb, wherewith he proves his
untruths, and presently alleges for his authority, that he has said
nothing, but what stands with reason, and is made good by all those, that have
any in-sight in natural Philosophy. And in this manner he quoteth a thousand
witnesses; he being the man that tells the lie, and lays the burden of it on
other men's shoulders. But I will run a contrary course to this; for I (my
self not lying) shall tell you their lie; not that I affirm it to be so; but
because it seems to be so. And so it ought to be taken. For that Apollonius
Tianeus takes it upon himself, and says; That he has seen a stone, called
Pantaura, which is the Queen of all other stones, (...) of (...) ^ne Pant^a.
whereon the Sun does work in that forcible manner, that it has all the
v^es in it, that are to be found in all other stones whatsoever that are in the
world, and that it works the same effects: And that as the Lodestone draws
the iron unto it; so this Pantaura, attracteth all other stones unto it self,
preserving that party from all kind of poison, that shall bear it abort him.

To this stone, we may very well, and with a great d^e of reason, compare
riche^. For see what virtue there is in all other things, the same shall we
find Of ri^es.
in riches. It draws all unto it self, and preserves the possessor thereof
from all manner of poison. It does all in all; it brings mighty things to
pass; it is a most fierce and cruel beast; it ouercomes all; treads down
all, that stands in its way; and commands all. It makes every thing stoop to
its power; it ^ubjcteth the earth, and all that therein is. By riches, the
fiercest beasts are (...) ^me; no fish, though never so great, can resist
riches; nor the least of fishes, that hide themselves in the concaues and
hollow holes of the rocks, though ouer-whelmed with water, and drowned in the
deep, can escape its ^orce; nor can the fowls of the air, though of the
swiftest and nimblest wing, (...) from its Empire; it exenterates, and pulls
out the very bowels from the profoundest parts of the earth, upon which the
highest mountains have their foundation; and it makes dry the most hidden
sands, which the Sea does cover in her bottomless Abyss. What altitudes, has
not it abased? What difficulties, has not it overcome? What impossibilities,
has not it facilitated? In what dangers, has she wanted safety? In what
adversity, has not she found friends? What thing has she desired, which
she has not obtained? Or what Law has she made, which has not been
obeyed? And being, as it is, so venomous a poison, that not only like the
Basiliske, by being beheld by us, it kills our bodies; but by a bare desire
only (being coueted) destroys our souls, damning them for ever to the
bottomless pit of Hell; yet she her-selfe is a treacle to the harm we
receive from her, and a counterpo^, Of the use of (...).
to that venom, wherewith she infecteth our souls and conscience, if he
that possesses riches, can (as of an Antidote, or some precious preseruat^
make (...) use thereof. Riches, in its own nature, and in it self, has (...)
^ur, (...) knowledge, nor power, nor valor, nor any other good, (...) name
(...).
(...) punishment, nor glory, more then that, whereunto, they that do pos^e
it, do direct it. It is like unto the Cameleon, which assumeth the color of
that thing, on which it settles its self: Or of the nature of that water of
the Lake Fenco; of which the Arcadians report, that he that drinks thereof
ouernight, grows sick; but he that takes it after the Sun is once up,
waxes well. He that shall live in idleness, heaping up treasure by night,
that is, secretly scraping a great deal of wealth together, ouer-charging his
conscience therewith, he sure shall be sick: But he that shall use them in
the day time, and show them to the light, that his works may shine before men,
and that he come with a clear conscience, having the stomach of his soul
empty of sin, and his conscience not ouer-clogg'd with worldly cares, this man
shall be made whole. Neither is the rich man condemned, nor the poor man
saved, for that the one is rich, and the other poor: but only because the
rich man abuses his riches, and the poor man his poverty. For if the rich
man treasures up, and the poor cover, neither is the rich man rich, nor the
poor man poor; The best and truest richer.
and both are to be condemned. But that may be called the best and the truest
riches, which being possessed, is despised. Fpr riches serve only (at least
should) to relieve our own necessities, to communicate with the good, and to
distribute amongst our friends. The better and greater pare, which rich men
have of riches, is the lester part, in regard they are so occasional in men,
inciting them (especially if their hearts be once set upon them) to this, or
that other Proverb.
sin. Ill desires, beget ill doings. Riches in its own nature, is a very
sweet thing: To this, man's appetite has a sweet tooth, and a greedy gaping
after it. And as it is in the Proverb; La mancana La mancana cor^e peligro en
las pujas del erizo. Of Gods providence.
corre peligro en las pujas del erizo; that Apple is in great danger, that
sticks on the prickles of a Hedge-hogs back.

The Divine providence (for our greater good) being to divide and distribute
its gifts, not laying all the weight of them upon one side, thought good to
repart them in different manner, and on different persons, to the end, that all
might be saved. This Providence made both the rich and the poor. To the rich
she gave temporal goods; to the poor, spiritual blessings: to the end, that
the rich man distributing his riches to the poor, might thereby purchase Gods
favor; and so remaining both equal, might equally gain heaven; which is to
be opened with a golden key; to wit, with riches, by using them How heaven gate
is to be opened.
well: And sometimes likewise this door of heaven is to be opened with a
picklocke; that is, by dispensing our goods to the poor: Yet notwithstanding,
does not man, only for that he has more, thereby merit more: but because he
more despises then desires. For, without comparison, much more is the riches
of a poor man that is contented, then of a rich man that is never satisfied.
He possesses them, that is not possessed by them; he is rich that seeks not
after riches; and he has most store, that is the least storer. This is the
only man whom we may truly term rich, wise, and honorable.

And if the wiseman would use his wisdom well, and would measure that Nature
contented with a little.
which he has need of, with that which he has, nature would content it self
with a little; and even in that little, would he find an overplus. But because
the fool inlargeth the cord, and would embrace that which he has, according
to that which he desires, God so orders this measure, that though he had all
whatsoever the world contains, yet should he still be poor. To him that The
covetous man never contented, and therefore never rich.
is not contented, nothing is enough; To a having mind, all is too little;
wanting much, by having too much. The eye of a covetous man, will never say, no
more then will the Sea, or Hell, Yame hasta. Now I have enough. Rich, and wise,
shall thou be, when thou live so within thy compass, that he that knows
thee, should admire the little, that thou have, and the much, that thou
spendest: and when it shall not cause any wonder in thee, to see what little
means thou have to live, and what great possessions other men enjoy.

Thou see me here now rich, very rich, and in Spain; but far worse, then
How it fared with Guzman now he was rich.
I was before; for if before, poverty made me too impudent; why riches has now
made me too confident. If I could but have contented my self, or had I but had
the temper of a well governed man, I could never have wanted; but because I
neither did the one, nor knew the other, for to get money I endangered my body,
and hazarded my soul. I was never contented, never satisfied, never at quiet
with my self. And for that I led an idle kind of life, and was not willing to
take any pains, (unless it were in roguery) I lost that with ease, which I
got with much labor. I was like unto that wheel which conuayes water to your
Aqueducts, no sooner full, but presently empty. I cared little for money, kept
it less, but alwaeys employed it ill. My money was the price of blood, it was
spent upon Sepultures for dead bodies, on dead works, and worldly vices. This
was the use I put it to, and therefore it is no marvel, if it thriu'd no
better with me. Easily it came, and easily it went. And in the end I lost both
it, and my self, as you shall hear hereafter.

Flying from that mischief, that might follow me, I went out of Barcelona,
Guzman, how he goes out of Barcelona.
forsaking the rode-way, going by by-pathes from place to place, betaking my
self to unknown trackes. I gave out that I was to go to Sevill, I framed
excuses, to be the better believed. I talked of the Vows that I had made, and
invented a thousand other lies; and for no other cause in the world, then to
defeat the Spies of their purpose, and that they might not know what was become
of me, nor find the pricking of the Hare, that was now so far before the
hounds. The Mules were mine own, my servant a new-comer, and unacquainted with
my tricks. I trauail'd which way it pleased me, according as my mind served
Prou^rbe.
me, or as it came first in my head; here to day, and to Oy a qui, masiana en
Francia.
morrow in France, without staying in any one set-place; and always changing
my clothes: for I came not to any place where I might change my apparel, but I
did it, being of no great charge, not passing a hundred Crowns or there-abouts.

In this manner did I travail over all that Country, till I came to Saragoca,
Guzman comes to Saragoca.
receiving no small contentment, that I was safely arrived in that noble and
famous City. According as my youthfulness did prick me on, my money hold
out, and the Dames did incite me, so did I continue there some few days,
though all, and many more had been too little for to view and enjoy it is
greatness: So fair and strong were the buildings, so good the government, so
His like, and dislike of Saragoca.
great the provision, all things so good cheap, and those reasonable rates,
that me thought it had a smatch of Italy. In one only thing I found it very
strange, and to my seeming, at the first sight, somewhat terrible: which was
the harder for me to digest, and the worse to be endured, for that I knew not
the cause of it. And it was, to see, how men, knowing the condition of those
women, and that every little occasion is sufficient for them to make their
longings laws, forming The custom in Saragoca concerning widows.
bodies of shadows, would put a bridle upon them, lest by losing that decorum
and respect which they owe to their deceased husbands, assuming too much
liberty unto them, they were likely to stumble on a thousand blocks, that
might be an occasion of their falling, and cause them to run on headlong to
the utter ruin of their reputation, which in a woman being once lost, is never
again to be recovered.

It was my hap to walk through a spacious street, which they call, the Cosso,
which though it made a fair show, yet was it much graced by a handsome widow,
that was young and well-fauoured, and to my seeming of good both wealth and
quality. I made a stand to view her; she likewise stood still, and would not
away: she knew well enough of what disease I was sick, but would take no
notice of it, nor made any other semblance or show unto me, then as if neither
I or she had been there, or as if we had not seen one another. I made more
turns about her window, then a horse does about a Mill; (for they are not a
few, that use daily the like kind of fooleries,) yet did she not show her
self either coy or scornful unto me, or that she was offended with me for
it. Nor did I once offer to speak a word unto her, till at last, she seeming
(me thought) unto me, to wax weary of this my foolish silence: I conceived
that she said to her self, what painted timbrell is this? what Piece without
powder, that has made me wait here these two long hours, and making still
proffers, as though he would shoot, has not yet discharged his musket, nor so
much as once opened his mouth. With that she went her way; and I stood looking
Proverb.
when she should return: being now fully resolved to let fly Perd^r un v^te,
p^ ^endat el (...).
another arrow, to see if I could find the former that I had lost; but she
came no more in play, and so I mist the mark that I meant to have shot at. I
went home to my lodging, and demanded of mine Host, what she was; but as it
were accidentally, and in a careless kind of fashion, without any the least
show that I did it of set purpose, or for any interest of mine own, giving him
such marks and tokens, whereby he might guess whom I meant.

This Gentlewoman (said mine Host) is a widow, and that not one, but many
ways, exceeding fair and beautiful. I would needs know of him how. He told
me, so many, that every particular fairness in her, were a sufficient
b^utifying to any other woman. She is fair (as you see) in her face, she is
l^kewise ^yre in her I i^ge, being of the best descent in this City; she is
also fry (...) her wealth ^es, having much of her own, and much by her
husband; and abo^ all, most fair in her discretion, for therein especially
does her beauty exceed. I saw the pot Tan ^na esta la med^da, que (...) de
vert^.
was so full, that I was afraid, it would run Proverb.
over; and therefore I said unto mine Host, that he might not run himself
out of breath; How comes it then to pass, if she be of that rank and quality,
as you say she is, that her friends and kinsfolk do give way, that such a
worthy Gentlewoman, should run such a deal of hazard, as she does; for
youth, beauty, riches, and liberty, can hardly walk out their stations without
tripping, Guzman arg^es with his Host about this custom.
if not falling. How much better and safer were it, both for them, and her, to
get her another good husband, and cause her to marry, then to suffer her to
live in this dangerous state of widowhood. Whereunto mine Host replide; you
say well Sir, but this cannot be done, but to her great loss and hinderance;
for that very day, that she shall betake her self to a second marriage, she is
to lose all the estate, which she had by her former husband, which is no small
matter. But continuing still a widow, she shall be Vsufructuary of all that he
left her, and enjoy it as long as she lives.

Then said I, O how hard a condition, how rigorous a clause is this? How much
better were it to deal with this Gentlewoman, and such other as she is, as
they use to do in Italy, whose husbands, when they dye, leave their wives a
large Legacy, disposing it in that manner, that it be paid unto them at the day
of their marriage, declaring thereby, that they merely left it them to that
end. And this they do, to the end that they may enjoy so great a benefit by a
second marriage, whereby their state shall not only be advanced, but their
honor likewise secured, which otherwise might chance to receive some scandal.
I was pressing this argument a little more home unto him; but he interrupted me
Proverb.
and answered thus unto me. Sir, has not you worship often heard say; En cada
tierra su vso; Every En cada tierra, su vso.
Country has his custom? This goes current here, and that in Italy. And that
other I am sure is not unknown unto you; Cada loco, Proverb.
en su Cada loco, sabe mas en su casa, que el cuerdo en el agena.
casa sabe mas, que el cuerdo en el agena; Every fool is wiser in his own
house, then a wise man is in another. Whereunto I replyde; If here be no
better Law then this, and if people shall suffer themselves to be governed in
this manner, I know well enough what I say, I tell you plainly, I like not of
it, nor can I by any means approve it. And to this end it is also said, Al mal
vso, Proverb.
quebrarle la pierna. A bad Custom is better broken then kept. The legs of it
g Al mal vso, quebrarle la pierna. Bad customs not to be kept.
are to be broken, that it may not stand any more in force. A holy, good and
just Law, ought to be grounded on reason. I am of your mind (said mine Host)
but they that are more learned, then I am, would peradventure give you better
satisfaction then I can. Yet in my opinion, it seems to carry some force with
it; and I am verily persuaded, that that which moved them to make this Law,
was; not that a vvidow might not marry, but that being a vvidow, she might
not live in want; and to take away all occasion, left for lack of convenient
maintenance, according to the condition of her quality, she might fail in her
obligation, and use that ill, which was instituted for good: so that the
fault is the vvomans, though the punishment be the man's.

This mine honest Host, did not half satisfy me with this (as he thought)
his sound reason: vvhereupon, I entered into a discourse, thinking with my
self, what kind of creatures these women be; who if you lead them by
evil vvayes, they turn evil; if by good, worse; and never shall you come to
know what to make of them. They Muger, el mal o el bien de su casa. Guzman
discourses of women.
are the making or the marring of their Proverb.
house: The establishers, or the destroyers thereof. In their running they
trip, and in going they fall. And therefore their name suits well with their
nature; being for this cause, called Woman, because she is a vvoe to man. She
has a smooth skin, but a harsh nature; a soft tongue, but a hard heart;
silken words, but sowtage deeds. They seemed (me thought) unto me, (pardon the
coursnes of my comparison) to be like unto straw, which if you let it stand in
the field in its natural place, without laying it in such rooms, where it
ought to be kept, it is preserved by the vvinde and rain; but if you restrain
and straiten it, clapping it up close in some little private lodging, it will
shoot it self out, and break through the walls; nor shall you reap any
other good of it, then that sour juice which it will yield you, like unto that
of the sour Orange, affording much bitterness, but no benefit. They know not
how to keep a mean in their actions, and less in their love or hate: Nor
ever yet could they use a moderation in their crauings and desirings. That much
which they receive, they think it still too little; and that little which they
give, they always think it too much. They are generally covetous; yet
notwithstanding all these faults, naked is that house Des dichada la casa, don
de (...) faldas faltan
where there is never a wife. All will reele, where the Reele goes not. Where
there is never a Donde no ay chapines, no ay cosa been puesta.
white apron, there is no Proverb.
good order, the meat ill dressed, and the table sluttish. As the breath of man
does uphold houses, that they run not to ruin and decay; so the steps of a
well gouernd huswife, does preserve and multiply wealth: And as a good Chine of
Bacon, makes glorious porrige; and as a man becomes the streets; so does a
Proverb.
woman adorn the house.

But this is not a place to treat of their virtues. I come unto mine own,
which at that time were more then the virtues of Tobacco. I continued a while
discoursing with mine Host, who made me a la ge relation of many things
concerning that City, as of its privileges and liberties, from which
conversation of his, I received so much content, and was so attentive to his
talk, that I would have forgone any other intertainment, to have inioyed this
his pleasing discourse. I may thank my sins that had brought me thither. I
had taken an extreme cold in the Galley, which I was not yet well rid of; and
finding my head st^t, I plucked a handkercher out of my pocket, and blew my
nose, which I h^d no sooner pulled thence, but I opened it, and looked
thereupon, as if that Oyster had afforded me a pearl, it being the manner and
fashion of that Country so to do, (contrary to the rule of good manners)
being a no less slovenly, then common trick amongst them.

The crafty Rogue mine Host, perceiving why I did it, and that I made, as it
were, a sc^ffe of their customs, being a good speaker (as he was) a proper
handsome fellow, and a pleasant; speaking in a low voice, and nodding his head
toward me, softly said unto me; Fly, Sir, fly; Hide your self, as soon as
you can: Quickly, quickly, I say. Poor and miserable man that I was, O these
his words, how ill did they sound in mine ears! O how my heart was Guzman, put
into a n^edlesse fear by mine Hosts means.
scorcht with them, like the Partridge that is first singed in the fire, and
afterward to be put presently on the spit! My feathers were singed, and my
pride abated. He had scarce made an end of his words, when at two leapes, I
had got me behind the curtains of the bed. He being ignorant of my villainies,
thought that I had done this innocently, and out of simplicity, as being
startled with the sodainnesse thereof: and so instantly breaking out into a
loud laughter, he merrily said unto me; I perceive, Sir, you are not troubled
with the Gout: by my faith Sir, you are a nimble active Gentleman: your Worship
may now come forth, if you please; as God would have it, it is nothing: the
storm is past, the coast clear, and you may safely show your self upon the
hatches. I came forth from thence as pale as ashes, my color was quite gone,
and death appeared in my face; and did much wonder at my self, considering the
great fear and pe^turbation I then was in, that the sudden astonishment, and
the aff^ight i^ had put me into, had not made me to leap out of the window into
the street.

I came out at last, but whether more amazed, or ashamed, I cannot tell you;
but I sought to dissemble it the best I could, that I might not raise up that
dust which might chance to put out mine eyes. Being now come again to my
self, I ask't him what was the mystery of this, and what he meant by it: I
pray Sir said he, content your self, rest you quiet, and give me presently two
shillings from you. I put my hand in my pocket, and threw him forth a Royal,
and when I saw he was quiet, having by this time laughed himself weary, I
began a-fresh to ask him, why he demanded two shillings of me, and what was
that, that had passed before, when he bid me fly, and go hide my self? He
falling into a new vain of laughing, louder then before, looking cheerily and
merrily upon me, said unto me: Sir, I have here a Procuration substituted by
the Administrators of an Hospital, for the recovering of certain duties and
rights of those, which come to my house, which I am to challenge of them, if
they commit any forfeyture, contained in the said Procuration. From this time
forward, your Worship may go over all the world by virtue of these my Letters
Patent, without any farther molestation to your person, or your purse. With
this Royal, you have paid for your entrance, and have free license to be gone,
when you list. When I heard him tell me this, what with that was A tale of a
Gentlewoman, that married with a new Christian.
past, and what with this present gamball, I was so confounded therewith, that
that might be said to me, which was to a Gentlewoman, that is well known, who
having matched her-selfe with a new Christian, for that he was rich, and she
poor; who being with child by him, and finding her-selfe (it being the first
that she had gone withal) out of ease, and in much pain, talking with
another Gentlewoman that was an acquaintance and friend of hers; she said
unto her; In good faith, I find my self so ill, that I know not what to say
unto it. I was never in my life, in that Tene^ el Iudio en el ^uerpo That is;
estar con miedo: To be in a great fear. Covarr. verb. Iudio, page 492.
Jewish taking, as I am now in. No marvel Proverb.
(said the other) having a Jew within you; and bearing him about you (as you
do) in your body. And in good faith, my self (like this Gentlewoman) was in
that fear at that time, that if mine Hosts laughing and jesting with me, had
not quickly rid me of this doubt, I verily believe, I should have fallen down
dead for fear. His breath, put breath into me; his liveliness, life: And
seeing him thus set upon the merry pin, I said unto him; A common oath, or
asseueration in Spain: English, Body of me.
Cuerpo de mi: As I am an honest man; since I have paid the penalty, I will
know, by your leave, what is the fault I have committed. For that Judges
sentence is rigorous and unjust, that shall condemn me in charges, for that
which I never did, and shall not give me a discharge for it. For it may be,
that both parties being heard, my money may be returned me back again.
Because your Worship (says mine Host) seems to be a worthy discreet
Gentleman, I will read unto you a bede-roll of such statutes as I have here
for the recovery of those amercements, and those penalties, wherewith they are
to be punished, who incur the danger of them. This Royal is a fee, that goes
to the Beedle for your entrance. Only I shall entreat your Worship to have the
patience to stay a while, till I shall go run, and fetch it you. He went his
way, and returns again in a trice, bringing a great book with him under his
arm, wherein he said, he did set down the admittance, or matriculation of
those that were made free of that Incorporation, and taking out some few sheets
of paper, that lay loose in the book, he began to read some of their statutes
and ordinances, whereof I will repeat such unto you, as remain in my memory,
with a protestation which I make unto you, to acquaint you with those few
hereafter, which shall occur to my remembrance. And they speak after this
manner.

The statutes and constitutions of Gotam College, OR The Hospital of Fools.

WE REASON, absolute Monarch, and sole Sovereign of the world, not
acknowledging any superior, or in any sort equal unto us, for the redressing
and reforming of men's manners, against the obstinate and perverse wilfulness
of folly, and all other her wickedness, which has taken such deep root, and
multiplied it self in that abundance, to our notable hurt and detriment, the
prejudice of our Royal prerogative, and the great damage of all mankind; for
to avoid those greater inconveniences, which the corruption of so dangerous and
spreading a canker may cause, that it may not creep more and more upon our
loving subjects (whose welfare and safety we tender as our own) and that it
may not dilate it self any farther, to their utter undoing, and final
destruction; We will and command, have and do ordain, as also do publish and
proclaim these our Laws, to all those that are already borne, or shall be
borne hereafter in succeeding ages, by the power of our Regal authority, and
by the general consent of our Council of State, that they be taken and held
for such, as are now by us established and confirmed, and that they be
punctually kept, religiously observed, and fully cumplyde withal, both in all,
and every the least point or parcel, herein specified, or contained, as you
will answer it to your peril, and incur that grievous punishment, which to
those that shall violate and infringe these our Laws, is in that case provided.

Moreover, because the first thing that we are in our princely care to consider
of, is, that all due, fitting, and convenient provision be made, for the quick
expedition, and good execution of Justice, we in our wisdom have thought it
meet, to nominate and appoint certain Officers, of good both sufficiency, and
trust, such as shall be requisite and needful for this so weighty and
important a business, And therefore we do depute, nominate, and assign for
Judges, good Policy, Curiosity, and Solicitude; to the end, that they, as if
it were us our self, and as representing us in our own proper person, may
truly and uprightly administer justice, giving them by virtue of our power,
full, and plenary authority, to apprehend, set at liberty, and punish, any
manner of person, or persons whatsouer upon just cause, referring our said
Judges to be ordered and directed by these our laws and ordinances, and not to
differ from the true intent and meaning of them, to the damnifying of the
subject, and the dishonouring of us. Furthermore, both for the present, and
ever here-after, do we substitute as elder Brothers of this Fraternity, and
chief Wardens of this Incorporation, all those that be jealous obseruers,
every one according to his place and merit, and he that shall be most jealous,
shall be most honored. Our Attorney General, shall be Diligence, and our
Bedle, that shall warn them to the Court, shall be Fame.

First of all therefore, any person, or persons, that shall go walking and
talking 1
to themselves in the streets, or shall do the like, when they are all alone,
or at home in their private houses, we condemn them for fools for three
mon^ths, within which term of time, we will and command, that they abstain
therefro, and reform this their foolery. And in case, they shall not amend
this fault, our pleasure is, that for the better accomplishment thereof, they
have a longer and more peremptory time set them down, of some three Terms, or
more; within which limited time, they shall bring in a certificate of their
said reformation and amendment, upon pain of being held for approved,
attainted, and convicted fools, and accordingly command our foresaid elder
Brothers, and Ancients of the Company to bring in their evidence, and to find
them guilty, and to see them afterward severely punished, as violaters and
breakers of our Laws.

Item, They that shall walk through any public or private place, that is
paued 2
with brick, or with stone, and shall go with a great deal of care and
study, pitching either their toes, or their heels, in such a direct line,
side, or corner of the said bricks, or stones, shall be condemned in the same
punishment as aforesaid.

Item, They that walking along the streets, casting their cloak under one
arm, and stretching out their hand, or their finger, shall go, as they pass 3
along, either patting the wall, or making streakes, and Indentures with their
fingers ends, let them be admitted scholars of our said House or College;
provided always, that they have six months of approbation granted unto them;
In which time, we command them to be reformed. Otherwise, and in default
thereof, we have already ordained, and do now ordain; That the Warden,
Sub-warden, or Deane of this our College, and in their absence, the
Seniorfellow, put his coat upon him (according to the custom of the House) his
cap, and his babble, and other ornaments belonging to his degree, and ever
afterward be held a professed fool.

Item, They that shall play at bowls, or at billiards, when they have thrown
out their bowl, if by chance it shall run awry, and that they with it, shall
also 4
wry their body; thinking, that which way they lean, the bowl should run
inclining to that side, and govern it self, as they direct it with these
their mimick gestures, shall dye in this their sin; and we must declare them
for brothers already professed. And we further command, that the like be also
understood of those, who use the like Apish action, seeing something fall down
from some high place to the ground, shrinking their shoulders, wrying their
mouths, or turning up the whites of their eyes. And likewise of those, who
having vizards on their faces (as in masks and revels) shall under those, go
making of strange gesticulations, either by frowning, or smiling, or biting of
the lip, as if in so doing, it did really and truly seem unto them, that these
variations, and alterations of their countenances, were taken notice of by some
outward appearance, when as being thus masked, it is impossible, that any
inward gesture of theirs should be outwardly discerned. And of those, who do
counterfeit and imitate the like, not knowing whether they do the same or no.
Or if in cutting out some thing with a bad pair of sheeres, or with a
dull-edged knife, or taking pains with any the like untoward instrument, they
shall draw their mouth on the one side like a Plaice; lill out their tongue, like
a Calfe; wrinckle up their cheeks, forehead and eyes, like a scorched piece of
parchment, and such Idiotlike postures, our will and pleasure is, that they in
like manner, shall take the degree of fools.

Item, They, who expecting their servant, (having sent him forth on an errand)
if in case he be somewhat long a coming, shall stay waiting for him at 5
the doors, or windows of his house, thinking that by his staying there for
him, he will make the more haste, and come the sooner, we condemn all such to
retract and acknowledge their error, upon pain, that in case they shall
refuse so to do, they be severely proceeded against.

Item, They that draw their cards with a great deal of leisure, seeking by
degrees, by a little and a little, to discover at this, or that other corner,
first whether 6
it color right, and afterward, discoursing and arguing the case, whether it
be such or such a card, they themselves knowing for certain, that for all
this their laborious lingering and delay, they shall never a whit the sooner
encounter, or miss, then if they had presently taken it up, and made show
thereof, as soon as it was dealt into their hand; we condemn them to the same
acknowledgment, as aforesaid. And for some causes moving us thereunto, we have
thought fit, to give them free leave and license, without incurring any farther
penalty, to follow their ancient custom; but with this condition; That as often,
as he, or they, offending in this manner, shall see an Ancient of the house, or
pass by his chamber door, he shall make an acknowledgment of this his error,
by putting off his hat.

Item, They that are gotten up into some upper room, and either sitting or
standing in some window, or open gallery, shall from thence spit down; whether
7
it be thereby to take (as it were with a plummet) the evenness of the
building; or to see, if he can make his spittle to light just upon such a
stone, or some one mark or other, which his eye has chosen out; we strictly
charge and command them, that they retract and reform this their folly, and
that upon short warning, upon pain of being taken for public professors of
the same.

Item, They who trauayling upon the way, shall inquire of those passengers, 8
whom they meet withal, how far it is to such a baiting-place, or to such a
Town, thinking, that by this their asking, they shall the sooner reach unto
it, we condemn them in the like penalty, inioyning them for penance, the
badnes of the way, the Carryers iading of them, and mine Hosts cozening of
them: Not inflicting any greater punishment, out of the hope of their amendment.

Item, They who when they make water, go streaking the walls with their 9
urine, as if they were busy about some curious delineations, or framing some
Antick-figures, or shall piss in the dust, making I know not what scattering
angles, and Circles; or in some chinke in a wall, or little hole in the ground;
We will and command, that they do so no more, upon pain (in case they shall
persevere therein) to be punished by their Judge, and delivered over to an
elder Brother, or one of the Ancients of the House.

Item, They who when they hear the clock strike, count not the hours, but
ask others, what is a clock; it being more fit and facile for them, to tell it
10
them selves. Which carelessness of theirs, proceeds often times from the
abundance of a choleric kind of humor; We therefore, strictly charge and
command all such, that they have an especial care of their health, and in case
they be poor, and not able to be at the charge of physic, that then one of
the Masters of our Hospital, cause them to be carried thither, giving order
that some preparatiues be provided for them of wild Cherries, or sharp sour
Orange, lest otherwise they might run the danger of losing their wits, and
quickly turn either fools, or mad men.

Item, They who have but a little meat before them, and many mouths a going,
shall divert themselves from their feeding, to entertain the company with 11
this tale, or that d^scourse, taking more pleasure (like a sort of prattling
fools as they are) to fill other men's ears, then their own bellies; by which
means they often rise a hunger'd: For as much, as these are did in the woll,
and come ready dressed to our hands, we remit them to be registered amongst your
incurable fools. And therefore command, that there be an especial care taken
of them. For these are in the 7th degree, and are almost in their full height
to be taken.

Item, They who out of covetousness, or any other cause or reason whatsoever,
so as they be not driven thereunto of force and necessity, (for in such cases,
12
Laws are not to be kept) when they go to market, buy the worser sort of
victuals for the saving of their purse, and spending the less in their houses;
as if a Physician, an Apothecary, or a Barber-Surgeon (who all the year long
come to your houses, to cure those diseases, which were caused by bad and
unwholesome meats) were not dearer by much, then any the best meat they could
buy: We condemn them to a general disgracing of themselves, declaring them
(as before declared) to be professed fools; forbidding them from henceforth to
do the like, upon pain of being committed over to the Curate, Sexton, or
Graue-maker of his, or their Parish, to be punished either more, or less,
according to the hurt that shall grow thereby.

Item, They who in the summer-nights, as also some in the winter, sit, or
stand, till their breech, or their feet ache, in some open Court or Tarasse,
gaping and 13
gazing on the heavens, and from the clouds of the air, go forming the
figures of Serpents, and the shapes of Lions, and so of other beasts, we
pronounce and declare them to be brothers of this Fraternity: But if in this
kind of sort, or the like manner, they shall thus entertain themselves with
these bables, that they may thereby, give place and time in their own houses,
assome use to do for their own interest and private gain, that they may see
the sign of Taurus, Aries, and Capricorn, which is a most foul and dishonest
case, we condemn them (though accounted of the Brotherhood) not to be capable
of the privileges thereof, nor that they be admitted into their Senate House,
nor that they have any wax lights allowed them on Festival days.

Item, They who wearing either black shoes, or white, or of any other
colored 14
velvet, shall, for to take away the dust from them, or to give them a better
glass, make them clean with their cloak, as if that were not of a more noble
and better condition, and much more costly, and that for to make them clean
and handsome, they shall leave that foul and dustie, we condemn them for neat
fools. And in case they be Noblemen, for their greater honor, we will have
them to be taken for three-piled fools.

Item, They who having past some few days, without seeing their friends and 15
acquaintance, when afterward, meeting one another by chance, they say each to
other; Are you alive Sir? Is it possible, that there should be any such man
upon the face of the earth? Which notwithstanding that it be a kind of
indearing of a man's love, yet must we have them enrolled amongst the rest,
being there are other more proper forms of salutation, without asking a man,
whether he be upon earth, or alive, when as he was never yet in heaven, and
sees him stand just before him. And we farther will and command, that all such
have a sign, or mark of Admiration, set upon them; and that (during our
pleasure) they never go without it.

Item, They who after the hearing of Mass, and when they have made an end of
their Ave-Maries, at the tingling of the bell, or at any other hour, when a 16
sign is given in the Church, that Service is ended, shall say to such a one;
I kiss your hands Sir, howbeit this phrase of speech is supposed to be no
other then an acknowledgment of thanks, the other having bowed his body toward
him, or given him the good day, or good night; yet notwithstanding we condemn
them for fools, and command them to abjure this manner of speaking, upon
punishment that they shall carry this name with them to their grave, and while
they live, be pointed at for their folly, for that they more esteem of a false
and lying beza las manos, I kiss your hands (which they never kiss, nor would
kiss them, though they were the Bishops hands, and much less those of other
inferior persons, whereof some have them full of scabs, of scurfe, or
leprosy, and other some, with nails either ready to drop off, or full of The
Spanish word is; Vn^^s cayreladas. The French renders it, Ongles si lanternes,
and si salement colorez.
dirt, looking like Caveary, that they would be ready to turn a man's stomach)
then to say, God give you good night, or good morrow. And the like command, we
lay upon those, who make answer with the like salutation, at another man's
sneezing, when they may as well say, God bless you.

Item, They who come to a man's house to inquire for him, and asking whether 17
he be within, or no; it being answered unto him, or them, that he is not
within, but is gone abroad, return a second time to reply: Is he then gone
abroad? we condemn them as rebels, and contumacious people, for repeating that
demand, whereof they had already satisfaction.

Item, They who having hit their shin, or their toes against some sharp stone,
by stumbling unawares upon it, and with a great deal of fleame, and full of 18
choler, return back again to look upon it at leisure with a fixed eye,
and a troubled mind, we condemn them in the same penalty, and command them,
either to remove it out of the way, or that they do not offer to look upon
it, upon pain of farther increasing their punishment.

I^e, They, who blowing their nose, in the taking away of their handkercher, 19
look steadily upon it, and pry into it, as if some pear'es had dropped from
thence, and that they would safely lap them up for fear of losing, we condemn
the^ for brothers of our said foundation, and that as often as they shall offend
in this fault, they give an alms to the Hospital of incurable ^les, grounding
our reason of this ^ulct upon this, that they shall hereafter have others do
^s much for them.

When he was come thus far, me thought he wanted only the bell to toll him
off. I was ready to burst my heart with laughing, and the bede-roll was so
long, that I would not suffer him to go on any further, and therefore
interrupting him in his reading, I said unto him; Now (my good Host) seeing
you have done me the favor to advise me of these things, that I may thereby
know how to correct my errors; tell me I pray you, where-abouts this Hospital
is, who is the Principal, and what lands and rents belong unto it. Sir (said
mine Host) for that there are so many diseased and sick persons, and that the
Hospital is incapable, and poor, considering the few that are well, and the
many that are sick; it was agreed upon, that they should change their lodgings
and be scattered up and down in diverse other places, so that now all the world
in a manner appertains to this Hospital. Where then (said I unto him) shall
those discreet and wise men, that remain yet untouched, be so conveniently
lodged, that they may be out of the danger of this infection? Hereunto he made
answer, I hear (Sir) that there is but one only man in all the world, that is
free from this contagion; but as yet I could never learn who that one should
be. Every particular man, thinks that he is this sound party, but few, besides
himself, will believe it.

The certainest news that I can give you hereof, is, That there is a great
Enginer lately found out, that will undertake to put into an egge-shell, as
many as shall be absolutely free of this disease, and does farther make offer,
that together with their persons, he will likewise thrust into the said
egge-shell, all their goods, lands, and rents, and that notwithstanding all
this, they shall have so much elbow-roome, that they shall scarce touch one
another. I could hold no longer, but must needs tell him; This (mine Host) is
a malicious interpretation, and a matter of mere waggerie, and no less large
then the Hospital it self. But, being well considered, I find that it is very
true; in regard we are all of us but men, and have all sinned in our father
Adam. Our conversation had continued somewhat longer, and we should have made
an end of reading of the statutes of the said house, if the night had not
hasted away so fast. Besides, I had a great desire to have another fling at the
widow, and did long to fetch a turn or two before her lodging, to see how the
world went there. So leaving the rest to the next days reading, I willed my
servant to bring me a Guzman goes by night abroad about the City.
very gallant suit of clothes, which I had in my truncke, and taking my sword
under mine arm, I went out of the house, and walked about the City, seeking my
fortune. I went stalking through those streets in a careless kind of
fashion, with a mind so well ^sed, and a heart so contented, that I would not
have changed my present state, with any Prince in Christendom; thinking my
self to be such a tall fellow of my hands, that no man was able to stand in
my way.

At the winding of a corner, where two streets met together, and made a cross,
I met with a couple of young wenches, the one was a reasonable handsome He
meets with two was.
one, and might very well have served the turn; the other, seemed to be her
servant. I made toward them, and they did not step aside; I stopped them in
their way, and they stood still. I began to talk and discourse with them, and
they with me, and in that kind and courteous manner, that I was as it were
ravished with their company. I could not put any question to this Gentlewoman,
whereunto she had not a ready answer; she would not give an inch of her
ground, nor let any Card that came from me, pass without a Vye. There was not
any one word, that could come amiss to her. I went about to dis-inwrap her
hands of her mantle, that I might come to touch them; but the crafty hyleding,
seeming somewhat squeamish, straining courtesy, did in a pretty kind of
fashion faigne a defending of her self from that friendly violence, yet did
she not make any great hasty retreat, but did suffer me to come on in that
cunning manner, and was so nimble fingered withal, that in that short space of
time, that I was busying my hands about her face, and her breast, she with hers
was not idle, but putting them into my pocket, took thence that little, that I
had. I was hot upon the business, and in this heat of mine, I had no feeling
His w^ cozens him.
of this ache; nor had it been possible for me to have been sensible of it,
had I taken the best care, that I could. For, at such times, and upon such
fits, our memory, and our understanding fails us, only our will is then
occupied. She had no sooner made her market, and ^ript me of a matter of some
hundred Royals, but she said unto me; enough (good Sir) I beseech you no more,
for Gods sake, leave off while it is well, and do that (as you love me) which
I shall advise you unto: Let me then entreat you Sir, that you will have the
patience to stay a while at the turning of this street, through which you saw
us now come, for the next house save one, at the end of this street, is mine;
we go but a little ways off here, to fetch a piece of work, that I have put
forth to doing, I shall make no stay, but come back by and by, and be
instantly with you. We will not tarry scarce the turning of your hand, and then
you shall go in with me into my house; for there lodges no body, but I, and
my maid, and there you shall see I will be at your service, as you shall be
pleased to command me; besides, you shall hear me sing, and play in that
manner, that you never heard a sweeter voice, nor saw a better or quicker hand
upon a Virginal. Get you thither (my dear) whither I have directed you, that
you may not be seen to have come along with me; for I am a married woman, of
honorable parents, well reported of by my neighbors, and generally well thought
of, and I would not willingly lose this their good opinion; yet you seem unto
me to be a a gentleman of that quality and nobleness, that I would willingly
hazard both my person, my reputation, and whatsoever else is dearest unto me,
for your sake. I believed her in all that she had said; and did now think my
self as cock-sure of her, as if I had had her already between mine arms. I
did as she commanded me, standing close upright against the corner, where I
continued from half hour past eight of the night, till the clock had struck
eleven, and ever now and then me thought I had a glimpse of them, and that I
saw the bulkes of them a far of, making toward me, but I might as well have
staid there till this day, for any coming again of theirs. The devil a
Mistress, or maid of them, that I could see any more. When I saw that it was
so late, and that they staid so long, I imagined with my self, that she had
some Gallant to her servant, and that she being gone to his house, he would
not give her leave to return. For the which I did blame her, but not much; for
my self would have done the like by her, if she had come once within my
doors. I persuaded my self, that she could not help it; and that it was not
in her hands to do as she would: and said to my self; Aun, seran buenas
mangas, despues de Pascua: It is no great matter; A pair of Buenas son mangas,
despues de pascua. The meaning whereof, is, when that which we desire, comes to
us somewhat later then we could have wished it. Covarr. verb. mangas.
sleeves, will not do amiss after Easter. What Proverb.
is not to day, may be to morrow: and as good then as now. There are more days
in the week then one; as there are more fingers then one, on the hand. Thus
goes the world; one day follows on the Un dia, viene tras otro.
neck of another; but it is the fashion of it, To be all for the present. I
took notice of the door against another time, and went walking along another
way, as I was led along by my desires. Anon after, I returned thither again,
whither when I was come, all was very hush and quiet; there was no memory nor
sign of any one body in all that street, nor at any door or window, any noise
to be heard, nor any nose, no not so much as of a dog, or of a cat, that
peeped out. I stood prying and watching from one side to the other; I fetched
many turns, I cought, hauk't, Proverb.
and spit; I made a noise with my feet, but all in vain, and to no purpose in
the world. In the end, having staid there a great while, and being now grown
weary with walking, as well as with expectation, I was resolved to get me home
to mine Inn, as despairing of any good hopes for that night: Which as I was
about to do, I might epsy from a little window, a countenance, which Guzman
talks with a wench from a window.
by its interpreter, the tongue, seemed to be a woman's, who had thrust out her
head at a little window, whose face I could not see, or if I had, I could not
give you an account thereof, for that it was so dark. I began to talk
youthfully to her, (or rather foolishly, for such kind of parlees are but
fooleries,) but she told me that she was none of those I looked after, marry she
had a maid, that I might happily make love unto, that was a drudge of the
kitchen, and scoured her pots and her pannes. But be she, as she may be; what
ever she were, she spoke so well, and entertained me so for the time, that I
quite forgot my self for the space of two hours that we interchanged talk,
all that long while seeming unto me but one short minute. But lo, (if it
offend not thine ears,) whilst we were thus prattling, comes out a deuillish
curre, one of Belzebubs whelps, which as it should seem, flew eagerly forth
of one of the neighbors houses thereabouts, and fell a barking and balling so
loud, that it was not possible for us to hear or understand one another: The
window was high, the woman spoke very low, there was a pretty fresh wind
abroad, and the dog did so lay on, and spend his mouth so fast, that being
willing to remedy that fault, I groaped with my feet for a stone, that I might
throw it at him, and not finding any, I cast down mine eyes to the ground, and
I might perceive near unto the wall, a little copped black thing, which I
took to be a stone. Presently I caught it up in my hand, but it was not a
stone, nor nothing so hard; but had How Guzman was besmeared.
quickly found that I had be-smeared my fingers; I sought hastily to shake it
off, and giving a flirt with my hand to fling it away from me, I gave my
fingers ends such a smart ierke against the wall, that I was much pained
therewith; and to case the tingling that I had in my nails, I clapped my fingers
to my mouth ere I was aware: but I forthwith repented me of what I had done. My
often spitting would not mend the matter, and therefore I sought for help with
my other hand from my pocket, thinking to take thence my handkercher; but there
was no such thing to be found. This struck me into my dumpes, and made me
melancholy, to think how the scuruy harlotry had cony caught me. And I was so
angry besides, to see how my mouth, and my hands were inammeled, that with very
choler, my eyes were ready to start out of my head; my guts were likewise in a
good forwardnes to have leapt out of my mouth, being upon the point to vomit
out of my stomach all that I had within me, as those women use to do, that
have a fit of the Mother. And the more to anger me, this scuruy curre did so
persecute me with his bawling, that my Gentlewoman was forced to withdraw
her-selfe, and to shut to her window, and I driven to look out some thing, to
rid me of this odious and filthy stink. I rubbed my teeth against the wall, as
well as I could, thinking that way to do my self good. Well, when I saw it
would be no better, I returned in a great rage to my Inn, with purpose to
return the next night to the same place, to see if I could by chance meet with
that good wench, that had sold me this Greyhound.

CHAP. II.
Guzman de Alfarache goes from Sarago^a, and comes to Madrid; where he turns
Merchant, and is married. He breaks his credit, and turns bankrupt. He treats
of women's subtle tricks. And of the inconvenience of counter-writings; and of
their remedy.

AS soon as I came home, I got me to the well, and seigning that I would
refresh my self there a while, (because I would not have my servant acquainted
with this disgraceful accident) I wil^'d him to draw me up two buckets of
water. Which when he had done; with the one, I washed my hands, and with the
other my mouth, having almost rubbed off the skin from either, and yet did
not rest contented and fully satisfied of my self, I had taken such a
villainous conceit of this filthy odor, or rather ordure. I could not fall
asleep for my life, nor settle my self to rest all that night, for thinking
on that truth which the wench had told me, that I should never while I lived
meet with a quicker or a nimbler hand. See now whether she ly'd or no? I am
sure I shall never forget her words, so good cause have I to remember them, for
that which fell out afterward. The Gracian Helen (I assure you) nor the Roman
Lucretia, cannot be more, or (...) remembered by others, then she by me. And
yet, when I was thinking on her, the others conversation would seek to put
that out of my head, one seeking to thrust out the other, so that I was as it
were distracted between them both. I would have had them (like nails) to have
driven out one another, that I might have heard no more news of them. And when
I began to shut the door of my remembrance to these, this same scuruy copped
pibble stone came flying in at a by-window, the very conceit whereof, began
a-fresh to turn my stomach. What a bad night must we needs make of this,
having to do with so many? For if Duero. Rio famosissimo en Espan^a. Por el
qual se dixo. yo soy Duero, que todas las aguas beuo. Covarr. v^rb. Duero.
Duero, did compass me in on the one side; Pen^atajada, did girt me in on the
other. But when my hat was come to its color, and that I had considered a
little better on the business, I said with my self; If this poor trick (not
for any great hurt that it did do me, but only for that it was a trick put
upon me) I can thus hardly digest, and that it makes my stomach to rise, as
often as I think upon it; how will my kind kindred in Genoa, digest those
gudgeons, that they swallowed? how brook that famous jest, which sticks so
close to their ribs? If such a Quando aqueste assi duele, que hara con guindas?
toy as this, a mere trifle, not worth the talking of, move Proverb.
my patience so much, how would it have wrought upon me, had it been a matter
of moment? Thus did I pass away the night, thinking one while on (...),
another on that; what I should do with my self the next day, how bestow my
time, what clothes I should wear? or whether I were best to put on my great
chain, which I kept in store for high Holy Days, and great Feasts? that part
of the Town I should quarter out? what words I should speak, to move her
affection? or what present I should send her, to oblige her unto me? Then
throwing all these things out of my mind, as if they had never been in my
thought, I should run by and by back again (like a giddy-headed Spaniel)
beating and questing upon the old haunt, saying to my self: If it should be my
good hap, to meet with this young crafty harlotry to morrow, what shall I do
unto her? Shall I lay hands on her? No: Shall I take that from her, which she
filcht out of my pocket? Neither: What shall I do then? Shall I crave her
better acquaintance, and desire her friendship? Least of all. Embracing
therefore none of these, I advised with my self, and said; Why should I
trouble my self to seek after her? To what end? I know the goodness of her
hand already, and how quick and nimble her fingers be, be it for Virginal,
Harp, or any thing else that you will put them to. Let her go; God be her good
speed; and much good may it do her with them, Alla se lo aya Marta con sus
pollo^. Los pollos de Marta, piden pan, y dan les agua Marta la piadosa, etc.
Covarr. page 541.
Allase lo aya Marta consus pollos: I could wish they Proverb.
had been more for her sake. Well may she thrive with them. For if she had
not stood in need of them, and been in want, I assure my self, she would
never have put her-selfe to so much danger. I began to look a little better
into my self, and when I had well considered what I was, and knew mine own
condition, and the courses that I had run, I whispered my self in the ear,
and said; What complaints will not the butcherly Wolf frame against the poor
silly Lamb, accusing him of troubling the water when he ca^e to drink, that
he might pick a hole in his coat? A lusty strong M^le can hardly carry the
gold, the silver, the pearl, the precious stones, and the jewels, which I had
parloynd, and come clear away with them out of Italy, and yet stick not to
find fault with this poor soul, for a thing of nothing, that she took from
me, being perhaps urged thereunto out of mere necessity. O the miserable
condition of men! how apt, and how easy are we to complain^? O how much a do,
do we make about a little! How take on, as though we were undone! What a
little loss, and what a deal of lamentation? O the immense and infinite
goodness of God! How much do we offend thy divine Majesty? How little reckoning
do we make of it? and yet how easily do thou forgive us our offenses? What
vassalage, and base subsection is that, which men do y^eld to their own
passions? And because the best of things, is the curbing of them, and to make
use of them in their time and place; I know very well, and am able from thence
to read this lecture both to my self and others; That we ought to have as
much compassion of those that offend, as we have cause to envy those that
forgive. For mine own part, I will follow this lesson: Let her make herself
merry therefore with the money she got from me; for I forgive her with all my
heart.

Now whilst I was thus discoursing with my self, the day began to break. The
light, by little and little, had crept in through some chinkes of the windows,
when together with it, a little sleep likewise came creeping upon my self,
being willing to have my senses clogged with those soft-lined fetters, in which
I lay fast till nine of the clock, and slept so soundly, that I could not say;
This mouth is mine. Nor was I so glad that I had slept so well, as that I found
my self thereby the better disposed to watch the night following, without
being bound to pay that debt to nature, when my game was at the fairest, if
fortune should chance to favor me so much, as to offer me a fair occasion, to
finish what I had begun. I rose up well satisfied, wishing the hour were come,
wherein I might go to that desired place. I made me ready, and went to Mass,
and visited the Image of our Lady of Pilar de Saragoca, One of the famousest
Charches in the world, for that our blessed Lady appeared there to the Apostle
S. James, and willed him to build a Church there to her honor. Padre Pin^da
lib. 10. Monar. Eccles. cap. 25. sect 4.
Pilar, which is one of the greatest devotions, that is in Christendom. I
spent that day in walking up and down; I saw my Widow, who came to the window,
to wash her hands. I could have wished, that those drops of water, which fell
from her snowie fingers, would have trickled down upon my heart, to see if
they would have been able to quench the fire, that flamed in my breast. I had
not the face to speak a word to her: No not so much as, God save you.

I stood leaning against the corner of a wall, putting my self in a good
handsome posture, looking on her with a wanton eye, a cheerful look, and a
smiling countenance. And she likewise smilde, and talking with her servants,
who attended there on her, after she had washed, they carried away the towell,
the basin, and the ewer, which when they had set them aside, they put their
heads out at the window, and looked upon me. I having received this favor,
thought I had now brought my business to an end. I stretched out my legs, and
my breast, The Spanish posture, when they court their Mistress.
and lifting up my head, and bearing up my neck somewhat stiff, I made two or
three short turns, throwing one corner of my cloak over my shoulder, setting
my hat on the one side, laying my left hand on my sword, and resting the right on
my side, treading my steps in state, and turning my rolling eyes upon her, I
walked ley surely before her window, my eye being never off on her. Whereat
they laugh't a good; and I rested well contented. They made themselves merry,
and I was very well pleased. I assumed so much liberty to my self, and
behaved my self so boldly, as if I had already obtained what I desired; and as
though the doors and windows of the house had of purpose been set open for me
to enter in. And all the while I was using this Courtship, and performing this
my Loue-exercise, she stood me still, and did not once offer to wagge from the
window.

Many Gentlemen past that way, well clad, young, able, and handsome: yet in my
judgment, none of them like to me, neither in apparel nor person. In every
one of them I could have found one fault or other; but in me, there was nothing
to be excepted against. One came short in the handsome shape and feature of his
foot; another wanted a well made leg, the calfe was too little, or the small
too big; some were too tall, and other-some too low; some too fat, and others
too lean: This, went a little limping; that, awry. All had one blemish or
other; I only, was complete; I was I perse I; I was like a Rule, without
exception. All in me, was in true Mood and Figure; In a full and perfect
symmetry, having a just and even proportion of every particular part, in
respect of the whole frame. And being of best both grace and favor in my
person, I was graced and favored more by her, then all the rest: for she did
not show them the like countenance, as she did me.

Night drew on, she left the window, but before she withdrew herself, she
turned her eyes toward me, and so went in. I hyed me home to my lodging, being
rich in hopes, and musing upon that which in this case was fittest to be done:
Mine Host came to me to keep me company; but because I took no content in
any thing but my contemplations, I entreated him to hold me excused, for that I
had business to go abroad. I supt, and taking my sword with me, I went out of
doors in pursuit of my business: you shall see how evil is Proverb.
man's inclination: For notwithstanding that I had made, (as you have heard)
that discourse with my self, in favor of that woman, which had cozened me of
a few Royals, and had put on a resolution to let it pass, and never to think
more of it; yet my thoughts were much troubled therewith, and like so many
Bryez or horse-flyes, did make me kick and stamp against my former
determination, and would not let me be in quiet, but that I must needs go and
seek her out. Whereupon, I gave that night a hundred turns about the very
self same street, having a conceit with my self, that it would be my good hap
to light once more luckily upon her in the same manner as before. But not
knowing well why, for what cause, or to what end I did it, but walked idly
there up and down, till the hour was come. I had waited long, and when I saw
to what little purpose, I thought to make homewards toward my lodging: and as
I entered into the Cosso, by a crosse-way, right ouer-against my Mistresses
house, I might discern a pretty ways off, two several companies, one on
the one side of the street, and the other on the other. Thereupon, I returned a
little back, and stepping into a porch, I began to think with my self; I
am a stranger, this Gentlewoman of good rank and quality, well descended, and
rich withal. There is general notice taken of her worth and means. This
flesh Esta^e la carne en el (...) por talta de gato. Alluding to those women
that are retired, and chaste; not so much out of their own will, a ^or want of
opportunity, and a natural re^ct, and shamefast fear, that the would may not
take notice of their incontinency. Casta est quam nemo rogauit. Ovid. leg.
(...). And anon after. Aut si rusticitas non vetat, ipsa rogat. Also we say;
Que alguna (...) garabato; when with her beauty, and other good graces, she
draws as it were with hooks, your gallants hearts after her. Coverr. verb.
Garabato.
need not to have been hung up upon the hooks for want of a Cat. No man will
say that this was not a woman worth the looking after, but rather that there
was a great deal of reason, that she should be wooed and sued unto, and to be
served and observed by those that had the happiness to see her. These (said I
to my self) do not wait here to give or receive an alms: I know not who they
are, nor what they pretend; whether they be friends and all of one company, or
whether any one of them be interessed here; if by misfortune I should come
amongst them, and that they should hedge me in in the midst of them, and make a
ring about me, the would not only muffle me with their cloakes, but make me as
full of holes as a Sieue, a^ prick me in the body with their Rapiers points,
as Bulls are stuck with darts, when they are bayted in the marketplace, and
perchance leave me for dead. This Country is dangerous, the men bold and
insolent; their weapons of advantage, they many, and I a poor single man. And
therefore (Guzman) The Spanish phrase is, Guarte, no sea nabo.
look to thy self. And if they be enemies, and have a mind Proverb
to go together by the ears, it is not I that can part them, I shall never be
able to make them friends, but endanger my self, and do no good. Go the
world which way it will, fall back, or fall edge, the best course for me, is
to get me home to my lodging, I am sure that is the safest way. And fitter it
were for me to go to mine Inn, and look to my trunkes, and to get me out of
Town as soon as I can. For I neither know any, nor am known by any. Besides
a quien se muda, A quien, se muda, dios le ayuda.
dios le ayuda. God helps those that alter their evil condition. I Proverb.
betook me to my heels, and came in a trice to my lodging. As Soon I came in,
I presently got me to bed, where I rested, with much more sleep, and a great
deal less pain, then the night before. For indeed, there is not any thing
that does sooner thrust these love toys out of our heads, then to see such
kind of visions. Whereupon I resolved the next day to leave the City, and so I
did; Alcala, an University not above a days journey from Madrid.
By little and little I drew toward Madrid; And when I come to Alcala d^
Henares, I abode there eight days, for that it seemed unto me, one of the
finest and pleasantest places of any other that I had seen, since my coming
out of Italy: and if the love of the Court, had not clapped wings to my feet, I
am verily persuaded, that I should have continued there still, that I might
have inioyed that fresh and delicate River, their plentiful provision, their
rare and singular wits, and many other good intertainments. But because Madrid
was patria Proverb.
communis, the common mother to us all, and a large field, wherein every man z
Dexar un mar, por el arroya.
might range at pleasure, I thought it no discretion, to forgo the Sea, for a
River. And for lesser things, to neglect the greater. In fine, every man may
there follow that which he has most mind to. There no man knows one another;
no not so much as those that live within the same doors, and lodge in the same
house. This drew me thither, and thither I came. The face of the Court, as also
of the town, was quite changed, since I left it. There was no Grocer there to
be heard of, no memory now, that there was ever any such Madrid much altered in
a few years.
man. I found the fields peopled with houses, children become men, young folks
grown ancient, the ancient old, and the old dead. The high ways turned into
streets, and the streets altered in their breadth and building; finding every
thing in good order, and far better then when I left it. I lighted on a
lodging, that liked me exceeding well; and so well, that I staid full eight
Guzman takes a lodging in an Inn.
days within doors, without putting so much as my foot over the threshold,
being only tide thus fast by the leg, by the good company and sweet
conversation of mine Hostess. Who, besides her handsomnesse, had a good
fashion of behavior, and a pleasing kind of entertainment. She was discreet in
her carriage, and at board knew very well how to demean her self. Those few
days that I staid there, she made me very good cheer, and did with all
possible punctuality, seek to please and observe me, fitting my humor to a
hair.

While I continued there, I went casting up of my accounts, plotting and
devising with my self, what course of life I should run, how, and upon what
I should live, and in conclusion Vanity weighed down the scales. And first He
turns Gallant.
of all I began my business with gallantry and bravery; being every day more
fine then other. I made me two different suits of clothes, with long silk
stockings, of the best Naple silk, neat ones they were, and strongly sowed to
my payn'd hose: And I took another suit out of my trunk for change; thinking
with my self, that being thus well clad, and getting me a good horse, and
taking two servants to attend me, by showing my self abroad in this good
equipage, I might the easier vent my merchandise, and meet with those, that
would buy these my jewels of me. I put this in execution, and began to brave
it, and to spend liberally. My Hostess was not short, either handed, or
Proverb.
witted, but a gentle courteous dame: she sought in all things to please my The
Spanish phrase is, Dauame can^as a las manos.
palate. She had found out the beating of my pulse, and need not to be taught
how to apply her self to my malady. It happened, that amongst many of those her
shefriends that did often come and visit me, one of them brought along with
her in her company a young wench, well favored, well behau'd, having a face like
an Angel; and though she were in extreme both fair and beautiful, yet was
she far more wily and subtle; it was a notable crafty carrion. To this wench,
did I make love; she shows her self coy and disdainful; gifts Dadiuas,
ablandon pen^as.
molifie rocks, and Proverb.
break the hardest stones in sunder. The more I did regalar her, and the more
courtesies I bestowed upon her, the more kind she grew; of a Haggard, she
became a gentle Hawke; and though somewhat wild and strange at first, yet now
was she taught to come to fist; I could play with her beak, cast her, Guzman
makes love to a young wench.
and give her stones, so that now she was managed, as I would have her. I
continued this friendship with her for some few days, in all which time, (as
if she had been some gutter to receive all the rain that falls; or some
Chimist, or Alchimist, to melt a man's money, and to extract quintessences)
there was not that day that past over her head, wherein she did not beg or
crave something of me; peeling, and polling me, as much, as possibly she could;
carrying her self therein so ^ily, and so cunningly, as if she had bin a woman
of much riper year's, and well beaten to these kind of businesses; never a
Courtizan of them all, could go beyond her. But she was the better Verste (I
doubt not) in these things, in that she had so good a tutor of her Mother. Once
(amongst the rest) I remember she entreated me, that I would buy her a gown of
crimson damask, which a Broaker had to sell at the Puerta A place so called,
in the high street of Madrid near unto ^an Felipe.
del sol, trimmed with gold lace, and richly embroidered, the price no less
then 1000 Royals. This seeming in her an excessive kind of liberty, that she
had assumed to herself, to dispose of my moneys at her pleasure, (for albeit,
I was not a little taken with her love, and though I saw her craving nature,
yet I had not dealt so ill with her, but that I had bestowed on her above 100.
Crowns one way or other, and that if I should suffer her still to The Spanish
phrase is, No quedara bolo en hiesto.
vntap my vessel, she would sackme so dry at last, that she would not leave
one drop in all the hogshead) I would not give it her, but grew somewhat angry
with her; she sets light by it, was offended with my denial, took it to heart,
and thought hardly of me, and that I had used her unkindly. I would take no
notice of it. The Unkindness grows betwixt Guzman and his wench. A plot to
cozen Guzman.
mother and the daughter, were both displeased with me. I said nothing, but
looked on, to see, what would become of this business. They came not at me, nor
did I send to them. They entered into counsel with mine Hostess. The Wolf and
the Fox, had both laid their heads together, how they might entrap the poor
harmless Sheep; and all three did combine themselves against me. Now here
see their roguery, and what a villainous plot they had laid for me. When I was
set down to my meat, when I was just in the midst of my dinner, not dreaming
of any ill, that was intended toward me, I might perceive an Alguazil
Proverb.
de Corte, make toward my lodging. Who, when he came within hearing, speaks
out aloud, Body of me; Aqui morira Sanson, y qua^tos, con el son; Here shall
Aqui morira Sanson, y quantos con el son; A kind of Rodomontado, or proud
menacing. An Algu^il comes to arrest Guzman.
Samson die the death, and as many as be here with him. My end (said I to my
self) is now at hand. I thrust the table from me, and rose up much troubled.
Then said the Alguazil unto me; Pacify your self Sir, and rest you quiet, we
come not to apprehend you for a thief. It cannot be for any other thing
(thought I with my self;) for he had named the word thief before, and I did
verily believe that he spoke in a frumping and scoffing kind of manner; and
that for this cause he was come thither to arrest me. That word Guzman much
dismayed.
struck my heart so dead, that I was not able to speak a ready word, much
less to save my self by flight, but stood as still as a stock. The
Catch-poles had made good the door, the window was of the least, and too high
from the street, from whence I could not get down so easily, but that they
would take hold on me, ere I came to the ground; or if I escapt their hands, it
was a thousand pound to a penny, I should break my neck in the fall. At the
last, for all my spirits were thus troubled within me, I did (as well as I
could) ask him, what was his will with me? He (having much ado to forbear
laughing, and having no share of the care that I was in) putting his hand into
his bosom, pulled out a Warrant, by virtue whereof the Alcaldes had commanded
him to apprehend me upon the breach of that law of theirs, de The Spanish
phrase is, Por el virgo de justilla.
viciatione virginum, of cracking of maiden-heads, and the deflowring of a
virgin. The devil take thee for a wicked woman as thou art, and me for an
arrant villain, (said I) if I know what thou would have, or what thou do
mean by this: And let me never live, if she do not lie like a hundred
thousand devils. I swear unto him, that it was a most sinful and abominable
untruth, and a testimony as full of falsehood, as God is true. The Alguazil
smiling upon me, said, I believe you Sir, but told me withal, that he might
not exceed his Commission, nor was it in his power to release me. And therefore
wished me to put on my cloak, and to go along with him to prison. Now I was in
the briars; I knew not how to wind my self out of them; my final ruin was
before my face; I had trunkes; what ones they were, you your selves can
imagine; my servants not known, I lay in a lodging where they had made a It is
an usual phrase (...) Spain to say; Esta hecha su cama. Such a man's bed is a
making; when there is some matter a working against him for his hurt.
bed for me, or rather a trap to catch me. I did fear this was but the
Prologue to the Tragedy, that would come after, making this but a color for
the better cozening me of all that I had. If I left my trunkes there, they
would have been as safe in the street; and if I should remove them thence, I
knew not whither to carry them; And to go to prison is like unto those, who
go to play in a Tavern, that is seated on the top of some cold mountain; who
begin in Cards, and end in drunkenness, falling asleep with the pot between
their hands. Thinking with my self, that though I went thither for a trifle, I
could not tell, whether these mole hills would be made mountains; and small
occasions breed mighty inconveniences. So that I was at a stand with my self,
and knew not which way to take. I took the Alguazil Guzman treats in private
with the Alguazil.
aside, and entreated him, as he did honor one only God, that he would not be
the instrument of my undoing. I told him, that wealth that I had, was like to
run great hazard of being utterly lost, and that he would be pleased to devise
some means, that they might not do me so great a wrong; for that I assured my
self they had a purpose to rob me, and they were minded to make a spoil and a
prey of me, and that this was only their intent, and nothing else.

He was an honest man (which was no small good fortune, considering his
calling) discreet, and courteous, he knew my innocence, as one that was well
acquainted with the contrary parties course of life; and I promised to be so
thankful unto him for this his kindness, that he should have no cause to
complain, or repent him of the favor he should afford me in this case. He
told me, that I should not need to trouble my self any farther in the
business, for I should find him ready to serve me in all that he was able. He
left his servants The Alguazil wrought to favor Guzman.
there to look unto me, and went to seek out the adverse party, that brought
him thither, who was in my Hostesses chamber. He went to and fro between us,
with offer of such and such conditions, to accommodate the business; and in
the end, he threatened them, that if they would not come to agreement, and make
some reasonable end, he would swear the truth in my favor, and discover their
cheatings, and their rogueries, if they would not rest contended with that
which was fitting.

They, when they saw how ill their cause was like to go with them, were Guzman
compounds his business.
willing in the end to put it wholly into his hands, and so this quarrel was
ended between us, for two thousand Royals. For he having put the mother to her
oath, she swore, that I had promised to pay for the gown, and double the value
of it in money, and that if this would not content her, she should have more.
But she I know rested well contented, and was glad with all her heart, that she
went thus away with these two thousand Royals, because she knew they were not
due unto her. Well, I paid down the money on the nail, and we went to the
Registers office, and there had the bill dashed: So that the suit was now at an
end. It cost me in the whole, a matter of two hundred Ducats; and within half
an hour after all was dispatched, it was dark night. But I would not stay a
minute Guzman leaves his lodging.
longer in that lodging, nor would not so much as have set my foot within the
doors of that wicked house, had it not been to have away my trunkes, and such
other things as I had there. Which done, I presently parted thence, and went to
seek out another. I was not curious, but took the first that came to hand,
till I could fit my self better, and meet with some quarter part of a handsome
and honest house, with persons in it of some worth and credit. I bought me some
moueables and such houshold-st^ffe, as was necessary for my self, and my
servants, and provided me pots and pans for the kitchen. Whilst I was making
this provision, it was my hap one morning to meet with the same Alguazil in the
A monastery in Madrid. The discourse that p^st betwixt Guzman and the Alguazil
at the Descalcas.
Descalcas, and after we had both heard Mass, at the said Monastery, we talked
together, and I swear unto him by the blessed Sacrament, that was there upon
the Altar, that I had never made any such promise to that woman; he told me,
Sir, not only in those things which I know, but in those, which I know not,
you might have spared this oath with me, much less was there need of it in a
thing of this nature; for this is well known, to be a packt piece of knavery,
and a plot laid of purpose to pick your purse. I know this young baggage; who
besides this, which she has now put upon you, has exhibited two other
several bills in the Court in this kind. The first, before the Vicar of this
town, against a poor The Spanish word is Cauallero de epistola, because it is
the subdeacons office to sing, or read the Epistle of the Mass. Covarr. 358.
Subdeacon, who came hither about a certain business; he was the son of
honest and rich parents, who for quietness sake, was content (good man) to
have his clothes torn from his back by them, and being stripped of all that he
had, went away (as they say) in his shirt, they leaving him as poor as Job.
Afterward they commenced the like suit here in this town, making a grievous
complaint against a Teniente, who was a Catalunian, and exceeding rich: They
firkt him too, and fleeced him as well as they could; but this man has deeply
sworn, that he will be fully revenged on her. And now has she complained on
your self to the Alcaldes; And had it not been, that I held it the lesser
inconvenience to pay them that money, then to yield your self a prisoner,
leaving your goods (as they say) at six and seven, I assure you I would not
have given way unto it, but have executed my office. But of two evils, the
least is to be chosen. For albeit you would out of doubt have been freed in
the end, yet would you not The incenueniences of imprisonment and Law-sutes.
have procured your liberty in haste; for much time must first have been spent
in the proofs, and then in the replies to those proofs; whereas this way,
though you were at an unjust charge, yet have you by this means, avoided the
prison, your shackles, your Visits, your Atturneys, your Proctors, and your
Registers, bringing in this relation, and returning that relation, this
information, and that information, al which is but vexation of spirit, and
prolongation of time, trouble, charge, and discontent. The bargain was driven
cheaper this way, and with a great deal less distaste. I vow this unto you,
as I am a Gentleman, and an honest man, that in all the time that I have served
his Majesty with this Uare in my hand, which is now going upon the three and
twentieth year, that of all the cases that I have seen in this kind, I have
not known above three in three hundred, that have been justly prosecuted in
Court: For he that feeds upon that dish, (unless he have very ill luck)
seldom or never pays for it. But when such things come in question, the
accuser has commonly the better of the accused; the plaintiff will be sure
to fare well, how ere it go with the defendant; he has that he looks for, he
cares for no more; for it is in this, as at Best The Spanish phrase is, Echar
la buena barba, A s^ort whereat one ^ayes for all the (...) that he and his
fellows cate, by asking the seller this question, Who is the honestest man of
all us? which is signified, por la barba. By allusion, it is spoken of those,
who with set^p eches, and flattering phrases gull a man of his money. The
fashion of your Spanish qucanes.
be trusted, amongst Costermongers, the first speaker scapes scot-free. And
these kind of people will never give over this trick, till they have lighted
upon one unlucky bird or other, whom they may rob both of his credit, and his
money, or get them such a husband as may supply their wants, and necessities.
It is like unto some botch or kernel, which first begins in the finger, but
afterward break s^out in the arme-pit: And the cause of it is, because the
delinquent either suddenly flies upon the accusation, or is so poor a fellow,
that he is not worth the looking after.

These young queanes, either walk the streets, to see if they can meet with a
good chapman, or drop into some friends house, or keep at home at their
fathers or their mothers house: this, or that other young man, enters within
doors, comes into the kitchen, where he has opportunity to speak unto her,
and she to answer him: They are all alone, the doors shut, time enough, will
they want not, occasion is offered, and the bargain driven. But this is
practiced for the most part amongst the poorer sort; and the party has no
sooner the sent of those rashers of Bacon, that are m^king ready for him, but
he presently gets him out of the house, and comes there no more. Now, when
their parents come to know it, that they may not lose the fruit of their
labors, they give her an admonition, or gentle reprehension. And afterward
they themselves stand sentinel, and have a nearer eye to the business, and
so order the matter for her, that she may fall into such a man's hands, of whom
they may Pr^rbe.
make profit of this their merchandise. Whence, it oftentimes comes to pass,
that he that is least in fault, The Spanish phrase is: Quien menos culpa ti^ne,
a lavar la lana. And it is spoken by way of pr^erbe; V^s lavarey^s la lana. de
aquel, qu^ le ^a caydo la suerte mas trabajosa Comolos, que trabaja^ en l^s
lavaderos; que v^os son apartadores. Otros ti^nen l^s mas oficios, que no son
pocos: y los que lavan la lan^ tienen mayor trabajo, por andar en el agua todo
el dia, desnudos. Covarr. 113. A tale of a can^g que^ne.
smarts most. Then said I unto him, I pray Sir tell me, if these things never
happen, but in secret, and unseen, none knowing thereof but themselves, who
dare to swear, or can truly take his oath, unless she shreeke and cry out,
whereby it may appear, that he did offer her force and violence, or that the
people came in and found them busseling together, or in the act it self? He
told me, such an oath is not necessary, nor in such cases do they put the
witness to prove, that he saw them together in that actual manner, for this
were an impossibility, the business being carried in that secrecy, as you
propound it. It will serve turn, that he, or they, depose, that they were
seen to talk together, or to have been in private together, or that he was
seen to kiss her, or to embrace her in his arms, or that he was in some
chamber with her, the door shut upon them, or that they had seen some such
passages, by which it might well be presumed, that such a thing was either
done, or in doing. For what with these circumstances, and her own
asseueration, standing stiffly unto it, that he had ravished her, and forced her
against her will, it being found upon inspection, by a Jury of women, that her
mayden-head is cracked, and that she is no more a Virgin, this shall be a
strong and sufficient proof against him. I my self (said the Alguazil) saw in
this Court, a very rigorous course taken in this kind, and one of the
strangest Cases, that I believe you have scarce ever heard of the like
heretofore.

There was once abiding in this Town a very handsome and beautiful
Gentlewoman, a stranger in this place, who came hither (being baited out of
her own Country) for no other end, then to seek out some means to live. She
professed her-selfe to be a maid, and in that habit she went a while up and
down the Town. A certain Prince in this Court had a great mind unto her; he
pretends, and procures her love; he gives her a ticket under his own hand for
to pay her eight hundred Ducats, in which writing, she would have it set
down, that there should be a respect had unto her honor; specifying therein,
that he bestowed the same upon her by way of dowry for her advancement in
marriage. The Prince did not pay this money at the day, she put his bond in
suit, he answers not unto it, she gets out an execution against him, and
recouers the money.

About some four years after (being favored by a certain great person) she
provided the like pickle for another, that was a stranger, who having had some
dealings with her, she picks a quarrel with him, and makes (...) grievous
complaint against him. And howbeit the defendant alleged against her the
original writing, and the payment of the principal, together with the
interest, yet they condemned him, and made him to give her full satisfaction,
so that the poor Gentleman was forced to pay her soundly for her cut Melon,
it was argued to and fro, that she was, and was not a maid; but not to
dispute, whether she were or no: Sure I am, that she recovered twice or
thrice in Court, that which she never sold; and in this manner did she go
away with the bucklers. And therefore (Sir) you have not been ill served in
this business, but have well woond your self out of the briars. For in good
faith (Sir) the witnesses did threaten you sore, were violently bent against
you, and spoke very bloody words (though the wench was not so.) And so we took
leave one of another, he going his way, and I mine. I did much wonder to hear
such businesses to be so carried. Insomuch, that discoursing thereof with my
self, I began by degrees to fall into consideration of the sacred Council of
Trent, which so holily, so justly, and so lawfully had made provision for
clandestin^ marriages; and by which there was a remedy found out for so many
inconveniences, stopping so many gaps, and rearing up so many walls, to keep
them out, and hinder their entrance. And I did likewise weigh with my self,
that if the secular power, would (as in justice they ought) do as much in
these days in such cases, (as mine was) I verily persuade my self, that there
would not be the fifth, nay not the tenth part of those lewd and naughty women,
as are now (the more is the pity) every where abroad in the world, living to
their own, and others undoing. For really, and truly, there is no such thing
as this force, which they so much enforce (that we may speak it under
benedicite) but that which they call force, is rather an accord and consent of
both parties. Nor is it possible, that one man alone should force a woman, if
she of her own will, or with a kind of unwilling willingness, grant him
not that which he desires of her. And if she give way, and rest contented with
it, why does she question and trouble him for it? And here I shall take
occasion, to tell you a true Story, which happened in a certain place within
the Signorie, or Jurisdiction of Andaluzia.

There was a Country Clown, a good honest day-labourer, that had a pretty A
Tale of a Country Clown.
young wench to his daughter, with whom a young fellow fell in love, that was a
neighbors son of the same Parish; and in fine, having obtained what he
desired, when her father came to know of it, and that this young man had plucked
from her the fairest flower of her garland, he made haste to such a Town (that
was the Head-Towne of that Division) to make his complaint against this his
neighbors son. The Alcalde hearkened with great attention to all that he
said, and after that the poor man had informed him at full of the case and had
said all that he could, he said unto him: Well (my honest friend) you
complain here of this young man, that he has tickled your daughter, and played
the wanton with her, wherewith you find your self agrieu'd; Is it not so (my
good friend?) yes (and it please your Worship) said her father, it is as your
Worship says; you say very true Sir. And I am much agrieu'd with it indeed,
for that he did dishonor my daughter by force. Then the Alcalde, spoke again
unto him, and said; Tell me (I prithee) how old is thy daughter, and how old is
the young fellow? My daughter (said the father) will be (next August) one and
twenty year old, and the young man (as I take it) is some three and twenty.
When the Alcalde heard him say so, in a rage he rose up from the bench, and
frowning upon him, said angerly unto him; And come thou with this to me now?
Have I nothing else to do (think thou) but to hear every idle foolish
complaint? He twen^y three, and she twenty one: Let me hear no more of this
(my friend) go get you home, and rest you quiet; here is a pretty accusation
with all my heart: one, one and twenty, and the other three and twenty, they
might very well do the business, they could not choose, but well and
willingly go to it. If others, in the like case, should receive the like
answer, and that there were a Law made, whereby it were enacted, That no woman,
from eleven years upwards, dwelling in a Town, should pretend her-selfe to be
forced; they would then be good perforce.

But upon this subject, may it please you to hear a singular accident, and a
notable A digression to another story of the like nature.
case in this kind, which happened (not long ago) in one of the principallest
Cities of that most noble Commonwealth of Venice.

There lived in that City, an old woman, base in her birth, and poor in her
means, who had a daughter, that was very lovely, fair, and beautiful. And
because she had not wherewithal to marry her, this crafty Gabri^a (being an
old cunning Hagg) devised with her-selfe to make sale of the purity and
virginity of her daughter, and that not once, but many and many times: and
these her wicked proceedings did prosper well with her. For she would either be
sure to have that before hand, which they had agreed upon, or by the favor of
some principal person, this, or that other man, was feign to compound with
her, and to make his peace as well as he could. One day amongst the rest, this
handsome young wench, being seen and well eyed by a young Gallant, and one of
the principal Gentlemen of that City, a singl^-man, and exceeding rich, used
diverse means to win her affection, and in the end obtained his purpose and
after that he had enjoyed her, he did very liberally requi^e her for her
kindness. But the greedy old woman (who was covetousness it self) thinking
this Lordly gift too little, made her moan to a particular Gentleman,
complaining how ill she had been dealt withal.

He, as it were in a jesting kind of manner (scorning and hating in his heart
the vile and base humor of this wicked and accursed woman) said thus unto her;
Thou know Lena (for that was her surname) that the most illustrious, and
most excellent Segnor Generale, will shortly be here; and thou likewise
know, what upright justice he does indifferently administer to every one,
without respect of persons, and more particularly in such cases that concern
the good and honor of maidens. And therefore the best counsel that I can give
you, is, That you and your daughter Ricci^lina get you both (as soon as he
comes hither) unto his Excellency, and plainly deliver unto him how Signor
Co^de N. has forced and deflowred your daughter, and falling both a-weeping
before him, ye further declare unto him, that after he had had his will of
her, he was not so good as his word with her, nor performed the promise which
he made unto her; which was, That he would either give her two hundred
crowns, or get her a good husband. And that therefore, seeing that he did not
cumply with you neither in the one, nor the other, that his Excellency would
therefore be pleased to take this your wretched and woeful case into
consideration, and to do you justice. If you can do this handsomely (as I
know you are not to seek, and can do it better then I can advise you) my life
for yours, you will have the day of him, and the business will go clear on
your side. It was not long after, that the General his Excellency came, before
whose presence these women being brought, they opened this their false
accusation. Upon which relation of theirs, his Excellency was much moved, and
caused the Conde to be sent for by one of his servants: who, when he came
before him, was demanded, whether at any time he had had conversation with
Ricciolina the daughter of Lena? He without any more ado, ingeniously confessed,
that he had. When he heard him say so, he bestowed upon him, such a lo^ing and
fatherly rep^ehension, that the Conde began to blush, and for very shame,
could not for the present express himself, as he might, and would have done
in his own excuse. Whereupon the General perceiving this his tacit
confession, caused Ricci^lina to be called forth (who by his appointment staid
in the next room) and when she was come, he gravely spoke in this manner unto
him; Signor Conde, if we should punish faults with rigor, a heavy punishment
would light upon you. But we, for that we love your self, and all other
offenders that come before us, as our own children, and taking pity and
compassion of your youthful feruor, and those violencies that accompany such
young years, we do pardon you that grievous and most heinous offense of
forcing this maiden, as far forth as it may touch your life; but withal, we
condemn you, to pay the double of what you promised her, which comes to four
hundred crowns: which before you go from hence, we command that you
presently disburse, and give it to Ricci^lina.

To this the C^nde, his blood now waxing warm, which before was frozen, with
that respect and decency, which was fitting for him, replied thus: Most
Illustrious and Excellent Sir, I have hitherto held my peace, it beseeming me
so to do, as one that is your most true, faithful and obedient servant, and
most ready to submit my self to any reproof or punishment, that you shall be
pleased to inflict upon me, in case this their accusation were true. And if
your Excellency out of the greatness of your wisdom, shall be pleased to diue
into the depth of these subt^l women's hearts, and search them to the very
bottom, your Excellenc^e will soon discover, how wickedly false these their
accusations have been against me. And though I have confessed, that I have had
conversation with her, it was upon covenant and agreement between us, upon
such a price, which I punctually paid, giving her more out of mine own bounty,
then she could challenge of me. Notwithstanding, if it shall seem good unto
you, that I disburse this money, I crave no longer time, then that I may go
home and fetch it, wherewith I shall presently return, and put the money into
your Excellencies hands, to be disposed of, as you please; but not as in
punishment of any such error by me committed.

The General having heard what the Conde said, replied unto him, Signor Conde,
go fetch the money, for I shall stay here till you come. And you Ricciolina,
see you depart not.

Now, whilst the Conde was going home, and returning back again, his
Excellency went a far off, asking this and that other question, one while of
the old woman, another of the young, and so talking to and fro of diverse
things, at last, he said unto her; Tell me (Lena) have you ever carried a good
hand over your daughter? have you always looked narrowly unto her? Yes marry
have I Sir (said she.) And did you never (replide he again) leave her all
alone by day or by night? No Sir, quoth she. How comes it then to pass (said
his Excellency) that you would suffer your daughter to be forced and deflowred
by the Conde? Why did not you defend her from that violence? And you
(Ricciolina) having your mother in your company, why would you let him force
you, and take that from you which (unless you should in some sort consent
thereunto) it were impossible for him to get from you? Both of them, then
weeping, said unto him; That the Conde was too strong for them, and that they
were not able to resist his violence, and therefore besought his Excellency,
that he would not suffer her daughter to be thus abused, and both of them to
be left open to such a deal of scorn and reproach: but that he would be
pleased to do them justice.

By this time the Conde was come, and had told out upon a little table of Iuory
four hundred Crowns; which by the General were given to Ricciolina, giving
her this Item withal, Take them (daughter) and look well unto them, lest they
chance to be taken from thee. And you (Lena) have a care both of her and her
money. And so God be with you, I have no more to say to you.

When they were gone, his Excellency turning himself toward the Conde, said
unto him, Go, get you after them, and see you take their money from them,
either by love or force, by fair means or by foul. And look that you give
me a true account of the passage of this business.

The Conde hearing this, moved with rage and disdain, seeing how basely he had
been used by these infamous women, (not considering the condition imposed upon
him, nor to what end it was done) made hastily after them; nor did he go alone
by himself, but made choice of a servant of his (amongst those many that he
had) whom he took along with him. And so walking a good round pace, he
ouertooke them a little on this side their own house, and coming unto them,
after that he had saluted them very kindly, and by little and little had
insinuated himself into them, he continued discoursing with them, till he had
brought them home. Where, as soooe as he was come into the house, he began to
demand his money of them. And when he saw he could not prevail with
entreaties, he assayed to get it by force, and went roundly to work with them.
But Ricciolina, who had put the purse in her bosom, stoutly defended both it
and her self, scratching the Conde with her hands, and biting him with her
teeth; who with all the strength that he had, could not come so much as to
touch, much less to take the purse from her. To make good this quarrel, the
mother ran in, and took part with her daughter, and they did so help and aid
one another, with their nails and their teeth, and by their loud outcries and
shreekes, that although the house were a lone-house, far from neighbors, and
little frequented, yet notwithstanding many people upon this great noise and
tumult, came running thither, and amongst the common route, one Gentleman, who
pressing in, and seeing the Conde all bloody, who fought like a fierce Lion,
set upon by two rather enraged Bears, then women, what with his words, and
what with his deeds, being assisted by others, he parted the one from the
other. The Conde was so overcome with choler, that he laid about him like a
mad man, and had so lost all patience, that doubtless he had done much
mischief, if he had not been restrained by the company. He washed his face and
his hands, and having wiped them with his handkerc^er, he departed thence in
company of that Gentleman, threatening those women, that he would be ^euenged on
them: who, no less offended then the furious Conde, made no long tarrying, but
hasted with all the speed they could to the General. But the Conde had got the
start of them, and was there before them, having fully acquainted his
Excellency with all that had passed, showing the scratches and the bitings
which he had received from them: who had no sooner told his tale, but in come
the women, unsheathing their malicious and sharp-edged tongues, grievously
complaining of the Conde, who was there present, declaring, how first with
fair and kind words, and afterward by violent and forcible deeds, he would
have taken their money from them, threatening besides to kill them.

Then said the General unto them; He has not taken them from you, has he? No
(and it like you Excellency) said they. How came it then to pass (quoth he)
that he took them not from you? They answered, Sir, we did so well bestir our
selves, with our hands, our nails, our teeth, and the shreekes that we made,
to call in company, that he mist of his purpose and could not do it.

Very good (said the General) and you Ricciolina, if your mother had not come
in to help you, could you (think you) have made a shift so to withstand the
Condes courage, that he should not have taken the purse from forth your bosom?
Yes indeed Sir, said she: for I fear him not, nor any thing he can do, I care
not a straw for him, for I think my self every way as strong as he; yet is it
not meet, that men should come in this violent manner into poor women's houses,
to take that from them which is none of theirs. Then (said the General) you
did both of you, help and defend one another, as well as you could. Yes Sir,
said they. It is very well (replied the General) I like well of it, and I must
needs say, you have borne your selves well in the business. But where is the
purse? I have it here in my bosom^, said Ricciolina. Let me see it, said the
General. The young wench presently pluckes it out of her bosom. Then said his
Excellency unto her; Pou^e them out (laughte^) there upon the board, and tell
them anew, to s^e if you have all, and that the Conde has not taken any of
them from you, She did so, and found the number just. Whereupon, she told his
Excellency they were all there, and not so much as one crown missing. Then the
General (who was a very wise and discreet man) perceiving the Condes
goodness, and these other women's wickedness, spoke and said: Sign^r Conde,
Take you your money again, you have fought hardly for it; it is yours, put it
up.

Then, turning to this young queen, looking sternly upon her, he said unto
her; Thou lewd and filthy baggage, if thou had defended thy self as well as
thou did thy money, the Conde could not have forced thee; but it seems thou
wast very well content that he should have his pleasure of thee, and having
consented to his will, you we^e not forced (Minion) as both you and your mother
have falsely accused the Conde, to whom we justly award his re-hauing of his 400
Crowns. And as for you, get you gone, and let me hear no more of you, and be
glad that you escape so, for if you were well served, and punished according to
your deserts, I should send you to Bride well, and have you well whipped, and
ring your mother out of Town, for an old wicked B^d. The General having
pronounced this so just a sentence, the business was ended to the great
contentment of all that heard it, and to his own no small commendation.

But to come into o^r ^ld way again: No force of man can prevail against
T^ing R^es.
the woman that is unwilling. But say such a thing might once in a thousand
years chance to happen; me thinks it is no reason, that a business of this
nature should be compounded withal for money, much less inioyne them marriage,
(unless he had formerly given her his word and faithful promise before
witnesses) but that in this case, the fittest means, were personal
punishment, either more, or less, according to the quality of the delict, and
that the cause might be handled before the Kings Attorney General, that there
might be no hope of pardon left, to such boisterous offenders. Assuring my
self, that by this means, men would have more fear; and women more shame:
and would not, so often, as now they do, commit such like sins, and
treacheries, as these. For, this refuge being taken from them, and having no
hope of remedy, or help left unto them, they would leave this lewd course of
life, and not be so hasty, to undo both themselves, and others. If a wench
go to it with a good will, why should she urge, it was against her will? Or
if perhaps she have not where-withall to live, why should she pick a living
out of such disgraceful, and dangerous deceits? There are a thousand other,
and far more honest ways, for a woman to live by, then these.

But here pity (me thinks) comes in, and pleads thus; A lack, poor women,
Women, weak creatures.
they are weak and simple, and suffer themselves to be overcome through their
too much facility and aptness of belief, and men's too much falsehood in their
promises; and therefore they ought to be much favored and pityed by us. Their
facile nature, and men's false promises, have wrought them much ^e.
I confess this plea to be true. But if they were either taught, or knew
before hand themselves, that this their facility is a fault in them, and that
they ought not to be so easily won, they would learn the better to keep
their cabinet close, and not to depart with so precious a jewel, but upon very
good terms. And this foolish confidence of theirs, has undone many a woman,
and is like to undo more, unless they look a little better to themselves.
This destroying confidence of theirs, is like unto faith, without good works,
which has sent thousands packing to Hell. Let no woman therefore (if she be
wise) depend upon men's promises, be they never so fair: for they promise with
passion, perform with delays, and seldom or never satisfy expectation. That
woman therefore, I say, that shall trust any man's faith or promise, and shall
upon such false assurance, surrender up her Copie-hold into his hands, let her
blame no body but her-selfe, if she be afterward cozened, and deluded by him.

There is another kind of injustice in the world, somewhat near in this
nature, which would require some reformation. You shall (which I have seen
oftentimes) have two fellow-seruants lodge together in one house, who being
agreed upon the business, and both very willing to enjoy each other, she
(like a silke-worme) continues her three Your Silke-wormes make three sleep:
Awaking after their first, to feed; then falling again to sleep, till they
begin to work their balls. Never leaving off, till they shut up themselves in
those balls, and consume them-s^lues, vngorging all that sli^nesse, whereof
they form the ball. Covatr. page 327.
sleeps with him, till at last their Master comes unawares upon them, and takes
them in the manner: Who, thereupon, lays hold on this his unfortunate servant,
who neither tasted the cream, nor the cheese of this milk, but only that
sour whey, which is cast out to the dogs and the swine: He puts him in prison,
where he keeps this poor soul so long, till at last growing desperate, he is
driven to marry her; and the more to increase his misery, they condemn him in
a pecuniarie punishment, which he, and all his whole lineage, if they were sold
to their shirts, are not able to pay. When he sees himself thus undone, being
first forced to marry whether he will or no; and then to have all that little
that he has, to be taken violently from him, and torn as it were out of the
very throat of him, he goes one way, and she another: He runs about the
Country, and turns rogue; and she stays at home, and turns whore. I pray
see, what a proper marriage this is, what a wise and worthy sentence, and the
great good that comes of it?

O, if there were some provision made for the reforming of this abuse, I doubt
not but it would do very much good, and prove profitable for the Commonwealth.
I paid the punishment of that sin, wherein I had not offended; and the price
of that meat, whereof I had not tasted: I had provided me a house, put Guz^an.
prouides him a house of his (...).
all things in order, and withdrew my self thither, with all that I had; for I
was much afraid, lest I might be served with the same sauce by another
Hostess, as I was by this. And because I was likewise jealous, that the Collar
and Girdle, which my Uncle had sent me, being pieces of that great value, as
they were, might, by the fame that went of them, come to be discovered, I was
the willinger to retire my self to an house of mine own, where I might with
secrecy all alone by my self deface the same, and so alter the fashion, that
they might not be known. I did so; taking out the precious stones, and the
pearls that Guzman alters the fashion of his Jewels.
were in them, with the point of my knife, laying every thing apart by it
self. I did put all the gold into a great Crisoll, but not all at once, for it
would not hold it; six or seven such pots, being scarce able to contain it,
which in the end I made a shift to melt; and preparing it with a little
sublimate (for I had some superficial knowledge in that kind of Art) having
all my tools, and moulds in a readiness, befitting such a business, I did
(when I found my self best at leisure) cast the whole mass into several
ingots, or little bars of gold. And I thought I did very wisely therein, lest
by saving their workmanship, my self might have made work for the hangman;
and by keeping them in fashion, been my self in no fashion: and therefore
thought it better to spoil that, then that should spoil me. With these
stones, I began to turn Ieweller, first informing my self very well of their
true worth and value, causing some of them to be set in Crucifixes, some in
rings, some in pendents for the ears, and other some ^n Jewels, as they would
sort and fit best, differencing the setting and inchasing of them, as I saw
cause: so that of the same gold and stones, I made diverse and sundry pieces:
whereof I sold some for ready money, others I lent out at weddings with good
gains, and others I rifled away at dice; insomuch, that I lost little of that
which I might otherwise have gained, had I preserved their fashion, and with a
great deal less fear of danger to mine own person. My stock began to
increase a pace, I knew how to sell at dear rates upon trust, and how
otherwise to afford a reasonable good pennyworth: I could tell how to turn
and wind my money to the best profit; and I wanted no credit, because I was
flush of money.

There was close a^ioyning to my house, certain ground, that was to be sold
for the building of houses upon it. I thought good to buy a plot thereof for to
build upon, that I might have a house of mine own to put my head in, making
choice rather of a little corner of mine own purchasing, then to go every
m^neth chopping and changing of our lodging, lugging our bedding on our backs,
and being at a continual charge in removing of our household stuff. Well, I
agreed with the owner of the Land, I paid him his full price in good Royals,
holding the same for ever, the Lord reserving only for himself a yearly rent
of two Royals. I built a house upon it, wherein I spent before I was aware (and
now there was no turning back) above three thousand Ducats. It was a neat
pile, handsomely contrived, and of good receipt, and stood finely for Guzman
turns Merchant.
pleasure and entertainment. There did I live, with that poor trading that I
had, like a Fucar; and there should I have ended my days like a Prince, if my
hard fortune, and greedy ill luck had not crossed me, by the unhappy encounter
of a crafty knave, with a covetous wretch. For my house being so well furnished,
my person so well respected, and my reputation standing on such good terms, as
it did, there was not a fool wanting, who had a months mind to make me his
son in law: Who had a conceit, that I was all good meat, and that I had not
(like the grape) some stony kernels in me, that were to be taken out, and
thrown away, as good for nothing.

This also is another great folly (and I fear me too much in use) that men
should be so simple, as to marry their daughters, to the sons of unknown
parents. Take heed, take heed, I say, how thou bestow'st thy child: Think
upon that old, but sound counsel of our forefathers; Al hijo de tu vezino,
metelo en tu Proverb.
c^sa: Al hijo de tu vezino, metelo e^ tu casa.
Match thy daughter with thy neighbors son: Thou know his breeding, his
disposition, his behavior; what his honesty is, what his wisdom, what his
means: but never admit thou a new-commer, or receive him for The care a father
ought to have in the bestowing of his daughter.
thy son in Law, who is a mere stranger unto thee: For such a one, though
thou see him to day in his own house, may to morrow be led thence to the
gallows if he chance to be known, and found out what he is.

This silly fool was a kind of trucker of commodities as well as my self;
Proverb.
and Acude cada un a su natural.
birds (you know) of a feather, will still flock together. He clung so close
to me, that he glew'd me unto him: He married me to his daughter, having no
other child in the world: He was rich, she was fair, and of a good and
graceful behavior. He promised me with her, three thousand Ducats, and I was
well contented with it. He, who was a subtle fellow, and knew the dapps of the
world, and could wind a penny to the best advantage, had no ambition to seek
any higher, then to find out a man of my making, that knew how to employ my
money to profit. And in this he had reason: For better is a poor son in Law,
that is a good husband, and knows when to save, and when to spend a penny,
then one that is rich, and a great waster. And there is no wise father (I
assure my self) but would rather have a man without money to his son in Law,
then money without a man. This man had a wonderful great affection unto me, we
were agreed on the point, the conditions were drawn, the writings sealed, and
the marriage solemnized.

Now I am a married man, now am I entered into an honest and honorable Guzman
marries a wife.
calling, I have a mistress now in my house, well contented with her choice,
much made of, and well served. Some days passed over, (which were not many)
when as my father in law, carrying us home with him one Sunday to dinner, after
that the cloth was taken away, we three being all alone, he said thus unto me;
Son, being now grown old, and having in my life time past through many
troubles, and for that I see thou art yet but a young man, and stand^st now but
at the foot as it were of the hill, that thou may get up to the top, with the
greater ^ase, and that thou may not tumble down backward when thou art half
ways up, I will deliver thee my opinion, as one who is so much interessed as I
am in thy good; otherwise I should save that labor, and not give thee any part
of that which I now pretend to do.

First then I would have thee to consider, that if thou shall diminish one
farthing Guzmans father in law his advice.
of thy stock, which thou windest and turnest in the world, it will quickly be
consumed, be it never so great. You must likewise have a care to uphold and
maintain your credit; And if you mean to be a Merchant, you must carry your
self like a Merchant; laying aside all that which is not integrity and plain
dealing, for there is no negociating now adays, but with it and with money;
changing, and re-changing as the market goes; making, according as you see the
times are, either more or less gain. I shall stand still by you, and be ever
ready to give you my helping hand, and hold you up by the chinne, that you may
not sink, if it be in my power to bear you up. But if at any time (which God
forbid) the Dice should turn, and that lucky chance which we look for, should
not come, take physic in time, purge your self while you are in health, of
your bad humors, and by a provident forecast, prevent all future sickness.
This said, he caused two bills of debt to be brought in, and two counter-bils
of credit, and going on in his discourse, he said thus unto me; One of these
writings shall be to this effect, that you acknowledge your self to be
indebted unto me in the sum of four thousand Ducats, which I have lent unto
you; against which (to save you harmless) I will make a Counter-bill, wherein
I w^ll confess a full satisfaction and true payment of the said debt, in such
ample manner as you your self shall be pleased to devise it. Both which we
will safely keep to help our selves at a pinch, if need should require;
though it were much better, that no such occasion should offer it self, nor
come (as I hope it never shall) within our doors. The other writing shall be,
that I will procure my brother to sell unto you an annual rent that he has,
of five hundred Ducats, de Iu^o, is a ^yall rent raised upon (...), ^wnes, and
other places of the ^ingdome, so ^uea a, ure, which the Kings have to sus^e
thems^lues withal, and to pay the (...) of his ^ts of ^ce. An^ from ^ence it
had the name of (...). This kind of Tribute is due unto the Kings of Spain,
for their aid and maintenance. Covarr. ve^b. (...).
juro, and it shall be done in this manner; There will not one cash-keeper or
other, be wanting unto us, who (out of the acquaintance and friendship that is
between us) will be willing to make show o^ ^o much money, to the end that the
public Notary, may a^ow and testify the payment thereof; or else we will take
it there, and they shall lend it us in bank, paying for the use thereof fifty
Royals; and when this bill of sale shall be made over unto you in as absolute
manner as Law can devise it, you shall return the same back again unto him,
giving him full power to dispose thereof, and by a writing under your own
hand, you shall acknowledge that this was but a feigned thing, put over unto
you only in trust, and that really and truly, those five hundred Ducats, are,
and were always his, and that you can by no means pretend any lawful claim
unto them. I liked very well of it; supposing, it might do me much good, but
could do me no harm.

I did as he directed me, who had been an old beaten Soldier in these kind
of businesses, had taken all the degrees of a cunning dealer, and knew the true
tracke, wherein he was to trade, by which tricks and devices, he had wrought
himself into a fortune, and come to be so rich as now he was.

This foundation, being thus laid, I continued my trading a pretty whiles,
b^ing always in all things, very circumspect and punctual: And because I was
not ignorant, that the credit of those that are great dealers in the world,
does depend much upon ostentation, fair shows, and flourishes, I did make the
world believe, that my house, my wife, and my self, were in a fullness of
plenty, and wanted nothing that was for ornament or necessary use. And in
particular, my word, in all my dealings, was like a clock, it struck always
true, and never went false. My wife had a hole Muger, de ma^o (...) This phrase
(...) taken in the worser part. Cova^r. page 478.
bored through her hand; all ran out to waste, that was powered into it; an
anger had likewise pierced her temples, whereby her hogges-head had taken the
vent of vanity. And I (kind fool) seeing the world thr^u'd with me, and that
my gettings were great, began to give way to her idle desires, and to humor
these her womanish appetites, giving her greater liberty, then in discretion I
should have done; and she for her part took so much on the other side,
stretching every inch to an ell, that she spent excessiuely, and beyond all
manner of measure in the accompanying and entertaining of her friends, in her
banquets, feasts, and other inter-mealary-intertainmen^s, besides the great
pomp of her apparel, jewels, dressings, and a thousand Prou^rbe.
other the like gallantries, with as many bobs, and other Trac^ ^as rabos que
un polpo. Covarr. page 600.
dingle-dangles, hanging at every one of these, as the Polypus has tales; All
these things concurring with that dear^h and scarcity which be^ell us in these
our first years, and that small correspondence which we had in trading, it
being a dead world, I began at length to know mine own weakness, and was
taken on the sudden with such a swimming and giddiness of the head, that I
was scarce able to stand on my legs, and lackt little of falling like a
lumpish piece of Lead, flat to the ground: So true is that saying; Nad^e sabe,
si no es el que lo lasta, lo que semejante ca^agasta.
No man knows, (save who by proof does taste) Proverb.

What a good house, and a bad wife waste.


If now in these days, there were made a Law; that whereas in Castile they
allow the half of that which a man has to his wife, in way of dowry; that the
husband should not only not give her that, but should rather take some of
their wives drowry from them; they would then labor to get something, at
least, seek to save what the husband gets; Whereas now they take no farther
care, then how they may waste and consume what the husband painfully brings in.

When I was a single man, I had wealth and trading enough, to have made Gu^man
begins to sink.
my self a rich man in a short time; but now, by having a wife I was grown
poor, and rea^y to go down the wind. And because my Father in Law was only
acquainted with my book of Accounts, and knew as well as my self, what was
owing to me, and what I did owe unto others, and was true and trusty therein
unto me. I could not want credit; and the rather, for that all men did verily
believe, that those 500 Ducats of yearly revenue were mine own. With this prop
I bore up the burden of my debts, till my back was ready to break, and when I
could endure the weight of them no longer, I suddenly sunk like unto a building
that is raised on a false foundation. Now the time of my paiments drew near;
and though time of it self does naturally still run along, yet to those that
owe money, it flies away with a swift wing, and seems shorter, then otherwise
perhaps it would. I saw my present ruin before mine eyes, and was so perplexed
with the very thought thereof, that I could not take any rest, nor knew in the
world what to do. In this perplexity of mind, I got me to my father in laws
house, that I might break my griefs unto him, and communicate my cares with
him; He comforted me the best that he could, and wished me not to be dismayed,
for that we had a salve for this sore in our own hands, and that the remedy
for this malady, was here at home within our own doors. He takes his cloak,
throws it on his shoulders, and away he and I go together to one that was
Escriuano de Prouincia, the public Notary of that Province, an especial
friend of his, and carrying him to Santa Cruz, which is a certain Church
adjoining to the Marketplace, and stands right over against the prison, and
those Offices belonging there into, there we made in secret unto him a private
relation, how the case stood with us. Then said my father in Law unto him;
Sen^or N* This business shall be many Ducats in your way; you know very well
how I dealt with you in my last troublesome suit, and how fairly things were
carried betwee^e us on both sides; and I must also truly confess unto you,
that by your good means, all the decrees and sentences that were published in
that cause, came forth in my favor, turning greatly (for the which I must ever
thankeyou) to ^y profit and credit, which makes me hope (presuming upon your
wonted lou) for all good from your hands. My son in Law, owes by a former
writing to th^s of mine a 1000 D^cats, and this is already presented, and
diligences used ther^ (...) in another Office; yet we are both of us very
willing, that all this business^ hold be brought before your Worship, and that
you should have the ordering of it; in consideration whereof, we hope you will
deal well with us, and use us f^endly, being so much your servants, as we are;
for I shall not only my self req^e this your kindness to your own good content
and liking; but my son, that is he with me, shall, when our business is
dispatched, bestow 200 Crowns on yo^ to buy you gloves; and I will pass my
word unto you for him, and shall see yo^ly paid. The Escrivano told us; All
shall be done to your mind, and as well as you your selves would have it. Let
this bil, said he, of 4000 Ducats be first presened, and we shall accord the
debt for ten in the hundred, by means of a friend, to whom we will give an
account of this pretension, to the end that he may do it ^on any reasonable
consideration, that we shall give him, and for the rest lay ^he care upon me,
and leave it to my charge. My father in Law, presented hi^ ^wne bond: In
conclusion, I was carried to prison, al my goods were seized Guzman committed
to prison.
o^ my wife she brings forth the Indenture for her Dowry, taking so much cath
to themselves, that there was a great deal of stuff wanting to make up
(...). For both of them, having possessed themselves of my house, my b^s, and my
moucables, there was nothing now left for me to take hold on ^h my teeth. And
for my Jewels, and my moneys, they were sold, and spent, ^d that little that
was remaining, was too far out of my reach to come at it.

When my Creditors saw me cl^pt up, they came all upon me, entering their
^ctions against me, presenting their bills and their bonds before diverse and
sundry ^otaries: But when this bond of ours was brought forth, all were to
yield to hat, as one that commanded all the rest, and had already past the
Office, as be^g the most ancient debt, and therefore ought to be served first.
For the Alcaldes, ^eeing it was res iustificata, a good and authentical bond,
and proved so to be, gave order that should be first satisfied. When they saw
what an ill hand they Proverb.
had of it, and that they could not come to finger my goods, they presently
went about to imbarque those my 500 Ducats of that annual rent, before
specified. But the true owner then appears, and defends his own right, my
wifes Uncle clayming those, as belonging properly unto him. Then they fell to
Law about it, whose bills, and answers, together with other writings,
processiue, iustificatiue, obligatiue, testamentiue, partitiue, acquisitiue,
renunciatiue, and infinite other the like, being as the body of a great Army,
when they were all joined together, came to no less then two thousand and five
hundred sheets of paper. Every one, that came to demand them, for to carry them
to his Advocate, when he saw, that he must, before he could have them, pay so
much money to the Notarie, he did tremble at it. And albeit there were some,
that were at the charge; yet there were other some, who seeing that they were
like to have a cold suit of it, and that they should but throw away their money
in vain, would not be at the cost to take them out, but did rather desire to
come to some indifferent terms of agreement, and to sit down with loss, then
to be at any more charge, and in a choleric humor, to cast the Echar la
soga, tras el caldero. Caldero, is commonly taken for a bucket, which serves to
take water out of a Well. Now, echar la ^oga, tras el caldero, To fing the rope
after the bu^ket, is, when we have lost one thing, to throw the other after it.
This proverb is taken from one, who going to draw water out of a well, the
buck^t slipping from the rope, and falling into the Well, in a rage throws the
rope after it, wherewith, if he would but have had the patience, he might have
^ot up his bucket again. Covarr. verb. Caldero. Guzman released.
cord after the cauldron. They well perceived, that albeit they had taken out a
Copy of the Process, they were as far to seek of their money, as before; And
therefore seeing there was nothing to be got by the bargain, their loss
remediless, and their debt desperate, they did help to negociate for me, and
to come to composition with me. I demanded ten years term; and some of
them were well contented with it. Then began my Father in law to stir in the
business, and because his was the greater debt, he wrought so with them, that
the lesser debts followed the example of the greater, by which means I came
out of prison, and was set at libert^ the Escrivano having well lickt his
fingers on both sides: whosoever lost, I am sure he got well by the bargain.
After all these storms, my ship, and goods sunk, I made a shift at last to
get a land, I came swimming to the shore in a pair of li^e^ linings, being
stripped of all the rest, yet were these linings well linde with ^uer. I had a
great deal of wealth of diverse poor men remaining still in my ^ds, who had
trusted me with all that they had, being deceived by that credit ^ich I had
abroad in the world. I did in this, as I used to do in all the rest of my
actions; I was no changeling; only I proceeded herein with a little more
credit, and a better kind of name, which my other had no color for. For
albeit ^is was no better then theft (to speak the truth of it) and plain
robbery; yet I continued still with the name of Merchant, and not of Thief.
By this, I go^ experience of that, which I knew not before. This roguish
trick, till now ^d I never understand what it was, nor did so much as once
enter into the reck^ng of it. This seemed unto me cautela^ damnosissima^, a
very hurtful wariness, (...) caution too too cautelous, which ought narrowly
to be looked into, and some g^od remedy in this case to be provided. For by
these their counter-writings, the^ is no debt certain, no assurance good, nor
any true security to be had; being ^e most prejudicial thing that can be to a
Commonwealth. For, from thence ^e occasioned most of your Law-sutes; by means
whereof, many of poor, com^o Against fraudulent conueyances.
be rich; and many of rich, to be poor; being thereby utterly undone, and
driu^ to beg their bread from door to door. And it being the intention and
purp^e of a good Judge, to auerre the truth between litigant and litigant, and
suc^s wage law one against another, and duly to administer Justice to every man
arig^t; yet is it not possible for him in this case so to do, because things
are so intric^e and so entangled one within another, that they which are most
innocen^, (...) oftentimes most deceived, and by consequence most wronged. And
the r^ son of it is, because when a man does plot a deceit or cozenage in this
kind, (...) goes warily to work, and beats his brains how he may secure
himself, posse sing himself beforehand of the ports and passages that lead
unto the truth, t^ the end, that the way thereunto may be barricado'd and
blocked up, that no bo^ may come unto it. So that this light being taken away,
the Judge remains blind, and that man's false play, which is not yet found
out by Justice, triumphs over truth, and go^s away with the victory. I know
there are same, that will not stick to say, that your counter-writings, for
commerce and negotiation, are very necessary; b^t I mast be so bold with these
men, as to tell them plainly, that they are not. For he that is willing to
help another m^n with his credit, let him stand (a Gods nam^) as a surety for
him, and not as a cloaker of his knauerie. That which I learned in Barcelona,
the first time that I was there, and now within The order in Barcelona, that is
taken with your Me^hants.
these two day^s, since my return from Italy, is; That to be a M^rchant, is a
dignity, and an honorable calling; and no man can have that title, vnless^ he
be first presented before the Pri^, and the C^nsuls; where he puts in security
to deal faithfully and truly in the Trading, that he shall undertake. And yet
in Castile, where there (...) such a Machina of merchandising, such a great
Trade driven, where there is Co^ractation for whatsoever commodities, the huge
storehouse of the (...) does in a manner afford, they take this noble
pro^ession upon them, when as they are neither men of ab^tie, nor able to put
in good security for that which they deal for; but are only ^ich in shi^ts
and tricks, and more cunning in deceiving those, who give them credit, then
skilled in an honest course of Trading. Every one now, will take upon him to
turn M^rchant; whereas in other parts of the world, he that enters thereinto,
had need of a good stock to begin withal, and a greater every day then other,
if he mean to continue in that course. And if perchance it so fall out, that
(through want of a strong brain, or a strong purse, or both) their businesses
fall out contrary to their expectation, and succeed otherwise then their false
imagination did suggest vn^othem, making use of these their counter-writings,
they remain in better and richer estate, then they did before. I need not to
instance in particulars, because it is exemplified unto us by daily experience.
With their breaking, they pull a great many others after them, especially all
those, that have trusted them with their goods; who consume that little t^t is
le^t them in s^ing for their own. And if pe^ad (...) they be O^ficers, or
Husbandmen, the Lord with their loss, loses likewise his part; wanting those
by this means, which should follow his profi^, and ^eceiue his ren^s, and his
(...) and the Commonwealth thereby robbed of the ^rauell and pains of th^se
(...) and industrious day-labo^rers, and honest husbandmen; who being (...) in
suits or Law, cannot apply themselves to follow the plough, and to manure and
d^esse their land as they were wont to do. Less harm it were a great deal,
that a few, and those b^ggage-people, should not be rich, then that a great
many good and honest men, should be onerthrowne, and undone by them. I^ ^t were
not for these Co^ter-writings, and fraud^lent deeds, men might more securely
trast one another, and there would be much better dealing in the world: For
then a man might have certain knowledge of his estate and means, whom he
trusts, without having other owners step forth, and challenge all that he has
to be theirs. And because it may be, that at some time or other, there will be
order taken for the remedying of this so great a misc^iefe, I will only
briefly tell the effects (that I may be as good as my wo^d) of this harmefull
coz^age, if they d^ not the sooner leave off these their damnable fraudulent
trick, and de^ses. For qu^stionlesse, many men would deal more honestly and
plainly, then now they do, if these f^bs and giggs, were not put into their
heads by oth^. And hence i^ i^, that many things lose those good effects, which
otherwise they wo^ld take, (...) that these strange owners are not made known
in (...), w^ (...) no^ only inue^, but execute what they have de^ised, cheating
^he Creditor (...) that just debt which is due unto him. I cannot choose but
speak my mind^ and (...) the^e be no ca^e taken for (...) of this gr^e (...),
I ^not d^ withal. It shall su^ice me, that I have herein s^tisfied that (...)
and duty, (...) in ^is c^se is required at my ha^. (...) likewise look t^
their obligations; and seeing, they neither want age, nor discretion to look
into these things, let them not also be wanting in their good will, to redress
that, which is so necessary for the service of God, and of their King, it
concerning so much as it does the general good of the Commonwealth.

When a poor Merchant is minded to enter into great trading, he entreats (for
the increase of his credit) some kinsman, or friend of his, that he will make
over some land of good value, or other his goods in trust, for the which he
makes him a Counter-writing, wherein he acknowledges, that notwithstanding
these parcels of lands or goods seem to the world to be his, yet really and
truly it is not so, and that he shall be ready at all times to resign them up
into their hands, to whom of right they belong, whenever they shall demand
the ^ame of him. And so with the credit of this seeming stock of his own, he
gets farther credit of others, and takes up upon trust, what he will himself.
See now, what a kind of people we are, and what true dealing there is amongst
us! How like unto those Moors and Negro's of Ghinie, an ignorant and barbarous
kind of people, who with counterfeit beads, false eare-rings, bells, and other
the like bables, which children wear about their necks, do with the bare
sound, gay show, and glorious glittering of these glassie commodities, cozen
and deceive us. If their trading thrive well with them, it is well; for then
the Creditor shall receive what is due unto him: If ill, they have a trap,
wherein to catch their Creditors, and all goes ill with them. Then he, that
made over his goods unto him in trust, comes by a Counter-writing to recover
them, and all the rest are defrauded of their due.

When a man will not pay what he owes; before the day of payment comes, that
this debt is due, the debtor sells, or absolutely passes away all his whole
estate in trust by some fraudulent deed, or counter-writing in that kind. And
it afterward so falls out, that before the day of payment come, the debtor,
who made this cautelous provision, dies; whereby the true Creditor cannot come
to recover his own. For the party, whom the debtor trusted with his goods,
does cover and conceal this Counter-writing; so that the Feoffe in trust
carries away all his goods, and the devil the deceased down to the pit of
hell.

When a man has a purpose to deceive with his person, to get him a wife with a
good dowry, the better to cozen both himself and others, he runs the like
course. He gets himself to be trusted with a great deal of wealth; and anon
after that he is married, his debts begin to grow upon him, and living at a
greater charge then before, he is not able to pay what he owes. So the owner of
these goods recouers his own, and the new married couple fall into want. This
his cozening of her, coming at last to be known, their love begins to cool
each toward other, and oftentimes they go together by the ears, for that the
wife will not consent that he shall sell away her dowry, or any way be charged
with her husbands debts.

All which inconveniences, would find a speedy and easy remedy, if there
were an express command given, that there should be no such kind of
fraudulent deeds, and Counter-writings at all; and if there were any, that they
should be of no force or validity in Law, and that any Act in that kind
should not stand good. And for the present, any such deed or deeds, to be
published and made known within such a certain time, upon pain of taking the
others debts upon him. If this course were taken, men might then certainly
know, what a man's estate were, and whether he were of that sufficiency to be
trusted, and to take up upon credit. And I dare be bold to say, that thereby
one half of your Law-sutes would be excused; for that most of those, which are
here in Castile, are of this nature, or at least, have their ground and
beginning from thence.

CHAP. III.
Guzman de Alfarache prosecutes the success of his marriage, till such time as
his wife dyed. And how her Dowry returned back to his father in Law. He
discourses of bad wives, and the hurt which they do their husbands.

READER; Have thou by this time considered with thy self, into what a
Labyrinth I was willing to put my self? What good can it do me? or why do I
spend and consume my time in vain, basting stones with butter, and annoyn^ing
flints with oil, to see if I can supple them, and make them become soft? Do
thou think I shall make the Blackmoore white, by my often washing of him? Or
do thou conce^e, that any good will come of that which I have said? Will it
bring forth any profitable fruit? I rather believe that I spend my breath in
vain, beat my brains to no purpose, and lose both my cost and my labor,
without receiving either profit, or honor thereby. For I know I shall be tit
in the teeth, with that old answer; Why should he give counsel to another,
that cannot follow it himself? It would have suited better with me, to have
told them two or three merry tales, wherewith Mistress such a one, and my Lady
what you call (who are now quite tired out, and begin to nod, being brought
a-sleepe with these fooleries) might have entertained themselves, and past
away the time. Me thinks I hear him say, who is now reading, what I have
written, that he will cast aside my book, and rather get himself into some
corner, and there take a nap, then endure the trouble of hearing me talk. I
confess, he has a thousand reasons on his side, to do as he does; nor can I
blame him; for, being truly (as they are) truths, which I treat; they are not
so fit for entretinimiento, as sentimiento, enterta^nment, as the
understanding; being to be respected more, for the sense, then the conceit:
These are not things fit for laughter, and to make merry when friends meet; but
are to be weighed with a great deal of study, and consideration; and to be
ruminated, and chewed over, again and again. But because the purge, that I
shall give thee to cleanse thee, may not seem loathsome unto thee, or that
thou may refuse to take it, propter malum olorem and saporem, for its ill
both smell, and taste, let us guild over these our pills with gold, or cover
them with the papp of an Apple, conserues of Roses, or some thing else, that
may please both the eye, and the palate. And so I return again to the
purpose, from whence I have made this digression.

Now did I begin to lift up my head again, and to enter a-fresh into the
world; I had a new stock a going, the best I could make, though much less
then I could have wished it, and meaner then stood conveniently with my present
both necessity, and occasions. For to bear a good Para grande ca^ga grandes
fuercas Aduertisements for those that will marry.
burden, a man had Proverb.
need of a good back; and they who build Towers on the sand, see them quickly
fall to the ground. Those that have a mind to many, must have where withal to
m^ke the (...). The good man must be able to give his wife a dinner; and she
bring wherewithal to bestow on him a supper. There is more goes to mari^ge,
then two pair of legs, in one pair of sheets. Four naked walls, six
carpets, two table-cloathes, and half a dozen napkins, are not a Dowry for a
wife, when at the first entrance into the house, I m^st spend upon her in
Jewels, and other idle dressings, that out of which I should pick my living.
My principal was gone, and I was now in want. For (as it is in the proverb)
Quien Proverb.
compra lo que no ha menester, vende lo que ha menester: He that Quien comp a
lo que no ha men^ster, vende lo que ha menester.
buys that he needs not, must sell that he has need of. What profit can it
be for a poor Tradesman, to trick up his wife in some six change of gowns,
wherein he consumes his maine stock? Can he afterward continue his Trade
with this tr^sh?

My Gentlewoman, my wife, was ill acquainted, and less exercised in miseries.
She had lived well at home with her father, she knew not there what want meant,
but had the world at will, there was not that dainty she desired, which she
had not; but now in my house, she had nothing less, though as long as my
wealth lasted, she lacked not any thing, that she had a mind unto. But being
not able any longer to hold out, she was forced to work and sweat for her
living, and being not used heretofore to take pains, it seemed the harder unto
her to endure it. With that little, which was now remaining unto me, I began to
buy at dear rates upon credit, and to sell good cheap for ready money, sicut
erat in principio. I stood engaged, and my father in Law bought the wares. I
could have wished the balance had weighed the contrary way. And these
commodities that we dealt for, never went out of the house. Our ordinary wares,
were gold thread, and sometimes wrought plate, and jewels of gold, handsomely
set forth, curiously inchased, and for the fashion exceeding neat and delicate:
Some other things we had of little or no value, old moth-eaten ware, which lay
upon our hands, and could not be rid away, which were bought at a far lesser
price. And thus out of those small gains, that we made, we rubbed out, and
made a shift to live as well as we could. But all was little enough to bring
the world about, because our stock was so little: and so by little and little, we
went eating of it out, it co^suming by degrees. And for all we were brought to
this low ebb, my wifes dowry was never so much as once touched or fingred by
me, that stood still on foot, being laid out upon possessions, which my wife
would never consent should be meddled with: I could as well take the Moon in my
teeth, as to come to lay hold on them; nay I could not so much as have a sight
of them. These our commodities, we did deliver forth upon credit for four
months, with condition to have a fifth part of the gains. And that Escrivano
(whom we had ready upon all occasions, to serve our turns) did always make
testification of the consigning over of these commodities, which goods, a
Broaker presently took into his hands, who made up the third person in these
our dealings, and was all one as it were with my self and the Escrivano. And
having them in this manner made over unto him, within some two hours after he
would bring the money to its owner, to such loss, as he himself should say
they were sold (as was ordered between us) though he had not sold one
pennyworth of them, but had them still in safe custody, and were never so
much as once removed out of the house. We made up the money amongst us: He
received an Acquittance for his discharge, and there was an end of this
business.

It was a common trick amongst us, to make use of a most cunning and subtle
Gentlemen in Spain cannot be arrested for debt.
stratageme, to the end that none might escape our fingers, by alleging his
Gentilitie, or any other exception that might bestead him, or free him from
arrest. When we were to furnish any man, we would first inform our selves,
whether he had the means to pay us; and knowing him to be a sufficient man,
and that he took up such or such commodities, only to supply his present
occasions, we did willingly give him credit: howbeit, it would sometimes so fall
out, that we should come short of this our reckning, and those men fail us,
whom we thought to be very good men, and of good wealth. But when we had no
perfect knowledge of the party, and that it did not sort to our purpose, we
would demand a Surety, together with the morgage of some house, or piece of
land, for default of payment. And howbeit we knew well enough, that this house,
or land, thus morgaged was none of his, and that whatsoever he had was extended
already for the payment of his debts, and that he had not so much as a tyle or
brick that was in it, which was not indebted in a crown, yet we did not stand
so much upon that, nor was this the thing that we did much care for, and were
willing it should be rather so then otherwise: But that which we did aim at
was this, To draw him to acknowledge by a writing under his own hand, that
this house or land, was his own fee-simple, free from all kind of
encumbrances, morgages, sessings, rents, feoffments of trust, or otherwise
obliged for any other debt whatsoever. And with this assurance, when the time
of payment was come, if he brake his day with us, we had an Alguazil still at
hand, with whom we were in league, who made him to give us so much for every
tenth part that we delivered unto him, and so we presently came upon the back
of him, putting our bond in execution.

And if at any time they would oppose the arrest, or did offer to make any
resistance To resist an arrest in Spain and to draw his sword against a
Sergeant, is a whipping matter, besides a condemning to the Galleys; and if he
strike or hurt the Alguazil, it is punished with death.
for to escape the hands of justice, that he might not pay the debt; then came
we upon him another way, bringing a criminal action against him, and making a
diligent search and enquiry into his estate, we would prove that it was not
extended to its true value; that there was some legger-demayne used therein,
and that he had dealt falsely and deceitfully to defeat his Creditors, laying to
his charge many other his misdemeanors. And thus did we make sure work for our
selves, whilst the poor man slipped down the hill, without being able to
recover himself, or to stay the force of his sudden falling. Using this
precaution, we played upon sure cards, and without this provision made
beforehand, we seldom prevailed in our businesses. Whether this kind of
dealing were lawful or no, I know what I know; but we ran the same course
we saw others run before us, we did no more then what others did; our
consciences were seared, so that we had no great sense or feeling of it. I well
wot, that all the while I continued this wicked course of life, I did never
truly confess my sins; and if I did come to Confession, I did not do it as
I ought to have done, and performed that duty for no other cause in the world,
but to satisfy the Parish, and to avoid Excommunication.

Will thou see whether it be so or no? Consider whether I ever promised to make
restitution, whenever it should be in my power to do it? Or whether I had
likewise a purpose to amend my lewd and wicked life, when at that time there
were fifteen, twenty, or more bonds a foot of the like nature; and yet did I
never go my self, nor use any diligence by others, to acquaint those that
were thus bound, that such and such a bond was unlawful, and that I had grated
upon them with a griping and biting Usury; and that for to clear my
conscience, and that I might worthily receive the blessed Sacrament of the
Communion, I would abate them of the ouer-plus, and make good all that which I
had wrongfully and unlawfully taken from them? And how that I would restore
unto them besides, all that which I had, for that it was all stolen, and had
nothing that I could justly and truly say was mine own. And if afterward,
when they came to pay me, I had no relenting in me, nor did not return them
any thing back again, what an intention must this be? Certainly as bad as bad
may be. This truly is that which I ought to have done, but I did it not, nor is
it in use now-adayes to do such good things as these. God (if it be his will)
give us a due acknowledgement of our sins. And I verily persuade my self,
that if then at that time I had finished this my life, my soul had assuredly
gone down to hell, and been condemned to fry in that eternal fire.

O, your Usurers, they are a wicked generation of Vipers: they have neither any
conscience, nor any fear of God. O what a brave, and what a sure mark is this
to shoot at! Howneere am I now to the drawing of mine arrow up to the head? And
how do these traitorous villains, these Caterpillars ofa Commonwealth, stand
peeping and watching to see how, and where, I mean to hit. O, what a
temptation do I feel, what a struggling do I find in my self, and what ado
to pull in this hand and arm of mine, from letting fly my whole sheafe of
arrows at them, and so to wound and gall them on all sides, that I leave no
part about them untouched, and no bone in their whole body unbroken* For, in
regard that I am (as they say) Ladron de casa, a house-thiefe, one of the same
stamp, I know them as well as they know themselves, and am not only acquainted
with their actions, but even with their very thoughts, and secrets of their
hearts. Will you give me leave to give them a gentle nip, and that I make them
to see their own perdition, and put them into such a great confusion, that
they shall not know in the world what to do^ with themselves. I know that ye
will not, and I also know why you will not.

But if I shall speak the truth, I must plainly tell you, Riches are the cause
of This is a digression. Against the greedy de^re of riches.
all this. But when they are ill gotten, in what misery lives the soul of such
a one? Certainly, it is in a very bad case. And hence it comes to pass, that
covetous men too much devoted unto riches, incur infinite troubles, perils,
and hazards. And therefore to free himself from this danger, and the better to
secure himself, Crates the Thebane, that most famous Philosopher, with an
undaunted Crates throws his goods into the Sea.
courage, bound up in one pack or fardell together all the gold and other such
precious Jewels as he had, and with great fury threw them into the sea, saying:
get you gone, o ye riches, into the bottom of the sea, lest you drench me in
the deep. I had rather drown you then you should drown me. But this great
Philosopher (by his leave) did herein (me-thought) very ill. Much better had he
done, if he had distributed these his goods amongst the poor: but in doing
that which he did, he gave us thereby to understand the great trouble that gold
brings with it; so that to him it seemed a far lesser inconvenience to
remain poor, then to live in so many griefs and afflictions, as riches
occasion in those that possess them. What other thing is it to enter with
consideration into the mind of the rich, then to enter into a fearful prison,
where within we see men imprisoned, laden with irons, bound with chains,
fettered, manacled, and girt about the neck with collars of iron, wherewith
they are brought before the Judge? And how many then are the afflictions, and
the torments, of these miserable and wretched men, thus incarcerated, and
compassed in with strong walls, and hard chains? And how much more are they
oppr^ssed, and how much heavier are their shackles, who Jove riches, and those
most bound, who most abound in them? And as there is more compasiion had of
those which are in these miseries, and are thus fast bound, and painfully laden
with bolts, manacles, collars and chains of iron, about their fee^, hands,
necks, and their whole body throughout: So much more pity is there to be taken
of the rich, and see how much the richer he is, and the more wealth he has
about him, and all those good things which his heart desires, yet for all this
are we not to account him a rich and wealthy man, but rather wretched and
unfortunate: For besides the prison, wherein he lives (miserable as he is) he
finds himself attended and guarded with a barbarous and cruel keeper, which
is the love of riches. And if it so happen, that thou fall at any time into
their hands, there is no getting out of their clutches: but that they may keep
thee safe when they have thee, and that thou may not escape from them, they
will have three or four strong doors shut upon thee, and as many great
chains to make all sure, besides locks and keys, with I know not how many
double wards and bits, that all the picklockes in the world, that ever have
been, shall, or will be, shall not be able to open these doors, and set thee
free from thence. And yet these wretched creatures are so blinded in the
pleasure which they take in this their imprisonment, that they never think
upon it, nor seek to get out, but are content to continue in it all the days
of their life.

Bona^enture says, that he who has once set his affection on gold, can hardly
withdraw his love from it. King David says, That our soul cleaves unto the
dust, and that our belly trayleth on the ground, and is as it were fastened and
glued to the earth: Unfolding thereby the affection which we have to these
earthly thing. For seldom or never are riches possessed, without a man's
settling his affection upon them, it being so easy a thing to have it wedged to
the things of this world. And by so much the more, by how much the more
strongly the heart of man is knit unto them. The Gloss says, That with
difficulty we despise them; and with lothnesse leave them. But the safest and
surest way is, neither to love them, nor to keep them. And therefore that
Kingly Prophet said, If riches increase, set not thy heart upon them. True it
is, that they are as hurtful for the soul, as dangerous for the body. And
therefore our Savior Christ, much pitying and lamenting those who possessing
them, did heartily love them; said: Woe unto you that are rich, for ye have
already received your comfort. And S. James likewise with a great deal of
grief and sorrow, does bewail and lament these kind of men, saying; Go to
now ye rich men, weep and howl for the miseries that shall come upon you:
your riches are corrupted, and your garments moath-eaten: your gold and silver
is cankred, and the rust of them shall be a witness against you; and shall
eat your flesh, as it were fire: you have heaped treasure together for the
last days. Behold, the hyre of the Laborers, which have reaped down your
fields, which is of you kept back by fraud, cries: And the cries of them
which have reaped, are entered into the ears of the Lord of Sabbath. Ye have
lived in pleasure on the earth, and been wanton; ye have nourished your
hearts, as in a day of slaughter. Ye have condemned and killed the just, and he
does not resist you. Bemourne therefore the miseries wherein you are, for your
riches shall end in anguish and vexation of spirit, and all your comforts shall
forsake you: you shall sleep your sleep, and when you awake find your hands
empty.

David says, Rich men turn fools through their too much wealth: they become
ambitious and vain, they give themselves over to a thousand vices; they suffer
a thousand sharp iourneyes, and as many troublesome toylings, for to get
riches; which when they have got, they have a daily fit of fear and trembling,
lest they may chance to lose them. The imagination of their loss causes
extreme sorrow in them: their brains are still working, and their
understanding never takes any rest. For, (as our Savior said) Where a man's
treasure is, there also is his heart. O wretched man, thou do not any thing
in this world, that is so bad for thee, as the love of money. For they, that
seek to make themselves rich, fall into a thousand temptations, and into as
many snares, which the Devil has laid to entrap them. For the root of all
evil, is covetousness. This causes us to commit sacrileges, thefts, murders,
rapines; it is the author of symony, the causer of vs^ring contracts, of
ungodly gain, and of a thousand deceits, and frauds, of breakings, both in our
deeds, and in our words, of periuries, and perverting of justice. O, what an
unquenchable fire, is the desire of riches; O how insatiable is this our lust,
but much more insatiable our will. Tell me (he that can) who did ever yet see
the rich man satisfied? who, hear him say, That he had now enough? For, when
he has got what he desired, he has no sooner obtained it, but he is as
greedy as he was before; like unto your hungry Curres, who when you throw them
one morsel, stand gaping for another. His end is always on that he desires,
forgetting how full he is, and the store of wealth that he possesses. The eye
of a lover is never satisfied with looking; And the covetous mind has never
money enough. But (which is a curse that accompanies the covetous) he that
loves riches, never reapes the fruits of them. Hell is never satisfied with
the swallowing down of souls; neither the eyes, nor heart of the covetous,
with riches. For these wicked men, have two horse-leaches belonging unto them,
which always cry, give me here, and give me there; let more and more come in
still. By so much the more the love of money increases, by how much the more
our money increases. O what a false and unfortunate felicity is that of riches
(...) because it makes him truly unhappy, who does not truly possess them.

The poor man lives more contented with that little which he has; then the
rich man that walloweth in his wealth. O how many have been deceived with the
desire of riches! Balaam, hearing the ringing and sound of money, which King
Balack offered unto him, fell into despair, and had a miserable end. Acha^,
being desirous of a rich raiment, and a wedge of gold, was slain, and stoned
to death, together with all his family. King Achab, out of the desire he had to
have Nabothes vineyard, was the occasion of Nabothes death, who by Iezabels
order, wife unto Ahab, was stoned to death: For which evil fact, Ahab was
deprived of his life, and his Kingdom; and his wicked wife Iezabel, the
inuenter of this villainy, devoured of dogs. Gehezi, out of a desire to be rich,
received so many changes of raiment; for which he was clothed all his life
time, with a most loathsome leprosy. Judas, to get thirty pieces of silver,
lost his Apostleship, and his body, together with his soul, by becoming his
own executioner. Ananias and Saphyra, out of greediness of gain, were
suddenly stricken dead. If thou will be rich, thou shall not be without
sin: for such is their miserable and unhappy condition.

Moreover, it induces men to embrace vice and to abandon virtue; it falling
out for the most part, that where the^ is abundance of riches, there is
abundance of pleasures, and sensual delights, and of evil company, which are
often an occasion of infinite infamies, and wicked actions, with great offense
to the Majesty of God. The rich think that God has no power over them; but
they are much deceived; who with open eyes see themselves carried headlong
into hell. And this misfortune befalls them, because the fear of God is not
before their eyes; and for that they love not their neighbor as they ought:
But rather on the contrary, love their riches better then themselves, nay more
then their own souls. O miserable and unhappy men as you are; look, and
diligently consider that which happened unto Lazarus, that poor beggar, who
received mo^e contentment in that his extreme poverty, and in those his rags
and stinking sores, living in the fear of the Lord, then in any other thing in
this world; by means whereof, he came to enjoy those rich treasures of heaven,
and the continual and ete^nall vision of his God. For a man to make himself
rich, it is a dangerous thing; for before ever he is aware, he draws upon him
an infinity of all kind of troubles and miseries. It is a wonder to see at how
dear a rate they buy hell, who pretend to be rich; seeing with how many
restless travails, they purchase eternal torments.

Wicked and worldly-minded men, for a ^tile vain glory, or rather a smoke that
sod inly vanish^th, care not how many tribulations they undergo; for love of
this, they submit themselves willingly to infinite sufferings, toils, and
sweats, and voluntary stoop their neck to the heavy yoke of so many woes.
And why do they this? Only for a little m^cke. So that your rich men take a
great delight in suffering annoyances, afflictions, tribulations, toylings,
turmoylings, travails, troubles, using diligences, solicitudes, and placing
all their care, and their study, in getting wealth, and with it, Hell. By which
their ca^ke, paines-taking, and sweats of blood, they gain unto themselves
eternal damnation. Do ye not perceive (ye wretches) that how much the more
care ye take in hoording up of riches, so many the more thieues, and murderers
you provide for your selves, that may rob you, and cut your throats? whence it
also comes to pass, that they who did commit these outrages against you, are
likewise for this their wickedness whipped, sent to the Galley's if not to the
Gallows, and there hanged and quartered.

That man is a fool, that boasts himself of his riches; For why should any
man glory in that, which takes away the safety of his life? Rich^s deprive us
of our lib^rty. We should be our own, it these were not our own: And masters
of our selves, if these were not our masters. Riches take not away want, but
occasion it; draw not on content, but withdraw it from us. They are massed up
with trouble, possessed with fear, and forgone with sorrow. The rich man
therefore has need of many things, and must submit himself to many basenesses,
and vile ind^ncies, being that he is evermore besieged and assaulted with
fears, iealousies, and suspicions. They are full of perturbation, and
confusion; the common subject of murmuring and repining. They scratch and
scrape all that they can rap and wring from others. They are daily more and
more inflamed with the desire of getting. In a word, they will commit any
wickedness, or villainy whatsoever, so as they may be sure to get by the
bargain.

Hearken to that, which was delivered unto me by a famous Preacher, who A merry
tale delivered in the Pulpit by a Preacher.
discoursing upon this subject of rich men, amongst many other things, I
remember he told us at that time of a certain picture, the upper and middle
part of which square, or piece, was taken up by a great rich man, which was
there portrayed forth to the life: On his right hand, stood a roaring boy, to
fight for him, if need were; and on his left, a fool, to make his Worship
merry, and to put him out of his dumps: both which were expressed in such a
posture, as fitted best with them. Under this rich man, was drawn a country
Clown; under the Clown, a Merchant; under the Merchant, a Counselor at Law;
under the Counselor, a Confessor; under the Confessor, a Physician; and under
the Physician, the Devil, with a long chain, whose linkes were made of women's
tongues, which kept a horrible rattling. And he farther added, that the rich man
had written over his head; These two I keep: The Clownes word was; I maintain
these three: The Merchants motto; I rob these four: The Counselors posie; I
pill these five: The Confessors; I absolve these six: The Physicians; I kill
these seven: And the Devil had a labell coming out of his mouth, which said;
I carry away all these eight with me to Hell.

All these, and many other the like mischiefs do riches beget, whose
possessor purchases no other fame, save only; Lo, there goes a rich man: their
riches being their total and eternal destruction. But your true riches
indeed, are the virtues of the mind; which like invincible forts, defend those
that possess them. Against these, neither all the men in the world, nor all
the devils in hell can prevail: They may wage war against them, but they
shall never overthrow them. O thou, that do either read, or hear me, make
virtue the end and center of all thy desires, and there strike in the nail,
that it may stick close unto thee. And here I will stop my pen, that I may not
run my self out of breath, in the praising of that, which is so well able to
recommend it self. But I would have thee withal to know, that as I have
purposely and willingly made this considerable digression; so in all the course
of my life, I have not done any thing more unwillingly, then to wink at these
men, and to let them go by, without leaving some pawn behind them. But
because they may not object unto me, that I spend all my discourse in
Reformations, and in prying into other men's actions, I am the more willing to
give way unto them, and for this once to let them alone. Another motive, that
makes me loath to meddle with these Usurers, is; That I may have one day need of
their help; and I would not willingly make them mine enemies, whom afterward
I must sue unto to stand my friends. In a word, we are so far forth to keep
some kind of men our friends, as we may have occasion to use them, and as they
may be profitable and beneficial unto us. And as a faithful friend is known
in doing good, in time of need; so an enemy will never hide himself, when he
may do thee a mischief.

Only this one thing I will say; Let a man cast up his reckonings with
himself, and when he finds, that he comes short of his Account, and that he
stands in need of 200 Ducats to make it up, let him but take up so much upon
Use, and he shall see them amount in two year, to more then six hundred. To
how much more then, if a man take up more? And therefore it is good to have a
care to the main, and to take heed, that we come not within such men's danger.
For there is no such Cormorant, as Usury; it deuoureth houses, and swallows
down whole Lordships, as it were at a bit, and makes no bones of it. And if a
man cannot get out of this bogg, when he is but over shoes, how shall he do,
when he is over boots? Or how shall he satisfy a great debt, that is not able
to discharge a small one. But here let your Usurers (for me) rest in peace, and
let me return back again to my self.

I say then, that men, by not doing that which they ought to do, come in the
end, to pay soundly for that which they do. What does it avail a man to gain
much? What good to get, if he know not how to keep? Especially, seeing we
Proverb.
are daily taught by experience, Que vale mucho Mas vale al cuerdo la regla,
que al necio la renta.
mas al cuerdo la regla, que al necio la renta: That a wise man will go
farther with a penny, then a fool with a pound. His poor pittance (well
husbanded) shall bring him in more profit, then all the others rents, though
never so great. Such great odds, has moderation, of revenue. He El que tuuiere
tiempo, no aguarde otro mejor.
that has a time of it, let him take time, while time serves; Proverb.
and not lie lazing, looking for a better, yet let him not be so confident, nor
so far presume upon his strength, that he do not keep a good and careful
watch upon himself: He must look about with many eyes, and that diligently
to, having an eye here, and an eye there; it oftentimes so falling out, that
when we think our selves safest, and freest from danger, then (when we least
dream of it) we meet with a Martinus contra; some pad in the straw, or some Un
Gil, que nos persiga. Giving us to understand, that escaping one thiefes bonds,
we fall into another.
Gil to plague us. I had money in my purse; I once was rich, but now am
Proverb.
poor. God he knows, why, and wherefore. I stood looking for a day, to set up
my rest, and how to order the remaynder of my life in some settled course; but
this day never came: I did build too much upon mine own strength; it was ever
my fault; I presumed I could recollect, and take up my self, how, and when I
listed: being verily persuaded, that though I could cozen and deceive all
others, I should never be such a fool, as to cozen my self. But here in me,
you may see, how selfe-confidence, causes a forgetfulness of God, and by
trusting more to our selves, then to him, hence it comes to pass, that we
lose not only our goods, but our souls. The greatest enemy that I had, was
my self: Mine own hands, wrought mine own woe: And as the good actions of
the good, are the reward of their virtue; so the bad actions of the bad, are
the occasion of their greater torment. M^ne own works did follow me. They were
the furies that did persecute me: Whereof mine own naughty dealing, and other
men's wickedness, were not the least part of this my misery. And God does
therefore permit, that that, which we make the instrument of offending him; the
same he makes to be our destruction. Nor did I so much grieve for the loss of
my wealth; for I knew full well, that the goods of fortune come with her, and
with her go their way. And that the more favor she shows, the less
certainty she assures. That which did vex me to the very heart, was; That
that, which should have been my comfort (I mean my wife) she, whom with such
earnestness her father desired to marry unto me, and used a thousand means to
effect it, that she, that was another my self, flesh of my flesh, and bone of
my bone, that she should rise up against me, and prove a cross unto me,
persecuting me without a cause, and for no other reason in the world, but only
for that I was now grown poor. And that her hate should come to that height,
that contrary to all truth, she accused me of keeping a wench at rack and
manger, seeking by this means to find so much favor as to sue out a divorce,
and procure a separation between us, not wanting a Lawyer to advise her
thereunto, firming it with his own hand, that she might lawfully do it.

This grief, of all other, was the greatest unto me; this wound struck
deepest. For as Matrimony once contracted, cannot be dissolved; so when it is
ill conjoined, it is hard to be endured. For a troublesome wife, is like unto a
house, Of good and bad women.
whereinto the rain falls, dripping into every room and corner thereof. And
by how much the more she shines in wisdom, and good government, when she
will apply her-selfe unto virtue; so much the more beastly she is, the more
insupportable, and the more to be abhorred, when she departs therefro. What
facility has she, in all those things, that she has a mind unto? What a
cunning Scotist is she, for to compass what she longs for? Put the
judgments of a thousand men together, yet shall they not equal the wit of one
single woman, for to frame a lie on the sudden. And although it be commonly
said, That when a man shuns company, and desires to be alone, he is aut Deus,
aut Demon, either a God, or a Devil, either spending his time in his service,
or living like a beast; yet do I say, that the solitude, which he suffers
all alone, is not so great, as is the punishment, which he receives, in having
ill company, and such as are contrary to his liking. I was rich, when I was not
mariyed; mariyed, I became poor. The days of my Nuptials were joyful to my
friends; but those ensuing days of my marriage, sad and mournful for me. They
were iocond and merry, and went well contented home to their houses; but I
remained to end are martyrdom in mine own dwelling; and for no other cause,
but because my wife would have it so, and for that she was too proud, and
presumptuous. She spent beyond measure, she had a high mind, and a l^berall
hand; and she had been used to see me come home, like the Be, laden with
much honey; and that I had sweet commings in, bringing her still one dainty or
other to please her: She could not endure, to see me go forth in the morning,
and bring nothing home with me at noone: She lost all patience, and was ready
to run out of her wits, when the world did not go as she would have it. But
now (ay me, poor wretch that I am) when she saw that all the oil was spent,
that should maintain the weke, and that also quite burnt out; and when she
found, that we had not where-withall to eat, nor knew where to get meat to put
into our mouths, and that we were feign to sell our household stuff to buy us
bread; from hence grew all this mischief, here she lost her footing, and with
it her patience; insomuch, that she could not afford me a good look; and
(which is worse) did ever after hate me, as if I had been her mortal enemy.
Neither my fair words, nor her fathers admonitions, nor the entreaty of her
kins-folke, nor the persuasions of her friends and acquaintance, could win
her to receive me into her former favor, or to recover her lost affection.
She fled from peace, because she found it in discord; she loved
unquietness, because it was her contentment; she would be revenged of me, by
retyring and separating her-selfe from me, both at bed and at board; and would
refuse many times to eat her meat, for that she knew how well I wished her, and
that it was a death unto me, to see her so to do. I knew not what to do with
my self, nor how to govern my passions, by reason of the great difficulty
that I found to give her content, which consisted only in feeding her with the
fullness of money, which (God he knows) I extremely wanted. Truly it seems
unto me, that there are some women, that only marry for to satisfy their own
foolish longing, and to make trial, what a kind of thing marriage is, it
seeming unto them, to be like unto an hired house; if they find themselves
well in it, it is well; if ill, and that it be not to their mind, and fitted
as they would have it, all is nothing, nor will they want one excuse or other,
and two false witnesses to work a divorce. And besides other so many
inconveniences, if it so fall out, that a man's wife being any thing fair and
beautiful, and that some one or other happen to fall in love with her; but
here I will be silent, and say no more. I could wish, that the Advocates,
Notaries, and Judges or such Courts, would open their eyes, and consider well
with themselves, that that which they do therein, is no other thing, then to
dissolve a matrimony, and to open a door to the Devil, that he may enter in,
first to the loss of the wifes life, secondly to the husbands honor, and
lastly, to both their vndoings. And I dare assure them, in the name of that
all-powerfull and mighty God of heaven and earth, that a most grievous
punishment shall be powered down upon them from above, which shall pay them
home, and make the smart thereof intolerable. I would have them therefore to
know, that these are secret sins, and that the plagues that shall come upon
them, shall be also secret. Nor because the husband has slasht his wife over
the face, and given her a whores mark, or has beaten her (like a slave) with
a cudgel, let these men think, that this sin shall escape without punishment,
for the chastisement is then inflicted upon them, when another takes away his
wife from him, God so permitting it. When he shall see his house full of
dissension, infamy, and sicknesses, let him lay it to his soul and
conscience, that these come for this cause. I speak not to one, but to all;
let them put their hand in their bosom, and take themselves by the sleeue, as
well those that are the occasioners, as they that are the favorers thereof,
for they all sail in one and the same ship; and the fault is alike in both;
and therefore are to look for the like punishment. Do thou not see, how (on
the wedding day) all things go trim and tricksie, what a troop attends us at
our heels, what a deal of kind care and pains every man takes from the
bridegroom to the guests, how contented they are, and how well pleased with
their entertainment, the tables covered with neat and pure linen, the boords
furnished with dainty fare, the bed The Spanish phrase is; la cama hecha de
lana nueva. The bed was made of new wool, or had new wool put into it. For in
Spain, in regard of their heats, they have no feather beds.
handsomely made up, the sheets fine and sweet, and all the rest of the
furniture answerable thereunto; all then was delicate, and delightful unto us.
And thus it lasted with us for a while: But now that my moneys are gone, that
our gallantry begins to go down, and that things go not so well with us as
they were wont to do, the teat with-drawes its milk, and the love of many
years (as if it were a mortal sin) is lost in a moment. It is like to succeed
with them, as it did with me, who was quite undone, not out of any
insufficiency in my self, or want of care, and paines-taking, for I had wit
enough, and knew how to manage my affairs with good judgment. But I
miscarried for the reasons I told you but a little before. This was Gods
handiwork, his chastisement was upon me. For, as he is infinite, so has he no
circumscription, his power is not bounded, his arm not limited to punish this
man for this, and that other for that. In some things he pronounces a set and
determinate sentence, and for such a particular sin, such a penalty appointed,
besides others, which appertain unto the soul, as also those that arise out
of such and such circumstances. Mine was ill gotten gain, and therefore could
not thrive with me. Male parta, male dilabuntur: Ill got, ill spent. Now when a
woman is married to a man, and afterward finds her-selfe deceived, for that
her husband proves not so rich, as he was reported to be, those goods that he
has, being other men's, and taken up upon credit; and likewise, that when he
was to be married, he ran farther in debt, for the apparelling and setting
forth of his wife, and that within a few days after, the Mercer comes to
demand his money for the silks he had of him, and the Tailor for the making up
of the clothes, and that the Sargeants be on the back of him both for the
one, and the other, there is not any thing wherewith to pay them; and if there
be, yet meat is more necessary, then the payment of debts. For whosoever goes
without, the belly must be served; though we could cozen all the world besides,
the belly will not be cozened. He will daily importune us, and we must daily
satisfy him. It is a debt of nature, that must needs be paid: It admits no
forbearance: it is a commandment without controlment; it is a rule without
exception. When it comes to this, the peacock hangs down his tail, as soon
as he looks upon his feet. The pride of his starrie train begins to flag, and
his hoarse trumpet shrikes out his pitiful complaints. The flowers then begin
to wither; their pleasant spring is past; contentment and patience betake them
to their heels. They presently set a sour face on the matter, like him that
has tasted sharp vinegar. And if you shall ask them then, what they have, how
they do, how their husbands use them, how like of marriage? In stead of an
answer, Proverb.
you shall have them stop their noses; it is Quartidiano es, ya hiede.
fish of four days old; it is too stale, and begins to stink. They will not
endure the moving of this stone; and will Proverb.
therefore tell you by some scuruy silent gesture or other: Speak no more of
him h No alcen la piedra.
for Gods sake, let the man alone, do not stir the turd, that stinks too much
already; let us talk of some other subject. But how can thy Lazarus (dear
wife) being dead in his sins, otherwise choose, but stink, and lament his hard
misfortune, being buried in the grave of thy miseries, from whence I shall
never be raised up again to life? Does he not lie intombed in the dark and
strong sepulcher of thy vain thoughts? and in that hollow vault of thy noisome
clamours, and pestilent importunities? Is he not shrouded in the winding sheet
of thy love, tied to thy contents? Which he strives all that he can, to give
thee, be it by hook, or by crook, with the expense of his purse, or the
hazard of his person, having my hands bound, showing that I submit my self as
humbly to thy subjection, as thou (good wife, were thou good) should submit thy
self to mine? He that has charge of a wife, and family, let him hold his
tongue, he cannot be at leisure to talk, he has something else to do, he
must employ himself in making provision to supply necessary wants, and
perhaps is in want through thee, and is come to all this misery by thy means.
Do not thou then complain that he stinks, seeing that he is putrified with
thy impertinencies, finding himself thrust in amongst the worms of thy
wastefull ryots and excesses, which like so many deuourers, lie gnawing upon
his heart and bowels? Thy boldness in going abroad; thy liberty in conuersing;
thy exorbitancies in spending; thy wastefulnesse in scattering; thy vanity, in
vaunting thy self, bragging and boasting thy birth and parentage, which has
so many mixtures, as there are differences of keys, and variety of stops, in
an Organ. Have thou a husband that can bear with all these, and much more; and
yet is he fish of four days old? grows he stale with thee, and begins he now
to stink? Tell me (I prithee) by the life and light (I conjure thee) of those
thy fair eyes, and do not lie unto me; whether yesterday thou did not visit
such a Hermitage, such a Chapel, and such and such other places of devotion,
making there thy vows, and thy offerings; but to what purpose, God he best
knows? And is it not likewise true, that since thou had the use of reason
(nay rather before thou had it, because thou yet want it) there was never
yet any Midsommer night, or feast of S. John, wherein, without sleeping (for
they say, that sleep hinders the virtue and operation of those, you know what
I mean) thou betookst thy self to such a prayer, thou know well enough what
one, but better it had been for thee, that thou had not known it (being
such a one as it is, and so much reproved) and without opening thy mouth, or
speaking so much as one word (for they likewise say, that silence is another
essential point of that prayer) thou should stay waiting and looking for the
first that should pass along by thee after midnight, to the end, that by what
thou should hear come from him, thou might accordingly judge of thy future
marriage, and know him that should be thy husband, having therein a strong
confidence and affiance, and giving the same credit and belief unto it, as if
it were an article of Faith, or one of those of thy Creed, when as in very
deed, they are no other then old wives tales, the impostures of witches, and
the mere fooleries of foolish women, and such as want judgment. And is it not
also true, that there is not that Beata, nor that devout and religious woman,
that thou have not either been with her, or she with thee, to the same effect?

Is it not true, that thou have put on thy mantle, walking diverse stations with
them, only for this purpose? Have thou not forcibly laid hold on their
garments, and torn the mantles of these Saints, who never throw them off from
their shoulders, burning tapers, to thou know whom? Have thou not broken the
bounds of modesty without blushing, neither setting before thee thine own
shame, or the fear of God? Have thou left any sieue, without trying thy
sorceries thereupon? or beans lie still in their place, which thou have not
made to leap and dance, by evil means, and by words, and charms, hated and
prohibited by our holy Religion? Is there any match-maker, or known friend of
thine, whom thou have not been importunate withal, telling them that thou art
sick, and that thou longest for a husband? At last, God sends her a husband (I
speak of others, not of my self) a quiet man, mild spirited, one that is
careful to live, and an honest man, who takes pains, and labors hard to get
a Royal wherewith to feed and maintain her, not suffering her to want her
ointments, her paintings, and a thousand other toys and trinkets, as brooches,
flowers, butto^s, aglets, and the like, for the ornament of her person; and yet
for all this, within four days, this man also grows stale, and stinkes. If
(poor soul) he do all that he can for thee, why do thou afflict both him
and thy self, and why should it turn thy stomach, and cause a loathing in
thee, when others shall but name him unto thee? Why do thou seek to defame
him, by thy obloquies, detractions, deprauings, reproaches, raylings, and
reuilings? Why do thou grumble at those good offices he does thee? Why
misconstrue his kindness? Why fashion his affection according to thy false
fancy, measuring his heart by thine own? Thou would not have him dug out
of his grave, but that the memory of him should sleep for ever, and yet thou
digg'st him up with thine own hands, not sparing the very bones of his
Ancestors, and harmless ashes of his whole lineage, throwing out lies and
scandals by shouell-fuls to those that give thee the hearing, laying foul (but
false) imputations upon him, proclaiming that (as they say) in the open
marketplace of him, which neither do thou know to be true, neither indeed
is he guilty of. To what end then is all this outrage? I will tell thee; It is
only out of her malice toward him, thinking by this means to affront and
disgrace him. But thou do therein, like thy self, thou showest thy self a
right woman; full of change and mutability, fickle and inconstant; and would to
God, these thy sudden, and undeserved alterations, do not arise (taking the
course that thou do) from the offenses, that thou have committed against thy
husband, against thy God, and against thine own soul.

Now that I am come hither, and brought thus, before ever I thought of it, into
this port, I will vnpacke my commodities, set up a boothe, and make show of all
my wares, as your Pedlers and poor Mercers use to do, that go from Fair to
Fair, and from Town to Town, opening them here to day, and there to morrow,
without making any set residence, in this or that other place, and when they
have sold all their trinkets, return home to their own country. Let us here
set open our shop, and sell you some of these our good wares, and let us in
open market make show unto you of the intentions of some kind of marriages; as
well, that we may put those out of their error, who are led thereunto for
those ends; as also for that they may know, that they are known; and it is
fit, that we should tell them the ill that they do, because they truly do
ill; and that done, we will presently return home again to our selves.

Some take this holy state of marriage upon them, out of no other consideration
in the world, then to free themselves from the subjection of a Father or a
Concerning marriage, and several ends leading thereunto.
mother, and to be at their own liberty, it seems to your foolish young
girl, (be she Gentlewoman, or otherwise) that she shall presently be a
freewoman; and that as soon as she is removed from her fathers house, and
received into that of her husbands, she may gad and run, where, and whither
she list. That she shall have the Law in her own hands; that she shall command
with authorite, have where-withall to give, and servants to wait and attend
upon her, and to be at her beck. To these kind of creatures, subjection seems
to be too sharp and cruel a tie upon them; and therefore easily suppose, that
as soon as they are married, they shall on the sudden, be absolute in their
Empire, powerful in their will, and sway all things as they list themselves.
They will not stick to frame this argument to themselves; that their parents
persecute them, that they are their daily torment, never suffering them to be
at quiet, and that they shall find their husbands more soft and pliable then
wax, and that they will prove kind and loving unto them. The growth whereof
springs from this, That their fathers, in the life that they led with their
wives, live like bruit beasts, whereby they raise up vain desires in their
daughters, inflame their appetites, and cause them (by their ill example) to
run a cross course; for, being (as they are) imprudent, they cannot
distinguish of things aright; they embrace all, that is sweet and pleasant,
thinking to meet with it, wheresoever they come, not thinking that there is any
tartness or sowernesse in any, save only in their parents.

These, and other the like idle conceits, disquiet their minds, making them not
to care which end goes forward, it puts them besides their wits, and leaves
them without any judgment. But as they look and gaze upon this, why do they
not also with a fixed and settled eye, behold that other friend and acquaintance
of theirs, who is married to a jealous fool, a rough and bitter husband, who
not only gives her not a good word, but will not suffer her to step a foot out
of doors, to take the air, and recreate her self, no not so much as to go
to Mass, unless it be very early in the morning, and that in a cloth kirtle,
and muffled up in a poor mantle, as if she were one of the servants of his
house: And in a word, not using her as his wife, but as his slave that had
fled, and run away from him. It is not so well (my masters) as you take it to
be; and believe me, that good marriages are not chickens of every days
hatching; they happen good now and then by chance, or as it pleases God to
send them; and it befalls those that are married, as it fares with him, that
buys a Melon, for one dainty and delicate one indeed, which he may chance to
light upon, he shall meet with a hundred other, which prove gourds and
pompeons in their taste and relish? Have thou not observed that other familiar
friend of thine, who has married a gamester, who plays away all, to the very
sheets wherein he lies, turning them into table-cloathes, at a common dicing
house? Do thou not think upon that other neighbor of thine, whose husband
keeps a whore under her nose, and never a morning throughout the year, but
that he sends her out of the market a good basket full of provision, whilst his
poor wife is ready to famish at home for hunger. Nor have they heard (as it
should seem) of some husbands, who are no sooner entered within the doors of
their own house, but that they level their eyes with their feet, and never
lift them up, unless it be to chide, and find fault without a cause, and to
feed this their pee^ish and froward humor? Do these women happly think, that
all wives are as much respected and beloved of their husbands, as they are of
their fathers? I can assure you, that a bad father is to be preferred before a
good husband; I have seldom seen a father that has not still showed
himself a father; but few husbands so kind, that they have still continued
kind. And if any such, has at any time been, that has not been wanting to
those obligations and duties, which belong unto wedlock, it may well be taken
for a wonder. But I never knew a father cease to be a father, though his son
ceased to be a son. There is many a good father, that will make much of a bad
son; but seldom shall you see a bad hu^band make much of a good wife.

Others do marry, because (having neither father nor mother alive) they A
second end.
desire to be out of their Tutors or Guardians hands; thinking that by them
they are sold and robbed of that they have. They cast up their reckoning, and
say with themselves, that a husband would manage their estate far better,
and look a great deal more faithfully unto it, then a Guardian, who being
loath to be dispossessed thereof, and to render that up into her hands, which is
her own, takes no great care to prefer her, but does all that he can to
keep her from marrying, hoping that to morrow she will fall sick, and die;
and himself have all.

And therefore, they say; How better were it, that mine own children should
enjoy that which I have, then to leave it to my enemies, who wish my death,
that they may inherit my goods. I will marry, that I will, I will to this
gear, though it be with some foul filthy Negro, for my father did not take
the pains to get that he did for my Guardian, nor was it his meaning, that he
should lick himself hole by me, cutting himself large thongs, out of
another bodies leather, especially using me so untowardly as he does, suffering
me to go all to ragged, and torn, half starued for want of good meat, and
not to much as one poo^e Royal in my purse to buy me a few pinnes. This is
that that makes them run headlong down the hill; and therefore taking
counsel of the first they meet with; they think, that this their friend has
advised them well, and that what they tell them, is out of love, and a well
wishing to their good: and being led thus along in this blindfold manner, they
pitch upon a dunghill, where they are so bemired, that they shall never come
off clean from thence, while they live, because they made choice of such a
young gallant, that wastes all upon his back, and his belly, in good clothes,
and good meat; whose maine care is to pamper his body, keep his horses fat,
bestow rich liueries on his servants, spend in feasts and banquets, leaving his
wife weeping at home in a corner; and that which she purposed, and desired to
leave to her children, to wit, the wealth that she brought with her, having now
a housefull of little brats, she has not one single penny to give, or leave
unto them; for having matched with an unthrift, the wind has blown it all
away. And if she were afraid before, that her kinsmen, for to make themselves
masters of her estate, did desire her death; sure her husband now wishes it no
less, for out of a humor of his that he has, to shift clean linen, being
now grown weary of so much wife, which never misses him at bed, and at board,
he desires, and peradventure also procures, to put her under ground; and so
this poor soul, deceived by her self and others, fayles in the obtaining of
that, which her false imagination proposed unto her.

Others, of a less stayed temper, a kind of giddy-headed Hobby-horses, will
The third end.
needs marry forsooth for pure love; these show themselves in Churches, and at
public meetings; when they are at home at their own houses, their windows
stand wide open, that they may see, and be seen; and in the night they lie
tumbling and tossing in their beds, looking still when some one gallant or
other should come under their Balcone, who with the Trin-Trin of his gh^terne,
should rouse them up from their unquiet rest.

This or that other young wench, hears him sing certain coplas or verses,
which Gerineldos made to Don^a Urraca, and thinks that they were purposely
made for her. She is more black then the Crow, more foul then the Tortoise,
more foolish then the Salamander, more ugly then the Rat; and because there
they paint her forth, to be more fair then Venus, not leaving any box, or
cabinet unsearched, from which they take not forth for her, Alabaster, Rubies,
Turkeses, Pearls, Snow, Iesmines, and Roses, even to the vnnailing from
heaven, of the Sun, and the Moon, setting her forth with Stars, and
comparing her eyebrows, to the Rainebow, that beautiful Arche of heaven,
they are taken as truly therewith, as if they did properly belong unto them,
applauding themselves with these their undeserved praises: Being as an even
so, or rather far otherwise.

Alas poor silly fool, get thee gone, and sooth not up thy self with these
glorious (but feigned) glosses; for he (I assure thee) that made them, did not
so much as once dream on thee; he made them not for thee; or if he did, he
lyde, that he might deceive and abuse thee with his flattering of thee;
knowing thee to be vainly given, and a lover thereof. Take heed, I advise thee
of such a glozing companion; for he is a mere Emperique, who with one kind of
sirrop cures all sorts of persons, and diseases. He says the very same unto
others, as he does unto thee. He reads unto thee (to stir up thy desires)
another Lecture, taken out of Diana, where he tells thee that he saw the burning
flames of those fair Shephardesses, the Palace of that wise Dame, with all the
riches and sumptuousness thereof, the pearls and precious stones wherewith it
was adorned, those delicate gardens, and pleasant groves, wherein they took
their pleasures and delights, and the dainty music which they had made unto
them; and as if all this had been true, or might have been, and that the same
things might one day happen to themselves, these poor fools begin to melt,
and pine away for love.

These wenches are like tindar, any the least spark that lights upon them,
sets them all on a light fire; they are quickly tinded, and quickly ended, no
sooner in, then out; they make a blaze, and dye.

There are some others, that are a little more curious, who refusing to make
themselves ready, and to buy other things more necessary for them, spend
their money in hyring of books; and because they have read in Don Belianis, in
Amadis, or in Esplandian, or Knight of the Sun, those dangers, and ill
voyages, whereon those unfortunate Knights went for the Infanta Magalona, which
should be (as it seemed) some well disposed Dame, they suppose, that the horse
is ready sadled at their door, and that there is the dwarf, and that good old
wench with Sen^or Agrajes, to go and direct them in the way, and to bring them
through those thick forests and woods, to the end that they might not touch
upon the inchaunted Castle; whence they go to perform some other
atchieuement. And a head-lesse Lion, encountering with them, as they were on the
way, using many courtesies and ceremonies unto them, with a great deal of
willingness, brings them, where they are served, and royally entertained with
diverse daintily dressed dishes of meat, which to their thinking, they now feed
upon, and that they find themselves afterward there sleeping in delicate
soft beds of down, not knowing who brought them thither, nor whence they come,
for all is enchantment. There they are honestly lodged, and well used, till Don
Galaor comes thither, and kills the Giant, who makes me to shed tears, as often
as I hear tell of the cruelties that he used toward them. Whereas it had
been much better, that by one of these Gentle-women, he had been sent into
Castile, together with his oppressed prisoners, where only for the very sight
of them, they might have got so much money, that would have made up a
sufficient Dowry for to marry them, without running so many adventures, and
disaduentures. And so this enchantment is now wholly come to an end. But let
them take heed, who read such, and the like books, lest that succeed unto
them, which happened unto Don Quixote de la Mancha, who thinking himself an
errant Knight, came to be an arrant Ass. But there is not wanting such another
mad rogue as my self, who told me the other day, That if such books as these
should, like a bundle of fagots, be pitched round about these fair curious
creatures, and that fire should be put unto them, yet were it impossible to
make them to burn, because their virtues would extinguish those flames. But I
say nothing; and so I protest, because my self goes wandering through the
world, I know not whither: and if I should say this of others, they would say
the like of me.

Other wenches there are, who upon the first sight of some spruce yonker, A
fourth.
with a starcht beard, and his whiskers turned up, his body peradventure being
as full of gummes, as a Valencia velvet, and as many issues in his arms and
legs, as Araniuez has fountains, yet conceiting him to be another Adonis for
his handsomnesse and his neatness, are taken with the pretinesse of his
person, and apparel, and are ready forsooth to run mad for love. This
dandling, fidling, tender, and wanton young fellow, made of purpose (as they
think) for pleasure and delight, who makes a profession of neatness, and
other apish toys, as conging and kissing his hand, a poppet that one may put
in his pocket, is the only man with them: as if these curiosities, were not
the Vespers of some bone-fire, wherein they are to be burned. Let a woman be
like a woman; and a man like a man. Though these vanities, and idle
superf^uities befi^ neither the one, nor the other, but serve only as
Liueries, to show that they are the Devils followers. But if you will allow
fore-tops, curlings of the hair, lies, paintings, neat dressings, a soft
skin, and a thousand other things to beautify both face and body, let-women
have only this privilege, who have need thereof, and know best how to make
use of these niceties. It shall suffice man that he express himself to be a
man: it will well become him, to have a big voice, a hard and bushy hair, a
thick skin, a manly face, a grave carriage, and a hand that is none of the
tenderest. Yet these foolish wenches, think that such spruce princoxes as
these, are made of such pure metal, that they have not any natural passions,
nor that they spit and cough as other men; and yet for all this their seeming
finenesse, they are subject to Sarsaparrilla, China earth, Guacum, Emplastrum
Melilotum, Unguentum Apostolorum, decoctions, sirrops, and electuaries, and
many other miseries, and medicines; for whom these fond things are ready to run
mad, and are so hot in their love, that if the bridle of shame did not somewhat
restrain this their headstrong affection, they would be worse then any
devil, when he is unchained and let loose. And if you shall ask, either all,
or any one of them, what they see in this finicall fellow, what reason they
have to dote upon him, why conceit him to be such a precious piece? This
accursed answer (as it is common with them) so it serves then in stead of all
other: That it is their pleasure forsooth to have it so; it is their humor,
and they will not be beaten out of it. And if you lay before them their
unadvisedness in doing so, the inconveniences that are likely to follow
thereupon, the ill counsel which they take, and the like, their answer is; I
must suffer for it, and no body for me; it is I, and not you, that must feel
the smart of it: and therefore you were as good hold your peace. If it succeed
ill with me, I must be contented with my bad fortune, and conne no body thank
but my self, and therefore I pray let me alone, and spare your labor to
speak thereof any more, for I am of age, and know well enough what I do. And
yet this miserable maid, neither knows what she does, or says* but if they
find themselves obliged by the sweet-meates, that are sent unto them, a gaudy
girdle, a neat pair of Twizes, a silk pair of stockings, garters fringed
with gold, perfumed gloves, or a loue-letter brought her by her maid, or her
answer thereunto, if she suffer him to pinch her as she passes by, or reach
forth her hand to him from under the door, if not perhaps her foot: when it
comes to this, Lord have mercy upon her, there is no other medicine for this
malady. For she is already touched Tocada esta de la yerua. A fifth.
with the venom of that herb, Proverb.
whose infection (without divine help) is incurable.

There are other women, that do likewise marry, only that they may live as
merrily as the day is long, that they may go whither it pleases them, as well
to see, as to be seen; that they may dress themselves to their own liking,
wear this gown, or put on this mantle, either as it suits with their fancy,
or the fashion: it seeming unto them, that because they saw such a one upon
such a festival day, or all the week long, in her bravery and her gallantry,
that as soon as she is married, her husband will maintain her in the same
manner, and if not better, yet at least as other husbands keep their wives:
and if such a man's wife trot up and down all the day long, he will not deny
her leave to walk the streets at her pleasure.

Hence arises the quarrel, this is it which makes the fray; for if her hopes
be crossed, and that things fall not out according to her expectation, or that
her husband does not like of it, and that he will not have his wife to go
either clothed, or naked, for any but himself; telling her, that though such
a one let his wife do what she list, and to go thus and thus, he does not
well in it, giving the world occasion to scandal her good name, whereby he
must needs be touched in his honor; and therefore he will not permit her so to
do, for fear of incurring the like censure. Whereupon, and for no other cause
in the world, because they will not give them leave to wear what clothes they
list themselves, what shoes, and what stockings, nor to take their pleasure
abroad, and to walk the streets, as some other women do, nor be left wholly
to their own liberty, not one stone shall rest quiet upon another in all the
whole house; she plotteth treasons wherewith to revenge her self upon her
unfortunate husband, who being a wise and considerate man, knowing what a kind
of woman she is, and how affected in her disposition, is afraid, that if he
should grant her this license, and give her wings, they would turn to her
destruction, as they do to the There are diverse sorts of Ants, whereof some
are borne with wings, but to their own b^rt. Covarr. verb. Ho^ga.
Ante. So that he dares not give her leave to range abroad, nor to consent to
other her extrauagancies. This only coal is enough to kindle the fire, this
single contradiction will serve the turn to make her fall a scratching of her
face, and tearing her hair, calling her self the most wretched and
unfortunate of all women, and wishes that as soon as she was borne, it had
pleased God, that her mother had strangled her, buried her in a ditch, or
thrown her into some deep well, rather then to live to be subject to so
tyrannical a power; that she only of all other married women, is the most
miserable; that such a woman is of this and that quality, and that she lives
like a Queen with her husband, in comparison of her; that she is no whit
inferior unto her, nor brought a lesser dowry with her, nor would she ever
have married, if she had thought her husband would have used her no better. And
breaking the bounds of womanhood, she dishonours him, calling him base fellow,
dung hill-squire, neglectfull villain, rogue, rascal, and what not;
vpbraiding him, that her father kept better men then he was; and that he was
not worthy to make clean her old shoes. And if her husband chance to
ouerheare her, she strains her voice a note higher, crying out, Wretched woman
that I am, was I so daintily bred up, to be fed with this course fare? Are
these the delights I am like to have? Did they leave me so well for this, that
tho^ should use me in this scuruy manner as thou do? Must I be thy slave
night and day, to look to thy house and children, and to be made a drudge to
thy servants? See, and there be any grief like unto mine? God and the world
knows what I am, of what house I come, and how well I am descended! Don
Fulano, and Don Cutano, such a Bishop, such a Conde, and such a Duke, are of my
alliance; leaving out neither beardling, nor shaueling, high, nor low, whereof
she does not make a Letany, and verbal process.

But poor unhappy man as he is, if it should fortune so to happen, (which God
forbid should ever befall any honest man) that he have his aged mother at home
with him in his house, his sisters that are virgins, or children by another
wife; then will she keep a racket, and cry out; That it was for them, that her
father got his wealth; that it is spent upon them; that they eat it out,
whilst I (poor soul) who brought him all this, must be used like a Negra;
Negra (said I) if it were Gods will, would I were no worse used then such a
ones Negra, which passes here daily by our door, as if she were some great
Lady; to day in this change of clothes, to morrow in that. I only am that
unlucky bird, that continue still in these old rags, ever since I was first
married, and have not where-withall to mend them, mewed up between these walls,
accompanied with I know not how many spindles, reeles, distaffes, and hitchels
for flax: What can her husband (poor man) say to all this? What answer can he
make her? His best course will be to let her alone, otherwise he shall never
bring his purpose to pass.

There are another sort of women, that marry, to the end that by having The
sixth.
a husband to cloak their faults, they may not be molested by the Justice, nor
reproached by their neighbors, or any other persons whatsoever. This is
roguery, knavery, villainy, beastliness, and dishonesty in the highest degree.
What should a man say more of them? They are a kind of kind wen^es, but
dishonest and shameless. They are like those Gardiners, that clap up a
skar-crow in a fig tree, that the birds may not come and pecke at the figs:
which are only kept for those, whom it shall please the Gardener to give leave
to pluck them; or such as shall pay him well for them: so as the birds do not
pecke them, it is all good and well.

Is there none then, that may correct, reprove, or open his mouth against these
kind of women? No surely. They have a skar-crow in the fig tree; a husband of
their own in the house. Touch them who dares. They can either give or sell,
their honor, or their persons, as they will and list themselves, even in the
sight of the whole world, and yet by-reason of this their skar-crow, the
Justice dare not offer to punish them. For it fares with them, as it does with
Vine-yards, which have a guard upon them in their time of fruitage; but when
the Vintage shall be gathered in, and the grapes carried away, and put into the
wine press, they are no more looked unto, but are laid open, and made a common
field, for their flocks and herds of cattle to feed on, treading and
trampling them down with their feet.

Sister, let me tell thee, that these are the steps that lead unto hell: God
will take away this cloak from thee, this husband of thine for thy dissolute
life and shameless lust, to the end, that this may be the w^ip to lash thee,
by bringing thy secret whorings in public view: and in that balance wherein
thou did put his honor, thine own ere long shall be weighed. But I were best
take heed to whom I speak, lest I may chance to have my head broken for my
labor. She feared not her husband, she was past all shame toward God and Man:
and shall I think to reclaim her, or such as she is, by these my fooleries?
(for I know they take them for no other,) I shall never be able to do it while
I live, and therefore I will let them alone.

Other some also marry, for that they see their wealth begins to waste, they
The seventh.
know not how themselves: yet pretend, that the only cause why they marry, is,
for that they are young, and are loath to have their honor liable to the lavish
tongues of evil disposed people; as also, lest their persons might run the
hazard of Rapes, and other the like violences. Well, of two evils the least:
But because God has not any part in all these marriages, and that it may be
better said of them, that they be the Devils contracts: and for that all things
are to be reputed either good or ill, according to the end whereunto they are
directed: and this being known, those actions are determined and defined that
lead thereunto; bearing more love always to the end it self, then to those
things which conduce and guide us unto it. So that marriage is not loved in such
as these, for the love that they bear unto marriage, but only use it as a
means, for the accomplishing of their desires. And these kind of women do
not walk directly in the right way, but go somewhat about to serve their own
turns, running a by-way to their own ruin. And therefore I hold it no good
marriage, (nor indeed is it) when it has any other end in it, save only to
serve God in that holy and honorable estate.

God does permit (I confess) all these marriages, but I must tell you withal,
that in most of them the devil has a share, and that not the least. It is a
good and holy Calling, but thou make it a hellish Marriage. It was instituted
for quietness and for comfort, but thou love it not; thou neither have it,
nor art willing to have it: but thou do rather entangle thy feet in it, that
thou may the sooner trip, and fall with it to the ground. Let not a virgin,
or a widow, make the butt that she shoots at her lawless liberty, nor the
freeing of her-selfe from her Fathers, or her Gardians subjection: let her not
be led along with vain love, let her cast away from her all such filthiness
as follows her sensual appetite. Which if they do not do, let them assure
themselves, that it will go ill both with the one and the other: and if their
husbands shall not prove so good and kind unto them, as they themselves did
think, and wish they should, if they shall make slaves of them after they are
ma^yed unto them; if they shall me we them up like Hawks; if they shall lead
an evil life with them; if they shall waste away their wealth, and yet leave a
great charge of children upon them; if their purse shall be still empty; if
troubles shall come upon them; if their husband shall be a Gamester, or a
whore-master; if they shall be thus abused by them, and shall happily dye under
their hands: all this arises from those evil ends, which they proposed to
themselves, either by seeking to advance themselves beyond their quality, or
to flaunt it beyond their means: or those other forementioned reasons, which
are the sole cause of their ruin. This Idol of Baal, whom they adored, in him
did they put their trust: this was the God who (they thought) could succor,
free and defend them; but in case at any time they should have true need indeed
of his help, they shall find, that he ought not to be feared, nor that he is
able to send down fire to consume their enemies, or comfort them; for as he
has it not, so can he not give it them. Thou adorest Idols, but thou shall be
delivered by none of them in the day of trouble: for in a word, they are Idols,
the workmanship of our own hands, fashioned out of wantonness, and a longing
to be doing of something, and adored only out of an idle humor, and out of a
kind of pleasure and delight that we take in these toys. Fire shall come
down from heaven, and consume the sacrifice, the wood, the stones, and the
ashes, even to the waters themselves in the trenches, (like unto that of Elias)
though they be filled afresh, barrel after barrel, yet shall all that
moisture be licked up by the fire. Know ye then, that those are marriages which
God ordains, and such as you enter into, only to show your selves obedient
to his will, and have consulted therewith aforehand; leaving it wholly to him,
to work in the rest, as he shall think fittest for his service, without
seeking after any ill and foul means: and then though ye should be dung-wet,
and bucketted a hundred times with the waters of persecutions, of hunger, of
cold, of imprisonment, and all other troubles and miseries, that may befall the
life of man, it is no matter: For fire shall come down from heaven, that is to
say, the love of God and his charity, which shall consume and dry up, these
their many waters of tribulations. This quick fire makes speedy riddance of
all our troubles, presenting them as a sacrifice before his divine Majesty,
who will not only assist us with his grace in this world, but crown us with
his glory in the world to come. And let this serve as an end to this my Sermon.
Now let us return again to our Marriage, which (and it had pleased God) would
it had never been.

I had now served some six years in the Mariage-galley; in which short time
(would it had been less) I endured (I thank my wife for it) a great deal of
misery. Howbeit, for the four first years, our wedding loaves (I must
confess) were fresh and new: for as yet, it was but hony-moone with us; all
was of the finest flower and the purest wheat. But when we began to go
down the hill, and were now fallen half in half from that height wherein we
were before, and wanted money to maintain us at that scantling: when the
cloth-of-gold kirtle, which was richly both bordred and imbroydered, was to be
sold, and turned into gold; and that not any the least thread of it, though no
bigger then a Spiders, escaped the melting-pot, and yet past for a reasonable
handsome kirtle still, as the world went with us: when all our old ends were
spent and gone; when I could not inch it out any further; when I saw that the
water was come up above my chinne, and that I could not long hold out, but must
needs sink, for that she would by no means consent, that I should sell any
thing either of hers, or mine own, and that my credit to furnish my shop would
not reach so far as one farthing-worth of Radishes, I found my self then in
that strait, that aduising with my father-in-law, I was willing to take
somewhat a more rigerous course with her. God send us a good night of it. She
thereupon began to set out so loud a throat, as if (like a pig) I had offered
to stick her, or that the matter had been of more moment then indeed it was:
insomuch that the neighbors came running in for to help her, who were so many
that the house could not hold them. But when they saw the truth of the
business, as God would have it, it was a thing of nothing; and when they
perceived I had reason to do as I did, they rested quiet, and went their
ways: yet for all this did not she leave off her lamentations, which might
very well have served her turn for a hundred holy-weekes. I was enforced that
I might not fall further foul with her, to let her alone, and to leave her to
her self, that I might not be bound by hearing her, to answer her both with
words and deeds. I took my cloak, threw it on my shoulder, and got me out
adoores, leaving her all alone, and giving her thereby free liberty to say and
do what she would, till she should grow weary, and could no more.

This madded her more then all the rest, when she saw me set so light by that
which she said, and that I seemed to make such little reckning of it. And I may
truly confess unto you, that in all that time that I lived with her, I cannot
accuse my self, nor did she ever tax me of any the least injury that I had
done her, but used her with all the kindness that a husband could use a wife.
But when God shall bestow wealth upon us; or when he pleases, take it away,
this alters the case; for man cannot then do withal, it lies not in his
hands, neither is it in his power, to go increasing in riches, neither can he
stop them in their course, (no more then a man can the tide) when they are
ebbing from him. He cannot be termed an unthrift, or a bad husband, who uses
his best endeavors, as others do, for to get where-withall to live in some good
and honest fashion, and to provide, as well as he can, for his wife, children,
and family. But he is a bad husband, who spends his means upon women, throws
it away at play, wastes it in eating and drinking, and prodigally consumes it
in pride of apparel, and other vices of like excess.

Let my young prodigals hearken unto me, and do thou to understand this
lesson, thou that art the only son and heir of some rich merchant: for it
is unto thee that I speak, and thou know why and wherefore I speak it. And
I was also about to say farther unto thee, that if thou do not take heed, thy
rash and unadvised courses, (helped on by other men's ill counsel) will carry
thee hence to hell. Repent thee therefore betime, and have a care to live, that
thou may not dye.

So that I say, it is neither good, nor bad success, that should cause any
separation betwixt Man and wife; nor ought married folks to fall out and
disagree about the transitory things of this world. For a husband has no more
obligation, then to use all his industry and diligence, and to do the best he
can: The success we must leave to God. Nor is he to be condemned for a bad
husband, who keeps his wifes dowry well secured, and has rather augmented,
then diminisht it, without having either sold, or paltred it away. She,
without doubt, could not confess so much, or if she did confess it, she did
not speak the truth; or if she did speak it, she did adulterate it in that
manner, that they might absolve her upon it. Thus (poor soul) did she
deceive her-selfe, whilst she thought to cozen her Confessor. Likewise, there
were not some wicked people wanting, of base birth, who, upon weak grounds,
and a weaker understanding, to flatter and sooth up this her idle humor, did
help to further her fooleries, favoring them all that they could, not so much
as once giving care unto me, nor knowing the justness of my cause: And these
were they that wrought my woe, and brought her to hell. For she dyed shortly
after of a sharp disease, without showing any tokens of repentance, or Guzmans
wife dies.
receiving the Sacrament.

In two things may I style my self unfortunate: First, in this my marriage,
though on my part I did use all possible means to observe the laws thereof.
Secondly, that having done penance so long a time with her, and having lost all
my wealth, I had not any acquittance of receipt under her hand, no not so much
as a child by her, whereby I might have recovered her dowry. Howbeit, I have
no great cause to complain much for this: for the unhappiness of her death,
made my life happy. For there is no burden so heavy, as the insupportable
weight of a froward wife. As a certain passenger plainly gave us to
understand, A short tale of one that threw his wife ouerboord.
who being upon a voyage at Sea, and a great storm arising, the Master of the
Ship gave order that they should presently lighten the Ship, and throw the
heauiest commodities ouer-board for the saving of their lives. The passenger
hearing him say so, took his wife up in his arms, and threw her into the sea.
The Justice going afterward about to punish him for this his offense, he
excused himself, saying; That the master of the ship, had commanded him so to
do. And that amongst all the merchandise that he had aboard, there was not
any that waighed so heavy as his wife, which was the cause that he threw her
into the Sea: And it pleased God that they had fair weather after it.

Now, turn your eyes upon my father-in-Law, who never had any difference with
me, but did cherish and comfort me, as if I had been his own natural son;
and taking always part with me against his daughter, and would ever chide and
reprehend her; and when he saw his fatherly admonitions could not reclaim her,
nor work any good upon her, he would never come within her doors. But
howsoever he did hate her conditions; in conclusion, she was his daughter; and
children are those tables that are sawen and hewn as it were out of the
fathers heart. And though they cause their sorrow, yet they love them dearly.
He mourned much for her, but we remained friends. We buried this unhappy woman
(for that must be her name) and did that was sitting for her soul. And within
a few days after, we parled of parting Company; for he would that I should
return that unto him which he had given me with his daughter. I did not stand
off, but gave him all that he had given me, and in better case then he
consigned it unto me. He kindly thankt me; we leuel'd our accounts, remaining
still as good friends as ever we were heretofore.

CHAP. IIII.
Guzman de Alfarache, being now a Widower, resolves to go to Alcala de
Henares, to study the Arts, and Divinity, that he might make himself fit to
say Mass. And having fulfilled all his terms, and duly heard his Lectures,
he leaves all and marries again.

FOR to tumble down a stone from the top of a hill, every mean man's strength
will serve, with the touch (as they say) of his little finger, he will make it
to roll to the ground. But if the same stone were to be drawn out of some
deep Well, many men would not be able to fetch it forth, and great diligence
must be used for the getting of it up. For to make my self fall from that good
estate, wherein I was, and to run headlong out of my wealth and credit, my
wifes wastfulnesse was enough to turn me going; but to get my self up again,
to the same height wherein I was before, I had need of the help of other the
like Uncles and Kinsfolk; such another Genoa, and Milane; or that another
Sayavedra should come and live with me; or that the same man should rise
again; for I never lighted on the like servant, or companion for my turn; by
whose helping hand I might have been raised up as high as ever I was, and
restored to a better estate then before: But wanting these good helps, I lay
buried and whelmed-ouer head and ears in a well of miseries.

Goods and riches, the slower they are in coming, the quicker they are in
Riches long a coming, but quick in going.
going. They are gathered with a great deal of leisure; but (...) scattered
away in haste. All at this present (whatsoever it be) in this world, it is all
subject to mutation; it being fuller of alterations, then any thing else. Let
not the rich man therefore rest too secure, nor yet the poor man despair. For
the wheel is as slow in coming up, as in going down; and as quickly
emptieth, as fills the Buckets that it brings up. The excessive expenses of my
house had stripped me of all, both my jewels and my money; My wife might with a
good conscience (if she had had it) considering what I suffered for her sake,
and the troubles which by her exorbitancies, lighted upon me, have left me
some small part of her portion, (which she might lawfully have done) wherewith
at least I might (had I been so disposed) being a sole and retired man, have
driven some small trade, attended my old occupation of usury, or employed my
self in some one thing or other, to have picked out a poor living, and to
begin the world anew, to see if I could recover this my weakness, whereinto
by her means I was fallen, and now brought so low. But not only in this
particular occasion, but in all the rest, that offered themselves unto me,
with my friends and acquaintance, I might say that which Simonides said; He had
two Simonides his two coffers.
coffers or chests in his house, and was wont to say, (using to open them at
certain times) that when he opened that of cares and troubles, from which he
thought, and hoped to reap some profit, it fell out contrary to his
expectation, finding nothing but his labor for his pains; and of that it was
brim-full; but that wherein the Graces were kept, who should have recompensed
him for his good services, he could get nothing thence, but had the ill luck
to find it always empty.

This Philosopher and my self, were equally unfortunate; and it seems, that
the influence of one and the same Star, had lighted on us both. For albeit, I
did ouermore labor to help and benefit others, not considering the good or
hurt that might come thereof, and without taking the counsel of those, who
say; Haz bien, Haz bien, y guarte. Guzman hurt by his kind heart.
y guarte: Do well for others, but yet look to thy Proverb.
self; so may I also say, That I never washed that head, that I had any other
reward for my pains, but scabs and scurffe. And albeit I had felt the smart of
it, and paid soundly for this my folly, yet I could not hold my hand, but
wilfully persisted in mine own ways; for, being made drunk with the delight,
that I took therein, I did not seek to repair the hurt it had done me. For
as it is an easy matter to strip a Facil despojar a un ebrio.
drunken man out of his clothes; so is it hard to Proverb.
do the same upon him, that is sober. They may Pueden roba^, al que duerme,
pero no a quien vela.
rifle him that sleeps; but not him, that is awake. I did never stand upon my
guard; I did never think Proverb.
to see the day that I should have wanted; Whilst I had where-withall, I
always made this account; But when I saw to what poverty I was brought, I then
knew the error I was in. And though I was a naughty man, yet I had a desire to
be good; not out of any true love to goodness it self, but for the shunning
of some greater evil, that otherwise might ensue. I had thrown aside my
vices, forgetting them for a while, and had applied my self to labor and
paines-taking; I had trid^ all the means and ways that might be to work
Guzman could never thrive by any good courses.
my self a fortune, and to come forward in the world; but not any one of them
that thriu'd with me. I was an unfortunate man in all those better courses,
that I ran. Only in doing ill was I lucky, I had a happy hand in filching
and stealing, fortune only favoring me so far, as to make me vnhappily-happy.

This is a cunning trick, which sin still puts upon us, to further us with
its counsel, and to help those that are her champions, to the end, that
Sin, how she uses her followers.
with that heat and warmth they receive from sin, they may be the better
encouraged and drawn on with the more metal, to commit more heinous crimes;
and when she sees that they have attained to the height of all villainy, and
that they cannot well climb higher, she tumbles them down headlong with a
witness. She makes them to mount by the ladder, but sends them down by the
rope. Differing herein from God, who works after another manner. For he never
sends us any trouble, which he does not accompany with some blessing or
other; from our greatest miseries, grows our greater glory: leading us by a
narrow path, to the broad and spacious way of bliss.

It seems unto us, that when we are swallowed up as it were with desperation;
God is always at hand to help us.
and that want and poverty lie heavy upon us, that he is forgetful and
unmindful of us; when as indeed, he is but like unto that father, who for to
teach his son to go, makes as if he did loosen his hand from him, faigning
to let him go alone by himself, and for a while to see how he will shift
his feet, stands in some near distance from him, yet not so far off, but
that he still keeps himself close by his side, and when walking softly, and
with trembling steps toward him, he sees him ready to fall, he runs in unto
him, and catching him in his arms, receives him into them, and embraces him,
not suffering him to fall to the ground. But when the father has no sooner
left him to himself, but that either he makes too much haste, or will not go
at all, nor so much as offer to move a foot, or letting go his hold,
vnfastning himself from his fathers hands, he comes to catch a fall, the
fault is not in the father, but in the sons either too much dullness, or too
much haste.

We are of a naughty and an evil nature, we are not willing to help our The
naughty condition of man's nature.
selves a jot, we do not endeavor to do our selves good, we will not use our
best diligence, nor put to any helping hand of our own, but look (like little
children) to have our meat put still in our mouths, (being now big lubbers)
and that all should be put into our laps, without any pains, or care-taking of
ours. But God is of that infinite goodness, that he never forgets us, nor
forsakes us; He knows very well how to take away from the wicked in a moment,
How God rewards the righteous.
many great Lordships and Farms, which they have been many years a
purchasing; and to enrich Job within a little while, with double so much
wealth, and those other good blessings which before he had taken from him.

I never had the grace to be so good; but I am sure I was as naked as Job. For
Guzman as poor as Job.
I had nothing to lean my self against, save only the bare walls of my
house. If, when I had plenty, I did pamper up my self; now I did desire, to
have only where-withall to hold life and soul together. I was ready to perish
for want of food.

I remember (when I was a youth) that I had known in Madrid a pretty A Tale of
a little boy.
little boy, that was very well given, and for his years, of good
understanding. This little Lad was bred up by a Gentlewoman, that was his
mother, not that she had borne him, but for the love she bore him; she gave
him good breeding both for his book, and otherwise; she clothed him well,
and handsomely; and for his diet, if there were one bit better then other at
the board, he was sure to have his part of it. This child was bred in Granada,
where there are certain little small grapes, which are very dainty ones
indeed, wonderful pleasant, and of an excellent relish; which in those parts
they call j^ies. Now there being none of this kind in Madrid, and for that this
little boy would not eat any other save his own Country grapes, when he saw he
had none of that sort given him, seeing your Aluillas: A kind of great gray,
or whitish grapes.
aluillas one day on the board, he asked for some of those little ones, as he
was wont to do; To whom his mother said; Child; Here are no little ones to
give thee. We have none but these: To whom the child answered; Then (good
Mother) give me some of those. For I can eat also great ones for a need.

I likewise could now feed upon gross fare, no meat came amiss, all was He
that cannot live as he would, must be content to live as he may.
sweet and sauourie unto me, nothing did hurt me, but hunger without meat;
any thing, so as it were a belly full, it was all one to me. For the
alterations of times, oblige all, and to all; and to content our selves with
those things, which are quite auerse to our nature, and no way suting with our
disposition. I was driven to do that, which I never dreamt to have done, to
the end, that I might always be able to say; That neither self-love made me
doubt; nor fear, dread to adventure upon any means whatsoever, that might
make for my profit. And questionless, if I had wholly bent my self to some
one set course or other, and had settled my self close unto it, and constantly
perseuered therein, I should have done some good in it, and made it a means of
no mean advancement unto me. But I was hot and choleric; I misspent my
time; and my beginnings being bad, I failed in the goodness of the ends. I had
often resolved to be good, but I was quickly weary of well-doing; I was that
Proverb.
Pi^dra mouediza, (...) la cubre moho.
rolling stone, that never gathers moss. And because I could not tame my
self, time had now tamed me. I saw my self abandoned of all humane remedy,
and had no hope of any other help, then that only of my house. I began then
to consider, and say with my self; What have I now in the house, to stanch my
hunger withal? Shall I bite upon a brick-bat? that is but tough feeding, and
somewhat too hard a crust to gnaw upon. Shall I roste one of my rafters? That
will be burnt away upon the spit: I found that a naked house, without something
to maintain it, could not afford me any kind of remedy. I could think upon
no better thing, then to betake my self to sacred Orders, and to become a
Church man: Saying to my self; I have humane learning; I will make benefit of
that, by hearing those Lectures read in Alcala de Henares. I Guxman resolves to
go to the University.
have some little smackering also in the Liberal Arts, and Divinity, and when
I have studied these awhile, I will take my Degree, then shall I be qualified
for the Pulpit, and being able to say Mass, and to preach a Sermon, I shall be
sure to have wherewithal to eat; and if all should fail, I would turn Friar
at the last, whereby I should not only live upon certainties, but should also
lead a very safe and secure life. For a Dominus vobiscum, did never yet dye of
hunger. By this course, I shall not only repair my life, but I shall free it
likewise from any danger whatsoever, which I might have incurred by my former
misdemeanors. The time, for the payment of my debts, draws on a-pace, and my
wealth goes away as fast; if by this means I did not provide for the storm,
that was now a coming, I might afterward see my self oppressed, and in great
peril to be utterly lost.

I knew that this came not from my heart, for I was not ignorant of mine own
evil inclination; but he that has no other means, and is put to his shifts,
must do as he may. He that cannot make choice of his game, must fly at that
which comes next in his way. Now that I am embarked, I must play the cunning
Mariner, and seeing I cannot sail with a fore-winde, I must fetch boords, and
come about with a side-winde. Any one will serve my turn, so it be not such a
contrary wind, as shall chop me into the mouths of my hungry Creditors. This
is the key that must make all sure, and keep them out from coming within me.
The money that I shall make of this house, will serve well enough to maintain
me as a scholar; which being well husbanded, though I should spend yearly a
hundred Ducats, or a hundred and fifty, which will be the most, (and is a good
liberal allowance) I shall have store of money for that time, that I shall
need to continue there; so that I may live like a Duke, (if I list my self)
and yet have wherewithal to buy me books, and to take some honorable Degree.
I will make choice of a good Chamber-fellow, a What a student should do.
student of mine own profession, that we may follow our studies close
together, hear the Lectures, compare our Notes, communicate our doubts, that
so by joining our forces together, and ayding one another, we should be able to
quit our selves like brave fellows, when we came to break a lance in those
lists. In this manner had I made up my recknings with my self; this was my
consultation, and this was I fully resolved to put in execution. But how ill a
consultation, and how worse a resolution, that I should determine to study
Divinity, more for the nourishing of this my body, then for the feeding of
others souls! How a Gods name should it enter into my imagination to be a
Masse-Officiall, and not a Mass Priest? Or that I should once think of
becoming a Religious man, having such a scandalous spirit? Accursed I, and
accursed Young Divines, what they should propose unto themselves.
he, who is so unhappy, as not primarily to propose unto himself the service
and glory of God. And most unfortunate are they of all others, who treat of
their own profit, of their preferments, of their honors, and of the
maintayning of their back and belly, by this so worthy and divine a Calling;
and that do not solely and wholly take the Ministry upon them, for no other
end, but to be Gods Messengers, and to do him service in his Church; and What
their ends ought to be.
that shall not worthily perform that holy function; and that shall not desire
learning for any other end, then to be a light unto himself, and unto others.

Traitor as I was, why did I treat, like another Judas, of the selling of my
Master? And I speak it to all, as well as to my self; that he shall be taken
for no other then a Traitor, that shall treat of being a Priest, or a Friar,
having no other aim, but to feed his belly, cloth his back, and spend
lauishly. And that father is a Traitor, whosoever he be, that Fathers ought not
to enforce their children to take Orders.
shall enforce his son, contrary to his own inclination and liking, to take
the Ministry upon him, because his Grandfather, his Uncle, his kinsman, or
his friend, has left him such a Patronage, or such an Advouson, if his son
shall in such a time take holy Orders. When a father casts about with himself
to make his son a Friar, or one, or more of his daughters Nuns, either
because he has not store of wealth to leave them, or that he may leave his
other children the richer, or for any other worldly causes, which cannot be but
vain and idle, let him weigh and consider well with himself what he does in
so doing: For it is a great wonder, if one of a hundred prove good (I say
nothing of the Nuns) the most part of them, roming and rambling through the
world, like a company of vagabonds, and Apostata's, dishonouring their
religion, disgracing their habit, putting their lives in peril, and sending
their souls to Hell. It is God that must call us to this holy Calling: For it
is he that anointed David, he that made choice of the Priests and the
Prophets. The religious man must be religious, merely for Religions sake; for
the very love that he bears unto it. This must be the principal end, this
the substance, and all the rest but matter of dependence. For it Proverb.
is fit and just, that he that serves at the Quien sirve al Altar, como del.
Altar, should live by the Altar: and it were inhumanitie, when thy Ox has
plowed thy ground, and labored hard, to tie him to his stall, and give him no
meat. Let every one open his eyes, and look well about him, before he resolve
as I did. Let him weigh well with himself, what charge he takes upon him, and
what a deal of danger he runs. Let him first ask of himself, what moves
him to take that estate upon him? For by walking in the dark, the eye that
sees not, must make the feet to stumble. The mark whereat a good Priest, and
an honest religious soul should shoot at, must be brighter, purer, and clearer
then the Sun. Let not Parents think, that for to fill their sons bellies,
they must needs make them Churchmen: nor let them think, when they have a
lame, weak, sickly, unprofitable, crumptback't, or ill-featur'd son, to
offer him upon Gods Altar, or to make him a Priest. For God will have the best,
and those that are without blemish for his sacrifice, being that he offered up
the best that ever was for us, when he offered himself in his beloved Son.
Therefore if thou shall make a bad choice, thou will have the worst of it. For
if thou shall reserve the better for thy self, and give the worser unto God,
he will take them both away from thee, so that both thy eyes shall be put out;
he will bereave thee of the bad, because he was not good enough for him; and
of the good, because thou thoughtst him too good. You must not Proverb.
change No se han de ^ocar los frenos.
bridles, least you spoil the horses mouths: Every horse must have his own
bit: What need a continent man to No hare buen casado, un continente.
marry? Or a lascivious Seria malo un lacivo, por religioso.
wanton be made a Priest? The one is not so fit for a wife; And I am sure the
other altogether unfit for the Church. There are many habitations Proverb.
in heaven, and every one has his right place appointed for him. Let every man
take that way, that may direct him to his salvation; and let him not go any
other way, lest he may chance to lose himself; and Proverb.
thinking he treads in the right path, never sees his desire, nor that which
he pretends. It were a pretty kind of ouer-sight in me, if being to go from
Madrid to Barajas, I should take over Segouia bridge, and pass on to
Guadarrama. Or being to go for Valladolid, I should make for Siguenca. Do
thou not see how thou art out of thy way? Do thou not perceive thy folly?
Let a Virgin, be a Virgin; A married man, a married man: Let the Continent
abstain; The Religious, be religious: And let every one go on in the way that
is set before him, without turning to the right hand, or to the left.

I was resolved to be a Churchman, and for no other reason in the world, but
only to repair a broken fortune, to fill my belly, and to be free from my
Creditors; who, as soon as my ten years were out, were to come upon my back.
With this, I finely stopped their mouths, shut the gap whereat they should
enter, and left them to shake their ears. I sold my house for almost as much
as it cost me: For albeit men do usually sell houses to great loss, yet mine
yielded me little less then what it stood me in. For I did value it at
somewhat the dearer rate, because it was bettered by the bordering buildings
that were round about it, which time had wrought for me. When the Scriuener
had drawn the writings, and that they were ready to be sealed, and I to
receive my money, I said; An abuse about the rates of houses in Spain, set
down here at large by Guzman.
That before I proceeded therein any farther, we would go to his house, that
was the public Officer for the rating of men's goods, that we might have a
License from him under his hand, requiring his confirmation of the Contract
that was between us, and that we might conclude with him touching the sessing
of the rent, as also the twentieth part that was to go out, and to be leuyed
upon the sale of the house. When we came thither, and had cast up our
reckonings, we found that the sessment came not to above six Royals, but the
twentieth part to better then a thousand five hundred. Me thought this was
somewhat cruel, and beyond all reason of policy, that I should give him such
a great sum of money, which amounted to more then the Fee-simple of the
ground, whereon I built it. I stood upon it, and was very loath to pay him so
much, but because my standing out might have hindered the sale thereof, and so I
might have let slip the occasion of doing my self good, I paid those duties;
but with protestation, to require the same again by course of Justice, as a
thing which in all Law and Conscience, he could not duly challenge of me.

The Master of the Office began to laugh at me, as if I had uttered some famous
foolery. And it might very well be so; but as then it did not seem so unto me.
I asked him, why he laughed: He told me, at my pretension. And that he would
return me all my money again, on condition, that I would but give him half a
Royal every day, till I had sentence on my side in this suit. I was about to
have accepted of it; it seeming to my understanding, that an ill custom ought
not so far to ouer-sway reason, but that upon discovering the cunning and
deceit used therein, it would easily be abrogated, and broken. Nor would this
which I speak of, been my case alone, but all the whole Kingdom would have
put in their plea into the Courts of Justice; and as well for their private
profit, as the public good, would have declared themselves in my favor, to
the end that there might be some order taken for the redressing of so great a
wrong. I was not so wide of the mark; nor did I go upon such weak grounds;
but that with that which I then knew, I thought I should be able strongly to
maintain my opinion, it seeming unto me scientiam certam, a settled knowledge,
the certainty whereof could not be gaine-said.

It might have so fallen out, that I might have defended it with a little
cost, and peradventure I might have spent much in it, and so much, that not
only this one, but all others of this kind, might have been utterly
overthrown. As it did once happen with certain Sessings, that were a-foot in
those days, for that it was found out at last, that there was in the setting
of those rates a certain kind of Usury, which our State does not allow. The
cause which moved me to this Defense was, because I saw it grew out of the
discourse of natural Reason: considering with my self, that only from
thence, all Laws had their beginning.

But because this business crept in by degrees, and was not so current and
common in the world, as now it is, it was not much stood upon. But if we shall
a little more curiously search into it, and the abuse thereof were well looked
into, I doubt not but it would appear so harsh and sower to most men's tastes,
that it would in some great part, if not wholly, be reformed. For suppose a
thing not to be worth any more then that which is given for it; and that this
which is given, ought to be limited, finite, and certain. Now, if to me they
should sell that plot of ground for a thousand Royals, with two Royals of
perpetual rent upon it, and that there is not any man that will give more for
it, nor indeed is worth any more; and that I have spent in building a house
upon it, three thousand Ducats at least in good money: If it be a truth, and a
Rule in Law, that no man ought to make himself rich with another man's wealth;
why should this prolling Officer enrich himself out of my moneys. For that
this, which gives this value, and inhances the price of the ground, is mine
own peculiar purse, and those moneys I laid out my self, is a clear case,
and cannot be denied. So that, if the same building, which I had reared,
should be taken down and carried away, the ground it self would remain upon
the very same terms, as it did before that I had bought it: So that this
twentieth penny to be leauied out of it, seems in my poor understanding, to
be rather poena delicti, a punishment for the offense that I had committed in
building me an house, then debitum iustum, a just and due debt; because it has
its being from a bad cause.

And so true is this, which I have already told you; that in case even that
very day, that I sold this house, I should have placed a pillar in it, or a
Statua of stone, of some great value, and that buying the same together with my
house, he should give me in the whole ten thousand Ducats, out of which sum,
this officer will have a twentieth part; if I, to excuse this intolerable tax,
may take away, and have taken away the Statua, and afterward sell the house
for only one thousand Ducats; I may well justify the doing of it, and they
can demand no more of me, then what accrewes unto them out of the price of the
house. But that we may proceed a little farther; If I should afterward carry
away all the yron-worke, the timber, and the glass; if I should demolish the
walls, and should make it, of a house of ten thousand Ducats, scarce worth a
hundred, I may likewise do it. And I may lawfully sell all that I thus took
away, and separated from the house, without being charged with the twentieth
part.

How then can this hang together, that the parts, every one of them being taken
severally by themselves, do owe no such tax, but in whole, and in gross,
should be liable to this debt? If the master of this office should say unto me;
you are to pay me the twentieth part of that price, whereat you first bought
this plot of ground, for the which you paid a thousand Royals, and that the
charge wherewith he charged me, should still run on in this set and certain
kind of manner, there were some reason for it; as being grounded upon Dominium
rectum, a true and lawful claim; for that it was sold with that condition, at
such a set price, with such a reservation of a perpetual rent upon it, which I
voluntarily and willingly did accept of. But how can he oblige me, or I consent
to pay that which I my self do not know what it is, nor how much it may come
to, and which peradventure may amount to such an excessive sum, that only
with that twentieth part, I might buy a whole Town. And as those that I
bestowed upon my house, were but three thousand Ducats, they might as well have
been three hundred, or thirty thousand, and that house might hap to have been
sold thirty time, in one year, which would have come to an excessive and
exorbitant sessment. And such unreasonable rates as these are neither ratified
in the Civil nor the Canon Law; nor has any other ground or foundation for
it, but that which arises from that which we call ius Gentium, or the Law of
Nations. And that, not commune, but priuatum, not common, but private: for it
is imposed, as it pleases the Imposer, nor does it pass generally in all
places, but in some particular parts; and within four leagues compass, in
some towns they pay it, and in some, not. Especially in Sevill, and in almost
all Andaluzia they know no such thing, nor so much as ever once heard of it.
The perpetual Sessment, that was first settled, this, I say, is ever more truly
paid, without any other taxes or tallages, though the said possession or house
should be sold a hundred thousand times over.

Now, for to make the carrying away of the twentieth part lawful, it must be
by the virtue of a Common Law, ratified and confirmed by the approbation and
consent of the whole Kingdom: but this neither is so, nor ever was, but only
approved by the ignorant; and such men's error, cannot make this good. There is
no man but knows the nature and quality of your Sessings, as also how and
which way they are to be raised, and with what reason and moderation, and how
much is to be paid out of every hundred: And if these be liable to the Laws,
and subject to their censure; why should not these perpetual sessings, as they
call them, submit themselves in like manner to the Laws? What strange kind of
taxes are these? What new kind of devices to wrong the subject? What reason is
there, that they should be paid in this manner? What ground have they for it?
They have but two prices to work upon: Either that, for which I bought it; or
that for which I sold it. And why should they not rather pitch upon the price
for which it was bought, then for which it was sold? Will they oblige me to
pay these duties out of mine own particular moneys, out of my proper
expenses, out of mine own improuing of my estate, and out of mine own proper
industry?

So that every way, this Case being nakedly laid open, and duly considered,
there being no greater either Law or Reason on their side, then I can see as
yet, it seems unjust, that they should take that my wealth from me, which I
had bona fide spent upon it, or from my Wife and my Children, being that the
one half thereof is ordinarily lost, that is laid out in building. Why then
should it be permitted, that my principal, by the benefit of that piece of
ground, should not only become less, then before, but that I must afterward
also pay, and lose that which they take from me, and carry away with this their
twentieth part?

And in case it must be paid, as paid it is, and that to a penny; let it be
looked into, treated of, and determined: for it being defined and set down, we
will rest satisfied, because it has been consulted on, and that good heads
had the handling of it, who would not willingly do any thing but what is just
and honest; and therefore ought to like of it. But till that course be taken,
the people take great scandal thereat; not a man but talks, and that
liberally to of the great wrong and injury which they receive hereby. Some,
holding it for a great piece of injustice; and others, not able to contain
themselves, styling it with worser names.

This past with me at that time with the Receiver of these Sessments. But h^e
and I were well met, we were ene as wise one as another; I knew little, and
he not overmuch. He would needs reply unto me, saying; That, was the
condition of the Contract, and therefore was of force: For a man may oblige
himself as far out of his own free will, as if he had been otherwise
bound. This did not satisfy me, wherefore I answered that truly, That it were
likewise a Condition of Contract, if I should lend an hundred Ducats, which
were to be paid unto me within such a time, wherein if he failed, he was to
pay me every day eight Royals, till he had paid me the Principal. But this
is not lawful: So that, to justify a thing, it is not enough, that it is a
Condition contracted, and agreed upon; but we must see whether it be alowable
and lawful.

Then he turned upon me again, and told me: This, Sir, is but a matter of
hap-hazard: for, that a house be sold, or not be sold, is a mere venture: and
if it be not sold, there is nothing due unto me. O what a good reason (quoth
I) is this? As soon therefore as the house is sold, the twentieth part must
be as a punishment of the Contract. And if it be, why do you bind my hands,
and prohibit, that I may not sell it to such and such persons? You your self,
by your own confession, condemn the Contract. You open the door to all that
may pay you, you sell the thing for that it is worth, and you will have the
Iudians to give you the sw^t of their brows, and take pains for you, and for
no other end, but to better your own ground, and by securing you of a good
round sum of money, they augment your wealth by diminishing their own: And
when they must live thus by the loss, will thou have one out of twenty? But
say such a thing should be done mala fide, yet you may pretend your right; but
of that possession whereof you are now deprived, and have made me Lord thereof
in your room, shall I out of those things, which I may, as it pleases me,
either remove thence, of bring thither; will you have a pension out of that,
which I have ordained for my pleasure? Of the Statuas, the Pyramides, the
Fountains, of whose conduits and waters, I always am Lord and Master, and can
alienate all this from thee, without letting thee have any part therein? will thou have it adjudged unto thee, because thou say it must follow with the
whole, as a thing that is founded on thy ground?

That totum of yours, I do not well understand (said he) what it is, neither
can I believe that it can be brought within the compass of justice, and that
you can carry it away by Law. And I am verily persuaded, that they who know and
understand these things, and are able to determine of them, will not incline
not to your part.

I paid him that which he called his due, though sore against my will, and
having made my protestation against it, I began to follow the sure: but
because the Schools at Alcala were now shortly to be opened, and that the time
d^ew near for the Reading of their Lectures, I gave that over, that I might go
about that which did more nearly concern me. And so committing the ca^e of
this and some other businesses to a Solicitor, a friend of mine, and to my
father-in-law, I prepared for my journey. I got me my money together, and put
in out to profit, which yielded me a moderate gain, purposing to spend upon my
self so much as was needful and necessary for me. I made me a cloak, and a
Sotana, provided my self of bedding and such other implements as were fitting
for a students chamber, and so presently got me to Alcala de Henares, where I
had so often wished to be.

When I came thither, I was doubtful with my self, what I were best to do,
not knowing as yet what to resolve upon, and whether it would be my better and
more profitable course, to take a The Spanish word is camarista, which is one
that has no house for himself, nor keeps company with any other, but hyres
him a chamber in some house, where he lodges, and locks himself up, without
conuersing with the rest of that house.
chamber by my self, and to be all alone, or to be under In your universities
in Spain, they are called Pupils, that are under a Tutor, for their diet, and
their government. And this house where they diet and lodge, they call
Pupillage. Covarr. verb. Pupilo. A Student that puts himself in Commons with
a Tutor and his scholar, what things he must be subject unto.
pupillage, and common with others. I had known already what it was to keep
and govern a house, to be chief commander of it, to please mine own taste,
and to enjoy mine own liberty. Yet notwithstanding, having respect to the
lesser trouble of the two, I was content at last to take my fortune in the
Common, amongst the rest of those Pupils that dyeted altogether in one house,
though it went somewhat against the hair with me, (I must confess) to submit
my self to the poor and slender pittance of a Master over Pupils, who was to
command in the house, to sit at the upper end of the table, to divide the
Commons, and to give every man his portion upon his plate, with those his
filthy, and perhaps mangy fingers, and those his foul and dirty nails, as
crooked, and as long, as those of an Ostriche, tearing, rather then cutting the
flesh, out into threads and strings, like the rending of the barbes, from the
root of some plant, or young tree, distributing the porrige in Lettice leaves,
to make it stretch the farther, cutting the bread eauen, and giving every one
his slice for the avoiding of waste, allowing us no new bread, but that which
was stale and hard, that we might eat the less of it; our Olla, is all that
meat, whatsoever is sod together in a pot. Covarr. verb. Olla.
Olla, was nothing but the fat of bacon, whence only it might take its name,
which made a very glorious broth to see to, and more clear then the light, at
least so bright that a man might easily discern the least Louse that fell from
our sleeves in the bottom of the porringer. Which if we did not swallow down
in stead of a crumme, we would take forth with our fingers, and crack it
between our nails. And of these kind of repastes, we had some four and fifty
every month; for on the Saturdayes, we always made our meals of The tripes or
intrals of any beast.
Mondongo's. In fruit-time we had some four Cherries, three sour Plummes, one
or two little Apricocks, half a pound of Figs, and now and then a whole
pound, according to the number of those that sat at table; but in that minced
and curtall manner, that there was none of us so nimble fingered, that we
could come to vye it the second time.

Our Grapes were divided by little sprigs or bunches, such as they give little
children to their Beuer, being no more in the whole, then would lie upon a
poor little plate, and he that had most, had not above six Grapes that fell
to his share.

And of these, you must understand, that we had not all of all sorts every day,
but in one only kind: for when we had Figs we had no Grapes, and when we had
Cherries we had no Apricockes. Our Tutor would tell us, that too much fruit
would breed tertian Agues, and therefore for our healths sake, he would not
have us to eat any more, for fear we should be sick.

In winter time, upon a little plate, thinly scattered, we should have a few
Raisins laid out, as if they had meant to dry them in the Sun, so far off
were they sundred the one from the other.

For our last course, to close up our stomach, we had a thin slice of
cheese, which seemed rather to be a Spiders-web then any thing else, or like
those thin shauings which your Ioyners planish away with their playners when
they shave their wainscoat; alleging that those thicker slunchins would dull
our wits. Besides, it was so full of eyes, and so transparent, that whosoever
had seen it, would have judged it to have been the diaphragma, or that thin
and slender caul of some young little Kid, or some Lambkins mid-riffe; and for
a need might have served in stead of spectacles, so easily could we see
through them.

Other whiles we had half a Pompeon amongst us all, and a little thin cut of
a small Melon, nothing so big as a man's head, but about the bigness of my
fist, or a well grown Pear. And upon fish-dayes, we had a mess of lentill
porrige, such as Aesope was fed withal, being no better then Duckesmeat; and
if at any time we had pease-porrige, (which was very seldom, that we had such
Gau-dies) I assure you, that the best and the cunningest Indian diuer of them
all, that fishes for Pearl, must have been forced to have diued four times at
least, to the bottom of my porringer, before he should be able to bring up one
of these pearls; which how scarce they were to be met withal, you may judge
by this, that the pease had not given so much tincture to the porrige as would
serve to give a color to a wenches coyre. One day in the Lent, and no more,
he did use to give us chesse-nuts for an Antipast to whet our stomachs, but
no honey with them, for that they were sweet enough (he said) of themselves;
and of those too, we had but a few, for he would tell us, we were as good eat
so much wood, they were so hard of digestion.

What shall I say unto you concerning our fish, which was poorer then the worst
poor- Ihon, of our withered and rott^n ropes of, Onions, our pulpe-fish, our
dryde pilchards, that had hung I know not how long in the smoke, and a man had
as good almost be hanged as to have eaten of them, being so dry, and so salt,
as if they would have fretted out our very guts and bowels. We had every one a
piece, and had the head also in to the bargain, if it were a fastingday; but
on other days, we had but half a one, and that was slit asunder head and all,
and equally divided between two of us.

What shall I tell you of that other fi^h, which the Abbot would not meddle
with, because it was so rammish, and stancke so vilely? yet they set it before
us, and we must be contented with it. As also of our fride eggs, that we had
now and then, like unto those in some base Inn, or poor victualling house, or
little better, if not sometimes worse; for they would buy a great many of them
together, that they might have them the better cheap, keeping them in a tub of
ashes, or in some great heap of salt, that they might not grow stale and
addle; and in this manner would they preserve them some six or seven months,
whole and sound.

What shall I say to our benediction and giving of thanks both before and A
tale of a Student.
after our meals, and how necessarily we were tied to say a solemn grace? In
so much, that a certain Student, w^o cook his diet in such another kind or
Ordinary, as I did, coming late to dinner, and being very hot with the haste
that he had made before they should have dined, fell to vnbuttoning of his
doublet, and to unbrace himself for coolness, and when he was about to
fall to his meat, he might hear them begin to give thanks: with that he
struck his hand against the board, and with a loud voice said unto them;
Silence (my masters) I know not what I should give thanks for, let them give
thanks that have cause so to do, for I see none.

At supper we had a sallat, but a very poor one, and a great deal of chopped
green stuff, (I know not what) amongst it; for they would not lose so much as
the green leaves of a Radish roo^e, or the blade of an Onion, whereof they
would not make use, pouring a little unsavory oil into it, and a little
vinegar, whereof the one half was water, the Lettice were only thinnely spread
upon the top, with two or three sh^es of Carrets, with a little Marjoram or
Pennyry^ll mixed with it; they were wont sometimes to intermixe with it (but
always all the Summer long) a hodge p^dge of boiled mutton, that was nothing
but mammocks.

They would buy of the reffuse-bones, which the Cooks had left out, when they
made their pies: they did cost but little, and took up much room. The show
being greater then the price. And when we had not whereon to gnaw, we wanted
not yet whereof to suck; and the hungry savor of our porrige, was a
shooing-horne to d^w (...) the hardness four bread. We had also certain
wild Olives allowed us, (...) we should not ^ate too many of them, for fear
of setting our teeth on edge. O^r wine was like that which they gave our
Savior upon the Cross, compound stuff, that tasted worse then sour beer.

What shall I tell you of the care that our Tutors wife had, to notify unto us
the fasting days that were in every week, to the end, that we might not look
for our Collation; nor call for our breake-fast; and for the more surety, that
she might not err, she would usually say there were two, when there was but
one. What shall I tell you of the commutation of our suppers into dinners,
which being put both together would not make up a reasonable nunchions. Which
when they did give it us, was weighed out as just, and as even, as you would
weigh out Saffron, allotting to every one his four ounces, and not a
penny-weight over; as if this same Casuist, who did thus size us, did know our
necessity, and how much would just serve our turn; or as if in regard of our
long studies, and short dinners, (and those none of the best) we had no reason
to find fault, seeing we were used all alike, and were now entered like
fellow laborers into one and the selfsame Vineyard, where every man must
have one and the same allowance, not one having more then another. Or, as if
the food that they gave us, were well fitted and proportioned for our
sustenance; being that all was so limited, so scanted, so little, and so ill
dressed, that your schoole-boyes, and poorer sort of scholars could not have
their diet in a worse fashion, who have their stomachs pined to their
backbone, who have more mind to a good meal, then a good lecture, and a
greater will Marcus Autelius his saying.
to eat, then to study.

This our Tutor that boorded us, would now and then tell us, that Marcus
Aurelius was wont to say; That Sots and Fools only had poor studies of
books, and tables plentifully furnished with meats; stinting their minds more
then their bellies; but that a wise man (showing himself therein most wise)
does abhor full dishes, and will feed very sparingly, that he may the sooner
and the better retire himself to his studies: That hoggs, and horses,
fatness did well become them; but that it was more commendable in men, to be
lean and slender; for that your gross men are commonly grosse-witted;
besides, they have a filthy wallowing gate; they are unfit to fight either for
themselves, or their friends; they are a kind of unwieldy lump, an
unprofitable mass of flesh and bone, being not able to use any manly exercise;
whereas we see it is quite otherwise in those that are lean, and not laden
with fat.

I was willing to grant him this, to the end that he might not deny me a more
manifest truth then the other; to wit; That a little meat, and that naught,
quickly shortens the life of man. And if I may not live to thrive by my
studies, it is but lost labor to drudge at my book. What Falcon I pray, was
ever brought into the field to fly, which was not first fed before she came
there? What Greyhound, or other dog, was ever put to course, or to hunt,
before they had put victuals into his belly? They must both be kept reasonably
high, and not come hunger-staru'd into the field; for then will neither the one
maintain her flight, nor the other his course. They must be kept in good
state; and so must we Students. There is a mean in all things; and that mean
is the best. We will grant to these meat-moderators, these gut-mathematicians,
That it is not fit to feed to fullness, nor to cram the belly as full as it
will hold: so as they will yield again on the other side, that we are not to
fast, till we grow so feeble therewith, that our legs are not able to support
our bodies. And we had one Student there amongst us, who was well known to
have his guts shrunk, and his excrements grown mouldie through the
penuriousnesse of his diet. Yet notwithstanding I thought good to make choice,
as of the lesser inconvenience, to enter into pension; it seeming unto me, that
being (as I was) a man of some years, if I should take a chamber-fellow unto
me, I must consort my self with one that was mine equal, and such another as
I am; considering with my self, that as our countenances must be differing, so
we might differ in our conditions; whereby it might so come to pass, that
whereas I had a purpose to profit my self by learning, my studies might end in
the harmefull exercise of Vices, frequenting them more then the Schools. Of
two evils, I chose the less; and so became a Pupil: Though I knew they would
play upon me, and laugh and scoff at me, to see such a Giant as I was, in
regard of the rest, with such a big muzzell, and such another great beard, as
the good wife of Pen^aranda, to sit and converse with boys. Yet it was some
comfort unto me, that there were likewise some boorders amongst us, that were
as big Lubbers (almost) as my self; so that (to say the truth) we, and
those lesser frye, were mixed one amongst another, like pease and beans. And
this benefit I had by boording my self, that I was free from all manner of
care and trouble, not being put to make mine own provision, nor to take
thought either for my dinner or my supper, but remained free and at full
liberty to follow my book, and such other things as I had most mind unto.
For he that will attend his studies, must first study to remove all
impediments, that may be a hinderance unto them; and he that will not do so,
may go shoe goslins, for any great good he shall get thereby. I did seek
all that I could to avoid your Innes-of Court wenches, those your ancient
mayds, or more elderly matrones, that make a living of sweeping chambers,
mak^ng of beds, emptying of pis-pots, and other the like servile offices; for
they are worse then fire, burning and consuming whatsoever is before them.

What we say of these, may likewise be meant of our Mistresses, our Tutors
wives; we may put them all into a pack, and shuffle them together; Mistress
and maid, maid and mistress, all is one; there is not a halfe-penny odds
between them: O, how my fingers ends do itch at them! How much better were it
to box them about the ears, and to tugg them by the hair of the head, then
to do them any the least kindness, or courtesy in the world. I speak of
these Governesses over your young Students, who will seem to take all the care
upon them of guiding the house, and ordering all things in good fashion, as if
nothing could be done well without them, when as there is not a more rascal,
or ^oguisher kind of people in the world. O how quick and nimble in filching
and stealing! how dull and lazy to do any labor! O how clean would they
make our chests; but how foul would they keep the house!

Our Master had one Gouernesse amongst the rest, who did commonly steal from
us a third part of that which sheee should have given us: And when she could
no* come to the fingring of our money, or to pilfering this or that other thing
out of our cofers, or our trunkes; she would rob us of our coals, our spices,
our pease, and whatsoever else she could cleanely lay hands on, and these
commodities she kept apart by themselves, and when they were grown to some
pretty quantity, s^ee would sell that unto us, which we had paid for already;
faigning to have bought that, which we well knew she had stolen. If she were
to wash our linen, she would cozen us of our soap, and what with the
boisterous blows of her beetle, squashing and beating them upon some stone, or
washing block, and rensing them in river water with I know not how many
lauers, she made our clothes reasonable white, though she took away two
thirds of the life of the threads, which we were forced, through all handling,
to turn into tindar, sooner, then had it been well used, we needed to have
done. So that we were not only damnified by that which she purloyned from us,
but she marred and quite spoiled that which remained unto us. Now if you would
feign know, how she spent that which she had thus got, hearken unto me, and I
shall tell you.

This Gouernesse, maid, servant, huswife, kitchen-drudge, or what other name
such a vile creature can be capable of, when she did not sell that which she
had stolen, she kept it for some poor Scholar, or Seruitor, that was her
sweetheart, on whom with all care and diligence she attended, furnishing him
with all such things as he had need of; he could not lack that, which she
would not presently help him to. For him would she steal our bread; for him
would she skimme our pot, reserving the very best, and as it were the very
cream and flower of all that was therein for him. And if by chance he were in
the house, she would be sure to give him of the fattest of the porridge, with
sippets of bread thoroughly soaked in it, and flesh without bones, and his
linen cleanely and handsomely washed with soap; and in a word, she maintaynd
him well out of our means; for it was our, and not her purse, that paid for it.

In conclusion, such kind of women, as these, are prejudicial, vntamable,
notable lurchers, arrant thieves; far worse then that soldiers boy, Tricks
of a knauish wagg.
who played the wagg-pasty with his Masters pastie; and of eight Marauedis made
twelve. For he opened the lid of the pastie, that it was not to be perceived,
and supt up all the sirrop and sweetness that was in it. Afterward, his
Master sending him for wine, he kept the eight Marauedis that were given him,
to himself, and sold the Jar for four, presently coming crying home unto
him, and telling him, that the Jar brake by the way, and all the wine was
spilt.

There never came a quarter of mutton into the house, but that by little and
little, we lost a fifth part of it, and with it the kidney, saying; That for
the devotion which she bare to the blessed Saint Zoilo, she would not boil
that part; so that the kidneyes never came to our share; they fell to her
sweet-hearts lot. But he was not so devoted unto her, as to offer her all that
he had. There was not any thing that we had, whereof he had not a part, nay
sometimes all: saying, I put it here, it stood there but now, the Cat has
eaten it, some body or other has taken it away, and a thousand such excuses to
serve her turn, stealing and filching from us at her pleasure. But will you
peradventure seek to restrain these thieves, to limit them, to keep them
within their bounds, or to hinder them in any thing contrary to their liking?
It is impossible to do it. Speak but a word unto them, that does not please
them, there is not a house in all that street, not a shop, a tavern, nor an
oven, where she will not make a large relation of your life, reckning up all
the miracles done by you, painting you out to be a wretched and unfortunate
man, baseminded, a crib, a hunger-staru'd whore-sonne, a miserable wretch, of
an ill condition, a grumble-seede, one that is still murmuring, that a Hen
cannot lay an egg, but you must be prying into her nest, that you must have an
eye to the skimming of the pot, that you will tie your bacon to a string, and
put it into the kettle amongst other meat, a fourth part whereof shall serve
you a whole week, taking it out one day, and putting it in another, making thy
meal of one poor morsel, to make it hold out the longer. Will you turn her
out of doors, and take another, you shall not find any that will come at you;
and so you must be forced to serve your self: for she that is gone from you,
will tell her that is to come unto you, what a manner of man you are, what an
ill life she led with you, and for what cause she quit her-selfe of your
service. In a word, he that will be served by them, must wink at all their
faults, must make no replies, and besides, must let them do what they lift,
let them have their own will, and yet that will scarce content them.

I remember, that before I was married, I received a maid-seruant into my
house; and for that she was a beastly filthy slut, an idle drone, and
altogether unfit for service, I turned her away after she had been some three
days with me: Then I took another, who seemed to be in good health when she
came unto me, but falling sick of her old disease, she only continued with
me two days, and went back again to the Hospital, from whence she came.
Presently after I had a third, a neat servant, but a great thief; for willing
her to roste me a Conie, she cuts it in pieces, and stues it, and brought
only to the table the head, the legs, and the wings, disposing of the rest as
she thought good; for which roguery of hers, she stayed with me only that
day, and the next morning I put her away.

When my neighbors saw that I had three servants in six days, and that every
one of them went away mumbling their mattens, and murmuring at me, a bad
report went of me, they laid a hundred faults to my charge, and did discredit
my sernice in that shameful and vile manner, that for some twenty days after,
I was feign to take my diet in a common victualing ^ose. For no woman would be
drawn to my house, by reason of the evil speech that was given of me, till
such time, as a friend of mine, brought me one, that was worse then all the
rest: for she would be in love with every body, and deny none that would ask
her the question: Not any Stallion that came amiss to her: She was a wheel,
that was easily to be turned with every hand. I would presently have put her
away, but I durst not, for fear of being ill spoken of by my neighbors. And I
tell you the truth: For this cause I held it the lesser inconvenience of the
two, to leave my house, and to hyre me another in some other street that was
farther off, keeping her till then with me, before I would dismiss her. And
so I did. If you were at home, she would be abroad; if you were abroad, she
would be at home. If ^ee have nothing to do, she will call to you for flax;
and if you give it her, she will say you are miserable, and too great a
husband. And neither of these, are without their mystery. But this I leave to
your conjecture.

And how can you imagine them to be otherwise then ill disposed in their
persons, when as there is not any Gouernesse, especially amongst these your
Scholars, which is not branded with the like baseness? These kind of
creatures, would not converse with all, nor yet filch from all, they would have
little or nothing to do with your young idle fellows, that lie loytring in
the marketplace, nor with your Lackayes, nor steal from some, though they
found it lying before them upon the ground.

I did not make any reckoning of it, nor did it trouble me so much, to see that
they robbed me of my goods, or that they were never without one sweetheart or
other, that still haunted their company, though I was not willing to give way
to any such things in my house; as that they went about to rob me of my
judgment and my understanding, and to deprive me of my senses; for with lies
and tears they would seek to grace and countenance their villainies; so that
though the truth thereof appeared unto me as clear as noone day, and that with
these eyes I plainly perceived their rogueries, their knaueries, and all their
wicked shifts and devices, yet they would force me whether I would or no, and
contrary to mine own knowledge, to hold their conversation, and their carriage
to be good and honest. A man must suffer much at their hands, even at all
times, and in all ages. If they be old, they are stark naught; if young, far
worse. And if one be so troublesome, what will two be? Happy is that man, that
can excuse him self of them, and serve himself with less; for no man is
worse served, then he that is most served.

Notwithstanding, I protest, that I do not speak this of our Mrs Gouernesse,
or with purpose that she should hear me, for I know her to be a good woman,
and of that kind nature, that she will forget and forgive all, if you will
but begin to her in a cup of wine.

I was now settled in my Pupillage, which I patiently suffered, that I might not
suffer: What was amiss I sought to amend, by some provision of damties, which
I kept still in store in my chamber, with which I past the better, entertayning
my stomach with them, when I saw it was needful. We thought it good
discretion so to do, and our Master was well content with it, that we should
roste a good lunch of porke, o^ boil us a friendly piece of bacon, and only
out of the hope that he had, that we would inuit him unto it. And I doubt not
but all Tutors, by a general consent, would yield to accept of such conditions
as these, four days in a week.

Living in this manner, as I have told you, after I had studied the Arts, and
the Metaphysics, and had duly observed those public Lectures that were
required of me, they gave me the second place; when I was presented to take my
Degree, the whole University crying out, that they had therein done me great
wrong, in taking the first place from me, that they might confer it on a
Gentle-mans son of good rank and quality, but my Junior.

Having taken my Degree, I began now to fall to my Divinity, and to frequent
those Lectures. I entered into it with a great deal of delight; for I took
much pleasure in following my book, the bayt that drew me on, being that most
sweet entertaynment of the Schools, because it was a kind of life, that was
somewhat near a-kinne to that, which I had always led. Where does a man enjoy
more liberty, then in the University? And who lives so The commendation of a
scholars life.
merry and so quiet a life, as your scholars? What entertainments of all sorts
whatsoever, have not your Students amongst them? There is not the thing you can
name, that they want. In a word, they have what they will; and do what they
will. If they will be civil and retired, they may fit themselves with
company that shall iumpe just with them: If loose and dissolute, they shall
meet with as mad waggs as themselves. There every bird shall find some of
his own feather, such as shall equally suit with them in their disposition.
The studious shall have those that will confer with them about their studies,
that will keep their set hours, write our Lectures, compare their Notes, and
punctually perform all those laudable exercises, that appertain to a good
Student: And if they are disposed to walk abroad, they are like unto your
Biskayners, those women that live in the mountaynous Countries; who,
where-soeuer they go, carry their distaffe along with them, that a man may
truly say of them, That they plow, spinning. Where-soeuer you light upon a
Student, though he be out of his College, and walked abroad, with a purpose
only to recreate himself by the Rivers side, in those sweet and pleasant
fields, yet even then does his wit and his memory also go a-walking, calling
to mind what he has read, arguing and reasoning upon this, or that other
point, and conferring with himself on those things, which he has studied,
being never less alone, then when he is thus alone. For men that employ their
time well, though alone, cannot be truly said to be alone. If once in a year,
he will take his liberty, and ride into the Country, slacking for a while the
stringe of his bow, fetching some vagari^s abroad to make merry with his
friends; what sports or what pastimes can be equaled with theirs? How by their
Art will they make a Pastie to run of it self up and down the table? A
Melon, to roll from one end of the board to the other? Your biskets, and other
dishes of sweetmeats to dance as they will have them? Who can so featly do
these tricks as they? If you will give your Mistress music at her window, if
you will bestow a posie on her, some fine emblem, or the like device,
entertain her with pretty jests, and witty conceits, will you have them with a
stentorious voice to deliver an Oration extempore, to maintain Paradoxes for
pleasure and entertainment, to press an Argument to the proof, to invent a
thousand merry toys, to pass away the time, to make something of nothing,
only to show their wit, without any reason or ground that they have to
maintain it: Who, where, or how, can th^se things be done so handsomely in all
the world, as in the Schools of Alcala? Where have you brauer, or more
flourishing wits in the Arts, in Physic, and D^uinitie? Where have you
Colleges better seen and practiced in the three principal Languages? Whence
do there daily proceed so many and so good Students, as from thence? Where is
the like concourse to be found of so many well skilled in the Arts, who
conuersing together like friends and brothers, yet as if they were enemies, are
always one against another in the exercise of learning? Where so many, so
good, and such faithful friends to be had? Where such good fashion, such good
fellowship, such good discipline, such good skill in Music, in Arms, in
dancing, running, leaping, and throwing the bar, making their wits able, and
their bodies agile? Where do concur so many good things together, besides
the pureness of the air, the clearness of the sky, the temperatenesse of
the heaven above, and the fertilenesse of the soil beneath, and above all,
such a Cathedral Church, which may justly be called the Phoenix of the world,
for the rare and singular workmanship in that most stately and unmatchable
fabric? O my dear Mother Alcala, what shall I say of thee, that may
sufficiently express thy worth? Or how, without wronging thee, shall I be
silent in thy praise? I shall do thee wrong, and yet I cannot do it. Though
it were better for me to hold my peace, for therein I should less offend. It
was a rare thing, if not a wonder, to see any Scholar so debaux'd, or so
wholly given over to Vice (were it of gaming, or otherwise) that would omit the
principal end for which he was sent thither, or neglect those good studies,
whereunto he was to apply himself; for with us, no greater infamy could
befall him, then to be accounted an idle loyterer, and mis-spender of his time.
O the sweetness of a Scholars life! You cannot imagine the many pleasures and
delights that they take: O how merry do they make themselves upon St.
Nicholas day, when they meet to make choice of some petty little Bishops
amongst them! What sport do they make with your fresh-men? how do they play
the waggs with them, putting them upon a wheel, and twirling them down into a
hollow pit, bring them up again laden with snow? How put a little round
rolling pin between the lid of their chests, and the lock, taking forth
what they can finger, challenging it as a fee for their entrance? not a book
of theirs that can escape their hands, no nor their very cloakes that are upon
their shoulders. What a pleasure is it to see them labor and canuase for
voices, to make up a mayor part at the election of their General? How close
do those that are Countrymen cling and stick together, how do they stickle
to make their own man, every one striving to prefer him that is of their
own Shire or Province? How stiffely and how faithfully will they labor in the
business? What a quarter and a racket do they keep, posting away messengers
to this friend, and that friend; impawning all that they can rapp or wring,
till the next return of the Carryer; some of their books lie in lauander at
the Cooks; some at this Inn, and some at that: Scotus his works are in pawn
at the Bunnoleros, or those that sell Frittars: Aristotle's, lie engaged in the
Tavern, Bartolus, at the Bakers; Baldus, and all his fellow Civilians, some in
one place, some in another: So one thing after another, all goes away; not
sparing so much as the Jack of male, that lies between our mattresses; the
sword, that is under our bed; the pot-lid, that hangs in the kitchen; the
couers of the powdring tubs, of the pans, and what not? In what Comfit-makers
shop, had not we a pawn and a score, when our credit began to fail?

In this manner, and with these intertainments, did I merrily pass my time,
till I was ready to profess Divinity. And when I was upon my last year, and
ready to proceed Bachelor therein, my sins carried me one evening toward How
Guzman was withdrawn from his studies.
Santa Maria del val; there are some kind of Pilgrimages, and other the like
places for devotion, that a man were better break his leg, and abide at
home, then to gad thither. For we often go thither, not with any intention to
give an alms to the poor, or to power forth our prayers unto God, and to
praise and thank him for his benefits; but all clean contrary. There we
commit a thousand offenses against our Lord God, that it were better for us not
only to break our leg, but our neck too, and to die in the state of grace.
I know, and so do thou too, why I speak it. This perambulation or station
of mine, was the chief cause, and principal occasion of my utter undoing.
Hence rose that terrible storm of my tempestuous life, the destruction of my
wealth, and the final ouer-throw of my credit.

I went out of my lodging, with a purpose only to visit this holy House: I did
so: And at my entering into the Church, I espied a company of women, and amongst
them some very beautiful and handsome; according to my wonted custom, I made
toward the Font, where the holy water was: I dipped in my right hand, and that
little I took out on the tops of my fingers, I sprinkled on my forchead: But
having my eyes and my feet tending toward that fair herd which you heard me
speak of. Not so much as once offering to look toward the Altar, nor once
dreaming or thinking on the Sacrament, I kneeled with one knee on the ground,
putting forth my other leg in that manner of posture, as your Fowlers use to
do, when they lie close to make a shoot. And in stead of crossing and blessing
my self, I made a hundred loue-signes; and that I might the better drive these
Conies into the net, I went directly toward them; but before I could come at
them, the game was risen; and going away from thence, they took down through
a grove of Alder trees, toward the River side; and being come to a pretty
little green meadow, they made the grass their cushions, and so sat them
down. I followed them afar off, to see where they did quat, and perceiving
that they had there taken up their rest, and meant to sit by it, for they had
now taken out of their sleeves such iunkets as they had brought along with
them. And as they were thus preparing for their beuer, fair and softly, and in
a sober and civil fashion, I drew nearer and nearer unto them: This good
company consisted of a widow-woman, a good honest Hostess, and two of her
daughters, that were more fair and beautiful then Castor and Pollux, besides
some other their friends and acquaintance, that were not much inferior unto
them, as being likewise endowed with those graceful gifts of nature; but she
whose name was Grace, (for so was the elder daughter to my Hostess called) did
so farre-exceed the rest, that they seemed rather her attendants, then her
companions; they were Stars, but my Grace was the Sun.

I was a man generally well known, I had resided in Alcala some seven years
and better; was accounted one of the best Students amongst them, and held to be
rich, which was no small addition to my credit; Attributes, that have the power
to draw the hardest hearts to love. And these wenches were the buxomest and the
wittiest in all the Town. Now they were beginning to fall to their merendar,
or inter-mealary repast, when jesting with them, I began to insinuate my
self, and to close with them; wherein I was not so crafty, but they were as
cunning.

But before I proceed any further, leaving this business on these terms you
see, I must give you to understand, that what with the charge I was at, for
books to furnish my Study, for the taking of my Degrees, and for apparel, I,
and my moneys, had in a manner made an even reckoning. I had some left, but so
little, that I was not able therewith to take my farther Degrees, and so enter
into holy Orders. And because, before I was to proceed Bachelor of Divinity,
I must necessarily take Orders, and this was impossible for me to do, because
I wanted an Ecclesiastical Benefice, or some Chaplainship to qualify me; I
had no other shift to help my self withal, but to have recourse unto my
father-in-law, and to request his helping hand, with whom I did always
communicate my necessities, whose friendship had never yet failed me. He did
encourage me on in my good courses, by affording me at once his best both
advice and help. For little does he (that is Quien puede, poco haz^, quando a
conseja, sino remedia.
able) who does not as well afford us his hand, as his head; his help, as his
Proverb.
counsel.

He told me, that he would make a Donation unto me of the possessions of my
wifes Dowry, saying; That he would bestow the same upon me for the maintaining
of a Chaplain to say Mass for his soul: and that I on the other side, should
make a Declaration of the truth, obliging my self by bond to return the same
again, when and as often, as he should require it at my hands. Even in these
things also are these Counter-bonds stark naught, being that they take place
against that which is established by the Holy Councels, running on so
insolently and so impudently, deuoid of the fear of those grievous penalties
and censures, which they incur by these their Symoniacall Contracts. O good
God, how is it possible to cut off the thread whereat this so great a mischief
hangs, since I cannot reform this abuse in my self.

I kindly accepted of his offer, and gave him many thanks, for that his good
will was such unto me, that he would hand in hand walk with me to Hell, to
keep me company.

Shall I here say any thing unto you concerning this point? Me-thinkes I hear
you say, No: And that I should not meddle any more with matters of Reformation,
unless they might do more good, and work more amendment then (for ought you
see) they yet do. I can do no more then I can do. But say (Friend Guzman) I
could, put that to thy account; for what is this to me? Nothing, I assure thee.
Do thou think, that thou art the only man, that is sensible of these
things? that thou art the first that has found fault with these Abuses; or
that thou shall be the last that shall complain of them? Do thou talk of
that, which concerns thee a little more nearly, and makes more for thy present
purpose: For (if you be remembered) you left those pretty wenches with the meat
in their mouths (feasting, and making merry) and expecting the words that
should come from yours. Bring us back again therefore to thy former
discourse, and let these things alone, for there will a day come, when my Lady
Symonie shall have her doom.

Thou say well, thy demand is reasonable, and I cannot deny it thee. And
since that I am so willing to yield to thy request, do me likewise the favor
to pardon this my fault, in falling afresh upon this subject.

I stood upon those terms which you have already heard me tell you, I had
past over all my Lectures, and in a manner ended all my Exercises, a
Chaplainship settled upon me, to qualify me for the taking of Orders, being
within three months after to take my Degree. This was in February, I was to
take my Orders the first Ember-weeke following, and my Degree about the
beginning of May.

This pretty Souls sayings and doings, name and actions, were all compact of
Grace: and all the Graces being put together, (should they come upon
comparison) must fall short of this Grace. For her wit, she was a Cabinet
stored with all manner of pleasant and merry conceits: for her beauty, I know
not how to express it better then by silencing it: she sang delicately, played
daintily on the Violl, was wonderful discreet, had a nimble apprehension, but
quicker eyes, wherewith (me-thought) she formed a pretty kind of cheerful
laughter upon him, toward whom she was pleased to turn them, so sparkling
and clear were they, and so full both of life and love. Glancing with them to
and fro, hers and mine met, it seeming on the sodai^, that the visiue beams in
both, reconcentrating themselves in this encounter, by a reciprocal
repercussion, struck home upon our souls. I knew it was affection in her, and
she was fully persuaded of the like in me. She had robbed me of my soul;
and so I told her then, speaking aloud unto her by my looks, but not a word of
any such matter that came from my mouth. All that I then uttered, was only
this; That they would be pleased so far forth to grace me, as to make me
worthy their Company, by inuiting me to be their Guest. They did so, every
one of them did offer me a part of their iunkets, and did in a manner enforce
me to receive this courtesy from their hands.

When I had given them thanks for this vn-deserued kindness they had shown
me, commending much their fair carriage, I began (with a very good will,
though seeming to be constrained by their command,) to spread my cloak upon
the ground, and sitting down thereupon, I took my share amongst them, (which
was none of the least) for they did all strive, who should make most of me,
and bid me best welcome. I did gratefully acknowledge this their love, the
wine went round, we took and gave healths one from another, as they came about
to our turn, and made so good a beuer, that I might very well excuse my supper.

When we had made an end of eating, a maid-seruant, that waited upon them,
took out a Violl, which she had brought along with her under her mantle; and
Grace putting it with a very good grace into my hand, entreated me to show my
skill thereupon, for that they were minded to dance: Which they did in that
manner, with so much comeliness and art, and every way so excellently well,
but Grace beyond them all, so gracefully, that I was exceedingly taken
therewith, and more inflamed now, then before.

When they were now grown weary, and were willing to rest themselves a while,
delivering up the Violl into her hands, from whom I had received it, I besought
her to grace that Instrument with a Song: which without any kind of nicety or
coyness, when she had tuned it, and accorded the same with her voice, she
performed both so sweetly, as well for the ayring of her notes, as the
vowelling of her words, now towering, then melting them at her pleasure: that
for the time, she seemed to have arrested Time. For before ever we were
aware, she had no sooner made an end, but Time went away; and hastening to
recover that he had lost there, it was instantly night.

And now was it high time for them to hye them home, homewards they go; and I
in kindness would needs accompany them all the way, leading my Love by the
hand. I was somewhat abasht at the first, not knowing how, or where, to begin
to speak unto her; till she taking notice of this either my dastardlinesse or
fear; I cannot say, whether carelessly, or of set-purpose, she tript with her
Chapin, but to save her from falling, I presently opened my arms, into which I
lovingly received her; and as I was raising her up, my cheek happened (as if it
had been done by chance) to lean a little upon hers: But having set her now
upon her feet, (taking my subject from thence,) I suddenly flew back,
beseeching her to excuse that excess, and that if either my self, or mine
eyes had offended in pressing so near upon her, they were for their own
unmannerliness, most willingly ready to receive such punishment as she should
be pleased to inioyne them. She answered me in that manner, that I was forced
to reply. And leading her (as before) by the hand, I did gently strain it with
mine, wringing it softly hard, that I might not hurt it. Whereat she smiling,
said; For all your wringing it so hard, you shall never squeeze any juice from
thence.

This put a little more metal into me, and added farther boldness to my
words: So that faigning that we staid behind, because we were not able to go
any faster, we went discoursing together of our Loves; I speak only of mine
own; for she laughed at all that I said, making her self merry therewith, the
better (as she would have it so to seem) to intertaine and pass away the
time.

Her mother was a crafty slye subtle thing; she sought after sonnes-in-Law,
and her daughters were desirous of husbands, nor did they mislike of the man:
They gave me line enough, till they had led me along by the nose within their
own doors: whither when we were come, they made me enter into their private
chamber, which was very well furnished; they brought me a chair, and would
needs have me sit down, that I might rest my self a while; and taking out of
a Cupboord, near there at hand, a box of Conserues, they brought me with it a
jar of water, which was no more then needed for to quench the fire of that
poison which had so scorcht my heart: but all would not do. It was now time
for me to take my leave; I did so: desiring them to give me leave, that I
might now and then receive the like favors again from them: They told me,
that they should esteem it as a great courtesy, that I would be pleased to
command this their house, and to make my self no stranger, and that in so
doing, they should thereby know that my words did correspond with my works.

Well, now have I left them, and am gone. Not so. I am neither gone, nor yet
have I left them. For my heart staid still there with my dear, that she might
the better imprint in it the lively image of her matchless beauty. I had
already bid them good night: But what a night (trow you) was this to me? How
long were the hours? How short the sleeps? What a confusion of thoughts? What
distractions of mind? What a general war? What a battle of cares? What a
cruel tempest risen on the sudden, even in the very Port and Haven where I
thought my self so surely anchored, the sky being so clear, the weather so
fair, and the Sea so smooth, as heart could wish? This made me say to my
self; How in so quiet a calm, could such a sudden storm come upon me,
without perceiving its approach, or knowing how in the world to provide any
remedy against it? I am utterly lost, and undone for ever; so uncertain is my
hope of recovery. But now that morning was come, and that I had got me to the
Schools, when I came thither, I knew not whether I were there or no; nor did I
understand any one word that was read unto me all the while that the Lecture
lasted. That done, I returned home, the cloth was laid, dinner brought in, I
sat down, and offering to eat, my meat would not go down, my morsels
remained as it were frozen within my mouth, and seemed so careless in all that
I did, that it wrought amazement in my fellow-Students, and admiration in our
Tutor, who thought with himself, that this was but an induction to some most
grievous ensuing sickness. Nor was he therein deceived, for this was the
disease that afterward wrought my death. He asked me what I ayled? I knew not
what answer to make him; only I told him, That my heart did fore-bode some
great misfortune, that was coming toward me; for ever since yesterday, my
thinks I feel it sunk down as it were into my body, and so shrunk
together, that I find my self in a manner without a soul. All is Lead and
lumpishnesse with me, that I know not what to think of it.

He told me that I must not be a Mendocino, nor be so superstitious as to admit
such idle toys to my imagination, nor to let such abusing illusions to come
within me, but to keep them off at armes-end; for this ill (said he) which you
presage unto your self, is nothing else but the abundance of some ill humor
in the body, which will quickly be removed.

Now, for that I already knew that my malady, Nullis erat medicabilis herbis,
was not to be cured by any herbs, or other medicinable drugges, I dissembled
the business, and that I might not manifest the misfortune that was likely to
befall me, I said unto him; it may be so Sir, and I hope it shall be so, but in
the mean while it pains me much.

I rose from board, but not from dinner, for I had eaten nothing. And thence
got me to my chamber, where I was so oppressed with sorrow, that suffering my
self to fall down upon my bed, wrapping my mouth and eyes in my pillow, I
powered forth tears in abundance, burying my sighs within the stuffing
thereof. What with this and the desire that I had to see the Physician of my
souls health, I found my self somewhat eased: So putting on my cloak, and
putting off my Lecture, I went home to her house. I may not omit only in two
words to tell you, That there is not any exercise, but desires a continuance
thereof, wherein to fail, though never so little, more then ordinary, is like
to the breaking of a stich in a man's stockin, which if it be not taken up in
time, will rauell out all the rest.

With this Lecture that I lost, I lost the benefit of all my former terms,
and with them my self. For one after another I left off to continue them, not
caring a rush for them. Love had now matriculated me in his School, Grace was
my Rector, her grace my Tutor, and her will my exercise. I did now desire to
hear no other Lectures, but those she read to me, nor any other directions,
save what her eyes taught me. I began in joy, but ended in tears. I begged in
jest of them a bit of their beuer, but I found in earnest, how (going cross my
throat) I was choked with this contrary morsel. Besides, I was poisoned
therewith, for it had quite taken my understanding from me, having now been
bereft thereof for the space of three months and more, it being much pitied,
but more condemned in me, that one that had been heretofore so studious, and
so famous a Scholar for his time, as there were few better in the University;
should now when he was come to the vp-shot, roue thus at random, losing both
himself, and that good opinion which the world had of him.

The Rector, when he had notice hereof, taking compassion of me, sought to
apply some remedy to cure me of this my disease; but therein he rather did me
hurt then good; for seeing my self so hardly set upon on all sides, but much
more oppressed with mine own proper passion, not having any power of
resistance, I burst forth into open rebellion, following my unruly appetite.
The bones of reason, which like so many props, should have served to strengthen
my weaker understanding, were all broken, and so strangely split and shiuered
in sunder, that there is no hope of ever setting them together again.

Now our Loves went on amain; the favors afforded me, great; the hopes, not
small; for it was left to my choice, whether I would have her to wife, or no.
Let us now (my masters) change places; and let him that is the wisest amongst
you take mine: let him be shut up, as I was, in Loves strongest prison; let him
have such just cause as I had, to yield my self captive unto him; let him be
croft and thwarted in his designs, all things conspiring together, to hinder
the execution of his desires; then let him sit down and give me counsel. For
that is the man that I would hearken unto. I knew no better means for my good,
I left all other for this; for that I thought this would be my best remedy. Her
mother offered me her house, and with it all that she had. She was a woman
that had good credit in her kind of trading, and had good and quick returns,
she gained wherewithal to maintain both the back and the belly, she made
exceeding much of me, she was ready upon all occasions to serve me, I could
not imagine more kindness then she was willing to do me; she kept me neat,
sweet and handsome, and made that reckning and respect of me, as Lord and
Master of all. I thought this world would still have lasted; I sought to avoid
the venom of evil tongues, but all in vain; for they had raised that already
of me, which if it had been true, perhaps I might not have miscarried. Pardon
me (Gentlemen) I am now a married man, and there is no more to be said of it.
Is not this an ill account which I have given you of so many years studies, so
much good learning, and being upon the point of taking Orders, and to attain
to some degree in Schools, that I might at least have been able to have read
another day Lectures in the open Schools, as public Professor, and Doctor of
the Chair: which might have been easy for me to have done, considering the
good conceit they had of me. And being come now to the height of all my labors
and paines-taking, and when I was to have received the reward of them, and to
take mine ease after all this toil, the stone rolled down, and I was forced
like Sisiphus, to begin the world anew, and to fall afresh to my work. Do
thou therefore consider that now, which I then so often thought upon.

O how often does God put a spoake in our wheel! How does he cross our
designs, making them to prove vain and fruitless! For the Altar being now
made ready, the wood laid upon it, and upon it Isaac, the sword drawn out, the
arm lifted up on high, and now letting it fall, to strike the stroke; even
then, and not till then, was it hindered in its execution.

O Guzman, why did thou sit up so late anights to thy book? Why wast thou so
diligent at thy studies? Why did thou rise so early in the mornings? Why
did thou continue so long in the Schools? So many Acts, so many Degrees, so
many pretensions, as thou had now on foot, what is become of them all? what
good will they do thee?

I have already told you, that the courses which I took in my childhood, came
to end in the carrying of a basket; and now these of my more manly years, to
make their mansion in an Inn, or common Victualling-house. And God grant my
troubles may here have an end, and that my foot may be once fixed.

CHAP. V.
Guzman de Alfarache, leaves off his studies; he goes to live at Madrid; he
carries his wife with him; from whence they were both banished.

Having ^apt from a Bachelor of Divinity, into the degree of a Master of
profane Love; it is now to be supposed that I am become a Licentiat; and
having already so far proceeded therein, I may with your good license (as a
true professor thereof) be permitted to speak so much as I know concerning the
same. For, out of the good experience that I have had thereof, I dare boldly
boast my self to be one of the best Proficients that was ever bred up in the
School of Love. If we should go about to define it (so many having said so
much of it) it were but to repeat that Lesson, which has already been said
over a thousand times and more. Love then is, Totum in toto, all in all: And so
contrary in its effects, that the more we say thereof, the less we shall be
understood. Yet will we shoot one arrow amongst the rest that have endeavored
to hit this mark, and say something of that whereof so many have spoken.

Love is the prison of Folly, borne of Idleness, bred up by Self-will and
Money, and maintained with Filthiness, Uncleanness, and Dishonesty: It is the
A discourse of Love.
excess of a brutish and beastly desire; most subtle and piercing, making
its way through the eyes to the heart: It is that poisoned shaft, delivered
from the hand of the Archer, which never stays till it come to its Center. It
is a guest, whom with a great deal of earnestness, we our selves inuit, but
being once received into our house, is not so easily put out. It is a child
that longs for every thing it sees, fantastical, and full of Apish tricks; it
is an old doting fool, feeble and decrepit. It is a son that will not pardon
his own father; and a father which will mis-vse his own son. It is a God
that has no mercy, a secret enemy, a feigned friend, a blind but sure
shooter, weak to undergo any pains, and yet as strong as Death. He observes
no law, nor is he governed by reason; he is impatient, suspicious, jealous,
reuengefull, and a sweet tyrant. They paint him blind, because he keeps
neither mean nor measure, distinction or election, order or counsel,
constancy or modesty, but evermore erres. They give him wings, to show his
lightness, in apprehending that, which is beloved by us, by which he brings
us to an unfortunate end. So that only he that goes blindly to work, speeds
best; and he that lightly wooes, likely winnes the wench. And though these, and
such as these, be the effects of Love, yet for to bring them to pass, ere
ever we can execute them, he will, that we shall want patience in our hopes,
fear in the hazarding of our persons, wit in our words, modesty in our
demands, judgment in making our choice, a bridle to restrain our
inconsiderate actions, and consideration to free us from dangers.

I fell in love at the first sight, I was taken with a look, the darts that
flew from forth those her eyes, coming so thick, and with that force upon
me, that I presently yielded thereupon, and became her Captive. Nor was
transcursion of time, needful in this case, as some would necessarily infer,
which affirmation of theirs, I hold to be an error. For, ever since the fall
of our first parents, with that Leaven of theirs, was the whole lump and mass
of mankind made sour, and corrupted with these their hereditary vices; the
frame of this humane horologe, was so broaken, and put out of order, that there
was not one whole wheel left, to answer one another, nor any spring remaining,
whereby to give it motion: But was so utterly spoiled, so rent and torn in
pieces, and so wholly out of all frame and order, as if it had been a clean
contrary thing, so differing was it now, from that first settled estate, wherein
God had created it; the alteration of this its truer course, arising from man's
disorderly disobedience. From hence, grew that blindness in his understanding,
that forgetfulness in his memory, that defect in his will, that disorder in
his appetite, that deprauednesse in his Actions, that deceit in his senses,
that weakness in his strength, and those pains and torments, in his greatest
delights, and pleasures. A cruel squadron of sore and fierce enemies; who, as
soon as God has infused our souls into our bodies, incompassing us on every
side, violently set upon us; and so hotly assail us with the sweet enticements
of sin, fair promises, and the false apparances of foul and filthy pleasures,
that they ouer-throw all goodness in us, and so taint and corrupt our souls,
that they put them quite out of that good course, for which they were created.
So that it may be said of the soul, that it is composed of two contrary parts,
the one rational and divine; and the other, of natural corruption. And
forasmuch as the flesh, on that side whereto it inclines, is weak, frail, and
so full of imperfection, (sin having so wholly infected it clean throughout)
hence is it come to pass, that imperfection and disorder, is as it were
natural unto us. And such and so great is this extreme, that man cannot
account any conquest Fortior est qui se, qua^ qui fortissima vincit (...).
greater then the subduing of his passions. Great is his courage, whosoever he
be, that can resist them, and bring them under, in regard of that mortal
war, and infernal enmity, which is, and still will be, between our Reason
and our Appetite. For our Appetite persuades us unto that, which is most
agreeable to our nature, to that which does best like and please us, and to
things of that quality, which we take pleasure to treat of, and have a desire
to obtain them. Whereas on the contrary, Reason is like unto a Schoolmasters,
who, that she may the better correct us, goes always with a rod of
reprehension in her hand, condemning the ill which we commit. But we, like
little children, play the Tr^ants, and fly from this School, for fear of
correction when we do amiss, and run a-mouching either to our Aunts house,
or our grandfathers, where we are made much of, and suffered to play the
wantons.

Thus often (if not always) Reason remains (which ought not so to be) in
Reason many times made subject to our sensual Appetite.
vassallage and slavery to our Appetite: Which when it has once gotten so
great a power and dominion over us, that of filthy Love, being so vehement, so
violent, so powerful, so proper to this our being, so solely, and wholly ours,
so suitable to our disposition, so glued and wedged to our nature, that to
breathe, or live, is not more proper unto us; it must of necessity follow,
that it is the hardest passion to repress, the terriblest enemy that we have
to deal withal, and who with most strength and greatest force comes upon us,
assaults us, and subdues us.

And albeit, it be true, that Reason, holding (as she does) her ancient place
of pre-eminence, is wont sometimes to hinder, by her great wisdom and valor,
the sudden working of a look (although it have the power of potent causes, to
assist and further the same) that it may not easily, and as it were in a trice,
rob us of our will, before we are aware, putting a man in an instant besides
himself: yet (as already has been said) for as much as the Appetite and the
Will, are such sure marke-men, so free, so Lord-like, being never yet taught to
obey, nor acknowledge any Superior, it is an easy thing for them, having Love
on their side, to work whatsoever effects, and in such form and manner, as
shall seem best to stand with their own liking.

And because likewise there is not any thing, which does not naturally appeterc
bonum, desire that which is good; and that every action which we undergo, is
in regard of that good, which represents it self unto us, or that happiness
we find to be in it, we evermore desire to obtain the same, and join it
unto us, side (as they say) to side: nay, we would (if it were possible) out
of this our earnest desire, convert it, and incorporate it into our own
substance.

From hence then, this Conclusion may be gathered; That, for a man to Men may
suddenly fall in love.
fall in love, there is no such force or necessity in it, that there should
some distance of time interpose it self, that some discourse ensue thereupon,
or that there be any election or deliberation had in the matter; but that upon
the very first veiw, that only, sole, single, and primary sight, there may
jointly concur in both, a correspondencie, or consonancie, or (as we here in
Spain commonly use to call it) Vna confrontacion de sangre, a confronting, or
conformity of the blood, wherein the stars by a particular influence, are
wont to work, and do often move us thereunto.

For, being that these beams do dart themselves by the eyes from the heart,
they take infection from that which they find before them, especially if those
they encounter withal, be like unto their own, and returning presently back
again to the very selfsame place, from whence they were sent forth, as they
draw these in with them to the heart, so do they portrait and ingraue therein
that fair object, which they saw and desired. And because it seems to the
Appetite, to be a noble pledge, and well worthy the buying, at any rate or
price whatsoever, esteeming it as a thing of infinite value; it presently
enters into treaty, how he may come to enjoy the same, freely offering for it,
and with a very good will, the greatest treasure and riches, that he has,
which is his Liberty, his heart being made prisoner by that Lord, whom himself
admitted into his bosom.

And in that very instant, that this bonum, or this thing, be it what it will
be, comes to be beloved, and entertained by us, it is likewise to be
considered, that man does forthwith apply his understanding to esteem it as
its summum bonum, or chiefest happiness: and so desiring to have it converted
into himself, is himself converted into that which he so much desires.

Whence it comes to pass, that those very selfsame effects, which may be
wrought by length of time, getting ground upon us by continuation,
consideration, and conversation: so also they may be occasioned in that
instant, that this contentment, or pleasure, that we take in that good, which
we in our imagination, figure and fashion to our selves, is caused in us. For,
in regard that we know not, or (to speak in a truer kind of language) will
not hinder the course thereof, nor make any resistance against it; as also in
respect of the corruption of our nature, debilitie of our reason, captivity of
our liberty, and the weakness of our forces, dazzled, if not blinded, with this
light, we want wings to fly from it; and like men that are hood-winkt, run
headlong on to our own ruin: it seeming decent and fitting for us, to yield
our selves presently thereunto, as to a thing that is natural unto us.

And this is so proper unto man, as light is to the Sun, cold to Snow, heat
to Fire; as it is to heavy things to descend, and to those that are ayrie to
ascend; without giving way to the understanding, or any power to freewill, who
inioying their privileges, might exercise their office; which are now in
subjection to the Will, which remains now no more free, so that in stead of
making resistance, we furnish the enemy with weapons against our selves. Just
so, does it succeed with Reason and Understanding, in regard of the Will. For
whereas in that first age, whilst we stood in the state of innocence, Of
Reason, Understanding, and the Will.
they were absolute Lords, and like Kings, had all things under their
subjection, and did conserve and keep in peace, all that fair and goodly
fabric. After man's first sin, they remained slaves, and were made obedient
to the Will, and forced to become the ministers and executioners of this her
cruel Tyranny. So that now, our passions and affections having got the
vpper-hand, and we being furthered and led along with a blind and depraved
understanding, and hungring and thirsting after our own lustful appetites,
we do inconsiderately debase our manly breasts, bowing them to the ground, to
lap of those waters, which may please the palate of our lustful pleasures.

We fly like hooded Falcons, one while towering to the uppermost Regions of
the air; another while taking through the thickest woods, ignorant of any
future danger, nor fearing the assured mischief that must light upon us. So
that few do stand upon this distance of time, which is set before them,
neither do they preuise, or provide for after-claps; or if they would, Love
will not suffer them so to do, so impatient is this littlegreat-God, of
delays. And these the like effects did he work upon me.

I was now turned married man the second time, and so well and happily to mine
own liking and content, that I did verily persuade my self, Que nunca por mi
se comencara el tocino del paray^o, That I should never have Proverb.
fallen from so great a happiness, and that I should still have continued the
happiest man in the world. I did not then consider with my self, nor did it
once enter into my imagination, that this holy Ordinance, ordained by God in
Paradise, I should solely and wholly have sought after it for the service and
glory of God, the augmentation of his Church, and the continuation of mine own
Species or kind, by a lawful means of succession. But these, were the least
of my thought, I did merely intend mine own pleasure and delight. It was her
beauty, and not my duty, that I minded. Much less, did I give place to the
Understanding, that he might advise me to to that which he knew was best for
me: nor indeed was I willing to hearken to his good counsel. I did shut mine
eyes against those things, that should have done me good. I did put Reason away
from me: I ill entreated Truth, for she told me, that marrying with a fair
woman, many cares must necessarily offer themselves unto me, for fear she
should become common.

In conclusion, being ill advised, I pursued to please mine own humor, an
ill-desired-good: I was blinded with those her natural gifts, and bewitched
with her grace and beauty; things, as proper to my Spouse as they were without
any artifice or dawbing. He erres, who thinks that any thing can seem well
that is an artificial composition, or a borrowed beauty: for this fair
tincture that is given to the face, is but a false and counterfeit plaistring;
and when that dawbing is taken off, that foulness that was there before,
returns afresh, and becomes more foul. Proverb.


I lived as merrily as the day was long: And he, Los, que no gozan de suegro,
no gazan de cosa buena.
that is not blessed with a Mother-in-law, knows not what a blessing he wants.
She used me as if I had been her own son, seeking by all means possible
how she might please me, and give me content. There was not any Guest, that
brought a good morsel of meat into the house, whereof I had not a part. And if
it came not in that ways, why then her purse should pay for it, buying the
best the market would afford.

And as my wife brought me but a small dowry, so did she take unto herself
Wives with great porcions look for large maintenance.
the less liberty of speech, and had the less cause to put me to unnecessary
and superfluous expense, and to demand a thousand idle toys of me which
chargeable fooleries, your wives that bring great portions, too-too often put
their husbands unto. She was young, and so young, that I easily wrought her to
mine own will, and could bow and bend her which way I list my self. It was a
pretty flexible fool, and was willing to be ruled by me.

I had got me kinsfolk, who thought themselves much honored and graced by my
person, because they knew I was every way superior unto them. For he that
shall link himself in alliance with those that are of greater rank and
quality then himself, shall never lack Lords, to serve; Judges, to fear,
and Princes, to whom he must pay perpetual tribute. But my Mother-in-law
Guzman his bappinesse.
was tributary to me, and my Sister-in-law was my slave, my Spouse did adore
me, and all the house did serve me. Never at any time, as now, was I so free
from taking thought for any thing, or from the troubles and cares of this
world. For I thought upon nothing, but eating, drinking, and sleeping, and to
pass away the time merrily, without being subject to another controlment, nor
liable to any payments, not so much as the value of one farthing, either for
house-rent, or to the King. All did dance after my pipe, and did foot it as I
would have them But this dance was the blinde-mans Measure, and my self that
led them, was the blindest amongst them.

They say of Circes, that enticing strumpet, that with her wicked sorceries,
and devilish enchantments, she turned those men into beasts, with whom she
conuersed. Some she turned into Lions; others, into Wolves, Boares, Bears,
Serpents, and other the like brutish shapes: but withal, left them their
understanding quick and souud; for in that particular she did not touch them.
But this other whore (which is our blind Will) takes a clean contrary course;
for, leaving us the forms of men, she bestows on us the understanding of
beasts. And (as I have said heretofore) I never saw any alteration of fortune,
which was not accompanied with some disasters, which were never presupposed,
The mutable effects of fortune.
or once dreamt of before. And always at the first she makes show of a great
deal of love and kindness, that to our greater grief she may tumble us
down, from that height of happiness, wherein we now supposed we safely
stood. For that which grieves, us most in these our worldly losses, is the
recordation the possession of them. So that the more (in inioying them) was our
happiness, the more sensible (in losing them) is our misery. She turned her
wheel, against me, my wife, and all our whole house.

My father-in-law (whose soul is now in heaven) though he were an Innekeeper,
yet I can assure you he was a good honest man: for they are not all of the^
Guzmans father-in-law, what manner of man he was.
knaves, they do not all pick their guests pockets, rob their mailes, nor
peruse their cloak-bags: and there are many of them that do not will their
Ostlers to cozen the beasts of their prouender; nor will themselves pinch
their guests in their diet, and yet make them pay dear for it. For these are
things which appertain more properly unto women, for that they are naturally
more sparing and solicitous about these things, then men, and more curious in
the ordering of their provision. And if there be any such false dealing amongst
them, the fault was none of theirs, nor was any such thing to be presumed from
my father- or mother-in-law; for they were good honest plain people, bred in
the mountainous Country, as good Gentle-folk, and as well descended as Cid
himself, save that through their misfortune and poverty, they were forced to
follow that course of life: which shall plainly appear unto you by that which
ensues. For he being so honest a man as he was, such a friend to his friends,
and naturally given to do other men good, he trusted one of his acquaintance
with a certain rent of Tithes: some would say, that he spent all this Barley
and Wheat in his house, but I do not believe it, being it fell out so ill with
him; but did rather lose thereby, preferring his credit before his profit. For
as it was afterward told me, both by my mother-in-law, my wife, and my
Sister-in-law, he was a man that loved to fare well, and that his table was
always well furnished, his vessels were filled with rich Wines, he made much of
himself, and led as merry a life, as cup and can could make him: for there are
a certain kind of men whose God is their belly.

I knew a good fellow in Seuill, that was just such another for all the world A
tale of a poor fellow in Seuill, that loved to fare well.
as he was, though he lived not in that credit as he did; who picked out a
poor living by copying out of Sermons, every sheet that he wrote, yielding him
half a Royal. This man's help my self had occasion once to use, for to copy
out a certain Process for me at home in mine own house, and he having
staid somewhat long after dinner, before he returned again to his work, I
demanded of him why he came no sooner: And he told me that he was feign to go
a great ways off to fetch his dinner. But looking a little better upon him,
and beholding him to be a man, made of Tailors shreds, composed of a company of
patches, and those all to be tatterd and torn, not having a ragge to his
tail, a shoe to his foot, a cloak to his back, nor a hat to his head, but
as poor as poor might be; I imagined with my self, that for his own ease he
might or ought to have dined in some poor victualing-house, or the next
Tavern, that was at hand. Whereupon, I said unto him, Are there no Cooks
shops, or victualing-houses here-abouts, that you are forced to go so far?
He told me; Sir, I am a poor man; I eat that I get, and I get what I can,
that I may live the better. To that Bodegou, or victualing-house whither I go,
they are acquainted with my diet; and know that I will have to my dinner a
pound of the best mutton that is to be bought in the marker, and another of
Kid: the sauce thereunto being Rocket and Sugar. And this is my fashion of
feeding for the winter: for the summer a little thing contents me, a morsel of
v^ale, or a chicken, ot some such light meat.

But to go on with my former discourse, This friend and acquaintance of my
Guzmans miserable estate.
father-in-lawes, beginning to sink in his estate, and dying within a few
days after, when the day of payment was come, they came upon my mother-in-law
with an Execution, by virtue whereof they ceazed on all that was in the house,
and carried away with them whatsoever they found there, and I was afraid that
they would have taken me and my wife along with them, as reckning us a part of
the houshold-goods. But though they did not, yet was it little better, and in a
manner almost all one: for they took us by the shoulders, and thrust us out of
doors, that we might not hinder them in the execution of their office, or
keep a coil and stir with them about the carrying away of the goods.

We saw ourselves, like those that are robbed by pirates, rifled of all that we
had. We made shift to withdraw our selves, as well as we could, to a neighbors
house; and because the creditors would make the best benefit that they could of
the Inn, being willing that they should have it, that would pay most for it:
there were not those wanting, that did seek to out-bid one another; for
Proverb.
there is no man so great an enemy unto thee, Quien es de tu officio esse es tu
enemigo.
as he that is of thine own trade. In these kind of men, there is no envy
wanting; they do repine at another prosperity, and secke to cut each others
throat.

This Inn, had been heretofore in very good credit; so that they went
out-vying one another, (every one striving to have it) still out-bidding my
mother-in-law, who was likewise a suter unto them, that she might rent it of
them, for that she, and her daughters, had been there bred up, and had
continued therein so long, which made her the more desirous to hold it, and to
offer more for it then it was worth. In conclusion, we had possession again of
the house, in despite of all our enemies, but so inhaunced in the rent (for
the which me may thank others malice) and other by-payments, that were to go
out of it, that we were scarce able to find our selves bread and pilchards. For
the Rent, like a Sponge, did suck up all our gains, and drunk up so much of
our commodity, that we were ready (being thus ouer-rented) to perish for want
of food.

When I saw my self brought to so low ad ebb, I began to bethink my self,
purposing to make use of my Philosophy, and apply my self to the studying of
Physic, thinking to thrive by that course, and to pick a good living Guzman
studies physic.
out of it; but it would not fadge with me, nor was it possiblefor me to do my
self good that way; howbeit I had spent some time therein, to make trial what
I could do: Some little profit I made of it, by reason of those good grounds
which I had from the Metaphysics: For it is a usual saying with us, That, Ubi
definit Philosophus, ibi incipit Medicus; and vbi Medicus, ibi Theologus: Where
the Philosopher ends, there the Physician begins; and where the Physician,
there the Divine. The maine drift of my desire was, to see if I could make a
shift to rub out, and by some means or other to sustain my self; but all was
lost labor, howbeit that I might the better bring the world about, I permitted
gaming, visites, conuersations, and other impertinencies in my house, all which
did me more harm then goods I The Spanish phrase is, Huy del peregil, y nacia
me en la frente.
sought to shun Charibdis, and fell upon Scilla. And thinking to mend, I
marred my fortune. So seeing mine own error, and perceiving at last, that none
of all these would come to take fire, I began to consider with my self, that
some dainty pleasing bayte, that was sweet to swallow, would do the deed, and
prove like unto your Comine-seeds, which being hung up in a little linen bag
in some Douehouse, The property of Comin-seed.
will only with the sent thereof, cause the Pigeons to flock unto it. But
herein that happened unto me, which commonly befalls your Comfit-makers; when
as the Flies with the very savor of his sweet meats, resort in swa^mes to his
shop, and there glut themselves with feeding upon these his pleasing
confections.

At the first I dissembled it a little, and would not seem to take notice of
any such thing; for give you but never so little way to a woman, slacken but
the Women apt to take too much liberty.
line that holds her in, and nothing in the world will lash out more, or assume
more liberty to it self. Lay but the raynes on her neck, and seek not to
hold her in, there is no ho with her; then shall you see what friskals she
will fetch, leap, fling, and fly out, that no ground shall hold her. She will
take hedge, or ditch, or any thing; nothing comes amiss, though it be to the
breaking of her own, and her riders neck.

All things (as it is with old clothes) grew worse and worse with us, we
Guzman driven to base courses, and upon what reason.
did eat, but (God he knows) how little it was, to so hard a scantling, and
to such a poor allowance, were our hungry bellies limited. But there was no
limitation put to our lawless liberties, they had now broken all bounds of
modesty, they had lost their former sure footing, and had run themselves out
of all order, without any fear or respect, either to God or man; so that my
reputation lay now in the suds, our honor gone to ruin, our house, all on a
flaming fire; and all this were we feign to suffer, for want of food. My
mother-in-law Want, a great enemy to goodness.
was content to wink at it, my sister she solicited the business, my wife was
a willing worm, and these three playing booty, they made their game the surer.
My mouth was bung'd up, I durst not speak, because it was I that had set open
the door to three, and entertained all occasions; which if I had not done, we
might all have starved.

I past a while with this, (still seeming ignorant of what was done) and taking
no notice of the meal, that fell into the Mill-chest) but the toll was so
poor, that we could not live by that kind of grinding in Alcala. The
Students were able to part but with a little; for their allowances were so
small, that they could not maintain themselves and another; and there was not
one amongst them all, that was capable to be made a Nominative to rule a Verb
in order of Construction, and whereunto a man might have reference and
recourse, when things are necessarily required to be joined together. But to
fare ill, to eat little, and that late, and to part with so much pleasure, for
so little profit, that I should see my self (like a person that suffers) put
still in the Accusative Case, I could by no means endure it; nor was I willing
to give entertaynment in my house to these needy Scholars, who are more for
the Vocative then Proverb.
the Dative. I had cast up my reckoning, and found, that the No puede ser el
co^vo mas negro, que las alas.
Crow could not be blacker then his Wings: The harm is already done: The
greatest Gudgeon is already swallowed down: Things cannot be well worse, then
they are. My honor is already imp^wned, the lesser evil is to sell it
outright; the profit here is small, the infamy great; the Students crafty, and
full of tricks; and victuals hard to come by: So that now it was not only
fitting to change our bowls, but to do the same speedily. It goes ill with us
one way, and worse another; and therefore we must apply our selves to that,
which may make most for our profit. And being that something must be lost by
the bargain, let us not be like the botcher, that dwells at the corner of the
street, who works all day for nothing, and then throws away his needle and
thread in a rage. We must not hurl all away with a curse, but carry things in
that manner, that we may have something remaining to help us at a pinch, at
least as is necessary for our victum, and vestitum; our food, and apparel.
Let us leave this valley of tears, before the long vacation come, when all is
in a calm, and no wind stirring, to blow us any good. Let us leave this
unhallowed people, from whom the greatest things of value, that can be gotten,
is a six-penny pie, or two rolls of manjar blanco, and when they do bestow
these things, they go not out of the house, till they have eaten the better
half thereof themselves. If their Mothers send them a barrel of Cordova
Olives, they think they do us a great kindness, if they give us a little
plate-full of them, and that they make our eyes water^, if not clean put them
out, with two smoakie sausages of the mountain. No, no, there is no such
matter, it cost us more then so. I will not sell my honor so cheap to
Scholars, where there is nothing to be got, but halfe-penny loafes, and
hat-bands.

I knew well enough what had past in Court, and how the world went there: There
had I seen many men, who had no other trade to live by, Wenches have better
trading in Court, then in the University.
nor any other in-come to maintain them, but a fair face, and that they would
often take in stead of a Dowry; for with them it was held to be a mine of
infinite treasure, laboring and (...) to marry with women of such worth and
credit, that were cunning in their Art, and knew what did belong to the
business, and could tell without teaching, where their shoe did wring them. I
was also acquainted with those their subtle and cunning tricks which they made
use of, that they might not be obliged to that, which was unbeseeming them. For
when the chamber was occupied, and that they had a friend with them, whom they
were willing to entertain, they would either take down the Lettice, or set a
jarr in the window, or a shoe, or some one thing or other, whereby their
husbands might know that they were to pass by the door, and not to come in
for fear of interrupting their sport. But at noone, the field was left open
unto them, they might then freely enter into their own houses, where they
should find the table well furnished, the meat good, and neatly dressed, and
needed not to take any great care to keep the chair warm; for he that sent
in this provision, would come thither in person to pass away the time, and to
make merry awhile with them. And a-nights, when the Aue-Mary-bell had gone,
and that devotion ended, they would return home again, they had their supper
ready provided for them, then would they go to sleep alone by themselves,
till that the hour was come, that their wives were to come to bed to them, it
sometimes so falling out, that they would stay away till it were broad-day, for
that they had occasion to go forth to visit some of their neighbors.

In a word, these good men, and their wives, did live in that cunning fashion,
that without suffering themselves to be understood, either by word, or by
deed, they both knew very well how to play their parts, and what each of them
had to do. And these kind of kind husbands, were well respected by their
wives, and honored with many Visites, in another gates fashion, then they
were, who did walk without this disguise: Nay, their wives would be earnest to
have them abroad with them, calling and carrying them along with them to those
feasts and bankets, whereunto they were invited, eating together at one board,
and sleeping together in one bed.

I knew one, who because a Gallant, that loved and maintaynd his wife, had
settled his affection upon another woman, made no more ado, when he heard A
base part of a Wittall.
of it, but goes presently in all haste to look him out: And when he had
found where he was, he comes unto him, and asks him, what fault he could find
in his wife, that he had forsaken her company: Which question he had no
sooner put unto him, but he suddenly claps within him, and stabbed him twice in
the body, but (as God would have it) he did not dye of those his wounds.

Such as these go to a Bodegon for their dinner, for their wine to a Tavern,
and to the market with a basket. But those that are of a more honorable and
noble disposition, it will well agree with them, that they leave the house free
for all co^mers, going themselves in the mean while to see a Comedy, or to
get them abroad to play a bout or two at billiards, or some other the like
pastimes, especially when their Commissions are out. I would not for any thing
do that, which some do; who, when in the presence of their wives, others
begin to commend these and these good parts, in such, or such a courted Dame,
will never leave till they make their wives discover theirs there before them,
preferring and praising them to be far better then any that they can show.
But for a tacit permission, without any kind of submission, or yielding
thereunto of mine, I did no way dislike it, but was well contented with it.

I got my bagg and baggage together, made up that little that I had into a
fardle, all which a man might in a manner have shut up in a Snailes shell; for
one little old worme-eaten chest contained all the household stuff and wealth
that I had; which being put into a Cart, my wife and I sitting thereupon, we
marched on to Madrid, singing all the way as we went, Tres anades madre, passan
por aqui, Mal penan a mi. It is an ancient and common song in Spain: And when
men travail merrily on the way, and laugh and be Iouiall, we usually say, That
they go singing, Tres anades madre, Three ducks etc. Covarr. page 67.
Tres anades madre. Before we came thither, I began to cast up my reckonings
with my self, and when I had well thought upon the business, and made up my
account, I said to my self; I carry here along with me a morsel for a King,
new fruit new, fresh ware, fresh, never seen, nor handled before: And
therefore I will sell dear, and set what price on it I list my self; I will
make mine own market: I shall not fail to meet with some one or other, who
that he may supply my turn, will employ me abroad in some profitable
business; and a secret molestation may well be dissembled, and fairly borne
withal, especially when it shadows it self under the cloak of friendship:
So that, what with sparing the expenses of my house, and what by getting other
ways, I shall quickly grow rich; I shall once more come to be Master of a
Family, and to have an honest house of mine own, wherein I may be able to
lodge six or seven good guests, which will yield me such reasonable profit,
that we shall not want wherewithal to live, but be supplyde with all such
things as are necessary for us. I am privy to mine own good parts, and know
how fit I am for any employment of importance, wherewith they may trust me,
and how surely they may rely upon me. In businesses abroad, I shall be
careful and diligent; and at home in my house, patient and quiet. I will use
all the means I can to gain my self credit, and to grow into a good opinion
with the world: And when the measure of my desires shall be full, and come to
its height, I will bend my courses to matters of greater moment, and leave off
my trading; nor shall any other by-occasions necessarily withdraw me from
these my designs.

My wife entered into Madrid in the best clothes she had, having a gallant hat
on her head, set forth with a fair plume of feathers of diverse colors, but
the devil a lot of any thing else that we had, that was worth any thing,
excepting only our Ghitterne, which we still carried with us wheresoever we
went.

We were no sooner come to Court, but presently in an instant, before we could
set our feet on the ground, the fame of our welcome to Town had spread it
self abroad, her beauty had mustered together a great number of Voluntaries,
that offered their service unto her, and were willing to hazard their life's and
fortunes fighting under her colors; where she was, there was their
rendezvous. The people flockt apace, where she had pitched her standard: But
the only man that showed himself most forward at that time to accommodate us,
being thus newly arrived, was a rich Fripper or Broaker in the high street, who
asking us, whence we came, and whither we would: when I had told him, that we
were bound for this place, and had no farther to go, and that we had no known
lodging, nor any acquaintance, whither to direct us; he forthwith made
profession how willing he was to further us, and how desirous to express
himself a friend unto us; and thereupon brought us to a woman's house, a
friend of his, where we were kindly entertayn'd, and with a great deal of
respect, not for the Asses sake, but the Goddess, that was borne by the Ass.

This good honest Broaker, when he had seen us in our lodging, told us, that A
Broaker insinuates himself into Guzmans and his wifes acquaintance.
we could not choose but be weary with our last nights ill rest, and our hard
journey: And for that we had not any, that could on the sudden make fitting
provision of such things, as were needful for us, that we should not trouble
our heads therewith, not take any farther care; for we should be supplyde by a
servant of his, whom he would send unto us. And so that day he sent us in
good store of meat ready dreft by one that kept a Cooks shop, and had always
good victuals in a readiness. And after that he had furnished us with all
things fitting, toward the evening he himself came to visit us, and after
that a few of complements and ceremonies had past too and fro between us, I
asked him how much he had laid out for us: But he seemed to make light of it,
and told me (as one that was willing not to hear on that care) that it was a
trifle, a thing of nothing; telling me farther, how much he did desire to
serve me, in things of a higher nature then these were, whenever occasion
should offer it self; and that this was not worthy the talking of, and
therefore I should speak no more of it, seeming as it were to be ashamed of
himself, that I should touch any more upon that string; yet notwithstanding I
did press him to receive the cost he had been at; Telling him, That
friendship is friendship, and money is money; and that I should not esteem the
less of his love, if he would give me leave to discharge it, it being enough
that I had put him to so much trouble. So at last (to satisfy my importunity)
he told me, that the whole came to a matter of eight Royalls, which I presently
paid him: But because I would not have him go out of the house, I began to use
my old occupation, and putting on my cloak, I took my leave of him, t^lling
him, that I must needs go visit a certain friend touching some businesses,
that did much concern me, and that therefore he would hold me excused, and
pardon this my unmannerly proceeding. Having thus made my way, I left him in
good conversation in mine Hostesses lodging, and got me abroad a walking until
it was night.

When I came home, I found the cloth laid, supper ready, and all things in
that good order, and in that plentiful manner, as if I had left store of money
in my wifes hands for to make this provision. I spoke not a word of it, nor did
so much as ask whence she had it, or who had sent it in; as well because it
was not fitting for me so to do, as also for that mine Hostess had told me,
that we were that night to be her guests; as also this honest man the Broaker.
And from that suppers acquaintance, he and I remained ever after very great
and kind friends. He did often come to visit us, and would carry us abroad to
walk, and merrily to pass the time, inuiting us sometimes to go down to sup
by the river side, to dine at such and such quintas and gardens of pleasure: In
the evening he would carry us to Comedies, and bestow a box upon us, and there
make us a good In Spain they use at their Comedies to entertain the women
they bring thither with good wines cooled with snow, and sweetmeats.
Collation; wherewith we past away the time the better.

And albeit I must truly confess, that this honest man did all that he could,
and that nothing was wanting unto us, yet notwithstanding, all that he did,
seemed little or nothing unto me; for I must tell you, there were some, who to
have had a taste of these sauoury fruits, would have past the bounds of
honesty, and come to a higher price, and given much more money for a standing
in such a Fair. For I knew very well, that women that are fair, and of a good
presence, are like unto your meal, which is made of the best wheat; for from
the flower, the purest and finest part thereof, that white and delicate bread
is taken forth, whereon Kings and Princes, your Grandes, and Gentlemen of
quality do feed; but that which is not of the choysest flower, but is
browner, as it comes from the mill, is bread for the household, for Seruingmen,
travelers, and persons of mean account: and the bran, or reffuse part
thereof, serves for dogs-meat, or for the feeding of swine, making lap of it
for the one, and wash for the other. But a woman of a beautiful and
cheerful countenance, she no sooner comes into any place, though she be
there unknown, but all are ready to grace her, the chiefest and principallest
persons, offering, the first thing they do, to rise, and give her respect, the
gallantest and richest amongst them, even to the very Lords, and greatest
Peers of the Kingdom, vayling their bonnets, giving her a fair and civil
salutation, desiring to enjoy such a dainty piece, whom Nature has so adapted
for noble conversation. But anon after (when these are glutted, and will no
more) the common route rushes in, first our neighbors sons, then those that
come to the Vintage with a tanka^d of New sweet wine.
arrope in their hands; a burden of wood upon the backs, to make a Christmas
fire; or a basket of figs, according to the season of the year; these pay a
pension all the year long for their pleasure, as duly as they do to their
Physician or their Barber. But when these will nible no more, but refuse to
bite at the bait, the dogs will begin to bark at her; not a knave
shooemaker, nor poor old Cobbler, that will not set upon her, and rail at her;
nor a fieue-maker, that will not make her dance to the sound of his bells.

This kind hearted Broaker had already bestowed on my wife a gown of black
saten, trimmed with velvet, and a scarlet mantle, which was daintily set forth
with a broad parchment lace of gold, which made a glorious show; we had a
marvelous fair bed, a neat little table, and a handsome suit of chaires
suitable thereunto; but how, or which way be came by them, I knew not. We had
four good pieces of leather-hangings, richly gilt. In a word, the furniture of
our house was now so well increased, that with the help of a little more
housholdstuffe, we might very well set up for our selves, and kill our flesh
within our own doors, and make our market within our own liberties, which
could not choose but be much more gainful unto us. On the other side our
hostess did fleece us, it seeming unto her, that she had good reason to lick
her fingers, and to dip her Avia de meter sopa, y mojar ^la miel.
sop in our honey, and only forsooth for her permission and Proverb.
conniuence. But this was not a thing that I sought after, I did not so well
like of it, nor did it make for my profit. And I did as little like of my
Broaker, for that a better and more beneficial Opponent sought to sit in that
chair, which he now occupied. And although I knew well enough, that he
proceeded in his dealing like an honest Broaker, yet the case was now otherwise
with me, it was quite altered, and come about another way. For I would part
with that to day for three, for the which to morrow I would not take ten. Men
must sell Eltiempoes elque lo vende.
according to the season, and make their market as the time serves. Nor is
Proverb.
it material that such a one be an honest man in this or that particular, if I
have more need of another for my purpose. For it little imports, that a
Tailor, who is to make me up a handsome suit of clothes should be a good
Musician; nor that a Physician, who is to treat of my health, should be a
famous player at Chesse. Money, more and more money, was that which I looked
after, and not honesty, and greatness of alliance, or good acquaintance.

That which was not of much profit, was to me tedious, and distasteful. For I
could not content my self with only necessary food and apparel; I must live
like a King; I was to be courted with extraordinary kindnesses; and that they
should buy at its weight in gold, the chair wherein I should give them leave
to sit, the sweet conversation that they were to enjoy, the good looks that
were cast upon them, our permitting them to come into our house; and above all,
the liberty which I left unto them, by going forth my self, to give them the
freer access. And this our honest Broaker could not do. He was willing to
lead us still along by that plain song, which he began withal, when he
grew first acquainted with us: as if it had been an imposition of some
perpetual tribute, which was so pass for ever, after one and the selfsame
form.

I had now found out one, who did far surpass him both in wealth, and in
merit, and was much more for my advantage; only that difference did present it
self to mine imagination, which there is between Having and Wishing; the
present possession of a thing, or the desiring to possess it. As also that I
knew not how to go to this amorous Gentleman, to give him to understand,
Proverb.
that I should be very glad to embrace his friendship. And better is one
Tienes, a qui eres.
bird in the hand then two in the bush. I knew full well, and it plainly
appears unto me, that he did much desire her, and had a months mind to have a
fling at her; but he was a stranger, and durst not adventure on the business.
And for me to animate him on to this gear, had been to make him the less to
Proverb.
esteem of it. And to leave the other, that was taken already in the net, had
been folly, if not madness. For better is stale Mejores pan duro, que ninguno.
bread, then none at all. So that I durst neither take nor leave. Thus did
things pass for a while, waiting still when that happy day would come.

I did usually frequent your Ordinaries, and houses of gaming, one while
playing my self, another while expecting something to be given me for good
lucks sake, by those that had a good hand, asking now and then, something of
those that have been my ancient friends and acquaintance. And what with that
which they gave me, and that which my self had scraped together, I took
occasion, when the Broaker was with us at our house, to give it to my wife to
spend as she saw cause, because he should not know the weakness of my estate;
or to conceive, that I willingly gave way to his Visites out of mere want, and
to maintain my self at his cost; but he was no sooner gone from thence, but I
presently demanded the same money again of my wife, to go to play. And she
did not only return me that, but much more. So that always before him, I
bare my self like a Lord of mine own will, without leaving any gap open unto
him, whereby he might have entrance to lose his respect toward me.

This stranger on the other side, went for his part sucking-in the air, and
(as it is in the Proverb) drinking Beuer los vientos. To drink in the wind,
is to desire a thing with great earnestness. And because the wanting of it,
till we come to attain unto it, causes anguish and vexation to the heart, a
man must of force fetch his breath thick, insomuch that he seems to sup in
the air, and to drink down the wind. Covarr. verb. viento.
down the winds; using extraordinary diligences Proverb.
to gain our good will; and every one of us on all sides, working upon all
advantages, to effect our several intents. But I, for my part, being very
careful to avoid all disasters, especially that might fall out in mine own
house; and for the better preventing of dis-order, was much afraid, and
wonderful loath, that two should tread together in one and the same path; as
one that knew by experience, that one Kingdom would not admit of two No sufre
dos cabecas un gouierno.
Heads; nor two birds No^e a^dan bien dos paxaros juntos en un agujero.
make their nest together in one hole. Nor durst my wife likewise consent
thereunto, being unwilling to have more sacks brought to her mill, then she
could well grind, it going much against her stomach to be put in the
Grammar rules for a common of three. Till at last, we perceiving that this
would make well for us, and that by how much the more the Broaker did slacken
his string, so much the more the stranger did strain to shoot home, drawing
his bow for that purpose to a good round compass; for presents, jewels,
moneys, and banquets, like so many arrows, came thick one upon another, in
hope at last to hit the mark. I began now to look big upon the matter, and
to talk in a higher strain, saying; That I was not minded to pay a rent any
longer for my lodgings, being that I was able to keep house of my self. So
the siege was raised, my old Hostess and I parted, and began to set up shop
wholly for my self. Proverb.


The stranger made me a thousand ducks and congies, saluting me, wheresoever he
met me, with a great deal of respect; and I on the contrary looked on the
Broaker with a scornful and disdainful eye, showing as dogged a countenance
toward him, as I could possibly put on. And by how much the more Proverb.
the one did seek to draw me after him; so much the more I strove to shake off
the other.

Till at last, growing weary of him, I came and told him, that if I had now
taken a house of mine own, and had left that which he wished me unto, I had
only done it, that I might be sole master of mine own house, that I might
go and come at my pleasure, and be either clothed or naked, as I saw cause,
unseen or ouer-looked by others. And that he should do me a favor to come
now and then and see me, when I should be at best leisure to receive him, and
not when I had earnest occasion of business. For neither I, nor my wife could
always be in disposition to receive Visits.

The poor man was so out of countenance with this answer, and took it so
Guzman shakes off the Broaker, to intertaine a new Gallant.
ill at my hands, that never after would he offer to put his foore within my
doors, except by the mediation of his friend, she that had been our Hostess,
and that also very seldom, some once (as we say) in a thousand years, when he
could do it handsomely, and my wife was best at leisure, neither my self, nor
any body else, being then at home.

Now, our stranger being so open-handed and liberal as he was, I was forced
to carry my self fairly toward him, for he was well able to go through
thick and thin, and if he held on that round pace that he began, there
was great hope that he would quickly bring us out of the mire, and that we
should happily arrive to our intended journey, and so it fell out. For my wife,
showing him but a good look, when they two were alone, he did so highly
esteem of every slight favor that she afforded him, that he would requite her
kindnesses with their weight in gold.

We entered into a great league of friendship; he invited me to his house, and
when I had taken my leave of him, he would send home after me many, and those
very good, dishes of meat, which served very well to furnish our own table,
taking secret order with those his servants, that carried them thither, that
they should not bring them back again, but leave them there, though they were
all of silver.

I was not offended at this, but it did somewhat trouble me, that he should
do it so openly; for there is no man so blockish, that does not perceive, when
such things as these are done, it is not a humo de pajas, for Moone-shine in
Proverb.
the water, nor for a man's good looks.

It is a brave thing, when a rich Gallant shall intertaine my wife with great
presents, and whatsoever else that may give her content, and that I may not
know the end why he does it. But I was well enough contented therewithal, and
all other Witals do the like. He says not true, who says it grieves him; for
if it did grieve him; he would never give way unto it. If I were glad thereof,
and gave my consent that my wife should kindly intertaine him; if I suffered
her to go abroad, and was well pleased when she returned, to see her come home
laden with jewels, or with a new gown, or with some delicate sweetmeats,
brought from the banquet that was made for her; and if my shame was so little,
that I could fall heartily to them, and eat my part of them, and could
dissemble all this, and much more; they likewise do the like; neither will
they, nor can they clap the horns on my head, and think to go without them
themselves. For I must assure them, that I understand them, and they
understand me.

But this was the mischief of it, that when they saw me walk the street so
well clad, with a jewel in my hat, and a hat-band suitable unto it, garuished
with stones of good value; they would say as I past by them; and that so loud,
that I might very well hear it; What rich stones has Guzman in his hat? O
what a glorious show they make; but do you mark how that same Cornix does
outshine all the rest? And perhaps some of these which said this of me, did
envy my good fortune; and others, like your Goats, did not see their own
horns, though all the world besides did see them.

This stranger of ours, did purchase our liberty, and he had such store of
wealth, that now my house was for no body else, but him. But I had always a
care to keep my decorum, entertayning his friendship, and maintayning mine
own credit. The goods in my house, did like froath, gather daily more and more
increase. I had both winter and summer hangings, pieces of Arras, wrought in
Bruxells, others of branched Damask interwouen with tinsell, beds of Damask,
Canopies, and quilts of the same, Turkey carpets to tread upon, pillow-cushions
for my wifes estrado, when she was pleased to sit in State; and many other
moueables, that might well beseem some great Lord. The table that I kept, and
the house that I maintaynde, did not (I assure you) stand me in less then two
thousand Crowns a year. And when I was disposed to make my good Master almost
ready to run mad, (which I was sometimes wont to do, especially upon
festival days) I would, as soon as we had din'de, command the Gitterne to
be brought in, and laid upon the board, and then looking cheerfully upon my
Wife, I would say unto her; I prithee (good Grace) if thou be a good Wench,
do us the kindness to bestow a Song upon us, it is a Holiday to day, and
therefore I prithee do not stick with us: but let us have it quickly, and with
a good will. For otherwise, it was a wonder to see her take her Instrument in
her hand. And still in my presence, when-soeuer I caused her to sing, (howbeit
she knew, that I knew all, and that nothing was hidden from me) she would
carry her self very soberly and decently, keeping always a settled and
composed countenance, and was as careful (as if her life had layne upon it)
that I might not perceive any thing to come from her, either in her looks, or
her gesture, that might give me any the least cause to interpret it as an
affront, or should otherwise force me to make demonstration, that I took any
dislike at it. Each of us did understand our selves; and both one another;
though we would not seem to understand any thing, or make any show thereof to
the world. With this Shooing-Horne sometimes we drew on our good Master, which
cost him many a fair Crown.

I lived like a young Prince; Silver dishes did run upon wheels round about
my house; one tumbled here, and another there. My Coffers could not contain
those rich imbroideries, and the rest of my wardrobe; some of sundry sorts of
Cloth of Gold, and others of Silks, that were full of variety: my Cabinets
were crammed full of Jewels, precious Stones, and other curiosities; I never
wanted money to game, I did triumph in plenty, and had good Cards in my hand to
trumpe about; And for this cause* our friends did enjoy their liberty; for I
perceiving, that it was not fit for me to enter into mine own house, (which I
knew, as often as I found the door shut) I past by it, and went abroad a
walking, until a more convenient time did offer it self; and seeing, when I
returned home, that the door was open, it was a sign unto me that the coast
was clear, and that they had past the time away in good conversation:
whereupon I boldly went in, and sitting down, we all fell a talking of some one
thing or other, as occasion offered.

Thou see all this my happiness; the fairness of the weather; the
freshness of the wind; thou see how favorable Fortune was unto me; how
she smiled, and laughed upon me; how frank, and liberal she was toward me.
But it succeeded in the end no less unhappily with me, then all things else
which I underwent by evil means. Nor do I think, that any man can escape
such flawes as these, whosoever he shall be, that shall sail in the same
Ocean.

Upon the fame of this so rare a piece of beauty, and the large license that I
The Courtiers court Guzmans wise.
had given her, some Princes, and Gentlemen belonging to the Court, assumed the
more liberty to themselves, who had smelt out what a hungry and sauoury sent
this rasher on the coals had with it; they walk their Stations before my
house, messages are sent to and fro; how-beit I am verily persuaded, that there
was never any friendship strooken with them, nor any just cause given, whereat
our young Master might deservedly take offense. Yet notwithstanding, seeing
himself thus persecuted, and as it were out-brau'd by others, that were
mightier and more powerful then himself, in wealth, lineage, and gallantry; he
grew so exceeding jealous there-vpon, that he was ready to run out of his
wits, and had almost utterly lost his judgment. He went about at the first to
strain himself to stand in competition against them all, exercising to this
end, extraordinary liberality toward us; presenting us with gifts of great
price, amounting to thousands of Ducats; but when he saw, that he could not
contest with them, nor be able to resist so great force and power as theirs
was, vn-constrained, without cause, or any other just exception in the world,
save only what his own jealousy did suggest to his weak consideration, he
by little and little fell off, and began to retire himself, frighted thus from
us only with a vain shadow.

And sometimes I went considering with my self, what a strange kind of fool
this was, that in his heatfull humor, set on fire with filthy Lust, he should
so eagerly follow the chase, and hunt with that violence after such
dishonesties as these, to his both so great cost, and vexation of mind. I
laughed at him, as also at the poorness of his wit and judgment. For if one
or the Malds of my house had come unto him, craving something of him that was
of good worth, he would very willingly and freely bestow it upon them; but if
by chance a poor man should come unto him, and beg but half a Royal of him
for Gods sake, he would not stick to deny it him. All of us received the
reward we deserved, we were paid in our own coin: The Master whom we
served, for to enrich us, had made himself poor; and we, through our ill
government, could not continue rich; so that like ruinous buildings, we fell
altogether to the ground. Our first man had left the field and was fled, and
now those other Gallants come on amain: for the greater those persons are, who
are privy to their greatness, and truly understand their own strength and
worth; so much the more free they are in that which they pretend, and think
that all other men must give way to them.

I could have told them, or demanded of them; Sir, what service do I The
condition of great men.
owe you? What have you thrown upon me, whereby to bind me unto you? What
good did you ever do me? Why then should you expect, that I should wait upon
you with my works, words, and thoughts? And which is worst of all; besides
that they are bad Pay-masters, they use us harshly, and bear themselves so
proudly, as if we were in debt to them, and had an execution to enter by force
upon my house, my wife, and all that I had. So lawless was this their liberty,
so uncivil their proceeding, that within a few days after we fell into the
hands of the Justice.

A grave Minister of the State came to know what had past amongst us; A Fable
of the Lion.
You may happily have heard, how the Lion once upon a time, having admitted all
the other beasts into his Company, and having in a general hunting killed a
Heart, when they came to the distribution and sharing of it, he out of his
absolute authority, and Princely prerogative, adiudg'd it wholly to himself.

Just so did this Minister deal with me. And that he might have somewhat A
Judge falls in love with Guzmans Wife.
the better color to do as he did, he began (Lyon-like) with a little
roaring, as if he had meant to quarrel with us. When I knew the course
whereunto he tended, I presently had recourse unto him, complaining of such
and such wrongs that were offered unto me, boasting my self to be a
Gentleman, and one that was anciently descended of the Goths. And he (cunning
as he was) who desired nothing more, then that I should thus come unto him,
gave me kind entertainment, and causing me to sit down side by side with him,
he began to ask of me what Countryman I was? I told him that I was of Seuill.
O (said he) of Seuill? The best Country in all the world.

Then began he to treat of that City, indearing it very much unto me, as if,
by his commendation of it, I should have received a great deal of honor, or
profit thereby. He demanded of me what my Parents were, and how they were
called? And when I had named them unto him; he told me, that they had been
his very good friends, and acquaintance, making a long discourse unto me, how
when he was Judge there, he had sentenced a certain suit in his favor. And he
farther told me, that he did assure himself, that my Mother was still living,
to whom he was well known in her younger days. In a word, he proceeded so
far with me in these and like kind of complements, that there was nothing
wanting to make it full and complete, but his acknowledging himself to be my
near Kinsman. Which I did still look for, especially when I saw him come to
such particulars, and that he could tell me such and such tokens; which made
me to say with my self, Omnia possunt potentes. What cannot your great men
do? And now I am fallen upon this Theme, I cannot but call to mind a certain
Judge, who having most faithfully used his Judicature, and exercised his Office
with a great Of a Judge that was given to wanto^nesse.
deal of integrity, his time of residencie being expired, and that he was to
render an account (as the custom is) of his Government, they could not charge
him with anything, save only for his wenching, and for being a little too much
subject to this humane frailty; for which, being sharply reprehended, he made
answer; That when he was recommended by them to this Office, they had only
given him in charge, that he should deal uprightly, and truly administer
Justice, which he most faithfully performed, and that no man could tax him of
the contrary. Would ye therefore be pleased to peruse my Letters, and to look
upon the Contents of my Commission, and if there (amongst other my
instructions) you shall find that I was by virtue of them, enjoined Chastity,
I shall most willingly submit my self to your censure, and endure such
punishment as ye shall be pleased to inflict upon me. So that, because this
clause was not expressly specified in his Commission, nor any particular mention
made thereof; it seems unto these kind of men, that they do not fail in
their duty, nor do any thing contrary to their Office, though they sweep (as
they say) a whole street before them, and do otherwise undo a Country: As
did a certain Judge, who having destowred Of a Judge that was a d^owrer of
Virgias.
about some thirty Maidens, and amongst those, the daughter of a poor woman,
who when she saw what wrong he had done her, she went unto him, and besought
him, that since he had done, or undone her daughter, that he would be pleased
to return her home unto her, to the end that her dishonor might not be
diuulged.

Whereupon, he taking a Royal of A piece of four shillings.
eight out of his Purse, said unto her: Good woman, I know nothing concerning
your daughter; Lo, here be eight Royals for you, take you these, and get you
some Masses to be said to S. Antonio of Padua, that he may do you the favor
to recover her lost maidenhead. A very good amends. I do not know to whom
this may seem to be well done. Do thou tell me if thou can. I am almost at
my wits end, to think on the small punishment, that is inflicted upon such
great faults.

He commanded me to get me home to my house, proffering (out of his love unto
me) to do me many favors, and that he should count himself very happy, if
at any time it should lie in his power to do me a courtesy. For it was a
sufficient motive unto him, to bind him unto me, that I was of Seuill, and the
son of such parents; and that as well in this, as all other occasions, he
would assist me all that he could, and afford me his best favor.

With this fair answer I got me home. And within a few days after, when Of a
Judge that was in authority.
I and my wife were all alone, and thought our selves secure, not thinking on
any thing in the world, much less dreaming of his coming thither, behold, one
night, when he walked the Round, he came to our door, and commanding one of
his people to knock thereat, upon answer given, they asked for me; entreating a
Jar of water of me for his Worship. I well knew where his thirst lay;
Whereupon I earnestly besought him, that he would do me the honor to come in,
that he might sit, and take his drink, and not (like beggars) to take it
without doors. He desired nothing more, this was that which he looked for. He
comes in, and when he was sat, some Conserues were brought him to sweeten his
mouth, which having tasted, he took the Jar and drank. Then began he to
enter into Discourse, telling us, that he had walked himself weary, and that
he had seen that night many fair women, but none that came near my wife. He
said farther, that he had heard her exceedingly commended for her good voice. I
then willed her to take her Violl, and seeing his Worship was pleased to give
her the hearing, that she should sing some one song or other, which she
thought fit. Which she did without any coyness, or straining courtesy; it
seeming unto us both, that it would much advantage us, to get so great a person
to be our friend, who might be ready to stead us upon all occasions. The man
was astonished, as well with the seeing, as the hearing of her; and when he was
to take his leave, he willed me to come now and then to see him, and that I
should make my self no stranger. With that, he went his way; and I and my wife
began to talk as well of this, as other things that had past; and how far
forth this his favor might be a means, to make us hereafter be more both
respected and feared. I did visit him sometimes: and one day among the rest,
careless of any thing that might befall me, he said unto me; How happens it
(Guzman) whilst I am yet living, (for men are mortal, and I may die before I
shall be able to do thee any good, if it be not done the sooner) that thou
do not make use of my favor, and sue unto me for some Commission, that may
be both honorable and profitable unto thee? I told him, that I held my self
much bound unto him, and that I should ever rest thankful for this expression
of his love and favor toward me, but because I was loath to be troublesome
unto him, as also for that I had not as yet served him in any thing, whereby to
deserve any the least kindness from him, I had forborne to move him in things
of this nature. He then selling me the friendship of my father and mother,
(though this his kindness toward me, proceeded more from his love to my wife
then my self) he offered me a Commission; telling me, that it would be very
beneficial unto me. I thank't him for it, though Guzman imployd in
Commissions, for the Council, de la hazienda. The Council de la hazienda is
of the same nature with the Barons of our Kings Exchequer
this was the Induction to all my future misfortunes. For within two days
after, he puts those papers into my hands, with order for the recovery of
certain debts that were due to the Exchequer. The which he had procured
(begging it for me) of an especial good friend of his, a great man in his
place, and one that assisted in that Court; telling him that I was a friend of
his, and a well-deseruing Person, worthy to be employed in weighty matters, as
should appear by that good satisfaction, which I should give both of my person
and employment.

When I had my Dispatch, I went from home, but (I must confess) sore against
my will; I carried along with me eight hundred Marauedis, which I had by way of
salarie, or stipend; and for that I had ever been accustomed to fare well, I
knew not how to begin to frame my self to live with this poor allowance, much
less to be able to put money in my Purse, or to hoord up to carry, or send
home any thing to my house. But I saw now, that there was no other remedy, and
must of force do as I did: and so for avoiding of farther mischief, I held my
peace, and accepted of it. Partime, v perdime, My departure was my destruction.
And when I went away, all went awry. For it seemed unto this kind Master of
mine, that he might get himself slaves at other men's cost to do him service,
and that with these eight hundred Marauedis, I might part shares with my wife,
and maintain two houses, and that this would be a sufficient recompense for
us; out of which respect, he was not only willing to be exempted from all other
taxes and tributes belonging unto us; but also, that my wife should not look
out to see the Sun, nor to receive any Visits, but only his. He sought to be
so absolute a Judge over any thing that was mine, and did so wring and pinch
us, that I and my family were ready to starve for hunger, so that we were
driven daily to go selling some of our hous-hold stuff, for to put bread in
our mouths. Guzmans Wife likes not the Judges miserable proceeding.


My wife (who was now become his Hostess) could not live by these recknings,
it was no good account for her, to endure so much subjection, and to be tied to
so short provision. She first began to show some dislike of this his imperious,
yet base dealing; and also many times of purpose refused to see him; hiding her
self out of the way, using the help of a great friend of hers, who still made
her excuse, when she was disposed that he should not come at her: For she
thought she should have made her self by this market; but it proved otherwise.

But when this new Master of mine perceived the evil correspondence which she
held with him, thinking with himself, that my presence would quickly remedy
all this, and bring the Bowl to it is old bias, he presently gave order, that
there should be no more Prorogations granted unto me, and that I should be
commanded to give an account of that which I had done. They put me to it, and I
did it; more willingly resigning up my Office, then I took it upon me; for I
found my state thereby much impawned, and my house much waited and consumed. He
thought that my presence should have been the only remedy to give him
content, and that he might the better enjoy all things to his own liking; but
it fell out far otherwise, for by my presence, his expense increased, and we
had the better means to make it rise. He was much troubled here-with, and
knew not in the world how to mend himself; and conceiving with himself, that
nothing would work us better to his will then rigor, then to put us to our
shifts, that we might come Cap in hand, crouching unto him, and that with our
arms acrosse, and tears in our eyes, we should come and cry him mercy, and
entreat his favor; he treated with his Colleagues and fellow Officers, to
banish us the Court; and so accordingly it was notified unto us. I began to
cast up my recknings, and made this account with my self; This Lord Judge
takes himself to be Guzman banished Madrid.
such a great man, that he thinks, he does me a great favor, in putting me
to maintain his House, and procure his pleasure, selling him that for a song,
which I have bought with so many affronts, and scraped together with such a
deal of toil.

Again, it will do me no good to stay here, if I may not have free leave to
make the best of mine own Commodities. It will be the lesser evil (thought I
with my self) to obey this banishment, and to be packing, then to tarry here
to no purpose. For though it were hard measure that was offered unto us, and did
pinch us somewhat; yet I knew it would wring him much more, nay gall him to the
very heart. For, though we lost one of our own eyes, yet we had put out both
his. For he mist of his mark; he had taken the wrong Sow by the ear, and all
went kim-kam, clean contrary to his expectation. So this poor silly ass,
thinking to bang us, had made a Cudgel for his own sides. Besides, at the end
of that year, those ten years were to be expired, wherein I was to give my
Creditors satisfaction.

All these things had I laid together, and thoroughly weighed them with my self.
I knew like wise that my Mother was alive; so on the sudden I hired a Coach for
our own persons, and two Carts, for to carry our stuff, and our people,
leaving the Court and the Courtiers to themselves, bidding them farewell for
ever. Thinking with my self, that those that came from Peru, flush with their
gold and silver, would prove a great deal more profitable for us. And so we
went quietly along to Seuill.

CHAP. VI.
Guzman de Alfarache and his Wife come to Seuill; He finds his Mother to be
now somewhat ancient, and well stricken in years. His Wife gets her away to
Italy with one of the Captains of the Galleys, leaving him alone to himself,
and exceeding poor. Whereupon, he falls to his old trade of theeuing.

FOr that they, who escape out of some great danger, as often as they think
there-vpon, it seems still unto them, that they are yet scarce free from the
peril they were in; I did often call my life to remembrance, but never to
amendment; and more particularly, that of my late lewd courses, the bad estate
wherein I found my self, the little honor that I had to mine own credit, and
the small, or no respect at all which I bare toward my God, all the while that
my feet walked in these evil steps. I began to wonder at my self that I
was Guzman discourses of those Wittols, that willingly make their Wives turn
Whores.
become such a beast, as amongst men, none could be greater. For none of all
those, that are created on earth, would ever have permitted that which I did
wink at; making my self a living, out of my wives lewd and filthy gain,
putting her into the occasion of sinning, giving her tacit license to trade,
nay, expressly commanding her to turn Whore: And which is as bad, (if not
worse then all the rest) that I should require from her, my food, my raiment,
and the maintaining of my house, whilst I my self led an idle kind of
life, holding (like the sluggard) my thumbs under my girdle. It is a fearful
and terrible thing, that I should think my self to be an honest man, and to
have honor in me, being so far from it, and so deprived of true good. That
for to have crowns to play, I should crown my self with infamy; and that by
not using these arms of mine, to labor for my living, I should blot those
Arms of my Ancestors, and the nobleness of that house, whereof I was
descended; Losing that, which is one of the hardest things to be gotten: to
wit, a good name, and opinion in the world; That I should profane so holy a
Mystery; That I should use it in that ill and vile manner, that being I should
have made it to serve as a means of my salvation, I made it the highway to
bring me to hell, and only for food and apparel, to nourish, and cloth this
miserable carcass; That I should oppose my self to such peril, when as
behind my back, and even face to face, they might have put an affront upon
me, obliging me thereby rather to lose my life, then to endure such
dishonor; That a man should not be able to do more then he can do; that he
should know it, and dissemble it, either out of his too much love, or his too
much grief, or that he may not proclaim himself a Cuckold to the world: I do
not so much wonder at this. And this may not only not be a Vice, but a Virtue,
and a goodness, in case he consent not thereunto, nor afford any favor or
entrance into it. But to do as I did, who did not only take pleasure therein,
but as if it had been necessary for me so to do, did (as they say) cast my
Cloak over it; I do not well know, whether I were blind, or mad, or bewitched,
that I did not consider better there-vpon; or if I did, that I did not use some
good remedy against it, but did further it all that I could. O fool, fool
that I was and give me leave here to be-foole my self a thousand times, that
I was so wretchlesse as I was; that I did not so much as once dream on this
mischief, and seek to prevent it; knowing, how incompatible companions these
two are, honra, y muger guitarrera; Honesty, and a woman that plays and sings
to her Instrument; and that I did not weigh, what hurt it had Music in a
Woman, a bewitching thing.
done others, and that it might likewise ruin her and me, besides the
dishonor that must thereby redound to us both. Men, for to oblige their
Mistresses unto them, are wont to bestow music on them under their windows,
and to sing unto them in the streets; but my Wife was such a one, that she
made these men to fall in love with her, by going abroad to sing and play at
their houses. And it is a clear case, that such graces are appetible in their
own nature, and much desired.

Now then, if men were invited, nay, incited thereunto, why should they not
desire, and seek after my Wife? What wit or judgment has that man in the
world, who will make show of his treasure to thieves? What quiet sleeps can he
take? with what ease can he rest, living (as he cannot choose) in in a
continual fear of being robbed? How was it possible, that I should be such an
Ass, that since I had given my self over to such shame and reproach, which
happily might be occasioned by my too much weakness, I should (for mine own
private interest) incur another far greater? To wit, to fall in company,
into the commendation of my Wife, extolling to the skies, in the presence of
those that pretended love unto her, those lovely qualities, and commendable
parts that were in her, entreating also her, nay, sometimes commanding her,
that she should discover and make show of some illicit part of her person, as
her breast, arms, feet, and likewise (but I will here hold my peace for shame,
for I blush to think on it) that they might see whether her flesh were fat,
plumpe, and soft; white, brown, or ruddy? So that all grew worse and worse
with me. For that which heretofore I did hate and abhor with my heart, and
was as it were a death unto me to endure it, was now by use and custom become
easy and familiar unto me, and I grew at last to take great delight in it.
That I should consent, that she should receive Visits, and that I my self
should bring Customers to my house, and leaving them with her, should get me
out of doors, and walk abroad; and above all, that I should feign
simplicity, and make my self ignorant, as if there were no such matter in the
wind; and that I should think withal, that they did verily believe, that
this was a good and lawful thing, being indeed a most depraved and wicked Act?
That I should set her a-worke to solicit Commissions, and to follow
businesses at such great Ministers houses, as had a mind unto her, and desired
nothing more, then that she should come unto them, and that I should make, as
if I knew nothing, so slight reckoning of that infamy, which returning with
them, or without them, she brought home with her? That they making her so many
feasts and banquets, giving her so many Jewels, so many Crowns, and so many
costly Gowns, that they could think, that I should believe, that they
bestowed all these things upon her for nifles in a bag, for mere smoke, for
her fair looks, for very pure love, and honest affection, simply and
plainly, without any doubling, or other by-pretension? What can I answer for
my self? Or what can be expected from me, who not only gave way thereunto,
but did also work for her to run that course? That fellow had good What a
Prisoner said to Guzman.
reason to say that he did, who seeing how well I began to thrive in Madrid,
himself being then in prison, he said in the presence of my self, and
others. You see in what case I am here; it is now some three years since that
I was apprehended for a Thief, a Forger, an Adulterer, a Slanderer, a
Murderer, and a thousand other crimes, which they laid to my charge; all which
being heaped upon me, I sink under the burden of them, and am ready to
perish for want of food: whereas Sen^or Guzman, only by giving his Wife leave
to take her liberty, lives free, takes his case, and grows rich.

What think thou, could I think, when I heard this? O accursed riches,
accursed ease, accursed freedom, and accursed also be that day, wherein I
consented to any such thing, whether it were for love, necessity, favor of
great Persons, or any other interest of mine own. But because the end may be
known, which that man must come to, who gains by such ungodly means, and
that ye may see the unfortunate success of such base delights and pleasures, I
will recount my misfortunes unto you, and intertaine you with the discourse of
my sharp and bitter life, which was as ill bestowed on me, as it was ill
employed by me.

We traueld to Seuill (as they say) al passo del buey: with the foot Proverb.
Al passo del buey.
of an Guzman leaves Madrid, and goes for Seuill.
Ox; That is, fair and softly, and with a great deal of leisure. For my Wife
was afraid of the iogging of the Coach, least it should make her little
foysting-Dogge sick, which she carried along with her in her lap, in which was
all her happiness, it was her only jewel, and her dearest delight. For one
of these fizzling-curres is a maine piece of a Ladies Essence, and the proper
passion of a Gentlewoman. Nor can they any more go without them, then a
Physician without his Gloves and his Ring, an Apothecarie without a
Chesse-boord, a Barber without a Gitterne, a Miller without a Kit, or a Spanish
Don, without a Tooth-pick.

When we were come thither, out of the desire that we had to draw profit The
foolish conceits, which vain men flatter themselves withal.
from those that returned from Peru, and to see our house to become such
another, as the Contractation house for the Indies; whither and from whence,
bars of gold and silver daily come, and go; and that it might be all built
of Plate, and pau'd with Gold; me thought it seemed unto me, that I saw them
already entering in at my doors, their backs bowing under them with the
burden of their Bars, so massy is that kind of metal; and that their
strong-sowne pockets were ready to rip and rend in sunder, with the weight of
their double Pistolets, and Royals of eight, and all to offer them up to that
their Idol, my Wife.

With this golden conceit, and glorious imagination, I sought to revenge my
self upon him that had banished us the Court; and said with my self; O thou
Traitor; Thou thought to put a trick upon me; but if any be coozen'd, it
is thy self; for all fell out to us for the best. The affront that thou
offered'st me, has lighted on thine own head. I am now coming into the
Country of Cucan^a, or the Land of Xanxa, where is Gods plenty of all things,
and where the streets are strowed with Silver, where we shall be no sooner
arrived, but they shall come forth to receive us with a rich Canopy of State,
where we shall all live like Kings.

With these, and the like thoughts, I called to remembrance, whatsoever had
succeeded there unto me, in that my first departure from Seuill. S. Lazaro his
Church would not out of my mind; I saw the Fountain where I drunk; the
Stone, whereon I slept in the Church Porch; the steps, by which I went up and
down; I saw his Sacred Temple, and that holy Chapel, where I so devoutly
said my prayers; And though I was far off from it, I saluted the Patron
thereof in this manner:

O glorious Saint; when I took my leave of thee, I went away with tears
afoot, poor, all alone, and a child. Now I return to see thee rich, attended,
merry, and a married man.

Then was represented unto me from the very beginning all the discourse
Touching these things, see the first Part, Chap. 3. and. 5.
of my life, ripping it up even to that very instant. I remembered my self of
my Hostess that kept a victualing house by the Highway side, and of the Inn,
where they gave me that good froyze of Eggs, and the Muleter of Cantillana;
but I had now left that on the right hand. I entered by that Royal Causey, we
turned about by the Field, rounding the City, till we came to the Inn where
our Carts were, where, of necessity my people were to stay; And for that all
those were steps which I had often trodden, when I was a boy, and that place was
well known unto me, because I was there bred and born, my blood began to rise as
cheerfully, as if I had seen mine own Mother. We lodged there that night,
but not very well. But in the morning I rose up with the Sun, for to seek out
a new Lodging, and to free my goods from that Magazine, as also to make
inquiry, if any one could tell me tidings of my Mother. But for all the good
diligence therein used by me, all was to no end; I could hear no news of her,
no, not a word. I thought I should have found all things as I left them; but
they were so far from being in statu, quo prius, in the same case, wherein
they were before, that there was not so much as a shadow, or any memorial
thereof remaining. For some were altered, others absent, and most of them dead,
insomuch that there was scarce one stone left upon another, whereby a man might
be able to say; This is still the same Seuill. I forbore for the present to
make any farther search after her, deferring it till some fitter season, in
regard of the great haste that I had at that time to accommodate my self; and
going about to see how I could fit my self, I might perceive a bill, newly set
up over the door of a certain house, that was to be let in the A Ward. A
liberite. A street. A neighborhood.
Barrios of St. Bartholmew, being within the precincts of the said Parish. I
made means to see it, I viewd it, I liked it then well, I hired it for some
months, and paying my Rent beforehand, I caused all my stuff to be carried
thither.

We rested our selves some two days, eating and sleeping our fill, till my
Grace began to think with her self, that it was not fit, that she should come
to so noble a City as that was and so much famoused thorowout the whole world,
to mue her self up within door, and not once offer to walk abroad. I got me
to the Gradas de Seuilla. A place like our Exchange in London, where men meet
to walk, and talk.
Gradas; for her, I had hired a Squire, to usher her through the streets, for
that these kind of people are best acquainted with them; and that she might
go see those things, that she had most mind to, without rouing up and down
at random, or losing of her self, or without asking which was the way to
such, or such a place. And so for fifteen days together, she never folded up
her Mantle. For every morning and evening, she duly all that while walked
abroad, and was never weary, nor fully satisfied with seeing such Greatnesses,
as did offer themselves every where to her view. For albeit, although that she
was in Madrid, she liked it very well, and so well, that she then thought, that
that Court had the advantage of all other habitations of the world for it is
State and Majesty, the greatness and great number of their Dukes, Marquesses,
Condes, and other Titulados, for it is concourse of Ambassadors from all
foreign parts for the good Trading, that is in it, for their temperate
carriage, their discretion in general, and their liberty without comparison,
for the earth affords not a freer place to live in: Yet she found in Seuill,
the savor of a City, another I know not what, other Greatnesses, though not
in the same quality, for there wanted Kings there to keep their Courts, nor
so many Grandes and men of Title, at least in quantity; yet had they great
store of wealth amongst them, and were in no less esteem; for silver was
there as common amongst the vulgar sort, as Copper money in other places, and
they made such small reckning of it, that they spent it far more freely.

Within a few days after we came thither, Lent was come, and we saw the Holy
Week in that manner, as it is there solemnized, we saw the liberal alms
that were there, and at that time bestowed on the poor, the store of Wax
which was spent in Taper-lights. My wife was strooken with wonder, and as a
woman besides her self, not well imagining how this could possibly be: so
far did it outstrip in works, that which had been uttered of it in words.

Now in this mean time, which was not long after my arrival in this City, I
had, by the great care that I had taken, and by some circumstances, got to the
knowledge of my mother, and if I may so say, had found her out by the tracke of
her blood. For my wife entering into speech with some other fair Gentle-women,
that were of her acquaintance, as they were discoursing of diverse things,
falling by the way upon her, she came to know, that she kept company with a
handsome young Wench, to whom she was suspected to be Mother, for the good
usage, wherewith she treated her, and for the due respect which she bare unto
her. But in truth it was not so; for she had no Guzman hears news of his
Mother, and how she got her living.
other child but my self. But the true cause thereof only was this; that
seeing she was left thus all alone, poor, and growing now old, she had bred
her up of a little Girl, to do her service hereafter, whom she now made
profit of, whereby they made a shift to live as well as they could. I, when I
had notice of her, was very instant with her, to have her come live with me;
but I could not win her to it, being wondrous loath to leave this young Wench,
as well for that she had bred her up; as also, for that she was unwilling to
have any difference with a daughter in Law, which, her discretion told her,
could not well be avoided. And as often as I entreated her thereunto, she would
still answer me, Dos tocas en un fuego, nunca encienden lumbre a derechas. A
mother in Law, and a daughter inLaw, seldom agree well together.
Que dos tocas en un fuego, nunc a en^ienden lumbre a derechas. That two white
Kerchiefs in one Kitchen, did never yet Proverb.
make good fire: Themselves being apter to kindle one another, then to kindle
it. For the sorrow is not so great which a woman suffers, when she lives alone,
by, and of her self, as is the torment which she indureth, when she is
enforced to keep Company contrary to her liking. And seeing that there was
never yet any daughter in Law, that could live peaceably and lovingly with her
Mother in Law, she was of the mind, that my wife would live more merrily alone
by her self with me, and rest better contented with it, then if she should
live with her. But in the end, the love of a son prevailed so far with her,
that I had persuaded her to yield to my desire. She was my Mother, I desired
to cherish her, and to make much of her, and that she might now take her ease
in her old age. For albeit to me she did still represent her self with the
selfsame beauty, and the same freshness of color, and clearenesse of
skin, with the which I left her, when I parted from her; yet was she now so
quite altered from that she was, that it was hard to say, This is she. I
found her lean, old, tawny, toothlesse, her face Beauties frailty.
(like an old Apple- John) all shriueled, and altogether another kind of
creature. I saw in her the ruins of Time; and how years consume every thing.
Whereupon turning my self about to my Wife, and looking wistly upon her, I
told her; This fair face of thine must run the like Fortune one day; beauty
will not last for ever: And if at any time a woman chance to escape that
deformity, which age lays upon her; yet at least she must fall at last into
the hands of death, which will dis-figure even the youngest body, and claw all
the flesh from the bones. I did figure the like unto my self. But as well in
this, as in all other those good considerations, which had offered themselves
Guzman unsettled in his good resolutions.
unto me, I did just as he does, who comes to drink in an Inn, that stands in
the Highway, who as soon as he has drunk, sets down the glass, and goes
his way. They stayed but a little while with me; I kept them still going, but
never proffered them a chair to sit down and rest themselves; for those that
I had in my house, were occupied and taken up by Appetite, and Sensuality. At
my earnest entreaty, the Mother and Daughter in Law See the first book the
first Part. Chap. 1. and 2.
came to house together. My Mother, you knew her well enough before, though not
by sight, yet by report, and those famous things you had heard of her. She was
able to ouer-master the best of them, not any of them all that could go beyond
her for her wit, and her understanding; as well because these things were so
naturally and truly her own; as also, for that she had been schooled and
trained up in them; and above all, having the advantage of so many years
experience.

She gave my wife very good counsel, aduising her, that she should not The
instructions of the Mother in Law, to her daughter in Law. Proverb.
admit into her company the young men of that street wherein she dwelt, but
(like the Fox) should fetch her prey farther off; for besides the infamy and
dis-honour that she should get thereby, she told her; that they are Como agua
de por San Iuan; Aquas de por San Iuan; quitan el prouecho, y no lo dan.
quitan el prouecho, y ellos no lo dan; Like unto your Midsummer rain, which
quits all profit, and yields no gain. They will rather draw from you, then
bring any benefit to you. They dine and sup still at home, and when they know
not what to do, or how otherwise to bestow their time, then will they come to
our house, and look to be entertained by us in good conversation; there will
they stay all that evening; Tres necios en Proverb.
plata, Tres necios en plata, y un majadero en menudos.
y un majadero en menudos; Three fools in one dish, and a blockhead cut out in
Sippets. Having no other ground for their acquaintance, but this weak
foundation, that they are (forsooth) of the same street or Parish, wherein you
dwell.

Of your Court Pages, your Students at Law, and your University young Pages.
Students. Scholars.
Fry, she read the like Lecture unto her; telling her, that they were like
unto Crows, which would smell out flesh a far off, and were good for nothing
else but to pecke at it, and when they had done, get them gone.

She wished her to set a Cross upon her door, to keep all married men out;
for, from no enemy that she had, could she receive greater harm. For Married
men. I ealous wives, their condition.
wives that are jealous, commit a thousand outrages, and cause millions of
inconveniences to come upon you. And when they cannot come to mischief you,
and work their will upon you themselves (for not one amongst a thousand of
them, but will scratch out your eyes, if she do but imagine, you draw the
custom from their Mill) they will get them to this, or that Judge, and with
four tears, two sighs, one wry mouth, and a wringing of the hands, they will
put all the Town in an uproar, and utterly overthrow your credit. In a word,
she gave in this kind, many true, wholesome, and sound Instructions, as one
that from the very womb of her Mother, proceeded Doctresse in her Art, had all
her Lessons that she had learned, at her fingers ends, and knew how to make use
of them. She carried her always along with her, whither-soeuer she went,
omitting no station, that she did not go unto; no Feast, that she did not
visit, nor no street, that she did not walk through.

When then they came home, they would one while return with Tasselgentles,
Kind Lovers. Rough hewne Hacksters.
amorous Knights, like Amadis de Gaul, that would easily be manned, and quickly
brought to stoop to the Lure; and other-whiles with fierce Mastiffes, roaring
Boys, and ruffian-like Swaggerers, such as would swear and drink, and throw
the house out at the Windows; And out of these my Mother did cull, and pick
out such, as she thought would make most for our profit: for, having traded so
long as she had done in that Country, she knew which tracke to take, there
was not that path, which she had not beaten; nor that thing which she did not
know; and knowing all, she knew best how to go beyond them all.

For your beardlesse young Gallants, and Sattin-cheekt boys, she would Young
Gallants.
not have her to have any thing to do with them; nor to be beholding to them
for so much as a stick of fire, which is a common courtesy betwixt neighbor
and neighbor. For such as these will not stick to tell you, that their penny
is as good silver as yours; their Sugar-pellets, are as sweet as your
Conserues; that their gay clothes, their curled Locks, and strong Perfumes,
deserve your person, and that you should kindly (without any other
retaliation) entertain their love: And they will also think (being well
conceited of themselves) that you should rather woo them, then they you; and
that you should make them a curt'sie, and cry, I thank you Sir. She took a
great deal of pains with her in these, and the like; but above all, she bid
her take heed, that she held no commerce or correspondence with those of the
Place of San Francisco, and that she should be afraid how she did meddle with
them; for if she once begin to have any thing to do with your Officers of the
Courts of Justice; as your Clerks, and Registers, the whole rabble of Lawyers
and their Clerks.
them will run in upon you, even to those that write at the Deske, and will
copy you out a sheet for a groat. And being they follow the Law, they think,
that all that is yours, is theirs, and that of right it belongs unto them. For
if you oncefall into their hands, there is no scaping from them; for either by
fair means, or by foul; by entreaties, or by threatenings, being so absolute,
and so dissolute, as they are, (I mean some of them) they exercise more
Tyrannies, and more cruelties, then Totila, or Dionysius, as if there were not
a God for them, as well as for other folks.

The Fleet was not come; the City was in great want; their purses were shut,
and our mouths open; and we were ready to dye for hunger. We fell a selling,
and then a eating; and which was worse, we paid a great rent, and had little
commings in. All went ill with us, we had brawling and scolding at home, and
the poor Maid that was in our house, she paid for it; off goes her Kerchiefe,
and with it her hair, tugging her thereby upon every light or slight occasion,
keeping a great deal of stir about toys and trifles, that were not worth
the talking of. There was not that Rogue, or base Rascal, but would dare to
do us wrong, and not stick to gybe and Fleare at Proverb. Don Fulano, y
Cutano: Words of scorn, men not deigning to call us by our own name.
Intimating that we are base fellows, and not worthy to be made any reckoning
of. Couarruuias. The Mother-in-Law, and Daughter in Law, fall together by the
cares.
us; one saluting me in scorn, with the style, of Sen^or Don Fulano, and
another with that of Don Cutano. My Wife lived in a continual fear, and was
now grown weary, and sick of the Mother-in-Law; For in regard that with me,
she had lived so long at her own liberty, and had taken so much head, and
now finding her self somewhat restrained of it, and that she could no longer
be Mistress of her own will; and that if the one did but speak, the other
would begin to grumble; of every gnat, they made a Cammell; and of Mole-hils,
Mountains. And such a cruel storm and tempest would arise between them, that
because I would not be Stickler between them, or seem to take one part more
then another, I would take my Cloak, and throwing it on my shoulders, when I
saw these Dolfines once begin to play above water, and hye me (with all the
haste I could) out of the house, and get me abroad, leaving them together by
the ears, tugging one another head-geare off; fight Dog, fight Bear, take
them off who would, for me. For I would have nothing to do with them.

My Wife hereat was so mad, and grew so angry with me, that I would not show my
self on her side, that by little and little she grew to hate me; that Guzmans
wife begins to hate her husband.
whether it were right or wrong, she thought it fit, that Man and Wife, seeing
God had joined us together, we should cleave each to other; or whether with, or
without reason, I had great reason to take her part against my Mother: but that
on the other side I held not to be so lawful.

Whereupon her hate grew to that height, and she did so abhor my company,
that meeting with an occasion by means of a Captain of the Galleys Guzmans
wife goes away with a Captain of the Neapolitane Galleys.
of Naples, that lay there in the rode, she exchanged my love for his. And
gathering all the money together she was able to make, and those Jewels of Gold
and Silver, which we were stored with at that time, she hoysed sail, and went
for Italy, I not knowing then for the present, what was become of her.

I have heard it spoken, That he is a Madman, or a Fool, that will seek
after his Wife, when she is once gone. And that a man should make a golden
Prou. Al enemigo, hazer la puente de plata, por donde huyesse.
Bridge, for a flying enemy: And be glad, that he can be so rid of him.

I thought with my self, That I should better be Proverb. Mejor solo, que mal
accompan^ado.
alone, then ill accompanied. For, although it be true, that I gave way to all
her desires, and so had all my maintenance by that means; whereas otherwise I
should have wanted meat to put in my mouth; and clothes, to put on my back;
yet I grew weary of it, because every one had one fling or other at me.

See the force of use; for being that I was always bred up to baseness, and
The force of (...).
was ever accustomed to hear affronts, when I was a child, and afterward when
I grew somewhat bigger, I could the better bear them, when I came to be a man.

My Wife was gone from me, and therein she did me a favor; for besides that I
was now free from that obligation of giving way, that she should lead that
kind of life, which she did; I was likewise free from that daily sin, which
might have layen upon my conscience; For I did not cast her off; but she for to
satisfy her own wilful humor, absented herself from me. And it was
impossible, that I should follow her, and hunt her out for the hazard that I
should run, if I should return back again into Italy. These difficulties
therefore offering themselves unto me, I led a retired life with my Mother.
And not having where-withall handsomely to maintain our selves, we fell a
selling such household stuff as was left. But there being more days Guzman
sels all (...) ^ath.
in the year, then we had implements in the house, all was gone within a very
short time. Saint John, Proverb. San Iuan, y Co^pus Christ, ^veron para ^i, en
Un dia. Guzman falls to stealing of C^oakes.
and Corpus Christi, happened to me all on a day. I had now brought both ends
together: I wanted goods to sell, and money to buy. I found my self out of
reparations, not having where-withall to cloth my back, nor to feed my
belly; not any thing else, whereby to gain a penny, unless I should fall
again to my old trade. I got me forth a nights into those streets, where
there were diverse turnings, or crosse-wayes, and when I had made my purchase, I
would come home laden with two or three Cloakes, such as I could compass with
least trouble, and peril to my person.

The next morning, one of these two courses I took with them, that I turned
them in a trice either into Mandillians, Doublets, and Hose, altering the
property of them, or else rid my hands otherwise of them as handsomely as I
could. But commonly when I had changed the fashion of them, in the duske of the
Evening I would get me unto the Gradas, and there barter them away, either for
other Ware, or ready money, as others did.

This kind of trading my Mother was not so well pleased with, she did His
Mother and ^e part.
not like well of it; as well, for that she had never used it in all her life;
as also, for that she would not willingly now in her old Age, run the hazard
of so foul an affront.

Whereupon, she resolved with her self, once more to open shop, and see what
good she could do by her old Trade; she, and the young Wench, She follows
her old course; and ^e ^is.
(which she lived withal before) being agreed to become partners, and equally
to share all gains between them. O how glad was she, when she saw my Mother
come within her doors, how did she hug and embrace her, as if she had
brought in the Indies with her; or were the only Physician to recover the
sick and decayed estate of her low-brought fortunes, having no such utterance
of her Ware, nor nothing the like doings now, as when she lived with her! I
(my Mother being now gone from me) quickly brought my self acquainted with
some other good fellows, with whom I might merrily pass my life, till fortune
should change, and the times grow better. These my Camerades, I fitted them
with invention, plotted their businesses for them, assisted them in all
occasions with my person, went along with them to the Towns and Villages near
adjoining. And whatsoever else we did chance to light upon by the way, we did
never likely miss, in some of the back Courts belonging to their houses, a
good Buck of Clothes, which together with their Flasket, we made to vanish
and dis-appeare in an instant.

We had in the Suburbs, and the Triana, certain known houses, places of
purpose for receipt, where, without entering into the City, we did pitch our
Pikes, and make a Stand. There did we dry our clothes, and being Thieves, and
their cunning carriage.
clean washed, and handsomely folded up, by little and little we conuay'd them
into the City, one while through the gates, another while over the walls,
after midnight was past, when the Justice had done walking the Round, and was
retired home. For those garments of Cloth and of Silk, which by our industry
we had purloyned here and there, as we could come to lay hands on them, we had
known Brokers for them, to whom we sold them at a reasonable good price,
losing little or nothing of what they were worth, which being once delivered up
into their hands, they well knew that they would pass for current, as goods
that had been gotten in a just war, and were their crafts-masters in
altering the form and fashion of them, to the end that they might not be
known, for fear of after-claps. For we had no other obligation, but to give
them good wares for their money, dry, and well-conditioned, putting it within
the doors of their houses free from tax and tallage, and all other paiments,
leaving them to be freely inioyed by them. Your clean white linen had quick
dispatch, in regard of the good conueniencie that was offered us to come easily
by it; as also for that it was very good chaffer, to traffic away with
strangers. And in this manner did we maintain our selves bravely, and went
well and clear away with it.

One time (I remember) in the Winter, there was such a continued rain without
intermission, that none did dare to go out of doors; so that the owners of
those houses, keeping themselves within, all commodity of visiting them was
taken away from us; whereby money began to grow scant with us. It was my hap
at that time, as I was passing along through a certain street, that I espide
all the forepart of a house quite fallen down to the ground. I asked whose
house that was? They told me it was a Gentle-womans that was a Widow. I
went, and sought her out, and desired her, That seeing there was no body dwelt
in her house, she would give me leave to go in, and lodge there, promising
her to look carefully unto it. She (good Woman) being afraid lest the whole
house should come tumbling down about my ears, told me; That I were best
take heed what I did, least the house should chance to fall. As for that (I
answered again, it made no great matter, for that there was an upper room
(which as I conceived) was strong, and sure enough, where-into I might safely
retire my self: telling her besides; That such as were poor (as I was) had no
cause of fear, or loss; life being to them rather a burden, then otherwise;
and was the thing, which of all other, they could best spare. Whereupon, very
willingly she gave me leave so to do. And I presently, without any more ado,
got me in, and within some four days after, there was not a door, which I
had not vnhindged, nor a lock, which I had not ripped off.

The next day after, I got me into the street of San Saluador, and there I
cased it to be openly cry'de at the Cross, that whosoever would buy four
Guzman robs a Widow of her Tyle-stones; and how?
or five thousand Tyle-stones, he should repair unto me; for I had authority
to sell them unto them. At that time, there was not a Tyle to be got in all the
whole Town for any money. Anon after came posting unto me three or four
Masons and Brick-layers, and happy was he that could come first, all of them
earnestly striving, which of them should have the bargain out of each others
hands, and were ready to go together by the ears about it.

Well, they came to agreement with me for five Marauedis a Tyle; and bringing
them to the house, I made show of them unto them; telling them that I was the
Mayor-domo, or Steward of the house, and that my Mistress was minded to pull
it quite down to the ground, and build it all new after another manner.
Besides these of mine, which I made my self Master of for the time, I showed
them others of our next neighbors, joining house to house with us, being so
near the other, as they seemed to be fellows, which likewise they were to
have away with them. They gave me six hundred Royals in good ready coin, upon
condition, that I should make up my tale of Tyles, to the full number of five
thousand; telling me, that the next day they would come and fetch them away.

When I had my money, I hasted away to the Mistress of the house, and said
unto her; that it was great pity, that she had given leave to her Mayor-domo,
to make sale of all the doors, and tyles that covered her houses. Whereupon
she grew into a great rage, and kept a foul coil about it, saying, She had no
Mayor-domo, nor yet knew, who had any such authority to do it. Thereupon I
told her; That your Worship then may know, who it is that takes this upon him;
I have been already commanded to get me out of the house, and that I must have
nothing to do there any more. Wherefore I must be enforced to look out a
lodging elsewhere. For to morrow very early, those that have bought the Tyles,
will come to carry them away. Your Worship may be pleased to send some body
thither, or to take the pains to go your self, and then you shall see what
has passed. This said, I took my leave of her; and the next day following,
standing aloof off, leaning against the corner of a Wall, I kept my self
close, to see the stir that would be about this business; and I can assure
you, it was sport alone, and was able to make as many as beheld it, to break
their hearts with laughing, to see how busy the Tylers were, in vntyling the
house, and how the poor Gentlewoman bestirred her self, to defend her own.
In conclusion, she exhibited a Complaint against the poor Tyler, and did not
only take away the Tyles from him, but also made him pay the price of her
doors and locks. This caused me for some few days to keep my self close
within doors, having a good fire, and laughing in my sleeue, till the storm
was ouer-past, and that they had given over looking after me.

One day, there was a great feast in San Augustine; and because such kind of
meetings made for us, I got me thither. Where I perceived, that a Gentleman had
good store of money loose in his left Pocket, on that side where his Rapyer
hung. Now, when he came into a place, where there was a great Guzman picks a
Gentleman's Pocket.
press of people, and that there was much thrusting and crowding one another,
I did gently lift up his Hangers, and thrusting in my hand, did nimbly diue to
the bottom, letting not so much as one Royal escape my fingers. But the
unquiet motion of those that were about me, hindered my hand, being so full as
it was, to carry it away cleanly, by means whereof a great deal of it fell
down upon the ground. And for that the Cloister was pau'd, it made a great
gingling; With that I let all go, and putting my hand into my Pocket, in a
trice I took out my Handkerchiefe, and crying to the people, that they would
for Gods sake give back, and make a little room, for that in pulling forth my
Handkerchiefe, I had shed all my money. All very kindly did as I desired them;
and the good honest Gentleman, whom I had thus robbed, moved out of charity,
hearing the pittious moan that I made, crying out, that I was with these
moneys to pay my Merchant, stooped down with me to the ground, and help me to
gather it up, till I had all to the last Royal. I gave him thanks for his
pains, and getting out of the throng, I went home well contented. This was
that Knife that cut my throat; this poor little theft, was my final perdition
and utter undoing; being the last that I did, and for the which I paid dearer
then all the rest. For albeit heretofore I had been taken in the like manner,
yet, for all those storms, I arrived at last in a safe Haven. With money I
could negociate what I list my self; and there, and in every place, there is
no other talk, then how a man may make a shift to live, and to get
where-withall to maintain his port; this was, is and will be the practice as
long as the world is the world; Judges have hands to take; and Malefactors
money to give. Every man (you know) would feign live by his place. But now
those Trumpes would do me no good, for I had renounced them long ago. When I
was flush of money, I would seek to furnish my self afresh, before they were
spent, for preuentions-sake. I would make new provision; for as long as I could
out of mine own ability, supply my necessities and wants, I did not seek
after encumbrances, or to draw sorrow upon my self. I had in a corner some
Purses, that I had cut, and some pretty little strange pieces, that I had met
withal. I made choice of one that I liked best of, and caused it to be
handsomely trimmed up, and putting into it six Crowns, in three Doblones of
gold, fifty Royals in Plate, a silver Thimble, and four Rings; I carried it to
my Mother, and showed her every thing particularly by it self, using therein a
great deal of leisure, pawsing well between every parcel: I likewise did set
down the same in writing unto her, to the end that she might learn it without
book, and not miss one letter of the lesson that I had taught her: for a good
memory is all in all; and that which in this business did most of all import
us. And having well instructed her in that which she was to do, when she was
to Guzman craftily coozens a Preacher, and gets a good alms, and how he did it.
come afterward to repetitions, I got me to the Cell of a certain famous
Preacher, who was a good man, and a holy, and reputed and reverenced of all
men, as if he had been some Saint, and said unto him;

Reverend Father, I am a poor stranger in this place, I am come hither to this
City, and am at this present in great want and necessity; I desire to
accommodate my self, if I could light upon some honest house, where I might
live peaceably and quietly for my souls health; this is the only thing that I
desire in this world; as for any set wages, I shall not stand much upon that.
For so as I may have honest clothes to my back, (I care not how mean, so
they be whole,) and some set Commons, (though never so poor) to pass over
this miserable life, I should well content my self there-withall, without
either hope, or desire of any farther profit. And albeit I am in this wretched
estate as you see, and that I am nothing but rags; in so much that for lack of
decent and seemly clothes (being so ill clad as I am) I shall not happily
light upon any, that will take me into his service; and albeit I could for the
present be able to help my self, and supply this my necessity by an
occasion, that is now offered unto me to relieve my wants, yet I hold it better
to suffer penury, and to rely upon a hopeful expectation of Gods helping
hand (who will at one time or other pity the distressed state of the poor)
then by offending his divine Majesty, in usurping upon the goods of my
neighbor. God forbid that other men's Purses should free me from my corporal
labor, leaving to my self a guilty and condemning conscience.

I got me this morning out of my lodging, for to seek some work, whereby I
might gain me bread to put in my mouth, and it was my good hap to find this
Purse in the midst of the street: I took it up, and went to look what was in
it. And when I perceived it was money, I presently shut the Purse, fearing left
mine own weakness might draw me to do an unlawful Act. I shall entreat your
Fatherhood, to take it into your hands, and being that you are next Sunday to
preach, that you will publish the same to the people. It may be, that the Owner
thereof may be present there, or by others report chance to hear of it, who
peradventure may have as much, if not more need of it then I have. Much good
may it do him with it, for I will not enjoy any other goods, save only such,
as his divine Majesty may be best served by me.

The honest Friar, when he had heard me out, and saw the heroical disposition
that was in me, took me to be rather a Saint, then a man. And he did so much
honor and reverence me for it, that there only was wanting the kissing of my
garment: and in a heavenly kind of language, he thus spoke unto me:

My dear brother; give hearty thanks to almighty God, that he has conferred
upon you so clear an understanding, and the knowledge of that little esteem
which we are to make of the goods of this world, and assure your self, that
he, that has communicated unto you this his holy Spirit, will (as he has
promised in his holy Word) provide for you, and minister such things unto you,
as his divine wisdom shall think fit and needful for you. He, who to the
poor least little Worms, and all your small fleshlesse and bloudlesse Vermin
(as your Ants, Flies, Caterpillars, and the like hurtful creeping things, that
crawle upon the earth) is not wanting, but cares for them, shall much more be
mindful of you, and supply you with all those things, that he shall see you
stand in need of: not only freeing you from these your present miseries, but
farther increasing your joys, and his blessings upon you. This action of
yours, is a supernatural and divine work, which strikes admiration into men,
and stirs up those Angelical spirits of heaven, to sing forth a thousand
Hymns of praise and thanksgiving, that such a noble creature was borne for
the glory of God, and the good of the world. This is his gift, and none but
his, acknowledge it, and magnify his praise by speaking good of his holy Name,
and perseuering in virtue.

I shall do as you would have me, and see you return again unto me some day
in the next week; for I hope in God, I shall be able to do you much good,
and procure some favor to be be shown unto you.

When this good man had made an end of these his holy words, my heart
therewith (me thought) was quite pierced through, and began to bleed within me;
for considering the greatness of his Sanctity and sincerity; and on the
contrary, of my roguerie and villainy, who by such vile and wicked means,
should go about to make him the instrument of my thefts; and the more to
color the business, I let fall a few feigned tears; this holy Friar, thought
I had shed them for Gods sake, and there-vpon began likewise himself to grow
somewhat tender.

This matter rested thus till the next Sunday following, which was All Saints
day; and when he came to preach, he spent the greatest part of his Sermon in
this business of mine, indearing that Act so much the more, for that it had
proceeded from a subject so much necessited; and did exaggerate it so to the
height, that he moved all those that were there to compassion, and made them
the willinger to do me good. So they repaired unto him with their alms, which
they powered forth in a plentiful manner.

On Monday morning, my Mother came to the Portaria in your religious houses, is
that gate or Porters lodge, belonging to the Covent. Couarruuias.
Portaria, and asked for that holy Father; saying, that she was to speak with
him about an earnest piece of business. The Porter, who perceived how desirous
she was to come to the speech of him, went in to call him, and presently
brought him unto her. Whom she no sooner saw, but taking hold of his hands, and
his Habit, kneeling down before him, and offering to kiss his feet, told him;
That the Purse was hers, desiring him for Gods sake, that she might have it
again. She acquainted him with all the outward marks of it, as also with the
particular and remarkable pieces that were in it, as one that had well studied
the Case. Whereupon the Friar, without any more ado, did deliver it unto her,
knowing the tokens to be true.

When my Mother had the purse in her own hands, she opened it, and taking out
one of those three Doblones that were in it, she gave it to this holy Father to
bestow upon me for the finding of it: As also four Royals, for two Masses to
be said for the Souls in Purgatory; and for that purpose she re-commended
them unto him. Thus did she recover her purse, and brought it presently home
unto me, not wanting so much as a pinshead of all that was in it; for I had
likewise of purpose wrapped some of those pieces in little parcels of paper, that
it might the sooner seem to be some woman's purse, who use such kind of
fiddling and fooling with their money.

After this business was thus ouer-past about some two days after, upon
Wednesday toward the Evening, I went to visit my Friar; who against my coming
thither, had provided me a Coffer full of clothes, which might very well
out-weare ten years, and spending money besides for some days. He gave it me
with a cheerful countenance, and willed me to return again unto him the
next day: For he had something else to say unto me, and he did not doubt,
but it should be much for my good. I did so; repairing unto him at the time
appointed: Then did he ask me, whether I could write or no? I informed him of
my sufficiency in that kind. Whereupon he told me, that there was a certain
Gentlewoman, whose Husband was in the Indies, who did much desire to have such
a one as I was, to follow her business, and to have a care to husband her
estate both in the City, and in the Country, and to be true and faithful in
those things that she should commit to my charge; and that therefore I should
deal plainly with him, and truly tell him, whether I could like of this
course or no? for that, according to my answer, he should seek, or not seek
to settle me there, as he saw I stood affected.

I (after that I had given him thanks) said unto him; My good father, that
which appertains to my personal pains, to my solicitude, diligence, and
fidelity, wherewith I ought to serve her, this I am able to tender unto you;
but I must tell you withal, that I am not of this Country, nor have any
known acquaintance in these parts. And therefore, if this Gentlewoman shall
put her goods into my hands, and that I must have the disposing of them, she
will expect that some body shall be bound for my truth; but I am not able to
give her any security; and this is likely to be the only rub that I know. I
leave it therefore to your fatherly consideration, what is to be done in this
case, craving your advice therein. He told me, that he would be my Surety;
and that if that were all that I stood upon, that stop should not damme up
the way, wishing me not to forgo so fair an offer. I accepted it very
willingly. For I saw, that by this means, my business was in a good
forwardness, and would find legs to go well on with it. For there is not
any thing, that does sooner deceive a just and an honest-minded man, then the
simulated sanctity of a wicked and counterfeit Rogue.

CHAPTER VII.
Guzman de Alfarache, being preferred to a Gentlewomans service, robs her; Upon
this theft he is apprehended, and condemned to the Galleys during life.

SO great is the force of Custom, as well in the roughness of Of Custom, and
the force thereof.
troubles and afflictions, as in the smooth waters of happiness and
prosperity, that some ease in the miserable, does lighten the load, and does
in some sort help to make them seem more facill in their sufferance; but the
greater burden lights upon those that have lived well and happily; there is no
grief to this; comfort hardly takes hold on them: Fortune cannot do a man
more harm, then when she has invested him with a habit of Happiness, to
dis-robe him thereof, and that disgracefully: for this vn-expected privation
makes it the more insupportable.

This Custom is that uncontrolled Lord, that prescribes, and proscribes Laws
at his pleasure; infirming some, and confirming others; ratifying this, and
dis-annulling that. He (like a powerful Prince) prohibits here, and
establishes there; and consequently, to that side, whereunto he leanes, he
carries all after him, as well in the pursuit of Vice, as in the practice of
Virtue. So that, if he apply himself to goodness, he easily runs the
danger of losing it; and adhering to that which is evil, it will hardly
afterward be rooted out. There is no force that can subdue it; but has power
and command over all humane actions.

Some have called Custom a second Nature; but experience teaches us, that its
power is greater then that of Nature; For Custom will overthrow Nature with
her little finger. She is no body in her hands: if she affect sour and bitter
things, with such artifice does she conserve and sweeten them; that as if they
were not bitter at all, she makes them to become sweet and pleasant. But if she
clap in close with Truth, and link her self in League with her, she is then
the mightiest Monarch that is, and her Fort is inexpugnable. Who but she makes
the poor Shepherd to live alone by himself in the solitary fields, in the
depth of the low Valleys, and on the tops of high Mountains, amidst Bushes,
and Thorns, Woods, and Rocks, opposing himself against the unmercifulness
and cruelty of a sharp and rigorous Winter, suffering terrible Storms,
continual Raines, bitter Winds, and piercing Airs? And in the Summer, a
parching, and scorching Sun, which does as it were roast, and sindge the
Trees, burn Stones, and melt Metals? And its force being so great, that it
tameth the fiercest and wildest beasts, and those that are most venomous,
bridling their fury, and allaying their poison, Time at last overcomes
Custom; it is he, and none but he, that works upon it, and to him only it is
subject.

For comparing Custom with Time, her long and strong prescriptions are Custom
must yield to Time.
but as Spiders webs, made to catch an Elephant: For, if Custom be powerful,
Time is prudent and wife. And as Wit goes beyond Strength; so Time subdueth
Custom. After night, comes day; after light, darkness: They tread one upon
the heels of another; and the shadow that follows after the body, and growing
greater and greater, contests with him for superiority. The fire wageth war
with the Air; the Earth, with the Water, and all the Elements go together by
the ears, and are at a perpetual enmity one with another. The Sun
generates the Gold, it gives it its essence, and its life. In like manner, Time
pursues, prosecutes, and fortifies Custom. It makes and it marres, working
wisely with silence, according to the selfsame order, as she is wont by
continued drops, to hollow the hardest stone.

Custom is of others, not ours; but Time is our own. It is he that
discovers the thread, manifesting what is most secret, and by the fire of
occasion, makes an essay and trial of his Art. By experience, he teaches us
the quilates and aloy of that gold, and shows us the end whereunto his
pretensions tend; And declared himself at last to be one, that never took
any pity of me. For, in a very short space, he made that public, which I had
labored with all diligence to keep hid and secret. All that which has been
said, was verified truly of my self in its proper terms and cases. O how
often treating of my businesses, trading of my wares, putting money out to use,
framing nets to catch fools, by raising of my prices, selling my commodities
far dearer to him that went upon trust, then him that paid ready money,
carrying always my Beads in my hand, my countenance composed, and still the
same; with a Truly, and a Verily in my mouth (from whence never any truth yet
came) I did openly (according to my old Custom) coozen and steal from as many
as I had to do withal! but Time did discover all my rogueries.

How often, and by how many, have I been heard to say; I promise you The
common course of Tradesmen.
Sir, that it stood me in more, I cannot afford it you at that price, I vow
and protest unto you, that I get not a Royal by you, in all this whole parcel
of Wares that you have bought of me? I may go shut up my shop, if I make many
such markets. And if I have let you have it better cheap then I could afford
it; it is because I am to make some payment of moneys, and if it were not for
that, you should not have them at this rate. And the same course I took in a
thousand other things of the like nature, not having any other use then for
moneys; more then from their hands to mine, to gain a hundred in a hundred.

How often likewise, when I was in my prosperity, during this my good Guzman
delivers some things worthy our consideration, but to be avoided by us.
fortune, and studying daily to grow greater and greater (only that I might
get my self a good opinion in the world, merely for vainglory, and not for
the love of God: for I did not so much as dream upon him, nor think upon any
thing else, save only to be well thought of, and to have the peoples eyes upon
me, who taking me to be a charitable minded man, and a giver of alms, would
gather there-vpon, that I was a man of a good Conscience, and that I had a care
of my souls health, and therefore might the better trust me) did I cause a
great number of poor, morning after morning to come to my door, and keeping
them there two or three hours, that there might be good notice taken of them,
and seen over and over by those that past along by my house, did I afterward
send away with (God he knows) a poor slender alms, whilst with that no
nada, that thing of nothing which they received from me, I did gain my self a
good reputation, which like a stalking horse, I made use of, the better to get
other men's goods into my hands? How often have I divided a loaf of bread in
twain, (when I was no whit hungry, but as full as my belly could hold) and of
that which remained, as if it were a thing to be lost, or to be cast away to
the dogs, did I part in a thousand pieces, and bestow it afterward on the
poor? Nor did I give it unto those, who, I knew had most need of it; but to
those, by whose mouths, I knew, it would be most spoken of, and divulged to
the world. And how often (having a bloody heart, and a damnable intention,
being naturally cowardly, timorous, and feeble) did I pardon, and put up
injuries, putting them in public to Gods account, mine own thoughts secretly
condemning me, did I in secret dissemble them, not sticking to say in public,
God be thanked for it; when I was truly inwardly offended, and that no other
thing in the world did hinder my revenge, but that I was fearful, and found
my self unable to put it in execution? But the coals thereof were alive, and
did burn within my soul, whose flames I had much ado to suppress. How often
at other times, did I show my self an abstinent and orderly faster, not for
any other thing in the world, then to seem to be such a one, and that I might
spend less, and spare the more? But when I did eat at another man's cost, or
spend upon another man's Purse, I did then swallow down my victuals like a
Cormorant, then I had a Wolf in my belly, and was still afraid, that I should
never have enough. I did continually visit the Churches, I would often both go
and send to the Prisons, only to get my self credit amongst the Officers
there, and such other Ministers as belonged unto them, and not for to do any
good offices for the Prisoners, or any grateful work unto God. But rather to
the end, that if it should be my ill hap at one time or other to come thither,
being formerly known by them, they might use me the more kindly, and bear me
the better respect. If I repaired to the Hospitals, if I went upon Pilgrimage,
if I did frequent places of Devotion, kissing, nay, gnawing as it were the
Altars, out of a hungry zeal; if I would not lose a Sermon, nor a Iubilee, nor
any public devotion, all those steps that I trod, and all that pains that I
took, were only directed to the getting me a good name, to the intent that
under the color thereof, I might the better coozen my neighbor, and take his
cloak from off his back.

Moreover, I must not forget to tell you, that diverse things were now and then
told me, and those very secret ones, touching such, or such a person; the which
were kept so close, that when afterward, when I did chance to talk with those
persons, whom they concerned, counselling them to leave off such and such
courses, or rather correcting and reproving them for it, they imagined of me,
that I had come to the knowledge of them by some divine revelation. And so by
indirect ways, and a seeming kind of holiness in me, I gave them to
understand their faults: by which means, I got my self a great deal of
reputation, especially amongst the women, who after these things, and Gypsies,
run as swift as the wind; being facill in believing, and nimble in
publishing. Out of whose mouths, my praise and commendation went spreading it
self abroad.

Many a time and often, when some poor body was willing to use my help, making
especial choice of me, as one that was well esteemed and reputed of all men, I
would stand in the open street with a Dish in my hand, publicly begging Alms
for him, of those that I was acquainted withal: and having got a pretty round
sum of money, I gave him the least part of it, and kept the rest to my self.
I lickt up the Cream, and left him the Whey.

When I was minded to do some notable villainy, the first thing that I went
about, for the better effecting of such a business, was to get me a very fair
and goodly large Jesuitical cloak, wherewith to cover it; and for the better
dissembling of it, I would put on all the gestures of outward Sanctity, as
submission, mortification, and good example; having the true turning up of the
white of mine eye, a sober look, a grave utterance, seldom spetting, but when
I was to speak to the purpose, a broad-waking Hat, a little Band, and a less
pair of Breeches. And with this kind of habit, and posture, I bore the Ball
before me, and tript up the heels of all those that stood in my way. Which if
in nothing else, yet was it plainly to be seen in this; that I had therewith
so easily deceived this holy man, this good honest Friar, that wished me so
well, nay had already done so well for me. Nor did I only do him this harm
alone, but a greater mischief followed upon the neck of it. That he by no
means lost that good opinion, which the world had of him: But say he had not
lost it; and admit, that he kept it whole and sound, as before; yet, what a
villainous instrument was I, and what just cause had I given of preiudicing, and
that in no mean measure, the credit and reputation of so honest and innocent a
creature as he was?

Well, he had now placed me with this Gentlewoman, being verily persuaded of
me, that I would do her all true and faithful service, as he might very well
presume by those particular Actions, which I had made show of unto him of this
my rare and singular (shall I say knauerie, or) perfection? Well, what so e're
I was, I am sure he took me to be a very honest man. He gave his word for me,
and trusted me with much of his own: I could not lack any thing, if it lay in
his power to pleasure me, so good an opinion had he conceived of me. She
willingly (upon his recommendation) received Guzman entertained into service by
a Gentlewoman.
me into her service. She trusted me with her wealth and her family. She had
ordained a very good lodging for me, provided a delicate soft bed for me, and
all other necessaries that were fitting for me. She used me in all things
else, not as a servant, but as a Kinsman, and as such a one, for whose sake,
she did verily believe, that God would throw many favors upon her. Sometimes
she would entreat me, to say an Aue-Mary for the health and good success of
her Husband. I made answer to all her demands, as if I had been some Oracle,
and with such a deal of mortification, that I made her many times to shead
tears. By this means I came to coozen her, to rob her, and which was worst of
all, to iniure her, by wronging her house. For you shall understand, that this
Gentlewoman had a certain fair white slave (none I wisse of these black
Moors, but a handsome well-fauoured Wench) to her Maid-seruant, whom for a
long time, I took to be freeborn, and she likewise seemed to be a good, and
holy creature. But in very truth, she was such a one, that she and I might very
well shake hands; of us both, there was never a barrel better Herring: Well,
were she better or worse then my self, be she what she will be, let it suffice
you, she and I had tumbled together Guzman lies with his Mistresses maid.
upon one bed. I know not how we did smell out one another, that in so short a
time, we had grown to be so well acquainted. For within some few days that I
had been in the house, there was no ho with her, I could not keep her out of
my Chamber, would I never so feign, but she would come in whether I would or
no. To all the rest of the servants, she seemed to be a Saint, and looked as
though butter would not have melted in her mouth; but with me she showed her
self most loose and dissolute, as if she had been bred up in some Brothell
house, or trained to this gear in the public Stews, yet still carried her
self with that wisdom and discretion, that none of the house, except my
self, no not her Mistress could come to know, or the least way to suspect,
that there was any such secret business between us. Besides, she did so
cherish me, and make so much of me, that my Chest was never without good store
of Collations, and other sweet-meates. So that my Chamber, was like a
Comfit-makers shop. She furnished me with a great deal of fine Linen, as
white as the curd, neatly folded up, neat and sweet it was. And her Mistress
was glad to see it; for she took us both to be Saints. She likewise gave me
money to spend, not knowing whence she had it, nor how she came by it, or from
whose hands she received it.

I had a glimpse of some things: but because I would not fall from those good
terms wherein I stood, I would not be too curious in the search of them; as
well that I might not lose her company, while I continued there; as also that I
might thereby oblige her the more unto me: I went intertaining her with fair
words, and good hopes, telling her, that when time should serve, I would seek
to redeem her out of her captivity, and afterward make her my Wife. This
seasoned the pot, made her rowze up her spirits, and like a Spaniell, to wait
diligently upon me, and to serve me in any thing that she thought would
please me. For, considering the love which I feigned to be are unto her,
(though she were a crafty subtle Wench) she did evermore make sure account of
me, as if I were not a freeman, and she a Slave. And yet not so free, as you
think neither, having a Wife (for ought I knew to the contrary) still alive.

My Mistress knew nothing concerning her own estate and wealth, nor did finger
any other moneys, then what I gave her. All things that were in the City, went
through my hands; I likewise had the command of all her stock abroad in the
Country, and did take and gather in all the fruits and profits thereof. For my
design was, to make a reasonable good round booty, and so, get me gone, to
seek out a new world. I had a great mind to go to the Indies, and did but
watch for an opportunity to imbarke my self, howsoever it should afterward
fall out with me. But I could not handsomely put this blow home. For my
Mistress foreseeing her certain ruin, for that her Farmers and Tenants had
told her, that they had paid in their rents to me; the Shepherds, that I had
sold her flocks; the Baylife of her Vineyards, that I had conuaid all her
Wines out of their Vaults and Sellars, where they were wont to be kept; and
that of all this one pennyworth thereof was not come to her purse; she
resolved with her self to communicate this matter in private only to one
Gentleman that was her near kinsman. She then acquainted him with all that had
passed, and what an ill account I had made her, entreating him to apply some
convenient remedy for the same. He, without speaking so much as a word thereof
unto me, when as I was going one evening to cast up my reckning, and to devise
with my self, how I might make clean work of all that my Mistress had, not
thinking (God wot) on any such thing, being deuoyd of all care, and free from
the least suspicion of any such matter, the weather being hot, and my self
very drowzie, I fell fast asleep.

Now, whilst I was thus taking my rest, and thinking no body any harm, Guzman
arrested and carried to Prison.
an Alguazil comes in suddenly upon me, takes hold on me, and without telling
me why, or wherefore; (for that (said he) I should know hereafter at better
leisure) he carried me away to prison. The business was thus carried, that
neither our house, nor the street, should be in a hurry and tumult, by any
stir or coil that I should make, when I should come to know by whose order I
was apprehended, and committed. I went along very sad and heavy, and knew not
in the world what to think of it; one while devising with my self, whether
this my Commitment were by virtue of some Requisitoria, or Commission come out
of Italy? Whether it were at the suite of my Creditors in Castile? Or for some
of my new thefts, that I had so lately committed in that City, which perhaps
for want of good carriage, were now come to light? And albeit every one of
these had weight enough to press down my heart, and to make it sink under so
many, and such heavy burdens; yet did it grieve me more then all the rest,
that I should now lie no more at rack and manger, as I was wont to do; and
that together with my good name, I should likewise lose my credit and
estimation, and that men would not trust me, as they had done heretofore. But
what remedy but patience? But seeing it was no better, God be thanked it was
no worse. For this misfortune befell me just at such a time when as my Crown
was shaven, and had not any thing worth the speaking, that was to be found
either about me, or at home in my lodging. For in regard that my Mother was a
single woman, and lived alone by her self, by a little and a little, I carried
all that I had scrap't together, to her, and she kept it for me. Afterward
they broke open my Chest, but found nothing in it, but a Bull of the last
year, and a few of old rags. Whereupon, they came to prison to take an
account of me; giving them so bad a one, as might well be presumed from such
a one as I was, who would always receive, but never pay.

I did not give them such a Bead-roll, as they do, that pray upon their Beads.
They laid great sums to my charge, but could meet with nothing but Blankes.
They made strict inquisition to find them out; They looked here, and they
looked there, but they could not light upon any thing, for I had not so much as
one farthing of it in my custody. When they saw that, they got them to the
Friar, and gave him a large account of the case how it stood with them.

He (like a wise man) did neither condemn, nor absolve me, till he should
hear, what I could say for my self, that he might the better judge thereof,
when he had heard both parties. He came to the prison to visit me, and
talking with me about this business, I deny'de all, and stood stiffely to it;
affirming, that they had suborned false witnesses against me; and that I was as
innocent as the child that was newborn; and that no man knew less thereof
then I did. And therefore my hope was in God, and that he would help me; and
that, as he had freed Joseph and Susanna; so would he defend the justness of
my cause, and would not suffer the uprightness of my dealing to perish:
Acknowledging withal, that this, and much more chastisement my sins had
deserved, for many other my former offenses, which I had committed against his
divine Majesty.

The good religious man knew not what to do, nor to which of us he should
give most credit He was much perplexed within himself, and stood doubtful to
which side he should lean. But for the present, he inclined to that part
that was falling, seeking to support the weakest. He gave me comfortable words,
promising his best care and pains in my defense, recommending my businesses
unto God, who would (when he saw fit) free me out of my troubles, and afford
me his helping hand. He took his leave of me; from thence he went to the
Escriuanos office, for to abonar, and make good my Cause, desiring him for
charities-sake, that he would have an especial care of it, and look well
into it, telling him that he was verily persuaded, that I was a religious
honest man, one that feared God, and was a Saint upon earth.

But when the Escriuano heard him lash out so far into my commendation,
laughing heartily thereat, he pulled forth some Processes, that had been put
in against me, and making a relation unto him of the particular points therein
contained, laying there before him, what a lewd kind of fellow I was; the
thefts that I had committed; and the coozening tricks that I had used; the
poor Friar was ashamed of himself. There-vpon, this good holy Father, with
all the sincerity and simplicity in the world, up and told him, what had past
betwixt him and me, and by what means he came to the first knowledge of me,
and how, and for what cause, he gave me so much trust and credit; not
thinking (good man) thereby, to do me any harm; but did only tell him this,
that he might be the better persuaded of me, and that he himself had some
reason to speak for me, and to do me all the lawful favor he could.

When the Escriuano had heard this Tale, he grew Hart-angry, and his soul was
vexed at this my villainy, to see that I had no more grace with me, but to make
so grave a person a stale for my roguery; and that I should put so gross a
jest upon so good a man. He was herewith so incensed against me, and his
choler did rise in that abundance, that if he had had the Law in his own
hands, I had presently been hanged out of the way, without any more ado. He
left the Office, and went presently to the Te^e, or Deputy Lieutenant, to whom
he made a large relation of all the whole matter, and set it down all under
his own hand, and finding himself as much affronted with this wrong I had
done the Fryet, and that the parties aggrieued had past over all their power
unto him to prosecute it for them, as if it had been his own cause, they laid
more and more to my charge, forming another new process against me of far
greater aggrauation then the former; and commanding me stricter imprisonment,
willing the laylor to put me down into the dungeon.

This unfortunate day did not catch me so naked, that I wanted money to be able
to draw out my thread to its length, and to wage Law with them. But the Prison
is of the nature and quality of fire; it consumes all that (...).
come unto it, converting it into its own proper substance. Large experiences
had I made thereof, and by my account I found it to be a Winde-Mill, and a
May Game for children. There is not any one that comes thither, but is a
Miller, and grinds there; crying out, that his imprisonment is but for a thing
of nothing, a toy, a trifle; when as sometime it so falls out, that they are
committed thither for three or four murders, for a robbery upon the Highway,
or for some other the like foul and odious offenses. It is a place where
fools set up their rest, a forced trial of a man's patience, a deare-bought
experience, a too late repentance, a proouall of a man's friends, and a
reuengement of his enemies, a confused Commonwealth, a short Hell, a long
Death, a haven of Sighs, a valley of Tears, a house of Madmen, a very Bedlame,
where every one cries out, and loves to hear himself talk of his own
foolish and wild prankes. And all of them being guilty, not a man of them that
will confess he is faulty, nor that his crime is any thing heinous.

They that are prisoners, are like unto your Grapes on a Vine Bower, which as
soon as they wax ripe, there is not a sprigge or bough of them which is not
laden with Waspes, who insensibly (they having no feeling of it) suck all the
juice and sweetness out of them, leaving only the Caskes and Husks of them
empty, hanging upon the Arbor; And as are the Grapes, so is the swarm; if
great and more, the more Waspes; if few and small, the less. As it is with
this Vine, and its Grapes; so is it with those that are led to Prison.

The Officers and Ministers, that belong thereunto, come thick and threefold
about him, clinging so close unto him, and sucking so hard from him, that they
never leave him, till they have drawn him dry, and taken all his pyth and
substance from him. And when the poor Prisoner has not longer where-withall
to feed their hungry maw, and that they have squeezed all his sweetness out
of him, they fly away from him, and forget him, as if there had never been any
such man, leaving him to himself poor, and comfortless. And this is as it
were but a flea-biting, and a little evil, in comparison of a greater, which
is too usual and common amongst them. For if the prisoner be poor, and have
no money, they presently pronounce sentence against him, leaving him stark
naked, and undone.

As soon as they consigne and deliver him over to the Master Keeper, or
Touching layors, and Keepers of Prisons.
head-Iaylor, who has the keeping and disposing of the vpper-Wards, and the
best lodgings, they give him that intertainment as his purse shall deserve. For
that Keeper or Iaylor does like him that buys; who has no respect to the
quality of him that sels, but to the thing that he sells: so to him it
matters not, whether the prisoner be more one, then another; Noble, or base;
Gentleman, or Clown; all is one for that: He looks only unto that which he
gives him. When his Commitment is not a matter of importance, nor meriting
corporal punishment, and is not of that heinous nature, as murder, theft, the
foul sin, and other such like, they leave him at large to take the pleasure
of the prison, always provided, that they pay him well for this his liberty. I
was well used at the first, (for my cause was not criminal) and handsomely
lodged, before that I had given security either to satisfy, or answer to that
debt, wherewithal I was charged. By this time they all knew me, and all of us
understood one another well enough, we were all Camerades, and hayle fellow,
well met, one with another. I gave them content, and stayed below amongst them,
talking and passing away the time with them, but had evermore an eye, to see if
I could safely get to the door, and stood still, watching an opportunity,
when I might conveniently do it, and so give them the slip.

But upon my first apprehending, as soon as I was come within sight of The
fashion of Attourneys, and Sollicitours, and the like Officers of your Courts
of Justice.
the prison; as also, after that I was committed, there presently flockt about
me twenty several Proctors, Attourneys, and Sollicitours, (who lived by the
sins of the people) who with their pen and Paper, (which they never went
without) took both my name, and the cause of my imprisonment; all of them
making it a matter of nothing, and an easy suite to go through with. One of
them would tell me, that the Judge was his very good friend, and did favor all
the causes that he brought before him; another, that he had a great interest
in the public Notary; a third, that within two hours he would get me bailed;
a fourth, that my business was a toy, a mere trifle, a thing of no
consideration in the world, and that for six Royals, he would instantly
undertake to free me. Every one of them would make himself Master of my
cause, saying, that it did properly belong unto him, for that he had
accompanied me, and come along with me, from the time of my Arrest. This man I
entertained, for his plea of prevention, being unwilling to cross that
Proverb; of First come, first served. Whereupon I entreated him, that he
would call such an Escriuano, a friend of mine unto me. Another, for that he
was the first that put pen to paper, and had drawn my Petition for me to the
Teniente. But to my self, I laughed at them all. For I knew them well enough,
and the manner of their proceeding. For they only live by what they can get
and wring from a man beforehand; but afterward you shall not draw them along,
with two yoke of Oxen, they will so hang the Arse. And there was one of them
that having a Power or Warrant to free a Thief, was not ashamed to ask him
money for to make his Interrogatories, after that he should be condemned to the
Galleys.

Thus, all of them striving, which of them should be employed in my business,
there comes me rushing in violently through the midst of them, a very bold and
confident fellow, that thought to rule the roast, and to carry all away before
him, one that had been my Proctor heretofore in criminal causes, and said
unto me; What, Sir, are you here? I told him, yes. Which question he might
have saved; for he saw I was sure enough. Then he asked me, What was the cause
of my imprisonment? When I had told it him, he replyde: Tush, Laugh and be
merry, Sir, take no care for this, it is a toy, a trifle, I warrant you Sir,
we will take order for this, and therefore let it never trouble you. Have you
any money, Sir, that I may carry it to the Escriuano? I will poast presently
with a Petition to the Teniente, that you may put in Sureties to answer the
matter, and in the mean time to have your liberty to follow your business.
And if he shall refuse to grant you provision in this Case, we will have a Writ
of remove, to bring the matter into the open Hall, and those that assist there
in Counsel, shall presently give order for your release. I shall speak to one
of them, who is my singular good Lord, and I dare pawn my word to you, that
you shall not tarry here above half a day.

When the others heard this, they said, Ha? how now? what is this? is the wind
in that door? Here is a pretty kind of form of framing a Petition withal
my heart. Is this the course you mean to take? We have been some twenty of
us and upward, these two long hours and better taking pains in this
business, and will you now take the same out of our hands? Shall the
hindermost dog bear away the Hare? Must he now follow the suite?

My Proctor there-vpon, made them this answer; My Masters, had you been
writing and laboring about this business these two months and more; yet not
withstanding upon my coming unto him, I am the man that must go through with
it. For this Gentleman is my very good friend, and I am to dispatch all his
businesses. And therefore a Gods name ye may be gone; and let my Clyent alone.

When they heard him say so, they replyde unto him; O what a sweet and seemly
manner of negociating is this? What a fair flourish does he make? Where has
he washed his hands, that he should shave us on this fashion, and carry away
this cause so cleanely? You may be gone, Sir, and it please you; for this
Gentleman knows reason, and will intertaine him in his cause that he has most
mind to: and therefore what need so many words? In conclusion, one said I; and
the other said no; and in the end, they differr'd so long about it, that they
grew at last so hot and so angry one with another, that they began to rip up
each others faults, and to tell (without any other bodies help) who they were;
there was not that spot in their practice, which they did not lay open to view;
nor that stain in their life, which they did not discover; showing how, and in
what manner they did coozen the poor prisoners, and pick their money out of
their purses. Which was a Dialogue (for those that heard it) of excellent
intertainment, and passing good mirth; for that they were truths, represented
to the life. And this (I assure you) is a common Trade amongst them, and this
coozening course they take at all hours, and with all persons, as well
prisoners, as others.

Now, when this heat was ouer-past, and all was quiet; I came to my old
Proctor, entreating him to do what was fitting, and I would see him well
contented for his pains. I gave him four Royals to begin withal: which when
he had fingred, I could see my friend no more in fifteen days after. I knew
well enough before, what he meant to do; and that he had no other errand unto
me but this, to lick something from me, though it were never so little, the
better to secure the seething of the Pot, against the next day following, and
to have where-withall to go to the Marketplace. But I was driven perforce to
make choice of him, because I stood in fear of him: Who, for that he was well
acquainted with all my old causes, if I should have refused him, or showed him
any but the least unkindness, and that he should have taken a stitch there-vpon
against me, he would have discovered the pot of Roses, and thrown open the
cloak that covered all my knaueries, and would in two hours have heapt upon
me a hundred several accusations. So that partly choosing him, (by refusing
the rest) and partly leaving him, (in the poorness of his Fee) as well to have
him hold his peace, as to get him to follow my business; for I must have paid
some body; I held it the best course to make him my Proctor, though this were
not a business that required much following; but did mainely consist on matter
of money. But afterward when I began to be examined, and thoroughly sifted of
that my audacious delusion, and imposture, which I had put upon that good
Religious Friar, and that they came to compare cause with cause, then did I
need a Proctor.

Now things began to go on in good earnest; they called me up, and went about
to clap bolts on my legs: but those I redeemed with my money. I paid the
Keeper, who had the keeping of them, and the young fellow, that was to put them
on, had his Fee likewise of me. My Escriuano now often visits me; my Petitions
run up and down from place to place; Give me thus much, says my
Sollicitour; Where is my Fee, quoth my Advocate? Thus by little and little,
like so many Horse-leeches, they went sucking all my blood from me, till they
had scarce left me one drop. So that now I was like a cluster of Grapes, that
was quite dry'de away, and withered to nothing. Yet notwithstanding all these
miseries, it is not fit, that I should pass over in silence, that which passed
betwixt my Wench, and my self. For as much that every morning, as soon as it
was day, she rayned down Manna upon me; in her I found some help, for that
she furnished me with all things that were necessary for me; and when the
rigor of my imprisonment was upon me, being sentenced by the Teniente to the
Gallyes, she sent me a letter: which, for that it is a pleasant and a witty
one, I thought good to make it known unto you; as also, because it is not
amiss, to slacken the string, and unbend the bow, by recounting of something,
that may serve for intertainment. Which letter spoke after this manner:

To Sen^or Guzman de Alfarache, my hearts-ioy, and my hopes comfort.
MY dear Love; (though now to my great grief, a poor condemned Slave) A
letter of Guzmans wench lamenting his misfortunes.
I write these lines to no other end unto thee, save only to persuade thee to
cast away sorrow, and to take comfort unto thee. Let it suffice (sweetheart)
that I have none; and let me alone mourn for thee: for ever since Saint James
his day, about two of the clock in the afternoon, when thou wast first
apprehended whilst thou lay'st quietly asleep, who (hard-hearted as they
were) would not let thee take out thy nap, my Soul has much sorrowed for
thee. But that which farther increases my affliction, is; that this sad news
is brought to day to my ears, that the Teniente has adjudged thee to two
hundred stripes, and ten years continuance in the Gallyes. God lash his
shoulders for it with whips of wire, and the knottiest, and seuerest scourges
of his wrath; Let him live a slave all the days of his life in the Galleys,
and then rot, and dye. It well appears, that he wishes thee not so well as I
do; nor knows the bitterness of those tears that I shed for thee. Little does
he think how dear thy love costs me.

Iuliana wishes me to tell thee, that thou should foorth-with appeal from
him. Appeal twenty times, and more (if more shall seem fitting unto thee) and
take care for nothing; for (by the grace of God) I doubt not, but all shall go
well enough in the end: And then, this Tyrannical Teniente shall see (though
it grieve him) that thou shall not for ever remain a prisoner to his pride:
for I swear and vow unto thee by this my Mulata, is a maid child, that is
borne of a Negra, and a fair man; and so on the contrary. And because it is an
extraordinary mixtur^, they compare such a one is a Mule.
Mulata face, that I will make him to remember as long as he lives, the tears
which he has drawn from mine eyes; which have been so many, that I had much
ado to keep them from the worlds knowledge; And I should have powered them
forth, till they should have grown to be great rivers, had I not feared, I
should have been drowned in them, and so never have inioyed thee more. By the
faith that I owe unto thee, I will never cease weeping, till the fountains of
my tears swell so high, that I may come swimming unto thee, and draw thee out
of that dungeon, whereunto my Soul is chayned, and remains there prisoner
with thee. Iuliana can tell thee, how I tore my hair, when I heard this bad
news. By her I have sent thee twenty Royalls, that thou may follow thy
suite, be as merry as thou may, and that thou would think on me, howbeit
I knew the time, when such ceremonies needed not between thee and me: For
had I been but a minute of an hour from thee, staying no longer away, then
while I had put a few coals under the pot, thou did think it a thousand
years. Remember (my sweet Slave, my pretty Cage-bird) that I both love, and
adore thee: And receive this green girdle from my hands, in token of the good
hope which I have, that mine eyes shall quickly see thee set free. And if for
to supply thy wants, it were needful that I should be sold, brand this my face
with two hot yrons, and set a Slaves mark in either cheek, and make sale of
me in the open market: for assure thy self, I shall esteem it the greatest
happiness that can be fall me, that my bondage may work thy freedom.

Thou tell me, that Soto, thy Camarade is ill, and was never well, since the
Hangman dealt so roughly with him, and strand the strings so hard, that he
made him change his note; racking as much from him, as there needed no farther
confession; it grieves me to the very heart, that a man of his spirit, should
be so cowed by such a vile and base fellow, that for very fear, he should be
forced to confess, not only his own, but other men's faults. Commend me unto
him (though unknown) and tell him, that I am heartily sorry for him; share part
of these Conserues with him, which I send you, which (my dear Love) I have
made a shift to save for thee.

Tomorrow is our kneading day, wherein we must mould up our bread, and put the
loaves into the Oven; then shall I make thee such a friendly cake, and butter
it so finely for thee, that thou shall not be ashamed to bid thy best friends
to the eating of it.

Send me your foul linen, and shift daily, that you may keep your self
clean and sweet: For since that these mine arms cannot embrace thee, they
shall tire and weary out themselves in thy service; as being most willing to
do any thing, that may give thee content. My Mistress swears that she will
hang thee, because she says, you have robbed her, of you know what; but I am
sure, you have robbed another Proverb.
of more then she; of I know what, you know; To a wise man, A Buen
entendedor, pocas palabras.
a word is sufficient.

If Usher Gomez shall come to see thee, talk not with him, or if thou do,
be very circumspect, what thou say unto him: For he is a man, that carries
two faces under one hood; He seeks to insinuate himself into other men's
bosoms, only to fifth them: And besides, he is a great friend to a cup of wine;
And a drunken tongue (which I neeed not to tell thee) will blab out all it
knows. I advertise thee of all: And because this is for no other end, I here
end: yet never end to pray unto God, that he will preserve thee for me, and
that he will free thee out of this filthy dungeon. From this thy chamber,
about an hour before midnight, my cont emplation (sweet heart) being solely
and wholly bestowed on thy best-beloued self.

Thy Slave till death.

This wenches oil maintained the week alive, all the time of my troubles,
which otherwise would have gone out. For I lived at a great charge, my expenses
were many, and though I had made my harvest, and gathered a great deal
together, yet all was melted away, like salt in water, or butter against the
fire. My Mother likewise, when she saw in what bad terms my suite stood,
told me; That she was robbed of all that she had; but as I did conceive (and I
think truly) her meaning was to hold that fast which she had, when she saw it
was to no purpose to let it go. Whereupon, I was enforced to do as the rest
did, and to follow the current. My plea still went on, and I wanted money to
maintain my cause. I could not corrupt the Escriuano, (for I had nothing,
where-withall to bribe him) The Judge, he was so highly incenst against me,
that there was no hope of working him; My Proctor, he slept in the business,
and would not stir a foot; and my Solicitor fled as far from me, as his legs
would carry him. There was now no more juice in my bunch of grapes, the Wasps
were now gone their way, and had left me all alone; they had pronounced
Sentence against me, the effect whereof was, That I should be set upon an Ass,
and so ride stripped to the waste, round about the Town, receive so many
stripes; the Crier proclayming my offense before me; and this done, to remain
for six years in the Gallyes.

When I saw I must be made a Gally-slaue, and that there was no redemption of
this my punishment, I put on a brazen face on the matter, and grew careless of
any man's either sight, or censure. I played my part without fear, or shame, as
being now the Kings Slave, and out of all other men's reach and danger, they
having nothing more to do with me. Yet was it some comfort unto me, that my
Camarade Soto was condemned to the like punishment, and that we should, like a
couple of loving Curres, be ty'de together in one pair of couples. And as we
were fellows and Companions in one Prison, and in one and the same Dungeon,
and had run both of us one and the same Carreere; so was I very willing, that
there might have been that good amity between us, and that true love that
ought to have been; which if he had been the same man he should have been, it
had gone better both with him and me, then now it did. But (as you shall see
hereafter) he played the Traitor with me.

He was a notable squeeze-grape, a huge quaffer, his glass should be always
brim-full, and he would up with it de profundis; his usual draught was a large
pint and a half: and having drunk liberally before he came to the rack,
thinking that would have made him less sensible of his pain, he confessed at
the first, whatsoever they would have him. Seeing I had now received my doom,
and that there was not any remedy, nor the least hope thereof, for my
redemption, I was willing to try my fortune; but I never had her yet to friend:
So that it had been a miracle, if she had not fayl'd me now. I feigned my
self sick for some fifteen days, never came out of the dungeon, nor rose
from my bed.

At the fifteen days end, having provided my self of woman's apparel, and
having shau'd my Beard clean away with a Razour, putting on those Guzman
seeks to break prison.
clothes, casting a Mantle over them, and painting my face, dawbing it first
with white, and then giving it a little tincture of Red; now when night was in,
I past through the two upper doors, that belonged to the Galleries, and neither
of those Porters said a word, but let me pass quietly, yet were they both of
them quicke-sighted enough, and had their eyes clear and sound.

But when I came down to the door that opens to the street, and was ready to
put my foot over the threshold, a blinke-ey'de Porter, that had but one Guzman
prevented of his purpose.
eye, (would to God he had been blind on the other) claps his arm athwart
the Posterne, kept me back, looked upon me, and presently knew me: Whereupon,
he shuts to the door. I had provided my self of a good short arming sword,
one, that if need had been, would have done the deed, which I carried closely
about me, if I should chance to be put to my shifts, and have occasion to use
it. But as ill luck would have it, I bore it about me at such a time, when as
it could do me no good, nor stand me in any stead in the world. This was such
an aggrauation of my fault, that my accusation was now made criminal.

Well, they turned me up stayres, and fulminating a new Process against me,
Guzman condemned during life to the Galleys.
they condemned me to the Galleys, during life. And it was no small courtesy,
that they did me, that they did not make me ride in those clothes up and
down the City, as they had heretofore done the like disgrace unto others. I
thought to have avoided danger, and fell upon my death.

CHAPTER VIII.
Guzman de Alfarache is taken out of the Prison of Seuill, to be carried to
the Port, to be put into the Galleys. He recounteth that which befell him on
the way; as likewise in the Galleys.

I Am a Gally-Slaue, and am now come to the end, for which I was ordained,
whereunto my lewd courses were the means to bring me. I must now lead that
life, as the rest of my fellows do, who endure the like fortune. I must pull
at a Rope, tugge at an Oar, and content my self with such poor fare, as
others of my wretched condition are allowed. I was one of the Band of the
Braggards; de los, de Dios, es Christo; one of that company, who confess
Christ to be God, and have no other Cognizance of their Faith; for their
works march under the Colors, and conduct of the Devil. I put on my white
linen breeches, my colored Stockins, my cut Doublet, and my Holland
Nightcap; all which my kind and loving Mulata had sent me; living in hope,
that in time the Dice would turn, and that she might one day see me again at
liberty. What with the help that I had from her, and what with those my fees,
that I recovered (as due unto me) from those new Prisoners that came in, I led
a fine gentle life, as also the life of a Gentile; for such is the quality of
such as I am, when they are admitted into such a famous school as that is,
where such a deal of Roguery is professed.

I had now got some oil to my Lamp, some money in my purse, partly out of
other men's devotions, and partly out of mine own endeavors; I did lend upon
pawnes, of every single Royal I made daily a Eight Quartos make a Royal: so
that he made a halfe-penny and better, of every six pence.
Quarte profit; I did such from those that were fresh men, and newly come in
amongst us; not one of them that escaped my fingers, all that came under my
hands paid soundly for it. When they were asleep, I would play the wagge with
them, putting the snuff of a Candle on the top of their shoe, and holding
matches of brimstone under their noses, or rolling a Card, let the smoke run
up into their nostrils, till it were ready to choke them; and a thousand other
the like knauish tricks. For albeit God is there known, yet is he not feared.
They have The wicked condition of the Gally-Slaues.
no more respect unto him, then if they were so many Pagans. And for the most
part, those that come to the like misery, are Ruffians, and Highway robbers, a
brutish and beastly kind of people. And it must be either a great wonder, or
misfortune, that such a one as I should come thither; and when it so falls
out, the reason of it is, because God blinds their understanding, to the end,
that by leading them this way, he may bring them to the acknowledgement of
their sin; and that they may in time come to a clearer knowledge of him,
learn to serve him, and so be saved.

There was a Ruffian, a notable shauer (in my time whilst I was there) who
being condemned to death, and put into the enfermiria, or that quarter, A Tale
of a Ruffian.
where the sick are cured; whence he was to be taken forth the next day to be
executed, seeing some of those that had the guarding of him, playing at
three-hand Primera, he rose from his bank, he made to them as well as he
could, crawling along, with his two pair of fetters, and a great chain; and
they asking him, whither he would? He told them; I come hither, to pass away
the time a while.

The Guards that had the charge of him, told him, that it was fitter that he
should betake himself to his prayers, and recommend himself and his Soul
unto God. Whereunto, he answered, I have prayed already all that I can pray; I
have not one prayer more left me. I have no more to do, then what I have done
already; and therefore shufflle, and deal about, and fill out some Wine, and
let the cup walk; that we may wash away sorrow, and rid away that care, which
is ready to choke my heart. They replyde, it was very late, and that the
Tavern door was shut, and there was no getting in. Go tell then (said he)
the fellow that keeps it, that it is for me, and that is enough; I warrant you,
he will not deny me. And therefore no more words, my Masters, but play on, and
follow your sport; for I swear unto you, that I know not what will become of
this business, nor what the issue thereof will be.

They dance all to this Tune. Others there are, that will have their Head and
Beard neatly trimmed, that they may seem the handsomer when they come to the
Gallows, and be said to be proper men, and well-fauour'd; and will likewise
take order to have a fine clean starcht-Ruffe, daintily and curiously set; it
seeming perhaps unto them, that the wearing of that, and the bearing their
Bigotes high, turned up with hot irons, and stiffened with gums, should be
their salvation, and bring them to heaven. And as in good Philosophy, men's
complexions follow generally the goodness, or badnesse of their meats; so may
it likewise of the good or bad company that we keep. Whence grew that
Proverb: No Prou. No con quien naces, si no con quien paces.
con quien naces, si no con quien paces. We must not judge of men by their
birth, but by their breeding. It is their conversation, that must give them
their denomination.

Now I was one of these, and like a barbarous and ill-bred fellow, would feign
employ that little money which I had, in renting one of those (a) Bodegones
belonging to the Prison; but fearing a day, that they would on the sudden (b)
Bodegon is a poor vittailing house.
strike up an Alarm, and so I might chance to lose all, I did not do it; and
I think I did well in it. For now that we began to make a number of some
six and twenty Gally-slaues, and were grown so unruly in the Prison, that
there was no ho with us; the Keeper was half afraid, that we would make some
hole or other in the Meshe, and find a time to get out of the net; and
therefore labored all that he could to be discharged of us.

One Monday morning we were called up, and giving every one of us a
Testimonial of his Sentence, we were all chained one to another: And Guzman
and the rest of the Gally-Slaues delivered over to the Commissary.
being thus threaded as it were upon four chains, we were delivered over to
the Commissary, who was to convey us by little iourneys to the Port, fair and
softly, foot after foot, and as we could hale our haltred legs after us; our
pace, like our irons, being very heavy.

In this manner went we out of Seuill, to the great grief and sorrow of our
Parents and Kinsfolk, and other our good friends, who went tearing their
hair, as we past along the streets, and scratching their faces with their
nails, every one according to the love and respect which she bare unto her
friend. And they on the other side, pulling their Hats over their eyes, went
along like so many meek and gentle Lambs, and not with that Lyon-like look,
and haughty carriage, as they were wont heretofore; it was not any brauing now,
or out-facing of the matter, that could do them good. Arrogancy was out of
request with them, and would not serve the turn. I cannot deny, but it did
touch me for my part to the very quick, it went to the heart of me:
especially, when I called to mind the merry life that I had led, the good
state wherein I had lived; if I had had but the grace to keep my self well,
while I was well; and to see the misery, whereunto now I was come.

Then did I begin to think with my self; If this be so painful unto me
already; if this chain do so much torment me, that I can scarce endure it; if
I feel such trouble now, and if this befall me while the wood is green, what
will it do, when it grows old and dry? What torment will they feel that are
condemned for ever to perpetual pain? Musing upon these things, I past along
through the streets of Seuill, for my Mother did not come to accompany me, nor
was she willing to see me. And I was the only man amongst them all, that was
Solus cum solo, left alone to my self.

We walked along very leisurely, which (God wot) was slowly enough, yet as fast
as we could conveniently; for when my chain was slack, and I was offering to
go forward, my next fellow would oftentimes pull me back, which he could
not sometimes do withal, and sometimes again would stop of set purpose, as
his necessary occasions did require. Another, he was foundred with going
barefoot, and all the rest ready to sink, they were so weary. We were men
sensible of pain, as other men are, and being in that case as we were, none
had more cause to sorrow then we; yet amongst our selves our griefs were so
equal, that we had but little advantage one of another.

O the wretched and miserable state that we live in, and to how many various
and unfortunate chances are we necessarily obliged! We came to a place called
Las Cabecas; and as we went on a morning from thence, we had scarce gone half
a League, but that one of our company had espide a far off, a certain young
fellow, who was going toward Seuill, with a great many fine little young Pigs,
and giving the word one from another, we did presently battell-wise cast our
selves into a Wing, as if we had been the Turkish Galleys; and marshalling our
selves after the manner of a half Moon, we did in such an orderly fashion
set upon them, that the points of the Horns meeting as it were before, and in
a kind of circle-wise inclining each to other, we had shut in the Pigges on a
sudden, and incompast them so, The Gally-slaues rob a poor fellow of his
Pigges, that he was carrying to Market.
that they could not get out from amongst us, and in spite of the young
fellows teeth, do what he could for his life, every one of us made purchase
of a fat Pigge.

The fellow began to cry out aloud, making great exclamations, and entreating
the Commissary, that for Gods sake, he would take order that he might have
them again. But he seemed to be deaf, and would not hear of that ear, as
one that was to have the greatest share in this booty; and so we past on
along with our prey, leaving the poor Clown to go seek his remedy
elsewhere. We knew the worst of it already, so that our care, and our pity
were much about one.

About noone, when we came to our Inn where we were to rest our selves, and
with a little sleep to pass over the heat of the day, the Commissary called
to us for the share that he was to have of this our theft: for, being that he
was consenting thereunto, the Accessorie was to have as much as the
Principal; the Assentant, as the Assaylant. He commanded one of them to be
roasted for him; whereupon there arose a great stir and tumult amongst us,
being ready to go together by the ears, whilst we were arguing the Case,
which of us was to part with his Pigge. For amongst us The Slaves matine about
their Pigs.
all, there were scarce three of us that had the use of reason.

When I saw the Mutiny, that was amongst them, and that in the carriage of this
business, he might (and that justly) blame me the more, because my understanding
Guzman offers his to the Commissary.
was more then theirs: I said unto him; Master Commissary, my Pigge is here
ready at your service, dispose of it as you please: And if you shall so think
it fit, seeing here is Guard sufficient upon us, may it please you to comaund
them to vnchaine me, and I will take the pains to dress it for you with mine
own hands: for I have some relics yet remaining of a good Cook. He
thankefully accepted of this my civil Compliment, and said unto me; Of all
this company, that is here under my charge, I must truly confess unto thee,
I have, since my first knowledge of thee, observed in thee a certain kind of
noblenes, and free nature, which cannot but proceed from some good blood. I
therefore thank you for this your present, and take it kindly at your hands,
and shall be very glad to eat it, as you shall order it for me. I was taken
from the chain; and being recommended to the Guards, He dresses it for him.
I called for such things as were necessary: but because the Inn was ill
provided of such things as I would have had, to show my Cookerie, I could show
my skill no farther, then in the well rosting of it, with a few eggs battered
together, and seasoned with a little pepper, and salt: I would have made a
pudding in it is belly, but I wanted necessaries. I minced the liver, and of
that, and such other things as I could for the present, I made him sauce to his
Pigge, which I knew well how to do.

At the same time some Trauaylours came in, to take their ease, who were not a
little sorry to find us there: for that they were half afraid that their
ears were scarce sure on their heads amongst such a company of Rogues as we
were. The Table whereat they were to sit, was a long planke, neeere adjoining
to a bench of stone: they were to eat altogether. The Commissary kindly
saluted them, and they him; and after a few Compliments were exchanged
between them, they sat three in a file, and one of them taking his
Port-mantua unto him, and putting it between his legs, under the board, he
there likewise laid his Alforjas, or wallet, wherein he had Cheese, a Bottle
of Wine, and a piece of a Gammon of Bacon; and that he might the better take it
out, he did thrust his Port-mantua a little forward, leaving the Alforjas in
the midst between his legs. I, when I saw that he was so wary, began to
suspect, that it was not without cause, and calling to the Hostess for a
Knife, I closely clapped it in between my arm, and my sleeue: And putting a
great earthen Jar full of water, underneath the board, and in it, a Bottle of
Wine; that the Commissary might have it fresh and cool, when he should call
for it; as often as I stoopt down to power out his wine, by little and little, I
fell to fingering of the Port-mantua, till at last, having made a shift to
undo all the Buttons, and giving it a gentle slash close where the Chain
ran along, that made all fast, I nimbly took out two little bundles, but
somewhat Guzman filches two Fardles out of a Trauailours Port-mantua: And the
manner how.
weighty withal, which I presently conuay'd very handsomely into my
Gally-sloppes, where there was Sea-roome enough for them; and afterward
buttoning it up just in the same fashion as it was before, it was close and
well, and not any sign to be seen of this theft that I had made.

When they had made an end of their dinner, the Cloth was taken away, and
having paid their reckoning, away went these Trauailours; and we likewise began
to provide to be packing: for we also were to be gone. Soto, my Camerade, was
fastened to another Chain, somewhat farther off from me, Soto Guzmas Companion
a notable Thief.
then I could have wished it, which did not a little grieve me, because this
distance did hinder our more private talk; but before they brought me back
again to my Chain, I came unto him, and secretly delivered unto him those two
bundles, desiring him to keep them safe for me, till we should meet with
some better occasion, to know what was in them. He received them with a great
deal of joy, and killing his Pigge unknown to any, he thrust them both into
the body of it, placing the intralls before the mouth of the wound, as well,
that the bundles might not drop out, as also to hide them Soto his cunning in
the cleanly conuayance of this theft.
thereby the better out of sight.

Now when they were going to put me to the Chain, I entreated the Comissary to
do me the favor, that I might be filed next to this my old friend and
acquaintance. He willingly granted my request; so one was taken out of that
file, and he and I were ranked together, that other and my self exchanging
places.

We went lazily on along, as the fashion is, and as we were pacing these our
leisurely steps, I rounded Soto softly in the ear, and said unto him; How now
(my Camarade) what have thou done with that which I gave thee to keep? How
have thou disposed of it? But he, as if he had not known me, or had not
given him any such thing at all, made so strange of it, that he made me to
suspect, that according to the custom of that Country, he had drunk a cup
too much, and so might happily have forgot it. Whereupon, I went putting him
in mind, when and where I gave it him. But he still denyde any such
delivery. And in the end grew somewhat hot and angry with me, asking me,
whether I were drunk, or well in my wits, that I should demand any such thing
of him, or make him believe, that I had delivered him either this, or that? I
understand you not, I neither know you, nor it, nor have anything of yours, and
therefore all that I can say unto you, is; That for me you must go look it.
Nothing I had of you, and nothing are you like to get from me.

You cannot imagine, nor am I able to express the great both anger, and sorrow
that I had, that I should be so unthankfully dealt withal, and receive such
hard measure from one, to whom I had done so many good offices, and loved so
truly, as I did him. For, there was not that morsel of meat, that went down
my throat, whereof he had not his share; nor that money in my purse, whereof I
did not divide half with him. And my purpose was, that he should likewise
share with me in this. But that he should thus break the Soto becomes an
enemy to Guzman.
bonds of friendship, and deny, (and that so insolently, and impudently) that I
had ever given him any such thing; this was it that troubled me; this was it
that vexed me to the very heart.

He was a man of an ill condition, his concoction was not good, and he was so
moved upon these words of mine, and so out of all patience, that in a thundering
voice he began to bolt out oaths and blasphemies, insomuch that the
Commissarie was enforced to correct him with a Cudgel. I, relying on the
favor he had shown me, entreated him to bear with him, because he was angry,
and in choler, which was the cause of this his intemperancie. And he being
desirous to know the cause of this his distemperature; I began to apprehend
with my self, that Soto would reserve all this for him; and I made this
reckoning with my self; If I shall acquaint the Commissarie with How Guzman
cries quittance with Soto.
that which had past between us, it may be, that though I should not have
all, yet at least, some part of the booty might fall to my share.

This thief (thought I) shall not carry it away so; he shall not have all the
thanks, and laugh at me when he has done. I will not be thus gulled by him.
And therefore I resolved with my self, to acquaint him with the whole success
of the business, who, I presumed, would not be a little glad of it, out of the
greedy and covetous desire that he would have to take that bone from us, which
we two strove for.

Hereupon (being informed by me) he commanded Soto, that he should presently
give him that which I had given him. He stoutly denies, that he had any thing
of me. The guards are willed to search him; they do so; and when they had done
the utmost of their diligence, they could find no such thing about him, nor
any the least sign or token thereof. Whereupon I gathered, that he had done
as I did, delivering the same over to some other body, to keep it safe for him.

I told the Commissary, that there was no question to be made of it, but that
he had secretly conuay'd it away to some one or other of this our company, for
that really and truly he received it of me, who gave the same unto him with
mine own hands. When he saw, that neither by fair means, nor by foul, by
persuasions, nor threatenings, nor any other course that he took with him, he
could be brought to manifest the truth, and to bring these things to light; the
Commissary commanded they should take him aside, and put him to the Rack, till
they should make him to confess. And for that they had no other instruments
there, save Cords, they applide them to those his lower parts; and when upon
their twisting, they began to strain somewhat hard upon the flesh, which was
too delicate and sensible to endure any torture, being likewise a faint-hearted
fellow, and of little or no courage, he forthwith confessed, whither he had
conuayd them. Thereupon, they presently took his Pigge from him, (so that he
lost that too by the bargain) and taking out the intrals to see what was
there, they quickly lighted on the two little bundles, in either of which was a
Rosario, or set of Beads of the perfectest, and the daintiest pure Coral, that
ever mine eyes saw; every Bead at both ends, having his Cap of Gold, which was
much graced by the neat cutting and inameling that was bestowed upon them,
which (it should seem) were sent as tokens to two several persons.

The Commissary makes no more ado, but presently claps them up in his pocket,
promising to befriend me for it, and to give me, what I my self should ask
for them. Soto was herewith so madded, and so extremely incensed against me,
that they were forced to change our chains, and set us farther asunder then
before; for though we were thus divided, and parted each from other, they did
afterward fall to manacling of him, fastening both his wrists together with
bolts of iron, because when he came where any stones were, he would take them
up, and throw them at me.

In this troublesome manner we came at last unto the Galleys, just upon the
very nicke, when they were calking, and rigging, and making all ready to put
forth to Sea, and to go in chase. And before they brought us aboard, they
carried us to a Prison, where we past over that night, with the like in
commodity and trouble, as at other times. Nay rather, it was worse with us
now, then heretofore, for that the Prison was little, and crammed as full as
ever it could hold. But be it better, or be it worse, such as it was, we were
forced to take all in good part, and to make as good shift as we could. For we
could not do as we would, nor make choice of (...) place to our liking.

The Commissary had talked in the mean while with the Kings Officers; who came
with those other of the Galleys, and the Kings Alguazil; and having now
assigned and appointed us our Banks, where we were to sit and row, they gave
the Commissary a discharge for the delivering so many Slaves into their hands,
who told me, that he would come and see me; and that he would stand my very
good friend; so he betook him to his Mule, and from that day forward, I did
never more set eye on him.

Now, before that they took us out of Prison, to lead us along to the
Galleys, they had ordered how we should be divided, and it fell out, that we
were to go six and six in a fyle; in which division, it was my ill luck
(thanks to my sins, that laid this punishment upon me) to have Soto to be my
Camerade.

This done, they presently delivered us over to certain Moorish Slaves, who
with their half Pikes came to guard us along, and tying our hands with tough
thongs, which they had brought with them for that purpose, away we go with
them. We come aboard the Gally, where-into being entered, we were willed to
retire our selves to the poope, till that the Captain and the Masters-Mate
should come, and call us out one by one, placing every man in this, or that
other Bank, as they thought fit; now, when they were come amongst us, they
went walking up and down on the Coursey, or the Gallerie-like space, on both
sides whereof, the Slaves Banks are placed: and whilst they were looking on
the banks, and aduising with themselves where it were fittest to dispose of
us; the other Gally-slaues began to set out their throats, and to cry out aloud
unto them, desiring that they would disperce us amongst them; some complaining
that they had an unprofitable member amongst them; others, that all in their
Bank were weak and feeble persons, unable to do any service.

But the Captain^, and the Masters-Mate, not giving ear to their clamours, but
governing themselves by their own discretion, having considered what was
fittest to be done, placed us here and there, as they saw cause: in which
partition it fell to my lot, to be ranked in the second Bank, just before the
Cooke-roome, near unto the Masters-Mates Cabin, at the foot of the Mast;
having placed, Soto in the Patron, or Masters Bank. It grieved me very much,
that he was seated so near unto me, in regard of the late quarrel that had
been between us; for we could never afterward endure one another; and he,
me less, then I could him; for he was a malicious minded man, and had
entertained in his heart a deep hatred against me; though I (for my part) never
did deny him my friendship, nor was ever wanting unto him, whenever he had
occasion to use me: but he, like the Commissary, would have all to himself, if
I should have let him alone. And all he should have had, and that with a very
good will, if I had but once thought, that he would have cry'de quits with
me, and paid me home in mine own coin. When they had brought me to the
Bank, those that were there, bade me welcome; in requital whereof, I could
have wished, that I had been able to say unto them; Excuse me, that I cannot
come.

They installed me in my seat, and put on the Kings Robes upon me, two What
Guzman endured in the Galleys.
Shirts, two pair of linen Breeches, a colored Wastecoat, and a red Cap. I
was scarce warm in my seat, when a base vnder-Barber comes unto me, a better
Shauer, then a Cutter, and with his Razor, makes my head and Beard: as bare as
my hand, which I took to heart, for the great account I made thereof. But
re-collecting my spirits, I began to comfort my self, that this was the
fortune of the world, and that others, that had been in far higher place,
had fallen into far greater miseries.

I removed my eyes from those that were before me, and looked toward those
that were behind me: not considering so much with my self how many were more
happy, but how many were more wretched then I was. O this looking downward is
a comfortable thing to a man in misery. And albeit, it be true, that there is
not any life almost so miserable, as that of a Gally-Slaue, yet was it not
half so bad as that which I endured with my first Wife. And it was some
comfort besides unto me, that I was not a lone man in this my afflictions, but
had many fellows that suffered the like torment.

A young fellow that belonged to the Alguazil, made presently toward me, to
clappe fetters on my feet, and manacles on my hands, chaining me, and other my
companions, that sat together on the same Bank, so fast, and so sure, that
we could not stir from thence. Then did they give me my allowance, which
was six and twenty ounces of Biscuit; it so fell out, that that day was (as we
call it) dia de Caldero, the Caldron day, for the boiling of flesh, and making
of pottage: And because I was but a new-comer, and was unprovided of a wooden
dish, I took my part of those mammocks that were shared amongst us, with one
of my fellows that sat by me. I would not offer to soke my Biscuit in it, but
chewed it down dry, as all your fresh-men do at the first, till time had
taught me the use of my arms.

The pain we were put to for the present was little or nothing; for the
Galleys being then a trimming, and a calking, we that were the ghing, the base
rout, and raskalitie of the Galleys, served as then for no other use, but to
row toward the shore, when we were so commanded, and to make provision of
boughs, or something else for shade, lest the hear of the Sun should melt
the tallow. All the clothes that I brought aboard with me into the Gally, I
made show of them, and sold them; which yielded me some money, though not
much, adding that, to that other little sum, which I brought with me, when I
came out of Prison. Nor did I know in the world, how, or where I might secretly
lay it up, and keep it safe, either to relieve me in such necessities as
usually offer themselves, or to employ it in some one thing or other, that I
might have a penny in my purse at a pinch. And for that I had neither Coffer,
Chest, nor so much as a Deske, that had a Lock and Key to it, where I might
safely lay it up, it did somewhat trouble me, not being able to devise with my
self, what I were best to do with it. To carry it still about me, were to
run the hazard of being robbed, or coozen'd of it by my own Camerades: And
to commit it to another bodies keeping, I had already too late experience of
the ill correspondence in that kind.

All I saw, was ill, it concerned me to look well unto it, and to be-thinke my
self, how I should dispose of it. At last (after long consideration) I
resolved with my self, that I could not give it a better or more secret place,
then to clappe it in my bosom, and to lay it as near to my heart as I could
possibly bring it. Others put their hearts there, where they put their
treasure: but I took a clean contrary course, putting my treasure where my
heart was.

Well, I got me a needle and thread, and clapping my Thimble on my finger, I
fell to work, and made me up a little Purse, about the bigness of a
Wax-kernell, which being strongly sowed, and quilted with many a sure stitch
upon that part of my shirt, which touched upon my heart, I bare it there, never
suffering it to be out of my sight; and having still an eye upon it, that it
might be the safer from its friends, and my enemies, who would be ever and
anon leering that way, casting a sheep eye toward it; but he, whose mouth
watered most at it, and had a months mind to be doing with it, was a notable
famous Thief, that was my Camerade, and sat next unto me, who could never
come to filch it from me, neither at midnight, nor at at any other time, so
surely did I guard it on that side. Yet was he not wanting to do his best;
for, when he perceived that I was asleep, he would go groping here and
there, visiting every part about me with his hand; and for that the rooms
were but few, and the household stuff that belonged unto them, not much, they
were easily and quickly run over. He had past over in a trice, a little
Satchell that I had by my side, my Gabardine, and my Breeches, and was come now
at last to my Waste-coat, which I might more properly have termed my Soul: for
that with its warmth, it did viuifie, and quicken the blood, whereby it
sustained it self, and was kept alive. We both labored hard, he to rob, I
to keep. He was not so crafty, but I was as careful. And if at any time I did
strip my self naked, I would order the business so, that it should be
impossible for him to take it from under me, unless he took me away with
it. He continued a long time in this his care to come by it, watching all
opportunities to rob me of it.

Now, in the mean while, forasmuch as I did consider with my self, that
wheresoever a man lives, he had need of an Angel of guard to attend him upon
all occasions; I began to bethink my self whom I should make choice of to
be my Protector. And after that I had thoroughly thought there-vpon, I could not
find out any fitter for my turn, then the Masters-Mate. For albeit it be
true, that the Captain, as Lord, and chief Commander of all the rest, is to
be accounted the only Protector of us all; yet, out of his authority and
greatness of his Place, he will not trouble himself with this rascal rabble.

They are for the most part principal persons, and men of quality; they will
not vouchsafe to look so low; they reckon not of such poor snakes as we be,
nor take any notice who, or what we are. And I was the willinger to make this
choice, for that the Masters-Mate was my near neighbor, his Cabin was close
by my Bank, by means whereof, I might the easier and more conveniently serve
him. And so much the rather was I desirous to settle upon him, because he
carried the Cudgel, and had the possession of the salt Eele, which he
distributed amongst us, either more or less, according as he favored, or
dis-fauour'd; paying some soundly, and letting others go scot-free.

Thus by little and little, I went scruing my self into his service, getting
more ground still upon him, and striving to outstrip the rest: As well in my
attendance at his board, as in having him to bed; I trickt up his Cabin,
brusht his Clothes, kept them neat and handsome, looked to his linen, and was
in every other respect so diligent about him, that within a few days I was the
only man in his eye. Nor did I account it as a small favor, that he would
deigne me a good look: It seeming unto me, as often as he looked upon me,
that he had bestowed a Bull (I mean not the Pizzle) upon me, and a free
Indulgence from stripes, and that he did thereby absolve me both a culpa, and
poena: From my fault, and the punishment thereof. But therein I was deceived;
for that they being naturally severe and cruel, and that commonly such kind
of stern and austere men are put into such places, they never have an eye to
consider courtesies, not seeking to requite good, but to punish ill.

They are a people, that will not acknowledge any thankfulness, because all
that we do for them, they think to be due unto them. A nights I did rid
the Dandruffe out of his head, rubbed his feet, fanned his face, destroyed the
Gnats, and waited on him with that observance and punctualitie, that the
greatest Prince in the world could not be better served. And if they serve
their Prince for love, I did the like to the Masters-Mate for fear; lest the
Hoope of a Hogs-head, or an Eeles tail should twine it self about my
shoulders, which kind of weapons they never go without. And howbeit it be
true, that this manner of service is not so perfect, nor so noble as the other;
yet fear makes men to take more heed. And now and then when I saw he was
waking, and had no mind to sleep, I would entertain him with a merry Fable,
or pleasant History, to pass away the time the better. And I was never
unprovided of a company of witty jests, and fine conceits, to make his Worship
laugh: It being no small comfort to me, to see him look cheerfully. I grew
in grace with him, and was very happy in this particular; yet am I so much
priuieto mine own worth, that it was no more then my good service did deserve.
So that now, he would not that any other, save my self, should serve him in
those things, which gave him the greatest content. And I had more especial
reason to esteem of this his favor toward me, in regard that he had a
Gally-slaue, before he entertained me, that attended on his Person. Whom,
though he used well, yet he went daily pyning and consuming away, that he
was very sorry to see it. For, though he led a better life then the rest, and
that he loved him so well, that he fed him from his own trencher, and
bestowed the best morsels upon him; yet was he like your Gaeta-colts, which the
better you feed them, the worse they prove.

One day, when we were both together with him, waiting at the table, he said
unto me; I prithee (Guzman) tell met (for thou art a Scholar, and an
understanding fellow) what should be the reason, that Fermen being, at his
first coming into the Galleys, of a very able body, strong, fat, and lusty,
and I having sought to continue him still in the same state, by entertaining
him into my service, and doing other friendly Offices for him, not eating that
good morsel, whereof he has not a part, should, the more I make of him, fall
(as thou see) the more away? Whereunto I made answer; Sir, for to give
resolution to this your question, it will be needful for me to relate unto you
another case, like unto this, of a new Christian, who had past through the hands
of the Holy-House, or (as we commonly call it) the Inquisition. A short tale of
a new Christian that had one of the Inquisition to to his neighbor.


This man was rich, and powerful, lived honorably, and in a plentiful
fashion, led a merry life, waxed plump, and fat, had all things neat and
handsome about him, and took much content in the house wherein he dwelt. Now
it so fell out, that one of the Inquisitors came and took a house, that was
the very next door to his; who, for no other reason in the world, save only
that he wasso near a neighbor unto him, grew so meager, and so lean
thereupon, that within a very short time, he was brought so low, and pined so
fast away, that he was nothing but skin and bone. So that to both these, I
shall give Solution, by another the like accident, which I shall deliver for
truth unto you, and thus it was:

Muley Almancor (who was King of Granada) had a great Priuado, or A Story of
the King of Granada, and his Favorite Buferiz.
principal favorite of his, who was called el Alcayde Buferiz; a very wise
man, punctual, trusty, and having many other good parts, worthy the great love
that his Lord and Master bare unto him; for the which his King loved him so
dearly, as also for the trust and confidence that he had in him; (for there
was not any difficulty in the world, which he would not wade through, so as it
might make for his Majesty's service) And for that those, that deserve these
kind of honors, are evermore enuy'd by those that are unworthy of them, there
were not some wanting, who, hearing the King speak of his love and affection
toward this his Favorite, said unto him; Sir, that your Majesty may see,
whether that be true or no, for which you so much commend your Alcayde; would
you be pleased to make proof of him in some business of importance, and where
in there is some difficulty; and then shall you find, whether he be that
manner of man, that you take him to be: For by the diligence that he shall use
therein, your Majesty shall truly know, whether his heart be with you or no.
The King liked exceeding well of this motion, and said; I will not only command
him in a business that is difficult, but such a one, as is impossible to be
effected. And causing him forthwith to be called in, he said unto him;
Alcayde, I have a thing to give you in charge, which you must accomplish out of
hand, upon pain of my displeasure, and the loss of my favor; And this it is;
I shall deliver over unto you, a good fat Weather, which you shall keep at
home in your own house, you shall give the same allowance of meat, as he was
wont to have heretofore, and more, if more he will eat; and within a Month,
you must return him back unto me, poor, and lean as a rake.

This poor Moore, whose desire was never other, then to serve his King, and
punctually to perform whatsoever he should be pleased to command him; how
beit he did believe, that he should never be able to bring such an
impossibility as this, to pass; was not therewith dismayed a whit, but
readily, and with a cheerful countenance receiving the Weather, he caused it
to be craryed home to his house, according as the King had commanded: And
there sitting down, and devising with himself, how he might bring this
business about, and give satisfaction to his Masters desire; he began to set
his wits aworke, and at last lighted upon a strange, yet a natural conceit,
which, he presumed, would make much for his purpose, and cumply with the Kings
command.

He caused two wooden Cages to be made out of hand, both strongly barred,
and of equal bigness, the which, he gave order should be placed very near
each to other; in one of the which he puts me the Weather, and in the other
hard by him, a Wolf: To the Weather, he gave his full allowance; but the
Wolf, he kept so short, that he was still exceeding hungry; And being almost
famished for want of meat, he did labor all that he could (thrusting his
legs within the grates) to reach at the Weather, and to try if he could come
at him, and eat him. The fearful Weather, being much troubled, and sorry at
the heart, to see himself so near his mortal enemy, although he did eat
that which they gave him, he did thrive so ill with it, out of the continual
fear that he was in, that he did not only not wax fat, but pined away, till
he was pure skin and bone. By this course that he had taken with him, he
returned at the time appointed: the Weather back again to his King, not failing
in that he was commauned, nor falling from his accustomed grace and favor.

Now that I may apply this Story to the purpose we have in hand; It seems
unto me, that Fermin is grown lean and feeble, by being so near about you,
and by living in that grace and favor with you, as he does: And it is only the
fear which he has of you, whom he so much desires to serve, that makes him to
thrive no better then he does.

The Masters-Mate was so well pleased with this Tale of mine, because it fell
out so pat to the purpose, that he presently gave order to have me removed from
my Bank, receiving me into his service, and giving me the charge of his
Wardrobe, and of his Table, for that he had always found me suitable to his
desires. Nor, (for all this favor that he showed unto me, which was very
great in releasing me from the obligation of a Slave, and exercising such
duties, as were required in the Galley) would I forbear (for mine own
pleasure) to come sometimes amongst them, and to do as they did; but would now
and then, of mine own accord, fall to my labor, that I might not be to
seek, if out of necessity I should chance to be put unto it.

There did I learn to knit Stockins, to make false Dice, as your High-men, The
exercises of your Gally-Slaues.
and your Low-men, setting two Aces one against another, or two Sixes on one
Dye, for your Coggers and Cheaters, who, for the use that they made of them,
would pay well for them. I likewise there learned to make Buttons, both of
Silk, and of hair; as also dainty delicate Tooth-picks, of diverse sundry
inventions, and colors, and neatly gilded; which none in the Galley could do
besides my self. My poyze being put into this balla^ce; that is, standing upon
these even terms, we were forced to go with our Galley to Cadiz, for Masts,
and Main-yards, Sails, Pitch, Tar, Tallowe, and the like necessaries; and
this Voyage was the first, wherein I was put to any pains: For, being so much
friended by the Masters-Mate, as I was, they did not force me to do any more
work, then what I would my self.

And for that this did not seem to me, to be a matter of any great labor,
that I might not show my self an idle spectator, or that I did seek to avoid
paines-taking, especially, being that we were not to give the chase, or forced
to betake our selves to flight; where, and in which cases, we were to row for
our lives, and to tugge with all the strength and force that we had, at the
Oar; And for that, when we were once in the Port, and had a good Haven to
friend, we did usually lie quiet, and were never whipped, and had our
intertainements, and pastimes, presuming that between Port, and Port,
especially being so near, there needed not the sinews of an Ox, to hale and
pull; I would needs set my self to the Oar, only to try what manner of thing
it was: But it was not so slight and easy a thing, as I took it to be: for
(because we were forced to go towing the Masts, and Main-yards) when we came
to cast Anchor, I was nothing but wearines and sweat, because I would not leave
my Oar, nor give occasion to others to murmur, by withdrawing my hand from
that, which for mine own pleasure I had voluntarily undertaken. And this was
the only, and sole cause, why so soon, and so soundly, (after I had had my
Master to bed) I fell asleep, falling like a stone, flat to the ground; giving
very good signs and tokens thereof to my Camerades, who heard me now to do
that, which they had never heard me do before; to wit, to snort like a young
sucking Pigge. That Traitor of mine own Bank, was the first (as being
nearest unto me) that heard me rout; and calling softly to another of my
fellows that was his Consort, one that was his very good friend, and whom he
might best trust, acquainted him with his desire, and the good occasion that
was now offered, to rob me of that little money that I had. They joined both
together, as well in the manner of sharing it, as of taking it from me. Which
they had gone clear Guzman robbed by the Galley-Slaues.
away with, if I had not had the Alcalde to friend. They took it as easily
from me, as they could wish; passing it presently from Bank to Bank, to the
further end of the Galley; persuading themselves, that because it was night,
and not perceived by any, both of them stiffely denying it, they should,
without any more ado, carry away the prey, and divide the spoil between them.

Now, when it was day, they all began to wake, and I amongst the rest, got up,
heavy of sleep, but light of purse: for that weight which I was wont to feel
lying upon my heart, I felt no more; and it did much trouble me, that it did
not trouble me. I looked about, and found my money gone; I was struck as dead
as a doore-nayle; death was in my face, and I knew not what to do. If I held
my peace, I should hear no more news of it, but must give it for lost; and if
I should speak thereof, I should roast all my part thereof (as the Proverb is)
upon my finger, and put all in mine eye, that I should get by the bargain. Now
was I put out of the possession of that which I had inioyed so long; Whereupon
I said with my self; If he that has taken it from me, will give me no thanks
for it, much less shall I reap any benefit from him; better it were
notwithstanding, that he should keeepe it, that has it, for it may be, that at
some time or other, he will not be wanting to make some acknowledgement
thereof; and he at last may come to be punished, who did me this wrong: at
least, he will eat his meat with sorrow, when he sees he shall reap no
profit by it. But this Counsel did not please me.

Now, when the Masters-Mate was ready to rise, I brought him his clothes and
while he was making himself ready, I made hima long relation of my
misfortune, making him (to my cost) to know, and to touch, as it were with
the hand the misery of those men, who having purst up a few pence with a
great deal of labor and paines-taking, earning it very hardly, are, either by
mischance, or by a pilfering hand, deprived thereof in an instant: Telling him
moreover, that I had brought those moneys from Seuill, amongst which, I had
likewise put those other, which I had made of my clothes that I sold, when I
came aboard the Galley, which I kept as charily as I could for my life, that I
might therewith either relieve my necessities, when occasion should serve, or
else employ it on some one thing or other, that might yield me profit. And as I
was opening my mind thus unto him, I likewise opened my bosom, and showed him
the false stuffing, wherein I had put it, the mold, or indented mark whereof,
these Thieves had left behind them, being for all the world, such a kind of
print, as a Hare leaves in her Form, when she is newly gone out of it.

It seemed to the Masters-Mate, that this that I told him, was an evident
truth, and giving credit unto me, strengthened the more in his belief by this
empty Form, where the Hare was used to sit, as also, out of the love that he
bare unto me, he commanded the two fore-Bankes, and six other that were in the
rere, to be had in Coramnobis; whereupon, the Alguazils servant, coming
amongst them with a good Ropes end, (which your Seafaring men The manner of
the bea^ing of your Gally-Slaues.
call a salt Eele) gave every one of them fifty sound blows apiece, which made
the wheales to bunch out upon their backs, leaving the skin clinging close
unto them: Examining first every one by himself, whether he had seen or heard
of this stolen money? And after they had been well lasht, they washed them with
salt, and tart Vinegar, rubbing their wounds therewith, leaving their backs
and sides so rent and torn, as if they had not been men.

When this theft happened, there was by chance a Gypsy that was not then
asleep, when my purse was stolen, and when his turn came to receive his
payment, he confessed, that he had seen his Companion, the night before, rise
from his own Bank, and to go to mine, but why, or wherefore he knew not.

When that Slave perceived that he spoke of him, and that he had charged him
in this manner, he started up on his feet, and said; That he was entangled in
that chain, which belonged to the other Bank, and that he had sprained his
foot thereby, it being wrung and wrenched by it, and that he was feign, (for
to give himself ease) to clamber over thither, to dis-intangle himself. But
because this reason was too weak to hold water, and carried not that
fairness with it, as to be taken for a just excuse, and much less with
those, who knew well enough on which foot he halted, they took him presently
to task, and had many more stripes bestowed upon him then any of the rest. And
the Masters-Mate was so angry with the Alguazils servant, because he did not
lay them on so soundly as ^hee would have him, that he gave order, that he
should presently have as many bestowed upon him; besides a great many more
which he himself with his own hand laid upon him with the Hoope of a
Hogs-head. And in this his choleric humor, (for he was now mightily moved)
he forthwith commanded, that they should take the delinquent in hand again,
and baste him as long as they could stand over him; who (poor man) had more
then enough before. But when he saw that he must go to this gear again, he
then began to think with himself, that the Masters-Mate would never give him
over, till he had confessed the truth, and therefore held it to be his best
course, to deal plainly and truly with him, who had the money, by what
means they came by it, and the plot that they had laid to get it from me,
excusing himself the best that he could, as that he had no purpose of
himself to do it, and that he had never entered into the business, had he not
otherwise been drawn into it.

Well, he was well lasht afterward for his offense, and my money was Guzman
recouers his lost money.
returned back unto me, which I received with a very good will from my
Masters hand, aduising me withal, that I should employ it, making profit
thereof, for he should be well pleased with any thing that were for my good.

My good fortune (like froth) began to increase more and more, in regard that
I gave my Master such good content. And the Galleys being to go forth, which
were to join with those of Naples, upon a certain employment at Sea, I got
me ashore, having a Soldier of guard to be my keeper, and to look to my
safe return, where I employed all that little money that I had, in matters of
victuallage, which presently from my setting forth from thence would double the
cost, and it succeeded well with me. Out of that gains, (with my Masters
leave) I made me a suit after the fashion of an old Gally-slaue, or one that
had been of ancient standing amongst them, Hose and Wastecoat of black
Buckram, listed and welted handsomely in the seames, which (it being then the
Summer season) was cooler and fresher for me, and fitter for my turn.

Now (thinking upon my former misfortunes) I began to have a glimpse of that
light, which they enjoy, who follow Virtue, and protesting with a firm
resolution, and settled constancy, rather to dye, then do a base action; I
did only study, how I might serve my Master, how I might please his humor,
and give him all content, how I might keep his clothes, his Cabin, and his
table clean and neat.

And as I was thinking and considering on these things, I said one night Guzman
discourses, and tells us, that it is only Virtue and Goodness, that brings a
man to Heaven.
with my self; Guzman, thou see here the top of that Mountain of miseries,
whereunto thy filthy sensuality has brought thee: now art thou come to the
highest part of it, and must either make a speedy leap down to the
bottomless pit of hell, or which thou may more easily do, by lifting up thy
arms, take hold on Heaven. Thou see now the care that thou have to serve thy
Master, for fear of a few stripes, which being given to day, are not felt to
morrow. Thou do watch late, rise up early, thou art diligent, careful, and
sollicitous in seeking out new Inventions, wherewith to delight him, and to
purchase his favor, which when thou have obtained, is but of a man, and a
Masters-Mate. And this is the most thou can make of him.

Now thou well know, and can not be ignorant of it, for thou have been a
professed Student, and have studied that point; how much less God requires at
thy hands, and how much more he has to confer upon thee, and how far a
greater friend he is, then any man can be unto thee.

Rouse up thy self therefore, and awake from this heavy sleep, which
oppresses thy soul; Return home unto thy self; and consider, that though it
be true, that thy sins have brought thee hither, yet so apply this thy
punishment unto thee, and lay it so near to thy heart, that thou may make
good use of it, and that it may turn to thy good. Thou have sought after a
stock to employ it for thy profit; seek now to obtain eternal happiness,
and lay out all that thou have, that thou may buy it. For it is a Jewel of
inestimable worth, it cannot be valued. These thy troubles, these thy miseries
which thou indurest, this thy care which thou take to serve this thy Master,
put it all to Gods account, and be as diligent in serving him. Charge him also
with that, which thou art to lose hereafter, and he will bear the burden of
that charge; he will lessen thine, and add it to his own account. With this
thou may buy grace, which if here-tofore it bore no price with thee, (for
even the best deseruings of all the Saints that ever were, cannot raise such a
stock, whereby to be able to buy it, till their merits meet with those of our
Savior Christ) now make much of it; and the rather seeing that Christ, that he
may communicate this his grace unto us, is willingly become our brother.

What brother did ever forsake a good and a loving brother? Serve him but with
a sigh, with a tear, or with a true heart-sorrow, grieuing for thy sins; and
being angry and offended with thy self, that thou have offended so good a
brother: And so by giving him that which thou have, he will join thy stock
with his own, and making it of an infinite price, not by thine, but his merits,
thou shall enjoy life everlasting.

In this discourse with my self, and in other, which rose out of this I spent
a great part of the night, showring down tears in abundance, and Guzmans
conversion.
waxing now heavy with the grief for my sins, I fell asleep; and when I
awakt, I found my self another manner of man then I was before. I had cast off
my old heart, and put on a new one in its place. I gave thanks unto God for
this my regeneration, and that he had renewed his spirit aright in me, humbly
beseeching him, that he would uphold me with his holy hand, and strengthen me
with his grace.

Presently upon this, I treated of the frequent Confession of my sins, and of
the reformation of my life, and of the cleansing of my conscience; in which
good deliberation, I continued many days; but I was flesh and blood. I did
still stumble, almost at every step, and now and then took a fall. But for any
proceeding in my accustomed evil actions, I was much amended, and went from
that time forward reforming my former course of life. Howbeit, for that I had
exercised my self so much in my fore-passed ill deportments, I was still
pointed at with the finger for a wicked man, which name I could never claw off,
but did stick close unto me. For this is an evil, that follows evil men;
that even those good actions which they do, leave a jealousy and suspicion
behind them, and occasion, as it were, scandal to such as see them. For,
though we do them never so well, and with an upright heart, yet are we held
to be but Hypocrites. We have a common Proverb amongst us; Que se sacan por
las Uisperas, los dias Santos: Proverb. S^ sacan por las Visperas, los dias
santos.
That by the Vespers, we come to know the Feasts of the Saints. So they, by my
precedent actions, would judge of the future.

But to give the world leave to censure things as they list, let him that would
feign know whether he stand in the state of grace or no, and live in Gods love
and favor, look, and consider with himself, how God works with him, and he
shall easily come to know it. Use thy best endeavors; do that, which (as a
good Christian) thou art bound to do: so shall thy works be acceptable in
his sight, and thou shall know (like Abel) that God is well pleased with this
thy sacrifice, and that he has set his eyes upon thee.

Mark and observe, whether he uses thee no worse, then he uses himself; for
this is a sure and infallible sign, that thy Lord loves thee, when of the same
bread that he eats; of the same clothes which he wears; of the same
table, where he takes his meals; of the same seat, vvhereon he sits; of
the same Wine, whereof he drinks; of the same bed, whereon he lies; he makes
no difference between thee and him, but is as it were all one. What did God
enjoy? What did God love? What did God suffer? Troubles.

Now then, when God shall share these with thee, he shows that he Troubles,
the signs of Gods love toward us.
loves thee. Thou art his Minion, he feasts thee, and makes much of thee; Be
thou so wise as to receive these things thankefully, and to make profit of
them. Nor do thou think, that God refuses to give thee thine own hearts
desire, thy pleasures, thy contentments, riches, and large possessions, or what
else may delight thee, for that he is close fisted, niggardly, or covetous; for
if thou art willing to see the worth of these worldly comforts, turn but thine
eye aside, and look upon those that possess them in greatest abundance. But
who are these? Even Moors, Infidels, and Heretics. But God runs a contrary
course with his friends, with those that are his elected, and best beloved
children; the cherishments, and blandishments, that he bestows upon them, are
poverty, afflictions, and persecutions. O had I but known so much heretofore,
as I do now, and that God would have been pleased to have enlightened my
understanding, that I might have truly seen, and looked into my former
errors, I might have benefited my self in another kind of manner, then I did
at that time.

I am the willinger to deliver this unto you, for that when I made this
Discourse with my self, I did do it truly, and with all my heart. And albeit
I am not worthy to merit thereby any reward, (being so great a sinner as I am)
yet notwithstanding, this little crumme, this poor drop, this small spark,
had its reward at that very instant, that slender repentance of mine, that my
resolution (though weak) to do good, and that good beginning which I had put
my self into, was not without its payment.

As soon as I had re-gained my moneys, new persecutions, and new troubles
began to grow upon me. Would to God that I had been so considerate, as I
ought to have been. He stripped me of that contentment, wherein I now lived;
and he began to touch me to the quick, and to beat me with many stripes.
That small shade of Iuy, (which like Jonas Gourd, did keep me from the
scorching of the Sun) was lost, and quite taken from me; it was dry'de up,
and withered, there was a worm bred in the root of it, which had wasted and
consumed it; so that I was forced to lie open to the heates, suffering new
calamities, and new troubles, and such as I never thought on, without any cause
given by me, or any the least sign of offense, having no way deserved such
hard measure. But stay thy Pen, and ingeniously confess, that such miseries
and afflictions as these, are that hidden treasure in the field, so highly
commended unto us. And since thou have patiently heard me hitherto, for thine
own pleasure, hear me now another while for mine; and hearken a little to
the remainder of my misfortunes, whereunto I shall give an end, in the next
ensuing Chapter.

CHAPTER IX.
Guzman de Alfarache prosecutes that which happened unto him in the Galleys: And
by what means he came to be freed from thence.

THere was a famous Painter, who was so excellent in his Art, that he had not
his fellow in all the world. Upon A short Story of a Painter, with its
application.
the fame and report of whose admirable pieces of work, there came a Gentleman
to his house, and going into the room, where he drew his pictures, he agreed
with him, that he should paint for him in a Table, a very fair and beautiful
Horse, with rich furniture, and gracefully set forth, who being loose, should
seem to run away as fast as his legs could carry him. The Painter
performed this piece of work with all possible perfection, and showed therein
the utmost of his skill. And having fully finished it, he placed it there where
the colors might soonest grow dry?

Now, when the Gentleman came to see how this his work went forward, and to
know how far he had proceeded therein, the Painter made haste to show it
him, telling him he had already ended it. And for that, when he set forth
this Table a drying, the Painter did not greatly care (as a thing that was
nothing material) to set it after this, or that other manner, more one then
another: So that the horse stood (as he had then placed the Table) with his
feet upward, and his Saddle downward.

The Gentleman, when he looked upon it, it seeming unto him not to be the
same, which he had be-spoken, said unto him; Sir, the Horse that I wished you
to make me, was to be drawn running away; and this rather seems to lie
tumbling on the ground. The discreet Painter, mildly made answer; It seems,
Sir, that you have no great insight in painting; the Picture is the same, that
you pretend, if your Worship will be but pleased to turn the Table.
Whereupon, that part that was downe-ward, was turned upward; Which done, the
Gentleman viewing it again, rested very well contented therewith, as well for
the goodness of the workmanship, as that thereby he was taught to know his
own error.

If we consider the handy-workes of God, they will oftentimes seem unto us
like this Horse, that lies tumbling and wallowing on the ground; but if we
shall but turn this Table, wrought by the pensill of that supreme Artizan,
that painted to the life both Heaven and earth, beautifying the one with Sun,
Moon, and Stars; the other, with all variety of colors, in flowers,
fruits, and the like; we shall find, that this is the piece that we would
have, and that the work is done to it is full perfection.

Troubles (as I told you a little before) seem harsh and sharp unto us: we
have not (no more then had this ignorant Gentleman) the true discerning of them
aright; there are few that understand them as they should; but when he that
sends them unto us, shows that mercy unto us, which is laid up in them, then we
shall see them in their true shape and colors, and shall take great pleasure
and delight in them.

Amongst all the Slaves that were in the Galley, there was none of them like
unto me, either in their good usage, or in the knowledge of giving such good
content as I did, to my Master. But the pin in Fortunes wheel slipped out, and
up came I in such a strange kind of manner, as the like was never seen.

It happened at that time, that there came a Gentleman into our Galley, who bare
our Captains name, and was also of kin unto him, to learn experience, and
to see some service. He was rich, well clad, better behau'd, and ware about his
neck a massy chain of gold, Soldier-like, being just such another for all the
world, as I was used to have heretofore. He dieted in the Poope; he had a good
garnish of Plate; and servants, that waited upon him, well and handsomely
suited: But it so fell out, that the very next day after his imbarking, there
were eighteen linkes of his chain missing, which were no less worth, then
fifty Crowns. Sure, some of his own servants must needs have them: for there
were none, that came into the Poope-roome, but such as were known persons, and
free from all suspicion: Yet notwithstanding, for the better clearing of this
doubt, all the Captains servants were put to the lash, yet for all that, was
there no news to be heard of them, they could never hear of them more, nor
get any the least inckling thereof in the world, nor is it known till this day
who stole them, or what became of them.

And for the better excusing hereafter of the like misfortune, the Captain
came to his kinseman, and told him, that his best and surest course was, that
for the time that he stayed there, he should commit the charge of his apparel,
and Jewels, to some trusty Galley-Slaue, who might take care of them and keep
them neat and handsome; assuring him, that what-soeuer he should deliver to
any one of their custodies, they durst as well be hanged, as not give him a
true account of it, and that there should not be so much as a hair missing,
of any thing that he should trust them withal.

This Gentleman liked very well of his counsel; and making afterward
inquiry, who in all the Galley might be the fittest man for him, and the most
sufficient, I was the only man they made choice of, as being recommended unto
them, for the good satisfaction that I would give him in my understanding, my
diligencie in attending his person, and for my cleanlines about my self, as
also any thing that was my masters. When the Gentleman had heard of these my
good qualities, and how I was likewise able to intertaine him with witty jests,
and merry conceits, he thought the time long, till he might see me in the
Poope. So in all haste, they called the Masters-Mate unto them, and being
entreated to part with me, he could not deny them their request, although it
grieved him much, for the good service that he received from me; They clapped a
long chain to my leg, which I trailed after me; and I was no sooner come
unto him, but he was very glad to see me, and spoke very kindly unto me: and I
think the rather, for that my feature, my face, and my actions, were
answerable to that which he had heard of me. It did somewhat grieve him, to see
me (like a Monky) tied thus to a chain, and to draw it after me. He
entreated the Captain, that he would favor me so far, that I might walk
up and down with one only fetter; which was granted: By which means, I was
enabled to do him the quicker and nimbler service, as well when he sat
without at his meals, as when he was within his Cabin, as also, in going to
and fro in the Gally, when occasion was offered. I had an Inventory delivered
unto me, of all his apparel and Jewels; whereof, I still gave him a very good
account; But that which he and I, had least affiance in, and were most jealous
of, was, of his own servants: For now that I had the charge of his recamera,
his Wardrobe, or whatsoever else was appertaining unto him, they might easily
excuse themselves of such things, as they could steal cleanly from me. They
cabbin'd with the Chaplain, near to the maine Mast: and the Gentleman, he had
his cabin within the Poope; and I, in alittle Dispense, or Pantrie, where I
kept some regalos, and dainties, besides other necessary provision.

I liked very well of my service, though I took a great deal of pains, but
it was a pleasure unto me, and gave me much content, that I had now the power,
by those things that past through my hands, to perform many kindnesses toward
such Slaves as were my friends and acquaintance: and albeit I was willing to
have done the like toward Soto, my old Camerade, yet I could not get within
him, nor come to fasten any kindness upon him; I wished his good as mine own,
but he did all me the spite that he could, discrediting and disgracing me,
telling some things truly of me, and inuenting other-some, like unto those, at
what time we were taken, and committed to prison, defaming me, as much as did
lie in him, broaching whatsoever he knew of me, not leaving any one thing
vn-ript up, for the manifesting of his malice, and my shame: so that, albeit I,
for mine own part, were privy to my self, how much I was now reformed; yet
those that heard him thus exclaim against me, would make interpretation of
them, as they stood affected, and comment upon them, as they themselves listed.
And though God, at that instant, should have given me the power to have
wrought Miracles, they would not have stik't to have said, that I had done them
in Belzebub's name.

Soto, was the knife, that sought to cut my throat; the point, or edge thereof,
was still toward me: yet never did any man hear me speak so much as one
foul word of him, or ever open my mouth against him, or make show of any the
least choler, at this his abusing me: I made no reckoning of it, but let it
pass as lightly as I could all my whole care being now taken up, in the -
diligent atending of my new Master, and in doing him all faithful service,
that I might procure his love and good liking toward me; hoping it might one
day so fall out, that either by him, or by some other, in recompense of my good
service, I might chance to purchase my liberty.

When he came out of his Cabin, I was still at hand to receive him; when he set
his feet to come down the ladder, I lent him my hand, at his entering, and
returning out of the Cock-Boate; I made him Tooth-picks for his Table, putting
them upon a plate, when he sat down to his meat; which, being many, and
maruailous curious, he would often send for tokens to his friends. His
Trencher-plates, and those his other vessels for the cooling of his wine, his
Cups, and his Glasses, were so cleanly kept, so neat, and so in every point as
they should be, that it was a pleasure to the eye to behold them. His bottles
of Wine, and his iarrs of water, fresh and sweet; the wool of the Mattresses
whereon he lay, kept vnknotty, and soft; his whole bedding so well looked to,
that there was not a Flea to be found in it, nor any the like troublesome
vermin: for as my leisure would give me leave, it was my daily exercise, to go
a hunting after them, stopping those holes and chinkes, where there was any the
least suspicion of their breeding, that my Master might not only be free from
Fleas, and Chinches, but the bad sent which they have with them.

So great was my diligence, and so pleasing the whole manner of my proceeding
with him, that my Master had now left off conuersing with his other servants,
and would at large discourse with me of grave and weighty matters; but dealt
therein with me as your Distillers use to do; he did Limbecke me, and squeeze
what he could from me; and when he had exhausted from me that juice and
substance, which was for his turn, and as much as he desired at that time to
draw from me, he would pause awhile upon the matter, or to speak more
plainly, was half jealous of me, that I was not so complete, and perfect as
I should be, nor had not that true touch and relish, which properly
appertains to your purer distillations. And all for the smacke of one Herb,
which was that evil report, which Soto had given of me. But his virulent
tongue could not make me wrong Virtue: I went as fast on in doing well, as he
did in speaking ill: as well, that my actions might give him the lie, as also
for that I now minded no other thing, then to run on still in that good
resolution, which I had proposed to my self.

When I waited on him at Table, I would out now and then with a merry Tale, or
some odd conceited jest or other. And a-nights, or at other such times as he
was disposed to take a nap, I would chat one thing or other to him, that I
might keep him still cheerful and merry. And the rather, for that of late
he was grown somewhat melancholy, upon a Letter that he had received but a
few days before from a grave personage, to whom he was much obliged, who all
his lifetime could never be drawn himself to marry, and was now wonderful
instant with this Gentleman my Master that he would get him a Wife. Perceiving
therefore how sad he was, I made bold to ask him the reason, why he was so
pensive. He told it me; and did likewise ask my advice, what he were best to
do in this case? I told him; Me thinks (Sir) that the fittest answer, which
is to be given to such a one, who has been so auerse from marriage himself,
and would now enforce others thereunto, at least seek to persuade them unto
it, is, That you are well content to do so, if he will give you one of his
daughters to Wife. My Master was well pleased with the counsel I gave him,
resolving with himself to take that course which I had prescribed unto him.
And continuing talk till it was dinner time, he willed me to tell him, being
I had been twice married, how I liked that kind of life.

I told him, Sir, a good and peaceable marriage, where love, and condition of
the parties stand upon equal terms, it is a glory; it is an enjoying Touching
Marriage.
both of earth and Heaven; it is a state for those, who make choice thereof,
out of a desire to be saved thereby, of so great perfection, and of such
exceeding both content, and comfort, that for to treat of such a subject, it
will require the relation of such a tongue, as has tasted the true happiness
thereof. But for my self, who made Matrimony a matter of money, and more for
pleasure, then propagation, as I did, I know not what to say unto it; I have
deservedly paid the price of that sin, by this my present punishment, which I
now endure.

There are some women (I must confess) who by their wisdom, and discreet
Worthy Wives, who are they?
carriage, have reduced to very good order and conformity, as perverse and
wicked men, as any are in the world. And there are other some again, that will
make the best tempered, and the holiest men alive, to lose all patience, Wicked
wives, and which are they?
though he he able to suffer never so much. Look but upon Job's wife, and see
into what a desperate humor she would feign have put her Husband; how did she
persecute him, and how much did it import him, to have recourse unto God, and
only to defend himself more from her, then from all other his persecutions,
and afflictions?

And therefore three friends being together in conversation; the one said;
Opinions of Marriage.
Happy is that Man that has the good hap to match with a good Wife. But more
happy (said the other) who buries her quickly, if she prove unto ward. And the
third said; Most happy is he, that has neither the one nor the other. How much an
importunate Wife and of an ill condition, does torment and vex a man, let that
Prouenzall tell it you, who being quite wearied and tired A Tale teaching a man
how to be vid of a bad Wife.
out with a shrewd Wife, and being unable any longer to endure her harsh
behavior, and not knowing in the world, how to correct these her malignant
humors, that he might without scandal rid himself of her, he was resolved
to go and make merry with his Wife and all his Family, at a house that he had
in the Country, that was not far off, it lying in his way, to pass by the
skirt of a Mountain, adjoining close upon Rodanus, a great and swift River;
which in that very part of it, for that it was narrow, and past along between
two Mountains, was very deep, and ran with a furious Current. He took
order that the Mule which his Wife was to ride on, had not for three days
before, one drop of water given her; so that, when she came to the place
aforesaid, and that she saw the water, there was no holding of her back, but
hastening down the hanging of the Hill, from one ridge to another, she got to
the River; from whence, it being impossible to turn her about, and to get up
again against the steepinesse of the Cliffe, nor being able with all the force
she had, to reyne her in, they both rushed into the River, where the woman was
drowned, and the Mule with much ado escaped; but came out so weak, and so
weary, that she was scarce able to stand upon her legs.

For those which never knew what marriage meant, and yet desire to be informed
what manner of thing it is, I may for a pattern set before their eyes, that
which passed with those Thrushes the Summer following that they were hatched,
and ready to fly abroad and shift for themselves. There A Tale of certain
Thrushes.
was a great Shole of them gathered together, as if all the Thrushes in the
world had joined in one muster, and were such a cloud of them, when they were
upon their wings, that they seemed to darken the air, and by their
interposition betwixt the Sun and the Earth, to make an Eclipse.

And when all this jolly company were assembled, and met together, they raised
their Camp, and marched away together, to seek out some better place to live
in, (for that year, their own Country failed them of that plenty, which it
was wont to afford them;) so at last they entered into a very goodly Country,
that was full of Gardens and Orchards, and fresh Fields, where there were many
pleasant Fruits, and other delicate feeding for them; where they were very
willing to set up their rest, it seeming unto them, to be a place not only of
much recreation and delight, but of sufficient sustenance and maintenance for
them. But when the Inhabitants of that Country saw how they flocked together,
they spread their nets, made ginnes, and pit-fals for them, and by little and
little went taking and destroying of them.

The poor Thrushes, seeing themselves thus persecuted, and that they could not
safely feed there, nor rest in quiet, they sought out another place that might
make better for their purpose, which they found as pleasant, and as plentiful
as the former; but they tasted here of the same sauce, as they did there;
which made them likewise to fly for fear from that danger which hung over
their heads.

Thus did they travel up and down from place to place, till that they being
in a manner almost all destroyed, those few that were left alive, agreed to
return home to their own Country. When their fellow-Thrushes that stayed at
home, saw them return so fair, and fat, they said unto them; O how happy are
you, and how wretched are we? We stayed here behind, and you see how weak,
and how poor we be; but you are come home in that good case, your feathers so
smooth, and so sleeke, that it is a pleasure to look upon them; and your
bodies so plumpe, and so well fed, that ye can scarce fly, ye be so fat;
whereas we through pure hunger, are scarce able to stand upon our legs, and
when we are on our wings, are ready through faintness to fall to the ground.

Whereunto these welcome-home Travelers returned this answer: The eyes of
your consideration reach no farther, then to this our fatness; but if you
would be pleased to weigh with your selves, how many of us went from hence, and
how few of us are returned home alive, you would rather rest contented with
your poor, but secure fare; then with this our fatness, and full feeding, so
full of dangers.

They who look only on the pleasures of Marriage, and go no farther, where
they may see scarce ten of ten thousand, to come off clear, and escape the
danger of it, will think better of a single life, then of Marriage; and that
it is far better and safer to be alone, then ill accompanied.

Whilst we were in this Discourse, dinner was serving in, and the cloth being
laid, I waited as I was wont to do; having my eyes still fixed on my Masters
hands, that he might not wagge a finger, but I might be in readiness to
apprehend and execute his thoughts. But whilst I was thus watchful about my
Master, Soto was not sleeping in the mean while to work me a mischief.

And when he saw all his former malice could not work me out of favor, nor
do me any harm, with sheere money he went about to purchase out his revenge
upon me. He grew into a League of friendship with my Masters Page, such
another Bird as himself, for that bribes had corrupted Soto his malice toward
Guzman. His plot to disgrace him.
him, and private interest drawn him to be thus dishonest toward me. He
promised him a dainty fine pair of Stockins of his own knitting, and told
him, that he would bestow them upon him, if (as he waited at the Table, he
could handsomely steal a piece of Plate from thence, and hide it in some
secret place in my Pantry, that I might not know of it. For, in so doing, he
should effect two good things. First, he should gain a good pair of Stockins
by the bargain. And secondly, himself, and his other fellow servants, should
by this means be received again into favor, and I cast out.

The Page did not like amiss of this motion; and taking occasion that day to
go down, he took up a Silver Plate, which (by lifting up a little board) he
hid in one of the sides of the Gallie.

Now when the cloth was taken away, going to gather up my Plate^ as my manner
was) that I might make them clean, finding one of them wanting, I made
diligent search for it; and when I had searched every corner, and could not
find it, I presently gave notice, that I mist such a Plate; to the end that
some diligence might be used, for the sooner recovery of it, with those his
servants that appertained to the Poope.

The Captain and my Master did believe what was truth at the first; but
Hatred, what effects it produces.
because my enemy Soto bare witness against me, it was voiced out amongst
them, that my self, abusing the favor that I had with my Master, had stolen
it, and conuayd it away, that I might lay the fault upon others, and so go
away with it my self. This roguish Page, did put a helping hand hereunto, and
did all that he could to disgrace me; So that now the doors began to be set
open to suspicion, and had made some little entrance; and stepping farther in
by degrees, my Master was often earnest with me, to confess the truth, before
the business should grow fouler. But because I knew mine own innocence, and
that I was as clear thereof, as the child that is newborn, I could give him
no other satisfaction save good words.

Then this Traitor the Page stood up, and said; Me thinks, Sir, it were not
amiss that you would cause his Dispense, or Pantry to be searched. For it is
not possible, but that he must hide it some where or other there-abouts. For,
being that I had not gone out of the Poope, it was very likely they might find
it in my lodging. This course took best, and was of all very well liked, and
approved: And so getting them down, and rummaging all that little room; first
this place, and then that, they lighted upon it at last where the Page had put
it; and taking it forth, they came up with great joy, and proclaimed, that now
they had found it, and that I had hid it there; for that it was not possible,
that any body else should do it.

Now, because this carried with it a show of truth, and that they had caught me
in the Negative, this confirmed them in their suspicion, and this crime was
laid to my charge.

The Captain commanded the Alguazils servant, to glue me fifty stripes; from
the which my Master did free me, entreating my pardon, for that it was the
first fault that I had committed; aduising me withal, that if hereafter I
should be taken with the like, I should be soundly punished, and pay both for
the old, and the new. After this, I held not up my head any more, my heart was
never truly merry, nor did enjoy my self, as before; not for that which was
past; but fearing that which was to come; Thinking with my self, that he, that
had done me this wrong, would (having escaped this so well) watch his time to
do me a greater mischief. And being jealous of some farther foul play, I
earnestly besought both the Captain, and my Master, that they would quit me of
this charge, and that I might have their good will to deliver over those things
that were in my custody to some other, and I should take it from them as a
favor, that they would return me back again, laden with my irons, to my
Bank. They thought, that the ground of all this, was the desire that I had to
go back again to serve my old Master, the Masters-Mate: And howbeit I did
importune them very hard, and was very instant with them; they, for the same
reason, were more earnest and urgent upon me; and that I should (though it
grieved me) serve and attend there all the days of my life. Miserable man that
I am (said I) I know not in the world what to do, nor how to defend my self
from Traitors; who, it seems, have set themselves against me, only of
purpose to undo me.

I did all that I could possibly do for my life, no man living could be more
careful, watching (like Argo's) with a hundred eyes, whatsoever was committed
Argo's eyes are not sufficient to keep a man from the malice of his enemies.
to my charge, not neglecting those things that were scarce worth the looking
after, being but trifles, and not to be reckoned of: yet all this my care
would not serve my turn; it has done me, you see, no good; I was now in my
rising, but Heaven has thought it fit that I must first fall.

One evening, as my Master was coming forth, I went out (as I was wont to do)
to receive him as he was to ascend the stayres, I gave him my hand; he comes
up: I took off his Cloak, his Sword, and his Hat, and gave him his Sea-Gowne,
and Cap, which was of green Damask; for these things I had still in a
readiness.

When I had done, I carried down those other things, putting them in their
right place. That very night, not knowing, how, who, or by what means (unless
it were the Devils doing, for I could not conceive otherwise of it) that the
Hat being fallen down from the place where it hung, I found it without a Band,
which was set with gold Buttons. Whip, Sir John, it was gone in a trice; so
that in the morning, when I saw how it lay, and the Hat-band gone, I stood like
a man amazed.

Well, I searched as diligently for it, as if my life had layne upon it; but to
no purpose in the world. The Hat-band would not appear, not was there any
sign, or mark thereof, how it should be gone.

When I told my Master of it; Ah (said he) now I know thee to be a thief; I
wot well what thou art, and why thou do it. But set your heart at rest, it
shall not serve your turn, for the Hat-band must not be so lost; I shall make
you fetch it out, and yet fail of your purpose besides. I know your fetch well
enough. Do not thou think, that ever since the Plate was missing, I have
looked into your water, and found out the disease thou art sick of, and that
thou go seeking new occasions, that thou may be quit of my service? But
thou shall serve me still in spite of thy teeth, if it be but to vex thee the
more, and thou shall have a thousand bastonado's walk daily about thy
shoulders: Nor shall thou ever serve any other Master in the Galley, but my
self; And in case I should go hence, I will so far befriend you, that thou
shall be rank't like a Rogue, according as thy Villainies deserve, and thy lewd
and naughty dealings, since my good usage toward thee, will not make thee
leave of, to be that which thou art, and ever wilt be Guzman de Alfarache;
that is enough, I need say no more unto thee.

I know not what to say unto thee, nor to indeare the grief that I conceived
here-vpon. Finding my self clear and innocent, and yet charged with a just
(as they would have it) and lawful crime, I reply'de not so much as one word,
nor had I the power to speak; And if I should have sought to justify my
self, had it been Gospel, that I should have delivered unto them, coming out
of my mouth, no more credit would have been given unto it, then to Mahomet. I
therefore was silent, and held my peace. For, when words will not profit a man,
it were better that his tongue should be dumb, and his heart tell its griefs
unto God. Inwardly to my self, I gave his Majesty thanks for this my
affliction, beseeching him, that he would free me from this man's hands; for I
knew not, wherein I had offended him. For I was so truly become another man,
and so quite altered from that I was before, that I would rather suffer my self
to be torn in a thousand pieces, then to commit any the least crime in the
world.

When they had used many diligences, and saw that by no means they could bring
this Hat-band to light; the Captain commanded the Alguazils man, that he
should beat it out of me, and never give me over, till I had confessed the
Theft.

I was presently taken up, they did what they could, and I endured it as well
as I could. They would have me to acknowledge that, which I never knew,
whilst I with my soul powered forth such prayers, as I knew; inuocating
heaven, that that torment and blood, which those cruel stripes did draw from
me, might be joined with those innocent drops, and undeserved tortures,
which my good God both suffered, and shed for me, and that they might be
auailable for me to salvation; seeing that there was now no way but one with
me: For dye I must under these their tyrannous hands, if they did not leave off
the sooner. They saw all of them in what a pitiful case I was, and there was
nothing else wanting betwixt me and my death, but the breathing forth of my
Spirit. And albeit it seemed to my Master, that my cruelty, in suffering my
self thus to be whipped, was greater then his, in commanding it to be done; yet
at last taking compassion upon me, and pitying the great torment that I was
put to, caused me to be taken away.

Then did they chase my body with Salt, and Wine Vinegar, which was of greater
torment unto me, then the other. The Captain would have had them to have given
me as much more upon my belly, saying; Little do you know, Sir, the condition
of these Thieves, who are of like nature to your Foxes; they will counterfeit
themselves to be almost dead, and will lie, as if there were no life in them;
but if you let them alone, and suffer them to take breath, they will run from
you, like so many young Colts: And other some are so hardy, that for a piece of
six pence, they will let you flea the skin from off their backs. But let this
Dog assure himself, he shall not carry it away so; for I will never give
him over, till I have either the Hat-band, or his life. He commanded me to be
carried away from thence to my Dispensilla, or little Pantry, where they did
lie at me (I know not how often) with persuasions and admonitions, ever and
anon notifying unto me, that I should either deliver up the Hat-band, or arm
my self with patience; for it was resolved, that I must be beaten to death,
rather then I should enjoy what I had stolen. But, as no man can restore that
which he never had; no more could I cumply with that which they commanded me.

Then I knew what it was to be a Gally-slaue; and how that the love, which some
made show to bear unto me, and the good looks that they gave me, proceeded
only from the pleasure that they took in my merry jests, and witty conceits,
and not for mine own sake. And the greatest grief that I did feel in these
my miseries, was not so much for the pain which I did endure, nor for the
false witness that was given against me, as that all of them did verily
believe, that I did justly deserve this punishment, and therefore took no
pity of me.

Some few days (after this my rubbing and being washed with Salt and Vinegar)
past over my head, when lo, they came a-fresh upon me, commanding me to make
restitution of the Hat-band; and because I would not or (to speak more truly)
could not give it them, they pulled me out of the Pantry, being very weak and
ill, fastening Cords to the wrests of mine arm, and haling me up with a pully,
I hung (I know not how long) in the air, which was a terrible torment unto
me, where I thought, I should have breathed my last. For my heart was so
afflicted, that I had scarce any feeling that there was any such thing in my
body, and my breath began to fail me. At last, they let me down, not to give
me case, but to lay me down upon my back athwart the Cannon, that lies
between the Fore-castle, and hinder Deck; where when my belly lay fit for
their purpose, they laid thereon such cruel blows, as if it had been for
some heinous crime, charging the Officer to be-labour me even to the death.

But the Captain, beginning now to fear, that I was ready to give up the
Ghost, and that he should be accountable to the King for me, if I should
through this his cruel usage perish in my punishment, he held it the better
option of the two, rather to lose the Hat-band, then me. Whereupon he
commanded they should take me away, and carry me to my wonted lodging, there to
be cured.

When I began to recover, and had got a little strength, they yet thought
themselves not sufficiently revenged of me; for they had still this steadfast
belief o^me, that I was such a notable Villainem and such a stubborn Rogue,
that I would rather suffer all that rigor of this their whipping and scourging
of me, then lose the interest of this my supposed theft: Insomuch, that they
commanded the Masters Mate, that he should never pardon me, when I did offend,
but that he should be very careful to punish still in me, those sins that
were venial, as if they had been mortal:

And he, who could not otherwise choose but fulfill his Captains command (for
he durst not for his life do otherwise) did chastise me with unaccustomed
cruelty one while for that I did not get me to sleep at my due hours;
another-while, for that I did not wake in time; if to supply my other wants, I
did sell my allowance, sparing the meat out of my belly, to relieve my
necessities, I was sure to be lasht for it; using me so extremely ill, that I
was weary of my life, and did desire with all my heart, that I were out of this
wretched world. And, that they might have the better color to do as they did,
and that they might pick occasion to pay me soundly, and yet save themselves
harmless; they committed to my charge the trouble of the The Italian will
have this to signify tu^a la robo del Rey. The French ^nders it, Con^ille.
Cor^lla; with protestation, that if any thing therein should be wanting, I
should be sure to pay well for it. I was likewise upon all occasions, like the
rest of the Gally-Slaues, put to tugge at the Oar; my Bank was the
hindermost, and therefore the more painful, as being subject to the inclemency
of the weather; in Summer, to heates; and in Winter to colds; being still ty'de
to have a care to keep up the Beak of our Gally in the winds mouth, and to
go snugge and tyte. To my custody, were committed all the iron implements that
were aboard her; as likewise the Cables, to cast or weigh Anchor, as need
should require. When we did sail with the wind, I was feign to look to the
fore-sayle, as also to the sheate that was to the Lar-boord; sail, or not
sail, I had something still to do, either before, or behind. I did spinne
all the Hemp, whereof your smaller cordage, and lesser Ropes were made, which
were spent and employed on the Galleys. It was put to my account to tie up the
Yards, to ruffle the Sails, to dry them, and then deliver them to the
Ship-boyes, to hoyse the Fore-sayle, and see every thing fit about it. I did
mend those ends of the sails that were torn and rent with the wind, I did
patch and lengthen out those that were grown too short; I did strengthen the
old tacklings with odd ends, that I had in store for that purpose; but the
Cables I supplyde still with new stuff: I did help the Gunners to plant their
Ordnance, remove their Carriages, and to wind and turn their Artillery, as
they would have it. The care was laid upon me, to stop the touch-holes, and to
see them well covered, that no wet should come at them; to look to the
scouring sticks, and the Spoones to power in the powder, to the Rammers, the
Spunges, and the Lin-stocks that belonged to the Artillery. And when the
Master-Mates man was out of the way, or otherwise occupied, it was enjoined me
to sweep and make clean the Gally, and to be the common Swabber, causing the
Ship-boyes to bring Mats and Rushes, to make Maps where-withall to rub it,
keeping it always neat and clean from all kind of filthiness. And of old
ends of Rags, or of Flax and Tow, to make wads and wisps for those that go to
the Long-house (you know what I mean) and this was the utmost of all miseries,
and that went most against my stomach, as being of all others the meanest and
the basest Office; for being to serve them with these, for so beastly (that I
may not give it a worse word, for fear of turning thy stomach) a piece of
business, I must first be forced to kiss it, before I give it into their
hands, so that by an Attorney, I must kiss, you know what.

He, that should have so many things committed to his charge as I had, and had
not been accustomed unto them, it must have been almost impossible for him not
to have failed in the performance of them; but through the great care that I
always took, I did study to do all things well, and did seldom or never
miss in doing of my duty, and with use, they grew every day less difficult
then other. Even from hence also would Fortune have thrown me down if she
could; but because her force cannot extend it self against the goods of the
mind; and that adversity makes men wise and prudent; I still bare up stoutly,
and continued firm and constant, withstanding all the power that she could
make against me. And as he that is rich, and lives happily, is evermore afraid
of falling; so on the contrary, was I in good hope of rising, because it was
impossible for me to fall any lower. And as my mind gave me, so it fell out.

Soto, my Camerade, came not to the Galleys, either to give Alms, or to preach
Faith in Christ to the Infidels It was his sins that had brought him thither;
for he had been the greatest, and most notorious thief, that ever was heard
of in his time, either in all Italy, or in Spain. He had sometimes been a
Soldier, and knew every part of the Country, as one that had trauell'd it to
and fro many a time. He perceiving that our Galleys did sail along the
Mediterranean, and that we went touching now and then upon the coast of
Barbary, seeking reprizals, it entered into his imagination to treat with some
Moors, and other Gally-slaues, that were of his faction, to make purchase of
this our Gally, and to go sheere away with it. For which purpose, he and they
were already provided of some weapons, which they had hid in bycorners, and
under their Banks, to make use of them, when time should serve. But because he
could not bring this his design to pass, without having me to be of his
Party, in regard of the place that I had in my Bank, where I was behind at
his back; and for that the ordering of the Tacklings and Cables were committed
wholly to my charge, he thought fit to make me acquainted with this his
intention, casting and considering with himself, that this business would be
better welcome to no man then my self, as well for that I was condemned to
serve there as a Slave all the days of my life; as also, that I might free my
self from that Hell, where-into they had thrust me, and did so severely punish
me. Soto would have broken the Ice himself, and did much desire to confer
with me about it, but he could not find the means. Whereupon, he sent a
Messenger unto me, (one that he might trust) desiring my reconciliation, and
favor, and that I would join with him for the better effecting of our
freedom from this cruel bondage and slavery wherein we now lived. I returned
him answer, that this was not a business so easily to be undertaken as he
supposed; but ought to be well weighed and thought upon, before we did resolve
thereon; for we must needs run a very great hazard in the undergoing
thereof; for that there was no medium betwixt these two; either to come off
clear, or to lose our lives. To the Moore, who had brought me this message, my
Counsel did not seem amiss; Telling me, that he would go with my answer to
Soto, and find a time to come again unto me, and talk farther of it.

In the Interim, while these messages past to and fro, I consulted with my
self; and for that I had put on a full resolution, not to do any thing that
was infamous, or ill, no not for any profit or benefit that should accrue
thereby unto me, I knew that it was now no time for me to advise farther with
them; as well, for that I saw how they were resolved; as also for fear, if I
should fall off from them, or otherwise miss of their purpose, they might
chance to disclose me, and suborne some false witnesses against me, the better
to excuse and save themselves: Giving out, that I, to free my self from the
misery, wherein I lived, had incited them thereunto. Well, I gave them good
words, and made my self to be of their party, they being resolved to put this
their plot in execution upon Saint John Raeptists day, betimes in the Morning.

Now, when the Eve was come, and that one of the Soldiers was going to
untruss a point, when he came to me for some Ockame to wipe his posteriors, I
rose up, and whispering him in the care, secretly said unto him, Sir, tell your
Captain, that it imports both his life, and his honor, to hear two words from
me, which tend to his Majesty's service: and therefore let him presently give
order that I may be brought to him into the Poope. He did so, and the Captain
forthwith commanded me to come before him, where, in his presence, I revealed
unto him this their conspiracy: whereat he blessed himself, and would scarce
give credit unto it; it seeming unto him, that I had invented this of mine own
head, that I might be eased of those troublesome labors, and great miseries
which I endured, and that by this means. I might procure some mercede or
favor from him. But when I told him, where he should find their Weapons, and
who, and how they were brought thither, he rendered many thanks unto God, that
he had delivered him from so great a danger; promising, that he would see me
well rewarded for my labor.

He commanded one that was Captain of a Squadron, that he should make
diligent search about those Banks, which I had pointed forth unto him, and
looking there for their weapons, at last they lighted upon them. Presently
there-vpon, was a Process fulminated forth against all the Offenders: And
because the next day following was a great Festival day, and very solemnly
observed by us, their punishment was deferred till the next day following-God,
(and my good fortune) who was well pleased with this my service, and did guide
these businesses of mine, by his own divine hand, would needs have it fall out
so luckily for me, that opening a Chest to hang out the Streamers that
belonged to the Maine-Mast, the Misne, and other fitting places for them, as
well in acknowledgement of their thankfulness unto God, as the honor and
solemnity of that day, they found therein a nest of Rats, and amongst other
trinkets my Masters Hat-band.

Soto conceiving how the world was like to go with him, was very desirous to
have his ghostly Father come to him, that (like a good Christian) he might make
confession of his sins, and craving pardon and forgiveness at my hands, for
the false witnesses, that he had suborned against me about the Hat-band, he did
together declare, how, and wherefore he had done it, and howbeit he had made
show to be reconciled unto me, and to enter into a new League of friendship
with me, yet his purpose and resolution was, when they had made themselves
Masters of the Gally, to have stabbed me, his hatred being such toward me,
that nothing could satisfy it, but my death. From whose reuengefull hand, my
good God, that day, was so gracious unto me, as to free me from this his
implacable malice.

Soto, and one of his Companions, who were the Ringleaders of this rebellion,
were condemned to be drawn in pieces with four Galleys; and five other to be
hanged: Which sentence was executed. And as many as were found to have a finger
in this business, were confined to the Galleys for term of life, being first
publicly whipped, passing from Gally to Gally, till they had rounded the whole
Fleet. As for the Moors, most of them had their noses and their ears cut
off, that by this mark, they might be known, where ever they came, to be
Rogues upon record.

This exemplary Justice having past upon these Offenders; when all was ended,
and things settled as before, the Captain sends for me, and highly extolling
the goodness of my nature, my innocence, and my loyalty, craving pardon of
me for my former ill usage, he commanded my irons to be struck off, and gave
me leave to go at liberty up and down the Gally, till his Majesty's Royal
Scedula should be sent for my absolute discharge. For so the Captain had
supplicated for me; and being consulted on by the Council of War, the
Petition was signed; which was no sooner sent down, but I was set at liberty.

And here (gentle Reader) do I put a full point to these my misfortunes. I
have given thee a large account of my lewd life; it is truly summed up unto
thee. What it was hereafter, thou shall see in my third and last Part, if God
shall give me life: and that I do not first exchange this transitory one, for
one that is eternal, which is the hope and life of the faithful.

FINIS.

