THE EPIstles and Gospelles with a brief Postil upon the same from after Easter
till Aduent, which is the Somer part, set forth for the singular commodity of
all good christen men and namely of Prestes and Curates.

Roma. i. Euangelium est virtus dei in salutem omni credenti The Gospel is the
power of god to the salvation of every faithful Christen man. Cum priuilegio
ad imprimendum solum.



Richard Tauerner clerk of the Signet to our sovereign Lord the king
wyssheth to the christen reader al grace from God above and increase of
knowledge in his word
Forasmuch as (good christen reader) at this present Mat^ IX.
time according to our Lords word, the harvest is great and plenteouse, but
the laborers are ^ewe: I mean as thus, that the people be very desirous and
gready to receive gods word, if they had ple^tie of sobre modeste and sincere
teachers, whereas now for skacetie of such in some places they be destitute and
^cattered a broad even as sheep lacking feythful sheperdes: I was instantly
required, to the intent yt Lord of the harvest might by this mean thrust forth
his laborers in to his harueste, to peruse and recognize this brefe postel
which was deliuerid me of certain godly persons for yt purpose and intent.
which thing to my little power and as the shortness of time would serve, I have
done. And such sermons or homylyes as seemed to want, I have supplied partly with
mine own industrye, and partlye with the help of other sober men which be
better lernyd then I my self. Now, if ye and namely you pristes and curates
shall use this synguler help and benifyte, which is here offered unto you,
well and to the edificatio^ of Christ's church, ye shall give occasis^ that
other fruteful works may be hereafter at the commandment of the kings
majesty or of his most honorable counsel set forth and published unto you. But
if, on the contrary part, after the X^^ Luke Mat^ xxvi.
exemple of ye unprofitable servant spoken of in ye Gospel, ye wol not find
in your hearts charitably and pru dently to occupye this talent that here is
frankely delivered unto you, but will either wrappe it up in a fair napkyn or
else irreverently handle it to the destruction and not to the edification of
others: he ye then sure, that not only no mo such benefytes shall be bestowed
upon you, but also all that which ye have already, shall be taken from you and
that not unworthy ly. Yea and finally according to our Lords own sentence ye
shall be cast as servants unprofitable int utter darkness, where shall be weeping
and gnashyng^ of teeth. But there is good hope that ye woll otherwise demene
your selves, namely now sith ye be so beningly invited, enjoined, and
continually called upon to execute your office in this behalf by our high
shepeherde under Christ and supreme head our most dradde sovereign lord the
kings majesty whom, I doubt not, but ye woll gladly obey, I mean to feed
more often your flock committed to your charge not with rash, erronyouse,
heretical or fabulouse ser mons, but with sobre, discret, catholic and Godly
in structions such as be here described unto you or better if better ye can
deuyse. In which thing doing; ye shall undoubtedly not only declare your
selves obedient to your supreme head Gods minister, but also ye shall
discharge your conscience before God of the due ministratio^ where unto ye be
called. To whom be given all praise and glory world without end.

Amen.
The preface of Richard Tauerner to the reader.
FOrasmoche as diverse and sundry light parsons at this day contrary to ye mind
and sentence of the aunciente doctors and also contrary the expectacio^ of
moderate writers of this time, do wonderfully wrest all that they read into
the worste sense in mayntenaunce of their carnal liberty and dissolute kind
of lyuinge, therefore I think it very expediente, yea and (as the case
requires) more then necessary, that ^yth this Postille is by me though not
made, yet recognized and in diverse places augmented: brefely to admonyshe the
reader, how it ought to be read and received. Ye shall therefore understand,
that this work is set forth to your edificatio^, and not to your de structio^.
It is I say set forth not yt by ye same ye should maynteyne any erronyouse
doctrine contrary, either to the kings majesty's laws and proclamations, or
to the determination and sentence of the catholyke church. Ye shall not learn
here to despise gods laws and man's, nor the decent and laudable ceremonies and
rytes of the church. Here is taught no lawles liberty to do what you lust,
but obedience to god and to his commandments, obedience to the kings
majesty and to his laws, obedience to the wholesome tradicions of the church.
The sacrament of the aultare, the sacrament of penance with the other
sacraments of the church be here not heretically contemned but catholykly
auaunced. Feyth is here not so nakedly extolled, but that good works also be
ne cessarily required to be in a christen man. Neither yet be good works here
so magnifyed, that feythe which ought to be the foundation of the christen
relygion is befrauded of her due place. Only this one thing I require of you,
that ye wol not rashly judge of a piece of the matier without the hole
circu^staunce, but that ye woll deliberately confer one place with an other,
and theu I doubt not but if any sentence shall happen to be either obscurely or
incircu^spectly spoken, yet by the conference of places ye shall perceive the
true meaning and sense of the same. Certeynely as touching mine own opinion
in matters concerning the christen relygion, I protest to all the world that as I
submytte my self in all things to the ce^sure and determination of the
church, so I think it unlawful for any man of his own private authority
either to speak or write against the same. Yet I wol not deny, but ma^s
infirmity shall otherwhyles err. Hierom, Ambrose, and Augustine were men of
excellent lernyg and also holiness, yet some faults escaped them in their
writings. Yea saint Austine openly retracted many things. This I dare say with
saint Austine, Err in my writing^ I may, but an heretic I can be none. For
being ones admonyshed of my error, I wol not obstinately defend the same, but
submyt my self to the iugme^t of the church. Which I would heartily wish, that
other would do ye same. Then these diverse sects of Anabaptists, of
sacramentaries, and of other heretics should not thus swarm abroad. Then
should ye christen church be in much more quiet then it is. Then should Christ's
religion be more truly kept, and Christ him self better pleased with us.
Which thing I beseech god, bring to pas.

Amen.
A TABLE OF THE EXHORTACIONS UPON the Epistles and Gospels contained in this
present part.
First a sermon of the resurrection.
The Epistle on the first sunday after Easter, called low sunday. The.i.
epistle of Ioh. the. v. cha. fol. j. The Gospel on the first sunday after
Easter, the xx. chapter of John fol. iij The epistle on the second sunday
after Easter, the first epistle of Peter the: ij. chap^. fol. v^. The gospel on
the second sunday after Easter, the x. chapter of John fol. vii^. The
epistle on the third sunday after Easter, the first epistle of S. Peter the.
ij. chapi fol. x. The Gospel on the third sunday after Easter, the xvi.
chapter of John fol. xv. The epistle on the fourth sunday after Easter, the
first chapter of James fol. xviii. The Gospel on the fourth sunday after
Easter, the xvi. chapter of Johan fol. xxi. The epistle on the. v. sunday
after Easter, the first chapter of saint James fol. xxvi. The Gospel on the.
v. sunday after Easter, the. xvi. chapter of John fol. xxviii.
A sermon in the Rogacion weke fol. xxxii.
The Epistle on the Ascension day, the first chapter of the acts of the
Apostles fol. xxxv. The Gospel on Ascension day, the. xvi. chapter of saint
Mark fol. xxxviii. The epistle on the sunday after the Ascension day, the. i.
epistle of Peter the. iiii. chap. fol. xlv. The Gospel on the sunday after the
Ascension day the. xv. chapter of John fol. xlvii. The Epistle on why^sonday,
the second chapter of the acts of the Apostles fol. L. The Gospel on
whytsondaye, The. xiiii. chapter of Johan fol. liii. The epistle on the
second day of Pentecoste, the. x. chapter of the acts fol. lix. The gospel
on the second day of Pentecoste. The third chapi. of Johan fol. lxi. The
Epistle on the third day of Pentecost, the. viii chapter of the acts fol.
lxiiii. The gospel on the third day of Pentecoste, the. x. chapter of John
fol. lxvi. The Epistle on the fourth day of pentecost, the. i^^ chapter of
the acts fol. lxvii The gospel on the fourth day of pentecost, the. v^.
chapter of saint John fol. lxix. The epistle on Trinity sunday, the fourth
chapter of the Apocalypse fol. lxx. The Gospel on Trinity sunday, the third
chapter of Johan fol. lxxiii. The Epistle on Corpus Christi day, the first
epistle to the Corinthyans, the. xi. chapter fol. lxvii. The gospel on Corpus
Christi day, the. vi. chapter of Johan fol. ^odem The epistle on the first
sunday after trinity sunday the. i. epistle of John the. i^^i. chap fol.
lxxvi. The Gospel on the first sunday after Trinity, the xvi. chapter of
Luke fol. lxxviii. The epistle on the second sunday after trinity, the i.
epistle of John the. iii. chapi fol. lxxxi. The gospel on the second sunday
after Trinity, the viii. chapter of Luke fol. lxxxiii. The epistle on the
third sunday after Trinity, the i. epistle of Peter the. v. chapter fol.
lxxxvi. The gospel on the third sunday after Trinity, the xv. chapter of
Luke fol. lxxxviii. The epistle on the fourth sunday after trinity, the viii.
chapter to the Romans fol. x^i. The gospel on the fourth sunday after
trinity, the vi. chapi of Luke fol. xcv. The epistle on the fyfthe sunday
after trinity, the. i. epistle of saint Peter the. iii. cha fol. xcviii. The
gospel on the fyfth sunday after trinity, the. v. chapi of Luke fol. xcix.
The Epistle on syxte sunday after Trinity, the syxte chapter to the Romans
fol. ci. The gospel on the syxte sunday after trinity, the. v. chapter of
Mark fol. cvi. The epistle on the seventh sunday after tri^itie, the vi.
chapter to the Romans fol. cix. The gospel on the seventh sunday after
trinity, the viii. chapter of Mark fol. cx. The epistle on ye eight sunday
after trinity, the. viii. chapter to the Romans fol. cxii. The Gospel on
the ^yght sunday after trinity, the vii. chapter of Mark fol. cxiiii. The
epistle on the. ix. so^daye after trinity, the first epistle to the Corin.
the. x. chap fol. cxvi. The gospel on the. ix. sunday after trinity, the.
xvi. chapter of Luke fol. cxviii. The epistle on the. x. sunday after
trinity, the first epistle to the Corin. the. xii. chapi fol. cxxviii. The
Gospel on the. x. sunday after trinity, the. xix. chapter of Luke fol.
cxxx. The epistle on the. xi. sunday after trinity, the first epistle to the
Corin the. xv. chap fol. cxxxii. The gospel on the. xi. sunday after
trinity, the. viii. chapter of Luke fol. cxxxiiii. The epistle on the. xii.
so^day after trinity, the second epistle to the Corin. the. iii. chapi fol.
cxxxv. The gospel on. xii. sunday after trinity, the seventh chapter of
Mark fol. cxxxix The epistle on the. xiii. sunday after trinity, the. iii.
chapter to the Galathians fol. cxlii. The gospel on the. xiii. sunday after
Trinity, the. x. chapter of Luke fol. cxliii. The epistle on the. xiiii.
sunday after trinity, the. v. chapter to the Galatians fol. cxlviii. The
gospel on the. xiiii. sunday after trinity, the. xvii chapter of Luke fol.
cl. The epistle on the. xv. sunday after trinity, the. v. vi chapter to the
Galathians fol. cli. The gospel on the. xv. sunday after trinity, the syxte
chapter of Matheu fol. cliii. The epistle on the. xvi. sunday after trinity,
the. iii. chapter to the Ephesians fol. clvi. The gospel on the. xvi. sunday
after trinity, the. vii. chapter of Luke fol. clviii. The epistle on the.
xvii. sunday after trinity, the. iiii. chapter to the Ephesians fol. clix.
The gospel on the. xvii. sunday after trinity, the. xiiii chapter of Luke
fol. clx. The epistle on the. xviij. fondaye after trinity, the. ^. epistle to
the Corin. the. i. cha fol. clxii. The gospel on the. xviii. Sunday after
trinity, the xxii. chapter of Matheu fol. clxiii. The epistle on the. xix.
sunday after trinity, the. ^^^^. chapter to the Ephelians fol. clxv. The
gospel on the. xix. sunday after trinity, the. ix, chapter of Matheu fol.
clxvi. The epistle on the. xx. sunday after trinity, the fyfthe chapter to the
Ephesians fol. cl^viii The gospel on the. xx. sunday after trinity, the.
xxii. chapter of Matheu fol. clxix. The epistle on the. xxi. sunday after
trinity, the. vi. chapter to the Ephesians fol. ^lxxii The gospel on the.
xxi. sunday after trinity, the. iiii. capter of John fol. ^lxxiii. The epistle
on the. xxii. sunday after trinity, the fyr^^ chapter to the Philippyans fol.
clxxiiii. The gospel on the. xxii. so^day after trinity, the. xviii. chapter
of Matheu fol. ^ixxvi. The epistle on the. xxiii. sunday after trinity, the.
iii. chapter to the Philippians fol. clxxvii. The gospel on the. xxiii. so^day
after trinity, the. xxii chapter of Mathewe fol. clxxviii. The epistle on
the. xxiiii. sunday after trinity, the. i. chapter to the Colossians fol.
clxxx. The gospel on the. xxiiii. sunday after trinity, the. ^x. chapter of
Matheu fol. clxxxi. The epistle on ye. xxv. sunday after trinity, the. xxxiii.
chapter of Ieremias fol. clxxxiii. The gospel on the. xxv. sunday after
trinity, the. vi chapter of John fol. clxxxv
POSTILLES OR HOMILIES UPON THE EPISTLES AND GOSPELS FROM ESTER until TRINITY
sunday, with certain other fruitful and godly SERMONS drawn forth by
diverse learned men for the syngular edificacion and commodity of al good
CHRISTEN parsons and in especial of prestes and CVRATES.



Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.

ANNO. M. D. XL.

THE COPY OF THE KINGS graciouse privilege.
HENRY the eight by the grace of god king of England and of France,
defensour of the faith, Lord of Ireland, and in earth supreme head immediately
under Christ of the church of England To all prynters of books within this
our Realm and to all other our officers, ministers and subjects, these our
letters hearing or seeing: Gretynge. We let you wit, that of our grace especial
we have given privilege unto our well-beloved subject Richard Banks, that no
manner person within this our Realm, shall prynte any manner of books, what so
ever our said subject shall prynte first within the space of seven years
next ensuyng the printynge of every such book so by him prynted, upon pain of
forfetynge the same. Wherefore we woll and command you, that ye nor none of
you do presume to prynte any of the said books during the time aforesaid, as
ye tender our pleasure, and woll avoid the contrary.

A SERMON OF THE RESVRRECTION.
CHRISTVS traditus fuit propter peccata nostra and resurrexit propter
iustificationem nostri.

Roma. iiij. Christ was delivered for our sins, and rose again for the
justification of us.

Romans iiij.
IF ever the greatness or excellency of any matter has styred up your minds
to give diligent ear at any time (good chri sten people well-beloved in our
Lord and Savior Christ) I doubt not, but that I shall have you now most
diligent and ready hearers of that matter which I have at this time to open
unto you. For I am come to declare that great and most comfortable article of
our faith, the resurrection of our Lord Jesus. So great is this article, and
of so great weight and importance, that it was thought worthy to keep our said
Savior still on earth after he was risen from death to life to the confirmation
thereof in the hearts of his disciples.

So that as Luke testifyeth in the first chapter of the acts, he was
conversant with his disciples by the space of forty days continually together
to enstructe them the truth thereof, before he would ascend up to his father in
heaven to receive the glory of his conquest and victory. So comfortable is
this article to our consciences that it is the lock and keye of all our faith.
If it were not true (saye^h S. paul) that Christ arose again: our
preaching were in vain, your faith were but void, ye were yet in the i. cor.
xv
danger of your sins. If Christ be not risen again, says the Apostle,
than are they utterly pery shed that be entered theey sleep in Christ, than are
we most miserable of al me^ if we have our hope fixed in Christ, if he were
under the power of death not re stored to bless again. But now is he risen
again from death, says he, to be ye first fruits of them that be aslepe, to
raise them to everlasting life again. Yea and if it were not true, that
Christ is ryse^ again: than were it neither true, that he is ascended up to
heaven, nor yt he sent down the holy ghost, nor that he sytteth on the right
hand of the father, having the rule of heaven and earth, reygnynge as the
prophet psa. lxxi
says from see to see, nor that he should after this world be a judge of
living and dead: to give reward to the good, and judgment to the evil.
That these lynkes therefore of our faith should all hang together in steadfast
confirmation: it pleased our savior not straight way to wythdraw himself from
the corporal sight of his disciples, but chose out forty days, wherein he
would declare unto them by manyfolde and most strong arguments and tokens
that he had conquered death and was truly risen again to life. He began
(says Luke) at Mo Iu. xxiiij
ses and all the prophets, and did expoune them the prophecies that were
written in all the scriptures of him, to confirm the truth of his resurrection
long before spoken of, which he verefyed in deed, as it is declared manyfestly
by his often appearaunce to son dry persons, at sundry times. First he sent his
angels Math. xxviij.
to yt sepulcher, which did show to certain women, that the stone of the
grave was removed from the door thereof: and showed them the emptygraue sa uynge
that the burial lynnen remained therein, and of these signs were these women
fully instructed yt he was risen again and so did they testifye it ope^lye.
Ioh. xx.
After this Jesus himself appeared to Mary Magdalene, and after that to other
certain women, straight afterward he appeared to Peter: i. cor. xv lu. xxiiij
than to the two disciples which were going to Emaus. He appeared to the
disciples also as they were gathered together for fear of the Iues the doors
Ioh. xxi
shut. At an other time he was seen at the sea of Tyberias of Peter and Thomas
and other disciples i. cor. xv
when they were fyshynge. He was seen of more tha^ five hundred brethren in the
mount of galile, where Jesus appointed them by his angel when he said: behold
he shall go before you into Galile, there shall ye se him, as he has said unto
you. After this he ap Actu. i.
peared unto James, and last of all he was vysiblye seen of all the Apostles, at
such time, as he was taken up into heaven. Thus at sondrye times he showed
himself after he was risen again, to confirm this article, and in these
revelations sometime he showed them his hands, his feet, and his side, and bad
them touch him, that they should not take him for a ghost or a spirit. Sometime
he also did eat with them, but ever he was talking with them of the kingdom
of God, to confirm the truth of his resurrection. For then he opened their
understanding to perceive the scriptures, and said unto them: Thus it is
written, and thus it behooved Christ to suffer, and to rise from death the
third day, and to have prea Iu. xxiiij
ched openly in his name penance and remission of sins to all the nations of
the world. Ye see, good christen people, how necessary this article of our
faith is: seeing it was proved of Christ himself by such evident reasons and
tokens by so long time and space. Now therefore as our savior was dilligent for
our comfort and instruction to testify it, so let us be as ready in our
believe to receive it to our comfort and instruction. As he dyed not for
himself, no more did he rise again for himself. He was dead, says saint
Paul, ^or out sins and rose again for our justification. O most
comfortable word evermore to be borne in remembrance. He dyed, says he, to
put away sin, he rose again to endewe us with ryghtuousnes. His death took
away sin and malediction, his death was the ransom of them both His death
destroyed death and overcame the devil which had the power of death in his
subjection. His death destroyed hell with all the damnation thereof. Thus is
death swalowed up by Christ's vic torye: thus is hell spoiled for ever. If any
man doubt i. cor. xv
of this victory: let Christ's glorious resurrection declare him the thing.
If death could not keep Christ under his dominion but that he arose again: it
is manifest that his power was overcome. If death be conquered: than must it
follow, yt sin, where fore death was appointed as the wages: must be al so
destroyed. If death and sin be vanished away, then is the deuels tyranny
resysted which had the power of death and was the author of sin and the
rulet of hell. If Christ had the victory of them all by the power of his
death, and openly proved it by his valiau^t resurrection, as it was not
possible for his great might to be subdued of them, and than this true that
Christ dyed for our sins and rose again for our justification: why may not
we that be his members by true faith rejoice and boldly say with the prophet
Osee and the Apostle Paul, where i. cor, xv
is thy darte O death? where is thy victory O hell? Thanks be unto God, say
they, which has given us the victory by our Lord Christ Jesus. This mighty
conquest of his resurrection was not only sygnifyed before by diverse fygures of
the old testa Iu. xiiij.
meant, as by Sampson, when he slew the Lion, out of whose mouth, came out
swetnes and honey, and as David bare his figure, when he delivered ye lamb i.
Reg. xvij. Ion. ij.
out of the Lions mouth, and when he overcame, and slew the great giant
Goliath, and as when Jonas was swalowed up of the whales mouth and cast up
again on land to live: but was also most clearly prophesied by the prophets
of the old testament, and in the new also confirmed by the Apostles. He has
spoiled (says saint Paul) rule and power and all Col. ij.
the dominion of our spiritual enemies. He has made a show of them openly
and has triumphed over them in his own person. This is the mighty power of
the Lord, whom we believe on. By his death has he wrought this victory for
us, and by his resurrection has he purchased everlasting life and
ryghtuousnes for us. It had not ben enough to be delivered by his death from
sin: except by his resurrection, we had been endowed with ryghtu ousnes. And
it should not avail us to be delyueted from death, except he had risen again,
to open for us the gates of heaven to enter into life everlasting And therefore
saint Peter thanketh God the father i. Pet. i.
of our Lord Jesus Christ for his abundaunt mercy, because he has begotten us
(^ayeth he) unto a lively hope by the resurrection of Jesus Christ from death,
to enjoy an inheritance immortal that shall never perysh, which is reserved in
heaven for them that be kept by the power of God through faith.

Thus has his resurrection wrought for us life and ryghtuousnes. He passed
through death and hell to put us in good hope, that by his strength we shall do
the same. He paid the ransom of sin, that it should not be laid to our
charge. He destroyed the deuell and all his tyranny and openly triumphed over
him, and took away from him all his captives, and has raised and set them
with himself among the heavenly cytesins above. He dyed to destroy Ephe. ij
the rule of the deuell in us and rose again to send down his holy spirit
to rule in our hart^, to endow us with perfyte ryghtuousnes. Thus is it true
that David song. Veritas de terra orta est, and iustitia de Psalm. lxxxiiij.
coelo perspexit. The truth of gods promise is in earth to man declared, or
from the earth is the euerla stynge verity gods son risen to life: and the
true Ephesians. iiij Captiua^ duxit captiuitatem,
ryghtuousnes of the holy ghost lokynge out of heaven and is in most lyberall
larges dealt upon all the world. Thus is glory and praise reboundinge up
ward to god above for his mercy and truth: and thus is peace come down from
heaven to me^ of good and faithful hearts* Thus is mercy and verity as David
Luce. ii.
writes, met together, thus is peace and ryghtuousnes, Psalm. lxxxiiij.
Misericordia et veritas obui auerunt sibi. etc.
embrasynge and kissing themself together. If thou doutest of so great
felicity that is wrought for the O man, call to thy mind, that therefore haste
thou received into thine own possession, the euerla stynge verity our Savior
Jesus Christ in form of bread to confirm to thy conscience the truth of
all this matter. Thou have received him: if in true faith and repentance of
heart thou haste received him, if in purpose of amendment thou haste received
him for an everlasting gage and pledge of thy salvation. Thou have received
his body: which was o^es broken and his blood shed for the remission of thy
sin, thou have received his body, to have with in the the father, the son,
and the holy ghost to dwell with the, to endowe the with grace, to strength the
against thy enemies, and to comfort the with their presence. Thou have
received his body to endowe the with everlasting ryghtuousnes, to assure the
of everlasting bliss and life of thy soul. For with Christ by true faith
art thou quyckened again Ephesians. iiij
(says saint Paul) from death of sin to life of grace, and in hope
translated from corporal and ever lasting death, to the everlasting life of
glory in heaven: where now thy conversation should be and thy heart and
desire set. Doubt not of the truth of this matter, how great and excellent so
ever these thyn ges be. It becomes god to do no little deeds: how impossible
so ever they seem to the: pray to god that thou may have faith to perceive
this great power of Christ's resurrection, yt by faith thou may certainly
believe nothing to be impossible with god. Only bring thou faith to Christ's
holy word and Lu. xviij
sacrament, let thy repentan^ce show thy faith, let thy purpose of amendment
and obedience of thy heart to gods law herafter, declare thy true believe.
Endeavor thy self to say with saint Paul from henseforth: our conversation
is in heaven, from whence Phil. iij.
we look for a savior even the Lord Jesus Christ which shall chan^ge our
vile bodies that they may be fashioned like to his glorious body, which he
shall do by the same power, whereby he rose from death and whereby he shall be able
to subdue al things un to himself. Thus good christen people, for as much as
ye have herd these so great and excellent benefy tes of Christ's mighty and
glorious resurrection how that he has raunsomed sin, overcome the devil,
death, and hell, and has victoriously obtained the better hand of them all,
to make us fre and saufe from them: and knowing, that we be by this benefyte
of his resurrection risen with him by our faith to life everlasting, being in
full surety of ^^^^. ^l. ^^
our hope, that we shall have our bodies likewise raised again from death, to
have them glorified in immortality and joined to his gloryouse body, having
in the mean while his holy spirit within out hearts as a fea^e and pledge of
our everlasting inheritance, by whose assistence we be replenyshed with all
ryghteousnes: by whose power, we shall be able to subdue al our euel affections
yt rise against the pleasure of God. These things I say well co^sydered, let
us now in the rest of our life declare our faith yt we have to this most
furtefull article, by conformyng us thereunto, in rysynge daily from sin to
ryghtousnes and holiness of life. For what shall it avail us (says S. Peter)
to be escaped and ij. pet. ij
delivered from ye fylthynes of the world thorough the knolege of the Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ if we be en^augled again therwyth and be overcome
again, it had been better (says he) never to have known the way of
ryghteousnes, than after it is known and received, to torn backewarde again
from the holy commandment of God given unto us. For so shall the proverb
have place in us, where
it is said: ye dog is returned to his vomyte again and the sow that was
washed, to her wallowynge in the mire again. What a shame were it for us,
being thus so clearly and frelye washed from our sin, to return to the
fylthynes thereof again?

What a folly were it, thus endowed with ryghtousnes, to love it again? What
madness were it to lose the enherytaunce that we be now set in, for the vile
and transytory pleasure of sin? And what an unkindness should it be, where our
Savior Christ of his mercy is come to us to dwell within us as our geste, to
drive him from us, and to expel him violentlye out of our souls, and instead
of him (in whom is all grace and virtue) to receive the ungracious spirit of
the devil, the author of al naughtynes and myschefe, How can we find in our
hearts to show such extreme unkindness to Christ: which has now so gently
called us to mercy, and offered himself unto us, and he now entered within us.
Yea how dare we be so bold to renounce the presence of ye father, the son,
and the holy ghost now received in this holy sacrament (for where one is there
is God al hole in majesty together we al his power wyldo^ and goodness) and
fear not I say the danger and peril of so traytorous a defiance? Good
christian brethren and systers advise your self, consider ye dignity yt ye be
now set in. Let not folly lose the thing yt grace has so preci ously offered
and purchased. Let not wylfulnes and blyndnes put out so great light that is
now showed unto you. Only take good hearts unto you and put Ephe. vi
upon you all the armoure of God, that ye may stand against your enemies which
would again subdue you and bring you into their thraldom. Remember ye be
bought from your bayne conversation and your fredome purchased neither with
gold nor silver, but with the price of ye precious blood of that most i. pet.
i.
innocent lamb Jesus Christ, which was ordained to this same purpose before
the world was made, but was so declared in the later time of grace, for your
sakes, which by him have your faith in God, who has raised him from death and
has given him glory that you should have your faith and hope to ward god.
Therefore as ye have hitherto followed ye vain lusts of your minds and so
displeased god to the danger of your souls, now like obedient children, thus
purifyed by faith, give your selves to walk that way which god moves you
to, that ye may receive the end of your faith the salvation of i. pet. i.
your souls. And as ye have given your bodies to unrighteousness, to sin
after sin, now give your self to ryghtuousnes: to be sanctified therein
Romans vi
If ye delight in this article of your faith that Christ is risen again from
death to life: So follow you the exemple of his resurrection, as S. Paul
exhorts us sayng: As we be buried with Christ by Romans vi
our baptism into death, so let us daily dye to sin mortifynge and killing
the evil desires and motions thereof. And as Christ was raised up from death by
the glory of the father: so let us rise to a new life and walk continually
therein, that we may likewise as natural children live a co^uersacion to move
men to glorify our father which is in heaven. If we then be Math. v
risen with Christ by our faith to the hope of everlasting life: so let us
rise also with Christ after his exemple to a new life, and leave our old. We
shall then be truly risen, if we seek for things that be heavenly, Col. iij
if we have our affection upon things yt be above and not on things that be
on earth. If ye desire to know, what these erthly things be, which ye should put
of, and what be the heavenly things above, that ye should seek and ensue, S.
Paul in ye epistle to the Collossians declares, when he exhorts us thus:
Mortify your erthly members and old affections of sin, as fornication,
uncleanness, unnatural lust, evil concupiscence and covetousness which is
worshippynge of ydols for which things the wrath of God is wont to fall on the
children of unbelieve. In which things ones ye walked, when ye lived in them.
but now put ye also away from you, wrath tearsenes, maliciousnes, cursed
speaking, filthy speaking out of your mouths. Lie not one to an other that
the old man with his works be put of and the new put on. These be the
earthly things which saint Paul moves you to cast from you and to pluck
your hearts from. For in following these, ye declare your selves earthly and
worldly. These be the fruits of the earthly Adam. These should ye daily kill by
good diligence in wythstandynge the desires of them, that ye might rise to
ryghtuousnes. Let your affection from henceforth be set on heavenly things. Sue
and search for mercy, kyndnes, mekenes, paciens; forbearynge one another, and
for gyuynge one another. If any man have quarrel to another, even as Christ
forgave you, even so do ye. If these and such other heavenly virtues ye ensue in
the residue of your life, ye shall show plainly, that ye be risen with Christ,
and that ye be the heavenly children of your father in heaven, from whom as
from Iaco. i.
the gyuer comes these graces and gifts. Ye shall prove by this manner that
your co^uersacion is in heaven phil. iii
where your hope is, and not on earth, following the beastly appetites of the
flesh. Ye must consider that ye be therefore cleansed and renewed that ye should
from henceforth serve God in holiness and ryghtuous Luc. i.
nes all the days of your lives: that ye may targue with him in everlasting
life. If ye refuse so great grace whereto ye be called, what other thing do ye,
then heap your damnation more and more, and so provoke God to cast his
displeasure unto you and to revenge this mockage of his holy sacraments in so
great abusyng of them. Apply your self good fre^des to live in Christ, that
Christ may still live in you: whose favor and assiste^ce if ye have, tha^ have
Ioh. v
ye everlasting life already within you, than can no thing hurt you. What
soever is hitherto done and committed, Christ ye se has offered you pardon
and clerly received you to his favor again: in full suertye whereof, ye have
him now uihabytynge and dwelling within you. Only show you your self
thankeful in your lives, co^pounde with your Col. iii.
self to refuse and avoid al such things in your conuersations that should
offend his eyes of mercy Endeavor your self that way to rise up again,
which way ye fell into the well and pyt of sin. If by your tongue ye have
offended, now thereby rise again and glorifye God therwyth. Accustom it to
laud and praise the name of God, as ye have therwyth dishonored it, and as ye
have hurt the name of your neighbor or otherwise hyndered him, now entende to
restore him again, for without restituci on God accepts not your shryft nor
yet your repentance. It is not enough to forsake evil except ye Psasm. xxxvi.
set your courage to do good. By what occasion so ever ye have offended, turn
now the occasion to the honourynge of God and profytynge of your neighbor.
Truth it is that sin is strong and affections unruly, hard to subdue and
resyst our nature so corrupt and leuened with the sour bitterness of the poison
which we received by the inheritan^ce of our old father Adam, but yet take
good courage says our Savior Mar. vi
Christ: for I have ouercommed the world and al other enemies for you. Sin
shall not have power over Romans vi
you, for ye be now under grace says saint Paul. Though your power be weak,
yet Christ is risen a gain to strength you in your batel, his holy spirit
shall help your infirmities. In trust of his confidence take you in hand to
purge this old leven of To. viij
sin that corrupts and soureth the swetnes of your life before God, that ye
may be as new and fresh dowe void of all sour leven of wyckednes: so shall
i. cor. v
ye show your self to be sweet bred to god to have his delight in you. I say kyl
and offer you up the worldly and erthly affections of your bodies, for Christ
our Ester lamb is offered up for us, to flee the power of sin, to deliver us
from the danger thereof and to give us exemple to dye to sin in our life. As
the Iues did eat their Ester la^be and kept their fest in remembrance of
their deliuerau^ce out of Egypt: Eue^ so let us keep our Ester feast in yt
thankful remembrance of Christ's benefytes which he has purchased for us by
his resurrection and passing to his father: where by we be delivered from ye
captivity and thraldom of al our enemies. Let us in like manner pass over the
affections of our old conversation to be delivered from ye bondage thereof to
tyse with Christ. The Iues Exo. xij
kept their feast in absteynynge from leuened bread by the space of. vij.
days: let us christen folk keep our holy day in a spiritual manner yt is in
absteining not from material leuened bread, but from the old leven of sin
the leven of maliciousnes and wyckednes. Let us cast from us yt leven of
corrupt doctrine yt will iufect our souls. Let us keep our feast yt hole term
of our life with eating the bred of pureness of godly life, and truth of Christ's
doctrine. Thus shall we declare yt Christ's gifts and graces have their of
fect in us. and that we have yt right believe and knowledge of his holy
resurrection, whereunto if we apply our faith to yt virtue thereof, and in our
life conform us to the exemple and signification meant thereby, we shall be suer
to rise hereafter to everlasting glory by the goodness and mercy of our Lord
Jesus Christ, to whom with the father and the holy ghost. etc.

The Epistle on the first sunday after Ester day, called low sunday. The
first Epistle of John, and the. v. Chapter.
Thargument of this Epistle.
Of the excellency of faith and how it overcomes the world.

MOst dear beloved brethren, all that is borne of God overcomes the world.
And this is the victory that overcomes the world, eue^ our faith. Who is it
that overcomes the world: but he i. cor. x.
which believes, that Jesus is the son of God? This Jesus Christ is he that
came by water and blood, not by water only: but by water and blood. And it is
the spirit that bears witness, because the spirit is truth. (for there
are three which bear record in heaven, the father, the word, and holy ghost.
And these three are one.) And there are three which bear record (in earth) the
spirit water and blood: and these three are one. If we receive the wytnes of
men, the wytnes of God is greater. For this is the wytnes of God (that is
greater) which he testified of his son. He that believes on the son of god
has the wytnes in himself.

An exhortation upon this Epistel.
Our Epistle taken out of the first epistle catholyke of saint John good
christen brethern does show unto us that we have a generation from god which
is that which proceeds of faith, and this ouercommyth the world that is to
say the concupiscences of sins, which be pride, covetous, and lecherye.
Assuredly my friends there is I trust noman among
us but knows that of nature we be al born in sins, in unrighteous, in
utter ignorance of al ghostly and spiritual things. And therefore Saint
Austine writes on this wise. Behold my brethern The words of S. Austine.
behold the generation of mankind from the first death of that first man.
For sin from the first man has entered into this world and by syn^e has
death entered and so has passed thorough all men as witnesses thapostle. But
mark (says saint Austine) this word passed through. Sin is ru^ne through
Pertransijt.
upon all the ofsprynge of Adam, and for this cause is the newborn child
gylty of eternal damnation, he has not yet done syn, but he has caught sin.
For surely that first sin of our foreparentes did not still remain in the
headsprynge, but it passed through into the ofsprynge not into him and him but
into al men. The first sinner the first tra^sgressour begat sinners subject to
death. Than came the Savior of a virgin to heal and save them, he came to
the, but not the way that thou ca^mest. For he proceeded not of the
concupisce^ce of the male and female, he came not of that bond of
concupiscence. Because therefore he came to the not by yt way that
thou cammest: therefore he delivered the. But where did he find the? He found
the sold under sin, lyenge in the death of the first man drawing up the
sin of the first man being gylty and having condemnation yet thou could
discern good and evil asunder. Hitherto I have rehearsed unto you the words
of saint Austyne. Wherefore to return to my purpose: forasmuch as we be borne
in sin which brings with it ignorance, blyndnes, and infidelity, therefore
we can not challenge this to our own power and virtue that we believe Jesus to
be Christ, but for the beleuynge hereof we have need to be borne again and to
be renewed through the holy ghost and by ye word of God to the intent we may
purely understand the things that be of God and Ioh. iij.
that we may by faith take hold of the promyses of Christ and so finally
with sure confidence determine with ourselves that Jesus is Christ, that is to
say, the anointed king and Savior of the world. For no doubt before we
be thus borne again, Before we be new borne a gayn by spirit we beal Nicode
mes.
we be all but Nicodemes, that is to say, we may well believe that Christ came
as a great master from God and that noma^ could do the signs and miracles
that he did. But this is but an historial faith, and they that have it do as
yet walk out of the kingdom of heaven with Nicodemus, to who^ Christ answers.
Uerely, verily, I say unto the, onles a man be borne again from about he can
not se the kingdom of God, which self thing the holy Ioh. iij.
apostle saint Ihon does in this place declare in i. Ioh. v.
other terms saying: he can not believe Jesus to be Christ. For he that
believes not this, can not se the kingdom of god. To believe yt Jesus is
Christ, is surely to determine and conclude with thy self that What it is to
be leave that Jesus is Christ.
Jesus is first to the a Savior: and secondly, that he is a king anointed with
the oil of gladness, perpetually to rule, to preserve, and to defend the so
saved by him, And here saint Ihons intent and purpose is to declare unto us a
difference between the historiall faith concerning Christ (which the devil
A difference of faythes.
also has, and so all hypocrites) and between yt true and saving faith which
believes that Christ does both save us and also takes a continual charge and
regard of our salvation. To this faith we be bor^e again when through the holy
ghost we be casted
by the word to the knowledge of Gods will, to thu^ tent we may understand
that Jesus is Christ, I mean, that he is such one in whom is reposed all
grace, health, defense, and sauegarde against sin, death, Satan, the world
and so forth. This he that Borne of God.
believes, is said to be borne of god, as though saint Ihon should say: To
believe yt Jesus is Christ is not a work of humane power and strength, but it
is such a work whereunto is required the power of God and an heavenly renewyng
or regeneration whereby the holy ghost transformeth us into new creatures.

And what is this faith which is so mighty? It is (as I have said) the fame
that makes us believe that Jesus is the son of god that was baptized (which
thing is to be comen by water) that suffered death and passion for the
redemption of men (which is to be comen by blood) That Jesus Christ is verite
(for the holy ghost does witness it) that is to say both true god and true
man. And that he is true god, three things does witness it in heaven, the
father the son (which is him self) and the holy ghost, and these three be one
self witness. And that he is true man, three things does witness it in
earth, the spirit which he has bequethed into the hands of his father at his
death, the water with which he was baptized, and the blood which he has shed
with water when his side was percyd after that he was dead. And these three
things be one self witness. And if we receive the witness of men, why
should we not take the witness of god (which is infinitely greater than ma^s)
that he is the son of god? This witness Mat. iij.
was made by god the father in his baptism. And also he has testified yt in
the mountain, he has testified it by the law and by the prophets. Who so
ever then believes that he is the sone of god, he has the witness of god in
him, he receives the record and testimonye of god, he is borne of god and in
the spirit of his faith, he is far stronger over ye world and victorious of
the world. Follow we then good brethren and systers this generation of God, of
faith and of baptism and lo we have overcome all things, that is to wit the
world the flesh and the concupiscences. Now if we be rydde and not combred
with these things surely the yuel spirit can have nothing in us but than the
spirit of god only may all and does all in us. Unto god then be all thanks
honor and glory accordingly.

Amen.
The Gospel on the first sunday after Ester day, called low sunday, the.
xx. chapter of Ihon.
Thargument of this Gospel.
How Christ appears to his disciples which were assembled together, and of
their commission that was given them to preach.

THe same day at night, which was the first day of the Sabbothes, when the
doors were shut (where the disciples were assembled together for fear of the
Jews) came Jesus, and stood in the mydde, and says unto them: Peace be unto
you. And when he had so said, he showed unto them his hands, and his side.
Then were the disciples Esa. lxi. Mat. xi Ioh. xvii
glad wha^ they saw the Lord. Than said Jesus to them again: Peace be unto
you. As my father sent me, even so send I you also. And wha he had said those
words, he brethed on them and says unto them: Receive the holy ghost.
Whosoeuers sins ye remytte, they are remytted unto them. And whosoeuers
sins ye retain, they are retained. But Thomas one of the twelve (which is
called Di dimus) was not with them, when Jesus came. The other disciples
therefore said unto him: we have seen the Lord. But he said unto them:
except I se in his hands the prynte of the nails, and put my fnnger into the
prynt of the nails, and thurst my hand into his side, I will not believe. And
after eyghte days, again his disciples were with in, and Thomas with them.
Then came Jesus when the doors were shut, and stood in the mids, and said:
peace be unto you. After that said he to Thomas, bring thy finger hither,
and se my han des, and reach hither thy hand, and thirst into my side, and
be not faythlesse, but beleuyng. Tho mas answered and said unto him, my Lord
and my Cod: Jesus says unto him: Thomas, because thou haste seen me, thou
haste believed: blessed are they that have not seen, and yet have believed. And
Ioh. xxi
many other signs truly did Jesus in the presence of his disciples, which are
not written in this book. These are written, that ye might believe, that Jesus
is Christ the son of God, and that (in beleuynge) ye might have life through
his name.

An exhortacion upon this Gospel.
THe Gospel of this day good people does declare unto us the appearyng of our
Lord Ie su Christ unto his disciples after his resurrection, that is to wit
how he came and showed himself vit to them, the doors being shut for fear of
ye Iues. And here truly he did show the diversity of bodies, and what
difference there shall be between the sensual bodies, and between the
spiritual, between the material and corruptible bodies in this world, and
between the spiritual bodies and incorruptible after the resurrection. Troth
it is also that we ought not to suffer any ^nfideles as were the Iues to enter
in among us from whom the Apostles did shut their doors. Now Jesus being
in the mids of them did salute them in gyuynge unto them his peace with
which gr^tynge or salutation he confor ted and confirmed his disciples minds
that they should nothing doubt of his resurrection which as Luke. xxiiij.
the Evangelist Luke witnesses they counted but for a dream. Wherefore he
showed unto them his hands and his side perced. And by this showing of his
hands and feere, Christ opens two things. First by these signs he would
be known. For in affliction is Christ truly k^owen. Second by them he would
assure his disciples of his glorious resurrection. And verily this shall be the
sign of sal uation unto the faithful at the great day of judgment, and the
sign of lamentation and of sorrow unto the infidels which tha^ shall se whom
they have percyd. The faithful shall be greatly comforted in seeing him as his
diseiples were at this time. To these disciples I say he did ones give his
peace and made them his apostles that is to say his legates or ambassadors
not only of Iurye, but of all the world, in like manner as god the father had
sent him and made him apostle in the world. And he gave them the holy ghost for
to remytte sins, and to pardon in his name, and whose sins so ever they
pardoned should be forgyuen in heaven. The pardone of the apostles assuredly was
but a sign of the true pardone, which was made on high alredye. And unto them
to whom they would not remytte here in earth they should not be remytted nor
pardoned in heaven. And this that they did not pardon them, was sign that they
were not pardonyd on high. Suerly it is S. Cypri an.
not man that foregyueth or reteyneth but God. For as saint Cypriane says. Non
potest seruus remittere quod in dominum co^missum est, that is to say the
seruauut cannot pardon the thing that is trespassed S Ambrose.
against ye master. And saint Ambrose says in his book of Cain and Abell,
that sins be foregyuen by the word of God whereof the pressed is but an
interpretour and as a certiane executour. But I pray you good friends who were
they whom they did not forgive? Truly all those which did not believe in their
wor^^s. And in this apperynge Thomas called Didimus was not present. Wherefore
when the disciples did show him that they had seen Didimus. i. Gemellus a
twynne.
our Lord rysyn again to liefe, which had showed unto them both his hands
and his side percyd, he did answer that he would not believe them, onles he
might se him and put his finger into the holes of the nails and his hand into
his side. Eight days after our Lord (the doors being shut) did eftsoon
apere in the mids of them as he had done before and gave them for salutinge
his peace according to the usage of the Iues by which is understand Pax vobis.
tranquyllitie of conscience and all goodness. And Thomas was there also unto
whom he said (aunswering him unto the words which he had said by his
infidelite) behold my hands and put thy finger into the holes, hold forth thy
hand and put it into my side. Be no more in mys^eleue, but faithful.
Declaryng unto him that he sees al, that he hears all, that he is in all
places, and that he may do al. And this done Thomas did confess him to be his
Lord and his God. And truly not so much Thomas as the spirit of faith which
with the faith entered into him. At that time our Lord gave witness of faith
unto Thomas which has believed in seeing of him, but he does give far
greater praise and commendation unto them which have believed, and yet have not
seen him corporally, but only spiritually with the eye of faith, and also unto
them which shall believe him. Then let us believe him, by seeing him spiritually,
and so doing we shall be more happy then Thomas, in this that he has seen him
corporally. Now, says the Euangelyst al these things be written unto us, to
the end that we believe that Jesus is Christ the son of God: and in beleuynge
this, that we shall have the The use of miracles.
liefe eternal by his name. Forasmoche as the end and use of all the signs
and miracles of Christ is that by them we should be brought and allured to be
leave on Christ, which thing only shall make us have everlasting bliss
through his name that is to wit, by his word. For the word is the virtue and
power of God unto the health and salvation of all that believe on Christ Jesus
our Lord and redemer Romans i.
To whom with the father and holy ghost be glory and praise etc.

The Epistle on the second sunday after Ester. The. i. Epistle of Peter the.
ij. chapter.
Thargument.
The Apostle sait Peter does exhort us here to follow Christ in all things
even as sheep do follow their shepeherde.

MOst derely beloved brethren, Christ also suffered for us leauyng us an
exe^ple, that ye should follow his steps, which did no sin, neither was
there gyle found in his mouth: which when he was reuyled, reuyled not again:
when he suffered, he threatened not, but committed the vengeance Mat. viij
Esa. liij.
to him that judges ryghtuously which his own self bare our sins in his
body on the tree that we being delivered from sin, should live unto
ryghteousnes. By whose strypes ye were healed. For ye were as s^epe going
astraye, but are now turned unto the sheperde and bishop of your souls.

THe Epistle of this day good christen people which is of saint Peter does
put before our eyes the liefe of our Lord Jesus Christ to the effect and
purpose that we should follow him as a perfect president and exemplar. For it
is he which is deed for us which has done no sin according to the saying
of the prophet Esaye, and in whose mouth Esa. lij.
has been found no gyle nor deceipte. The which when any said harm by him,
he said no harm again. When he suffered he did not threaten, but he
committed the vengaunce unto him that iugeth justly, that is to wit unto God.
No doubt God iugeth ryghtly, neither regarding men's persons (as does the
world) neither only after the outward works but after the heart and outward
works to. And therefore is gods judgment according to ye troth as Paul
says. Furthermore it is Christ Romans ij.
which has borne our sins on ye wode of ye cross to the end that our sins
might be by him taken away and we being dead with sin should live unto
justice. But what justice? Truly justice of faith which is from above, and
which is himself. For we be healed of our sin by his wounds, by his
passion, by his hostie and oblation. For surely this is the fynall use of our
delyuerau^ce or justification by Christ that we should no longer live unto
sin, but unto justice and virtue. As though saint Peter would say. Ye wol be
christians whom Christ has redeemed, than go to, it shall not become you any
lon ger by disobedience toward your rulers and supe riours to live unto sin
but unto righteousness to
the intent ye be obedient unto them and suffer persecution, vexacion, and cross
of them if occasion be gy uen, eue^ as Christ did. And truly this is even the
right use of Christ's passion, I mean to live a new life and to become just
and ryghtuous in all our living For as the Apostle saint Paul testifyeth
writing to the Ephesians, we be the workmanshyp of God Ephe. ij
created and made to do good works. But to return to the text, S. Peter
allegeth here unto you good people the words of the prophet Esaye where he
Esa. liij.
says that by the strypes and wounds of Christ ye were healed. O most
comfortable words. Bitter verily were these strypes to our Savior Christ,
but they were sweet to us, so sweet yt without them we should have been in most
paynfull mysery and anguysh. Let us than never put out of our minds this most
comfortable tidings, this sweet and me^^ Gospel that Christ bare our sins
in his body on the tree. This treasure I mean the knowledge of this thing who
so wants is most nedy and pore yea he has nothing at all. For this is (no
doubt) that preciouse perle that Christ speaks of in the mat. xiij
Gospel of Matheu, where he says, yt the kingdom of heaven is like unto a
merchant man, seeking goodly perles which when he found one precious perle,
went and sold all that he had and bought it. Now though this thing be
plain enough and apparaunt: yet with your patience I will declare unto you
what the most excellent doctoure of the church saint Hierome writes upon
this place. Surely (says saint Hierome) there is one The worcester des of S Hierom
perle most preciouse of all, that is to wit, ye knowledge of our Savior
and the mystery of his passion and resurrection, which when a marchaunte man
has found (as saint Paul the Apostle did) he despyseth all the mysteryes of
the law and prophets and his old obseruauncies wherein he lived without
reproach, yea and he regards them* no better than the parings of his nails
or chyppes to thin tent to win Christ unto him. This Christ (as Thon
baptist witnesses) is the lamb of god which Ioh. i.
takes away the sin of the world. Where as before his coming we were as
sheep wandering without sheperde but now by faith we be converted unto our
shepeherde which is the only good shepeherde, and unto the bishop of our
souls which is eternal, always mediator and intercessour for us, always
presentyng and offrynge himself for us. Let us tha^ good people follow his
conversation. Let us bear patiently all things for the love of him, which
has suffered so many tribulations and extreme pains for us. Let us not sin
wyllyngly Let us not speak any untruth, fraud, deception, and lies. Let us
not curse if any say evil of us. Let us not threaten if any do grieve us. Let
us remytte and commytte all vengeance unto God. Let us have remembrance of
the benefytes which he has done to us by his glorious passion, that we may
be dead with him as to him, and let us be mor tifyed by his spirit as to us.
Let us not live no more to our selves but let us live to him, which is our
justice, for we be the sheep which he has converted from wandering forth of
the right pathe from error and infidelity unto faith. He is our shepeherde
let us follow him unto the pasture of life. He is our bishop, our mediator,
our intercessour, our hostie. And how do we fear that we should not be ex
alted? Let us have this faith that none is refused, none goes away with out
being exalted. Who so ever has this faith in him cannot peryshe, yea there was
never so great a sinner but that this mediator and raunsomer has satisfied
for him if he has this faith. Our epistle willyth that we understand this
unto the glory of him which is al unto us, by the will of the eternal father, to
who^ be glory without end, in secula seculorum.

Amen.
The Gospel on the second sunday after Ester day The. x. chapter of Ihon.
Thargument
Christ is the true shepherd.

Jesus said to his disciples. I am the good sheep herd. A good shepeherde
gives his life for the sheep. An hired servant, and he which is not the
shepherd (neither the sheep are his own) sees the wolf coming and leueth the
sheep and flies, and the wolf catches, and scatters the sheep, the hired
servant flies, because he is an hired servant, and.itim. ij. Mat. xi. Luke.
x. Mat. xi.
cares not for the sheep. I am the good shepeherde and know my sheep, and I
am known of mine. As my father knows me, even so know I also my father. And
I give my life for the sheep: and other sheep I have, which are not of this
fold. Them also must I bring, and they shall hear my voice, and there shall
be one fold and one shepeheerd.

IN this Gospel good people our Lord does show us, that he is the true and
right shepherd. And it is good reason, for he only has given himself un to
the death, and has quyckened all his sheep. He alonly does nourish with his
doctrine all his sheep with ye fode of eternal life. If the wolf does come
(that is the great deuell of hell or any of his members) he never forsakes his
sheep but does defend and deliver them from the puissaunce and might of the
enemy, for he is strong above all, and is more mighty then all. And also the
sheep be his, and he has bought them with a great price, which is above all
prices. He does love them according to the price, yt is to say more than any
thought can think or tongue express. And he has not alonly bought them
again, but he has made them and created them, they be his own works and
his own sheep. It is the shepherde by whom al things has been made.
Wherefore naturally he cannot hate them. He is no forgetful shepherd, but he is
a shepherd know yng al, he cannot forgette any thing. For as the eternal
father knows al, in like manner he knowith all. As the father eternal knowyth
al in gyuing him all, in like manner he knowyth his sh^pe in gyuinge them all.
For he gives them liefe, wisdom, might. Yea and such liefe, wisdom, and
might, as is above the world. For those that be according to the world, be but
shadows of the^. And by this wisdom which surmountyth the world, his sheep
does know him. This is the good herdman gyuing liefe to al, know ing all,
which is alinyghty. But the hired shephard is none such. He does not dye for
his sheep. He does not give them liefe. And when the wolf commyth he does
leave them. They be not his own. He has another made them nor yet bought them
again. He connyth away. He lets them be lost, and suffers them to be
devoured with the wolf, and finally to go into eternal damnation. He is
vnmyghty. He is ignorant and clean unlike unto the good herdman. The hired
shepherd has but a little and a particular flock. But ye good herdma^ has a
great flock, he has the flock of ye nation of Israel and of al other
nations. He has the universal flock, the which from day to day he leadyth
and gatheryth together, for to here his sweet voice and his holy doctrine,
which is the doctrine of the gospel unto the time that all the world shall be
but one flock, and that there should be but one herdman which is our Lord Jesus
Christ, as it is said here. And there shall be made one shepecote and one
herdman. Now by this parable good friends we be taught and informed of the true
office of Christ, and wherefore he came into this world. His office whereunto he
was sent of his father was to teach us and also to save us. As touching his
doctrine and teaching, who ever in fedynge of his flock was more vigilant,
more busy, more paynfull than he was? Who ever ministered to his sheep more
diligently the fode of the euange licall verity? All that herd him speak and
preach were astonnyed upon his doctrine. For he taught them not after the
fashion of the scribes and pharisees which nevertheless were the great doctors
and learned men of the law but as one having a won derfull grace and
authority. Yea even his very ene myes were compelled to testify of him that
he taught the way of God in troth, as appears in the.xxij. thapter of
Matheu. Neither did Christ only teach his sheep, that is to say, those that
followed him like shpe that were well nere lost, but he also healed them
bestowynge even his very life for them. For I pray you did he not dye for our
sins? Was it not he only which with his blood washed away the fylthynes of
our sins? Yea doubtless. But who be these hyrelynges which when they se the
wolf come to devour the sheep they ru^ne their way? Surely these be those
which preach ye word and that also purely and syncerely, but they prech it for
lucre, for honor, for glory, or for the belyes sake. These I say be no true
herdmen but hyrelynges, for these drive not away the ravenous wolves that is
to say the devil and his lymmes I mean the Antichrists which persecute and
deuour^ Christ's flock, but as soon as persecution and trouble for the word
comes, anon they are gone. Of Ier. xxiij
these do the prophet Jeremy speak, saying: Woe be unto the shepeherders that
destroy and skatter my flock. I will therefore vysite the wyckednes of their
ymaginations. It is true that the Apostle wry Episcopatus quid sit.
teth. Qui episcopatu^ desiderat bonu^ opus concupiscit, that is to say: He
that desires an ouersyght or a cure over a flock (which after the greek word
is called a byshoprych) coueteth a good work. Lo says saint Jerome writing
to Oceanus) the Apostle Saint Hierom
calls a byshopryke a work and not a digni tie, a labor and not a
deyntenes, a work whereby through humility he must be lowly and not to swelle
in pride. For a bishop or curate must be fautles, sobre, full of good doctrine,
not given to foul and fyl thy gaynes, but meke, diligent, full of charity
accor dynge to thexemple of Christ the high and supreme shepeherde of all and
the shepeherde of shepeherdes which as this Gospel says gave his own lyf^
for the sauegarde and health of his sheep that is to say of all us that follow
and believe on him. When fore my brethren and systers to conclude how happy be
we for to have such a herdman and for to know to love, to follow, to hear his
sweet voice that gives life, to hear his doctrine, to be refectioned and
fed with the meat which gives everlasting life, to have wisdom and
might that surmou^teth the world by the said our herdmen, lyghtenyng us in him
by faith, drawing us to him by hope, and inflamynge us by charity. Unto him
therefore be glory in all the nations within the compass of ye earth for ever
and ever.

Amen.
The Epistle on the.iij. sunday after Ester. The first epistle of saint Peter
the.ij. Chapter.
Thargument.
Peter exhorts to lay aside all vice, to absteyne from fleshly lusts and to
obey worldly rulers.

Dearly beloved brethren, I beseech you as strau^ Gala. v.
ger^ and pylgrems, abstain from fleshly lusts, which fight against the
soul, and se that ye have To.xiij.
honest conuersacio^ among the Gentiles, that where as they backbyte you as
evil doars, they may se your good works, and praise God in the day of Mat.
v.
visitation. Submytte your selves therefore unto al ma^er ordinance of man for
the Lords sake, when To.xiij. Tit.iij.
there it be unto the King, as unto the chief heed: other unto rulars, as unto
the^ that are sent of him, for the punysheme^t of evil doars: but for the laud
of them, that do well. For so is the will of God, that with well doing ye may
stop the mouths of folysh and ignoraunte men: as fre, and not as having the
liberty for a cloak of maliciousnes, but even as the servants of God.
Honor al men. To.xij.
Love brotherly feloshyp. Fear God, honor the King. Servants obey your
masters with fear, not only if they be good and courteous: but also though
they be froward. For it comes of grace in Christ Jesus our Lord.

This Epistle, good christian brethern and systers is very excellent and
notable. For in it is handeled the second part of Christianity that is to wit,
how in this liefs after we have ones received and taken the euangell or glad
tidings of our salvation (which thing we call commonly in english a gospel)
we ought to live. In the process that goes before this epistle, saint Peter
taught and showed ye other part of Christianity, which is of faith and how
we ought to believe the gospel and also how we be edified and builded upon
Christ the corner stone, whereas before that time we were the chyl dren of
vengaunce and as ab^ectes and castawayes in gods sight but now we be made the
children of God by Christ. Which treasure truly saint Peter does extolle and
lift up with praises above measure, so that it were well with us, if after the
knowledge of so great riches we might be lycenced forth with to depart out of
this miserable life. But for asmoch as we dye not by and by after the receiving
of so great commodities and felicities, therefore now does saint Peter teach
us how and by what means we should live here in earth that we dye not eternally.
For Satan our mortal ennemy never slepeth but ever watches that he may either
quite and clean pluck us from gods word, or at lest way that he might weary
us and make us slauthful and negligent in doing of good works. For assuredly
it commethe so commenly to pass, that forthwyth when we hear by the preaching
of the gospel, that we be set at pear with God and justified in his sight by
only faith in him, then noman will do any longe^ any goodness at al, which thing
no doubt chanced even in saint Peter's time. By reason whereof The occasion of
this epistle.
he took occasion to write these things concerning the institution of the
christian liefe. As though this holy Apostle Peter would say. Good brethern sith
ye have now received the gospel, and sith ye be justified by faith in Christ,
now it shall be very good and necessary for you to goo about to redress your
manner of living, and to absteyne from carnal and flesshely desires and lusts.
But it is an horrible thing to be spoken, that fleshly disires and lusts do
not cease no not in the justified persons. Yea we se by daily experience that
then more and more carnal desires do break forth, not because this fault
comes by the gospel, as many enemies of the Gospel
and (...)es blasphemously do allege, but because Satan is the ennemy of the
gospel and of the justice which the gospel teaches. He doubtless never slepeth
though we sleep never so sou^dly and carelessly, but like a roryng lion he
runnyth and leapeth about, seakyng whom to devour as thapostle S. Peter does
testify in the end of this first epistle. i. pet. v.
But forasmoche as the power of desires and lusts is so great yea and that
after justification received, saint Peter uses certain warlyk words wherewith
he expresses the strength and power of these carnal and worldly desires, which
he says do war^e against us and (as the greek word purporteth) do daily
exercise militant
with us a pyched field, which thing the scripture otherwhyles calls the
conflycte of the flesh and of the spirit, against which no outward works
can do any good. As the holy fathers also have confessed and complained of
themselves. For saint Note this exemple of saint Hierom
Hierom himself when he sought every where a pre sent remedy against the
desires of the flesh, at last after long delyberation departed into the
wood, trusting that by this mean he should eschew and shake of from him his
carnal and fleshely desires, but it would not be, for even in his very mysery
and vexation of his body which he took upon himself for that purpose, he yet
thought he satte at Rome among the Roman ladies and fair wenches, and that
he daunced with them. Wherefore sith here in this life it is not in our powers
utterly to do awey carnal desires: the holy fathers and prophets desired with
high lamentation that they might be lycenced to depart out of this vale of
tears to the heavenly and perfyte joys. For here they thought themselves
only strangers and as pylgrimes or wayfarynge men. Which thing thapostle
Paul in his second epistleto the Corinthians does wonderfully well declare,
writing on this wise. We ij. cor. ^.
know, says he, that if our erthy mansion of this dwelling were destroyed,
we have a building of God, an habitation not made with hands, but eter nall
in heaven. And therefore sygh we desiring to be clothed with our mansion which
is from heaven, so yet if that we be found clothed and not naked, and so forth.
Now, such strangers S. Peter here wyll^th us to be, which ought continually
to look up, to contend, and labor thither, setting aside all earthly
things, all cares and worldly desires, and ever to stand ready in hope to be
delivered out of this our earthly tabernacle or hostrye, and to en joy the
everlasting inheritance. Howbeit yet in the mean season, good people, we
teach not (as do these Anabaptists) that he that has riches, should cast
them away, but that he cleave not in heart unto them, like as other places of
holy scripture do teach us and namely this present epistle of S. Peter, which
by a similitude of strangers or pylgrimes, does declare unto us, that in ye
hostrye of this present world, we should be in love with nothing, we should
vaynly and ambiciously require nothing, that is in our hoostes house which is
the world, even none otherwise, than a stranger, a pawmer, or wayfarynge body
does, which knows yt nothing
in his ynne or lodging does pertayne unto him, but only makes have homewarde
into his own co^ trey. Now they which be in love and admiration with any
thing in this world, they can not be called forenners, strangers, or
pylgrimes, but cytizens and inhabitauntes of this world. Wherefore it is great
folly now among christen men to be in love with the things of the world,
and to seek pleasure in carnal desires, sith such things belong no more to
what be carnal desires.
christians. But I pray you what vices does saint Peter call here desires?
Surely not only those gross faults, but also ye inward crooked affections,
which doubtless be the very causes of those outward and gross vices. Saint
Peter therefore writing especy ally to the Jews which were disperpled abroad in
diverse countries and by them unto us English men and to all others right
te^derly exhorts them (calling them his most derely beloved brethren) to
absteyne as forenners and pilgrims, from all fleshly lusts, that is to wit,
all vices, which of nature do stycke to the flesh, which vices do keep con
tinuall war and batell against the soul and spirit of man that ever more
tends and labors to do the will of God. And he wylleth them that they have
honest conversation among the Gentyls or pay^ems which worshipped false
Gods among whom at that time when saint Peter wrote this ^pistle the
christen men lived. Saint Peter therefore will not that christen men should
depart from the panyms, but that they should live honestly among them, to
thi^tent that where as they backbyte them as ^uyll doers, they might se their
good works and might praise and glorifye God in the day of visitation, that
is to say, that the paynyms being In the day of visitatio^
more ryghtly instructed and taught by the honest life of the christians,
might by gods visitation be called also to the Gospel and so to have a better
opi nion and judgment of gods word, which thing in deed came to pass in the
primative church by the godly exemple of the good Apostolical fathers and
christen people in Rome and else where. Where as now the paynims and infidels as
be turks and Iues be rather plucked from the Gospel then allured unto it by
the^emple of those that woll nevertheless be called the successors of Peter and
Paul and ye vicares of Christ. Wherefore it is to be feared, lest God will
visit them, not by heapynge upon them his benefytes and graces which they
refuse and neglecte, but by pourynge upon them his just ire and vengeance
according to their deserts. Be you subject therefore good christen people to
the word of God. Obey his commandments prescribed in the same. Let your
light shine before me^ and nam^ly before the proud Pharisees and infidels
(which think there is no God) that they may se your good Mat. v^
works and honest conversation and glorifye your father in heaven. Submytte
your selves, according to Peter's counsel here, unto every humane creature,
that is to say, unto all manner ordinance or power which humane creatures do
administer, and that even for the Lords sake. For it pleases the Lord ye
should so do, lest your conscience should be polluted and defiled with sin
through disobedience. And even here may ye learn good people that when ye
obey the publyke ruler and magistrate ye do please God by this obedience. Be
obedient therefore ^ayth S. Peter whether it be unto ye king as un to ye chief
head, or unto rulers as to the^ yt are sent of him for the punyshme^t of euel
doers. And surely as To. xiij.
witnesses S. Paul, whosoever resysteth power, resysteth the ordinance of
God. For he is the minister of God to take vengeance on them that do evil.
Wherefore ye must obey (says Paul) not only for fear of vengaunce, but also
because of conscience.

For as it follows here in the text so is the will of God, that with well
doing ye may stop the mouths of folyshe and ignorant persons, which
oftentimes judge such things as they understand not, and which esteem the
gospel and the word of god by the manners of the gospellers (which of humayne
frayltie ^nay times do fall into foul vices) and do not esteem it by the own
proper nature. Whereas Romans i.
in very deed it is the power and virtue of God to the health and salvation of
al them that believe. Let us then good christen brethern so be free and use the
liberty of the gospel, that we have it not for a cloak of maliciousnes,
workyng (under the pretense of it) all naughtynes according to our foul lusts
and desires, as many gospellers and evangelical brethren do, which be in deed
no gospellers but babler^ no true brethern but false brethern, no christians
but antichrists and sklau^ders to gods holy word. Let us then be no feyned
christians, but right christians and servants of God. Let us honor and have
in reverence all men. Let us love fraternity Fraternity.
not fraternity of monks, friars, nuns, and such other ^^oystered and
disguysed people which under ye cloak of fraternity devoured pore wydowes
houses and the lyuinges of other in their fratryes, and of whom the christen
people were fowly mocked and seduced while they persuaded them that they could
not do better then be of their brotherhode or fraternity, which in deed was
nothing else but a swarine of idle dranes that lived not by the swette of
their face (as gods commandment wylled them) but by other men's labors under
the pretense of long prayer; but let us love such brotherhode and fraternity
as gods word allows, which is yt we should love one an another after a gentle
and christian manner, al lordlines and proud lokes laid down, and when we
make a dinner or feast, not to call the rich which may quyte us again but our
poor christen brethern and systers which cannot acquit us, but our father in
heaven shall acquit it us. This is the fraternity or brotherhode that Christ
allows and that saint Peter does here speak of. Let us then fear God which
does prospere our obedience and helps us that we may truly honor all men,
that we may love brotherhode and give due honor to our king which is our
supreme hedde next under Christ none excepted, neither bishop of Rome nor
other. For if there were, saint Peter would not have passed it over with silence.
Neither is it to be thought that Peter which was one of Christ's Apostles and
that of the chefest knew not the bishop of Romes power or his own power. He
aganized no such supremacy as the bishop of Rome does challenge unto him as
S. Peter's successor. Saint Peter byddeth us here fear god and honor the
king. If the bishop of Rome were to be honored next God and before kings,
why does saint Peter set the king next God? Yea why does he speak nothing
at all of the bishop of Romes authority? So ye se good christen people that
saint Peter makes nothing with the bishop of Rome, and yet he says he is
his successor. But what should I speak more of this matter? I doubt not but
long age there is none of you but regards the bishop of Rome none otherwise
then an other bishop in his byshopryche ought to be regarded. Let him meddle
with his own flock, with us he has no thing a do, any otherwise then one
christen man has to do with an other. Let us therefore charitably pray for him
that he may execute his office in his own diocese and not enter into other
men's officies. Let us tha^ honor our king next unto God as our supreme hedde
according to S. Peter's counsel in this epistle, and according (...) p^a^e
before alle^^. Let also servants obey their masters not only it they be good
and courteouse, but also though they be froward, not doing service to the eye
(as Paul says writing to the Ephestans (and as they phe. vi
do that go about to please men, but as the servants of Christ, doing the
will of God from the heart with good will, seruinge the Lord and not men. For
it is then thank worthy, says saint Peter. Hitherto have I brefly declared
unto you the meaning of this Epistle. Now therefore good people if ye wol be
true christians, if ye woll be true feithfull persons, boost not of your feyth
in words only, but declare in your deeds and works that ye have the feith of
Christ. Show your believe in such works as this Apostle saint Peter does here
exhort you unto, and then shall we believe that you have the right belefe and
faith in Jesus Christ, which in whom so ever it is in, can not but fructify and
bring forth fruct even as sede does that is sown in the good ground, some
mat. x^ij
an hundredth fold some syxty fold some thyrty fold. And this feyth shall
justify you and make you the children of god and: inheritours of his heu^ly
king dome which was prepared for you before the beginning Math. xxv..
of the world by the father of heaven, to whom with the son and holy ghost be
glory and praise eternally.

The Gospel on the third sunday after Ester. The. xvi. chapter of Ihon.
Thargument
Of the spiritual reign and kingdom of Christ.

Jesus said to ^is disciples. After a whyl^ ye shall not se me, and again after
a while ye (...) Ioh. vij.
me, ^or I go to the father, Then said some of his disciples between
themselves: what is this that he says unto us, after while, ye shall not se
me, and again after a while ye shall se me, and that I go to the father? They
said therefore: what is this that he says: after a while? we can not tell what
he says. Jesus perceived that they would ask him, and said unto them: Ye
inquire of this between your selves, because I said after a while ye shall not
se me, and again after a while ye shall se me. Verily verily I say unto you:
ye shall weep and la meant, but contrary wise, the world shall rejoice. Ye
shall sorrow, but your sorrow shall be turned to Ioh. xx.
joy. A woman when she trauayleth, has sorrow, because her hour is come. But
as soon as she is de lyuered of the child, she reme^breth no more the anguysh,
for joy that a man is borne into the world. And ye now therefore have sorrow: but
I will se you again, and your hertes shall rejoice, and your joy shall no man
take from you.

IN the Gospel of this present day (good christian people) it is first to be
considered and marked, how Christ shows his loving disciples of his cross
and passion that he should suffer for the redemption of the world, and also of
his most glorious vprysynge again from death to life. And furthermore how and
in what wise by his vprysyng or resurrection he should co^mence his reign and
have access to his father. And assuredly the preaching and fore showing
hereof was right necessary to the Apostles of Christ to be often made and
driven into their heads. For the flesh (as Christ says himself) is weak,
and again the articles of our religion be such that they surmount the
sklender capacity of man's wit neither can they easily be perceived.

This is the cause why Christ like a faithful master never cease to drive
into his disciples heads the su^me and content of our faith, to the intent he
might fully execute thoffice that he came for. Now this is his sentence and
mind which he declares to his disciples, Within a little while O you my
loving scholars and disciples I shall be betrayed unto the Iues, as I have often
times heretofore showed un to you that I should be condemned, scourged, bobbed
Mat. xij
and at last nailed to the cross. And for as much as even like as Jonas was in
the whales belly three days and three nyghtes I must in likewise be buried in the
ground for the space of three days and three nyghtes: Therefore for a little
while in deed ye Christ's reign.
shall not se me. But again after a little while, that is to wit, the third
day after when I shall rise again ye shall verily se me, how be it that shall
not be long, for I must away to my father and begin with him my spiritual
raygne. Lo my dear friends Ephe. i. and. iiij.
with such words Christ teaches his apostles what manner thing his kingdom
should be and how ye coming is to ye same. Assuredly ye kingdom or reign of
Christ is none other thing tha^ that Christ has conquered the world, syn,
death, satan, and hell, and furthermore has taken of his father all power both
in heaven and in earth in such sort as hensforth he is to be ye most puissaunt
Psalm. iiij
and mighty king over the mount Sion, leading and gouernyng his subjects with
the holy spi rite of comfort. Into this his kingdom it behooved him to enter by
the cross, by sheding of his most precious blood and by death, even as the
prophet David long before had prophesied of him, saying, he shall drink of
the floude in the way, and therefore Psa. cix.
he shall lift up his head. Now this spiritual kingdom was not much known
to his apostles. For they thought rather that the kingdom of Christ should have been a worldly and an outward kingdom which thing they still looked for, until
the spirit was given them which taught them the knowledge hereof, and how they
ought to come unto it and to get it, and how to persevere and continue in the
same. If we therefore good brethren and systers be likewise minded to enter into
this kingdom, and by Christ to vanquysh sin, death, Satan, and hell: we must
needs acknowledge and take Christ for our Lord and savior, for our king and
high bishop, fastelye believing that we be reconciled and made at one again
with the father of heaven by his blood and in suffering and doing the things
that Paul i. tim. ii*
speaks where he says. If we shall suffer together with him: we shall also
reign with him.

Second, we have here (good people) an exemple An exe^ple of our ignorauce*
of our ignorance and blyndnesse and that in thapostles. For look how little
they attained the mystery of the gospel without the holy ghost: so little can
we also attain by our own powers to justice or soul health. But harke^ your
selves out of the very text the rudenes or ignorance of the appostles. Christ
had showed them that after a little while they should not se hun, and agayhe
after a little while they should se him again for he must go to his father.
This must needs be understand of his death and resurrection and of his
spiritual kingdom. For assuredly What it is to go to the fa there. Ps. lxvij.
to go to his father is nothing else, but to fulfill all things (as it is
declared in the. v. chapi. to the Ephesians) and by his holy gooste to exalte
gloryfie and save mankind, or (to speak the words of ye prophet) dona dare
hominibus to give gifts to men. But I pray you, how do thapostles understand
this? They talk and confer with themselves what means that he says, after
a while ye shall n^^ se me: and again, after a while ye shall se me, we know
not (say they) what he speaks. Lo my friends the apostles do here confess
their ignorance and that they atteyne not to ye words that he spoke albert he
had spoken often times before of his cross death and resurrection unto them.
Wherefore I do not a little wonder, what these men mean which fight so
strongly for the defense of their own natural and ca^^tall power sith they se
here so manyfestly ye the apostles themselves which had Christ so mo^h
conuersaunt anionges them could not by their own mere power before the holy
gooste came unto them, understand the spiritual kingdom of Christ. So that
it manifestly appears that while they woll be doctors and teachers of other,
they be them selves full of all blyndenes and ignorance.

This therefore is the su^^ine and effect of this place, that the flesh in
such things as perteine to justification can do no good, onles the holy ghost
being communitate by the word be received and had. For as the prophet Jeremy
records, they shall be Ier. xiij.
taught of God and not of themselves.

Thyrdly Christ does prevent his apostles when he espied them not to atteine
his words and that they would ask him the meaning of the same, saying unto
them in this wise. Of this ye do question among your selves that I said a
little and ye shall not see me and again a little and ye shall se me. Uerely
verily I say unto you ye shall weep and lamente, but the world shall rejoice.
Ye shall sorrow but your sorrow shall be turned into joy. Lo how Christ tendereth
his apostles, he shakes them not of for their rudenes and ignorance but most
gentlye instructs them, shewinge them how his format words ought to be
understand, saying unto them in this wise. Ye shall weep and be sorry but why?
because ye shall see your Lord and master apprehended and Cross and
persecution
taken nailed upon the cross and put to death. Then shall calamity and sorrow
begin, and principally this shall trouble you, that the world shall rejoice at
your adversity and your masters adversity. And even as Christ had spoken, so
it came to pass concer ^yng both his own cross affliction and heuines and
also his apostles. For do ye think yt a little cross unto him when yt he was
reviled and vpbrayded of the Iues ^ayeng unto him, let God deliver him if he
woll have him? I omytte and pass over with silence the thing that he himself
complayneth of where Psa. cxx
he says by his prophet David, I am a worm and not a man a laughing stock
or an obprobrie of men and the refuse of the people. As many as behold me mock
me, they shake their hedes at me. What is this but to cast Christ into trouble
and heaviness and not only him but also his apostles and loving fre^des, which
kept him company? And albeit Christ does specially in this place speak of
the time of his own cross which should be the occasion of weping and mournyng
to his apostles, yet his mind was hereby to show what state and fortune is to
be looked for in this world unto all true christians. True christians no doubt
can not but suffer in this world much displeasures and persecution, whereas the
wic ked persons and such as care neither for God nor deuell make good chere and
live according to their hearts ease. Hereunto agrees Solomon in his pro ^rou.
iij
uerbes saying. Cast not away the chastisement of the lord. Loye se how Christ
instructs his apostles and arineth them with pa^ience to abide and suffer
thobprobriouse words scorns and persecutions of the wicked persons and
Antichrists. And that he wills the apostles to do, the same he commands
and speaks even unto us so many as wolbe his disciples and folowers. Sorrow
turned to heavy ^es.


Fourthly fora^^noche as Christ has told his apostles of the sorrow and
heuines and of the persecutions that should happen unto them for his sake: he
now again does comfort them declaringe unto them what shall happen after
such storms of affliction. Your heuines says he shall be changed into joy, as
who should say the world as soon as they shall have killed me woll think they
have won the spurs and that they have put me down, but it shall not be so:
for ye third day after shall I rise again from death maugre their heads. I
shall comfort you, and in your heaviness pacify you, and make you glad. And
albeit, after that time also ye must still suffer much wrong and reproach for
my name and for the gospel sake: yet your affliction and cross shall not last
long, but eternal joy shall anon ensue and follow. An exemple of this
thing I wol ye take in a woman that traueleth with chyide: A woman wha^ The
parable* of the trauelyng^ woman.
she traueleth ye know is in heaviness and pain, for her hour is at hand. But
as soon as she has brought forth into the world a child and is delivered, she
remembers no more her pain and grief for the joy she has of the child
that is borne into the world.

In semblable wise ye be now sad and heavy for my departure, but I shall come
see you again, and tha^ your hearts shall leap for joy and no man shall be
hable with all the displeasure he can do you, to take away this your joy from
you. Assuredly (my friends) this similitude which is here brought forth of
Christ, is excedingly comfortable. For first of all yt shows that persecution
trouble and cross must as surely follow the confession of the gospel, as it
is sure that a trauelyng woman cannot bring forth her child without sorrow and
grefe, but in the mean season the Christen man thorough the word of God must
needs afterward have great comfort and joy. Furthermore this trouble cross
affliction and persecution of the true christians shall not be continual and
everlasting, but it shall endure but for a season. And on the contrary part
the world shall joy for a season. But their joy shall not long last as
Christ himself in an other place witnesses where he says: woe be to you which
laughhere, for ye shall Luc. vi.
weep and lamente. Albeit in very deed the christian man shall not be clean
void of joy in this world but what joy is this? I woll (says Christ) see
you again, and your haries shall joy and no man shall take your joy from you.
Undoubtedly the joy that Christ here speaks of is the gladness and peace of
conscience that the true christians shall have in asmoche as they know that
God shall be merciful unto them through Christ and shall keep and preserve them
into everlasting liefe which was prepared for them before the world was made
as Christ himself witnesses by the father of heaven. To whom with the son
and holy ghost be thanks and. c.

The Epistle on the. iiij. sunday after Ester day. The. i. chapter of James.
Thargument.
Saint James shows that Gods word is an heavenly gift and how it ought to
be received.

Most derely beloved brethren, every good gift and every perfect gift, is from
above, and co^ methe down from the father of lyghtes with whom is no
variablenes, neither is he changed unto darkness. Of his own will begat he
us with the word of troth, that we should be the first fruits of his
creatures. Wherefore (dear brethren) let every man be swyfte to hear, slow to
speak, slow to wrath. For the wrath of man works not that which is ryghteous
before God. Wherefore lay a part all fylthynes and superfluity of
malyciousnes, and receive with mekenes the word that is graf ted in you which
is hable to save your souls.

The holy Apostle saint James (good christian brethren and systres) in the
epistle of this day does first open and declare unto us the causes of gods
word from whence it comes, and then he commends and sets out the
authority of the same as a mean or instrument, whereby through new birth or
regeneration we be the children of god and as saint James here speaks the
first fruits of gods creatures. As towching the causes of gods word, ye shall
understand that the gospel or word of God is no human thing, it is the
word neither of Emperor, King, Prince, Duke nor other tempo rall ruler,
neither is it any meritorious word which ca^ chance unto us for our own
deseruinges or merits, neither yet is it an vnpythy weak or imperfect word
which either of it self is not strong enough, or needs any other word to
the perfection and accomplyshement thereof, but it is a divine or heavenly word
a good gift of God and perfect, that is to say which has almighty god for
author of yt, which god gives of his mere grace and favor and which is
strong and full of efficacy and power according to saint Paul which says it
is the power of god to the health and sauetye of all such as believe Rom i.
the same. It is perfect forasmoche as it neither needs any other word
neither yet can it suffer any other to be matched with it. Now al this tends
to this purpose and intent, that saint James woll commend and set forth unto
us the authority of gods word, lest by errynge and strayeng out of the way
we might happen to deceive our selves thynkyng it enough and sufficient to
hear the word of god with out any manner of regeneracion and new lyefe. For
the word is a far greater thing, it is even an heavenly divine good and
perfect gift which comes from above even from the father of lyghtnes, with
whom is no transmutation of light and of darkness, neither can he suffer that
we should mengle our dreams and darkness with his lyghtsome word, I mean our
own inue^tio^s, our blindness, our careless manners, our carnal liberty, our
euel liefe and so forth. We be also here admonished and taught of the final use
of gods word and wherefore it serves. Yt serves doubtless, that by it we
should be regenerate and be made the first fruits of the creature of god,
which comes not of our own deservings, but it is the work of god the
father, which does renew and regendre us with ye word of troth that we may
be the first fruits of his creature. Saint James therefore in this place wylleth
us to set aside and lay down all security and slauthfulnes toward the
word of god, and that we should pray god that he woll vouchesaue to open and
disclose unto us the understanding of his word, and that he wolle give us
also increase in the same, that we may hear the word with fruit,
^nderstandynge if, and being regenerate thereby, might be made the first fruits
of Nolite errate.
ye creature of god. Do not then err my dear brethren as though it were
inoughe only to hear the word of god and not to understand it with the
heart, not to catch hold of it by faith, not to work well outwardlye. Every
good and perfyte gift is from above, that is to say, the word of god is
perfyte, it needs none other word to stey it, and to make it perfyte. Yea
thou ca^^est neither take it nor understand it perfytly, onles it be given the
of god. Yt is of it self most perfyte, and it is it also which only can make
us perfyte. Yt proceeds from the father of lyghtes, that is to wit from god
which is ye only cause of all light in such sort that ye thing which we se in
understanding the word, is of god. Yt is also the gift of god that his word
does lyghten, for the father is of himself light. With whom is no variablenes
nor change into darkness, that is to say, he can not abide nor suffer that
the light and darkness should be confounded or myngled together. For he is the
father of light only, and not of darkness, Neither can he suffer that we should
glory and brag of his word as of a gift and in the mean season do the
works of darkness. And by this the apostle saint James does move us from evil
works by thexemple of god which is intransmutable and inconuertible that is
to say he is not now light now darkness. And therefore ought not we to follow
both light and darkness together. For wyllyngly be gatte he us with the word of
his troth, that we should be the first fruits of his creature. As though saint
James would say. Because god has regenerate us by the word of troth that we
might be now his first fruits, then seeing we be his first fruits, i^ de comes
us not to follow the darkness, it becomes us no more to lead our lyefe in
vice and naughtines, but it behooves us to be doers and not only hearers of the
word. In that he says, voluntarily, or of Voluntary.
his own will, he excludes merit. It is called the word of troth as well
because of it self and of the own nature it is true as because it makes other
true.

Secondly, Ye shall diligently note and mark (good people) that thappostle
James in the latter part of this epistle does stir us to new liefe and to
such works as the word of god and regeneration would ask. For it is even due
and annexed to new birth that a man should do good works, as also Paul
testifies saying. What shall we then say, shall we Romans vi
abide in sin yt grace might abou^d? God forbid. We that be dead to sin,
how shall we hereafter live in the same: Also to the Ephesians he says.
Ephe. ij.


We be gods hand work created in Christ to do good works which god has
prepared that we should Col. iij.
walk in them. And to the Colossians. Wherefore if ye have risen with Christ,
seek ye the things above, regard heavenly things and not erthly things.
wherefore dear brethren (says saint James) let every man be swyfte to hear,
slow to speak. By Slow to speak.
which words he forbyddeth chefely much talkyng and pratlynge whereby in saint
James time many did brag (as they do at this day) of the gospel without
changing of their former liefe and without lyuinge after the gospel. Such
persons saint James would have swyft to hear and slow to speak till time they
rightly understand the word and do deeds worthy for the same. He wills us
also to be slow to wrath, but he wol we should be meke and pacie^t. For the
wrath of man works not that which is rightouse before god, that is to say.
Ire or wrath and the effects thereof can not do the things which be just
before god, or which god requires of us. And saint James calls here the
justice of god, not that where by we be justified before God, but that which
god requires of us being already justified to the declaration of that justice
which justifies and which is gotten by faith. Wherefore casting away all
vnc^enlynes and superfluity of maliciousnes se In mansuetudine.
ye receive with mekenes the word that is grafte and implanted in you of god
the father of heaven. Receive it (he says) with mekenes that is to say with all
modesty and reverence, not after a ryottouse and sediciouse sort as though
ye would fight for it, nor again with an euel and struglyng mind (as many
(...) do) but gladly thankfully and gently. For it is the thing which is hable
to save your souls. which thing also saint Panle proves wrytinge to Romans x.
the Romans where he teaches that we be justified by faith by the ministry
of gods word.

Now therefore good people let us according to the meaning of this epistle
which I have brefly declared unto you imbrase this word of truth that saint
James does here speak of, and so embrace it that we may be counted doers and
not hearers only. Thus doing we shall declare our selves to be the chosen
people of God and we shall enjoy at last the kingdom prepared for us of
almighty God. Who be lauded and.c.

The Gospel on the. iiij. sunday after Ester. the. xvj. chapter of Ihon.
Thargument.
Christ promyseth to send the holy gooste. and of his office.

Jesus said to his disciples. Now I go my way to him that sent me, and none
of you asks me whyther I go. And because I have said such things unto you,
your hearts are full of sorrow. Never thel esse I tell you the troth, it is
expedient for you that I go away. For if I go not away, that co^forter will
not come unto you. But if I depart, I will send him unto you. And when he is
come, he will rebuke the world of sin, and of ryghtousnesse, and of
judgment. Of sin, because they believe not on me. Of ryghtousnes, because I
go to my fa there, and ye shall se me no more. Of judgment, because the prince
of this world is judged ^^^^^ I have yet many things to say unto you, but ye
cannot bear them away now. Howbeit, when he is com (which is the spirit of
troth) he will lead you into al troth. He shall not speak of himself, but
what so^ ever he shall hear, that shall he speak and he will show you
things to come. He shall glorify me, for he shall receive of mine, and shall
show unto you. why ^holy ghost was pro mysed.


THe chief part of this day gospel good brethren and sistres consistethe in
the declaration of the office of the holy ghost which for that purpose is sent
of Christ that he might ^^u^late and open the spiritual kingdom of Christ
and might detect the blyndnes of the world concerning this kingdom. For the
spiritual kingdom of Christ because it consysteth in feyth is not perceived
of the world, no more then is his justice and beatitude, forasmoch as the
world, because it is led with reason, requires an other kingdom, an other
justice, and consequently an other bless, even such as be most agreeable to the
judgment of reason and may be seen with the carnal eyes and groped with the
fleshely hands. Such things because reason allows them, they flatter the
world, and they be letters and impedimentes, that the true spiritual reign
or kingdom of Christ can never be rightly understood of the world. And
assuredly the disciples did here gayly represente the world, for they also did
as yet after a carnal sort trust and hope upon the carnal presence of
Christ as though he had come into the world to set up some carnal reign or
Empire that
all the world should have looked upon and seen.

Wherefore when they hard Christ say he would go again to his father from
whom he was sent, their hearts were cold and replenished with care and
heaviness. As though they should say unto him: We trusted that thou woldeste
have commenced and set up here a galant and triumphante kingdom, and now thou
say that thou wolt depart hence to thy father. Assuredly my brethren all we
be even thus naturally affected and disposed before the sendinge of the holy
ghost that we still dream upon some carnal thing concerning Christ's
kingdom. But when the holy ghoost come, he shall teach us that the kingdom of
Christ consists in feyth and spirit and not in an outward dominion or
worldly power. The^ also shall our justice shrynke and quake which we feyne we
have before the lightenyng of the holy ghost, and our judgment shall appear
whereby according to reason we judge of the reign of Christ. Finally also our
sins shall be disclosed concerning our incredulity or misbelefe which we
had toward Christ the only Savior, when we se that those be sins which
before we iuged for righteousness as for exemple the affiaunce and trust in our
works and such like. And lest a man should feyne to himself some peculiar
vision and illumination I wot not what, ye shall understand that the holy ghost
comes when the word is preached which word no doubt is the work of the
holy ghost. This holy ghost does lyghten us and leads us to the knowledge But
now I go etc.
of gods word. Now therefore (says Christ) I go my wey to him that sent me,
to thinte^t I might come again and begin a new and spiritual reign in
reuerting by death. And notwithstanding that I say unto you that I must
depart and go my ways from you, ye ask me not whether I go. As who should
say, if ye were not blinded with the care of the flesh and sought not for
worldly things, ye would undoubtedly have asked me whether I go, sith I told
you I must depart. Nevertheless because I have said such things unto you, your
hearts be full of sorrow, not so much because of my departure, as because ye se
that ye shall lack those outward and worldly pleasures and promocions which
ye hoped to have received in my kingdom. Expedit vobis.
Howbeit I tell you the troth, it is expedient for you that I go my way, as
who should say, your opinion concerning my reign is false and clean wrong.
But I wole show you the treuth why I must depart, partly because ye may
understand what manner kingdom my kingdom is, and partly what ye ought to look
for in it. I say it is expedient and pro fitable for you that I depart.
Brethren here ye see that all things which Christ does, he does the same for
our vtilite and profit, insomoche that even his departure out of this world
yt is to say his death was so profitable to us that without it we should
never have been delivered out of our damnable state of everlasting death. He
adds. For if I go not away, that comforter shall not come unto you. The pro
fyte of Christ's death.
^o good people in this place is contained the great utility and profit of
the death and departure of Christ unto his father. For therefore departed he out
of this world, because he would begin a spiritual kingdom, which
nevertheless could not help, if he had not also sent the holy ghost. For
where there should be a spiritual kingdom, and we yet carnal, we could in
no wise understand nor perceiueit. No More then even at this day we understand
it but by the help and aid of the holy gooste. Wherefore let us remember that
Christ has for our cause sent the holy ghost which might lead us into all
truth that is to wite, which might disclose and open unto us our sins that
do naturally stycke in us and yet nevertheless we take them for no sins,
which holy ghost also might bewrey our ryghtuousnes to be be^or god more
unrighteous, and finally which might show the deuell to be iuged by the
ouerture and openyng of the gospel, all which things noman should have
understood, had not Christ sent his holy ghost, whom in this place he surely
promises Actu. ^.
should come and he came in deed according to his promise upon the day of
Pentecoste as it is read in the first chapter of the Acts of the Apostles.
Now the holy ghost is called a comforter which in the Greake is called
Paracletus of his effect or Paracletus quid it.
office forasmuch as his office and feate is even from time to time so long
as this spiritual kingdom shall endure, to comfort men's consciences in this
world. When this comforter comes, says Christ, he shall rebuke the world of
sin, of righteousness, and of judgment. Here ye se good people, three lettes
Three iet tes.
or obstacles, which by thoffice of tholy ghost must be moved awey to
thintente this spiritual kingdom might be understand, that is to say,
sin which is, not to believe in god, and this thing noman does understand by
his propre nature, and yet onles it be understand noman can have access to
the kingdom of Christ. The second is the ignorance of the true justice which
pleases god, and this also can no man take nor perform of himself. The third
is judgment, whereas we understand not naturally that the deuell is iuged by
the disclosing of the gospel. These three lettes and impedimentes be roted
naturally in every man's mind which no man can understand of himself or take
them away by his own power. Wherefore to the doing hereof is the holy ghost
promised in this gospel. Now for asmoch as the kingdom of Christ is hear
conuersaunt among men which be sinners and which of nature can do naught but
sin but love their own rightuousenes and judge after their own faschion of
the gospel: therefore the holy ghost in executinge his office does not move the
to depart out of this world that thou may have no occasion to sin,
neither woll he that civil justice or humane judgment should not be executed
in this world, but he teaches the, truly to know, what thing sin is.

For every man of his own brain, and by his own power and wit feyneth this
or that to be sin, as it has been sufficiently proved under ye kingdom of
the Bishop of Rome. But when the holy gooste comes and repryueth us by gods
word, our own imaginacions and fantasyes destroyed, then we know that to be
sin which no man judged before to be sin. So we know now that it is
sin, if a man believe not in only Christ concerning justice, which thing
before the receyuynge of the holy gooste none of us all knew. In semblable
wise it is to be spoken of ryghtousnes and judgment, which two things, we
utterly co^sydered not before ye openyng of the gospel, whereby the holy gooste
reproves the world. But lest ye should suspecte this interpretacion to be not
grounded of scripture, harken how Christ himself expouneth this thing: The
holy Of sin
gooste (he says) shall rebuke the world of sin. Why? because they believe
not (says Christ) on me. Loo how Christ expouneth himself what he means by
sin, that is to wit incredulity or mysbeleue toward him, which only
thing does condemn men, like as on the contrary part the only belefe in
Christ saves. The papists have wrested
this text (as they do al other) to the mys^eleue of ye Turks and Sarasynes,
and such people as be far from us, but they ought to remember that in this
behalf they do sin worse then the Turks, forasmoch as they would be counted
Christianes, and yet in ye mean season they labor to be made rightouse and
just before god by their own works without faith in Christ. Of this
abhon^^able sin, the world knows nothing at all. Of ryghtuosnesse shall
the holy ghost rebuke ye world. Why? because says Christ, I go to my
father, and ye shall se me no more: That is to say, because I shall begin my
new reign, wherein an other manner of justice then ye ymagine, must be required
and shall be of va lour before god. Of judgment the holy ghost shall rebuke the
world, why? because (says Christ) the Prince of this world is judged
already. And he calls Judgment
judgment the blyndnes of man whereby the world allows naturallye the reygne
and the works of Satan, for the world has a corrupt judgment by Adams fall,
so that it sees not what things god aloweth and what not. But (says Christ)
I have yet Adhuc multa habeo.
many things to speak unto you meaning of his cross and of his glory but by
reason of your weakness and infirmytie ye are not able to bear them now. As
who should say ye be yet carnal and therefore ye perceive not the things that
be of the spirit But when the spirit of troth that is the holy ghost shall
come he shall lead you into all troth. The spirit shall teach you things
spiritual. He shall transform you and of carnal persons shall make you
goostly. For surely because ye be yet carnal, ye cannot perfytly perceive the
scriptures concerning my death and gloriouse resurrection, which is to be
fulfilled for your rede^ptions sake. Here ye se plainly good people, yt this
place makes nothing at al for the confirmation of the papisticall traditions
but rather against them. For I pray you what is this troth that the holy
ghost shall teach you? Man's traditions? no not so. In them is no certayntie.
It is Christ and his word that is the only troth. Wherefore he shall teach
only Christ and the word of god, for this is all truth. For (as Chrysostom
Chrysostom.
says) the gospel conteyneth al together. And the office (says he) of a good
preacher is truly to prosecute
all that is in his commission and not to thaunge, put to, or take away any
thing. But this ye Bishops of Rome in times paste have done, and yet at this
day do presume to do. Wherefore they are no interpretours but deprauers of
scripture, no vicars of Christ, but of the deuell. They speak of their own
heddes their own inventions and dreams, whereas the holy ghost which here is
promised by Christ unto us shall speak nothing of himself, but what so ever
he shall hear, that shall he speak, that is to say, he shall speak none
other word or gospel, only he shall open and declare the word that is already
spoken by Christ. This do not the papists, for they expou^de not Christ's
word, but they bring another word besides Christ's word. This spirit of
troth shall also show of things to come, that is to wit, of the spreading
abroad of Christ's gospel throughout the hole world even unto the Gentilles or
hethe^ persons as well as to the Jews, whom yet the Iues despised and took for
refuse and abiecte persons and counted them selves only for Gods elect and
chosen. This holy ghost shall glorify Christ, that is, he shall expoune him,
he shall make him clearer and shall auaunce and set him forth. But the bishop
of Rome does clean contrary for he obscureth and darkeneth Christ and his
doctrine. This holy ghost (says Christ) shall receive of mine and shall show
un to you. And all that the father of heaven has are mine. This is to say good
people that the holy spirit of god wherwyth every christen man must be renewed
(according to Christ's communication with Nicodemus) Ioh. iij.
shall breath or inspire nothing into the minds of christian folk but that
which Christ's gospel and word wylleth. He teaches no new thing Wherefore my
friends, if we woll be true christians not only in name but also in deed let us
put of our carnal and old man, and let us be led with the spirit of god
which is here called ye spirit of troth Which spirit by the instrument of
gods word as here is declared shall open and disclose unto us all troth
necessary to our salvation and soul health. Which thing also the ancient
doctor Ihon Chrysostom Chrysostom in cap. mat xxij. homi. xli.
witnesses, saying. What so ever is sought to the soul health the same is al
together contained and accomplished in holy scripture. He that is ignorant
shall find there enough to learn. He that is stubborn and a sinner shall
find there the skourgies of the judgment to come that he may fear. He that
labors shall find there the gloryes and promises of lief everlasting, by
chawyng whereof, he may be more and more kyndled to do good works as becomes
a christian man to do. Let us pray then to god with pure hearts that he woll
vouche save to send us this holy ghost this co^forter unto our minds which may
open unto us al troth. To whom be glory and praise immortally and.c.

The Epistle on the. v. sunday after Ester. The first chapter of saint James.
Thargument
Saint James exhorts christen men to declare their feyth with good works.
And he shows what thing true Religion or devotion is.

MOst dear beloved brethren, every good gift and every perfyte gift is from
above and comes down from the father of lyghtes, with who^ is no variablenes,
neither is he changed unto darckenes. Of his own will begat he us with the
word of troth, that we should be the first fruits of his creatures. Wherefore
(dear brethren) let every man be swyft to hear, slow to speak, slow to
wrath. For the wrath of man works not that why ^he is ryghtouse before god.
Wherefore lay aparte all fylthynes and superfluity of maliciousnes, and
receive with mekenes the word that is grasted in you, which is hable to save
your souls.

THe holy Apostle of God saint James good christen people in the epistle of
this day does discern the true hearers of gods word from the false hearers.
And ye shall understand that the true heaters of gods word be they which take
it with who be the true hearers of gods word ^at. xiij
faith, which understand it in their heart and which do garnishe it
outwardely with such works as be prescribed and appointed them to do, and (as
the pa rabble of Christ declares) which do hear the word of god and
understand it, which also bring forth fruit some an hundred fold, some
sixty fold, some thyrty fold. And it is he (according to the words of Psalm.
i.
the prophet David) which is like a tree planted by the river side, bearyng
his fruit in due time. the false hearers.


But the false hearers of the word be they, which hear it, but they receive
it not with faith, they understand it not in their heart, neither do they
furnyshe and declare it to the world with good works and as the parable of ye
sower says, they suffer the devil to take the word out of their heart.
These be only temporal hearers and but for a season, they be but starters,
they stycke not by it. They be also such as when they have perceived and taken
the true word of god, they choke it with the care of this world and with the
disceitfulnes of riches and so make the word unfruitful, for they receive it
not with full mind but by snatches and myndyng other things, even as he which
beholds his bodily face in a glass, and forthwith goes his way and
forgets by and by Estote factores verbi.
what manner thing it was. Be ye then doers of the word, that is to were,
declare with good works that ye truly understand it, and be ^at hearers only,
as who should say. Ye that hear the word of god with your ears and do boste
and glory in the knowledge thereof, and nevertheless be occupied and intaugled in
other matters ye do nothing else but deceive your selves which thing he declares
with a wonderful goodly and apt similitude. For like as it nothing
helps a man to stand before a glass and to se him self fair, when he
goes away forthwyth, and forgets strayte his beawtie, So it helps a man
no thing at all to hear gods word, onles he receive it in his heart, and
take hold of it by faith, depely printyng in his mind the beauty thereof, and
be de lyted therein, and finally declare with good works that he does truly
understand it. Furthermore he that stands before a glass may well glory
and brag of his beautye for a time: So he that hears the word may well
rejoice and glory of it.

But when the glass is taken away anon the beau tie is out of the mind. So
in time of necessity and tribulation, if the true glass of gods will that is
to wit the word of God be taken away and not co^ sydered, anon the promyses
and gospel that is to say the glad tidings concerning our redemption is out
of mind, the beauty of gods goodness is forgotten, and finally the will and
pleasure of the Lord is neglected. But on the contrary part who so looks in
the perfyte law of liberty and continu eth therein, if he be not a forgetful
hearer but a doer of the work, the same shall be happy in his deed. As who
should say: He that rightly hears and under stands the word and does
express the same with worthy works in such wise as he shows himself to
have a firm and sure understanding of the same whereby he may vaynquish and
chase away death, Satan, and sin: he shall be happy in his deed or work, he
shall be declared by his deeds to be a justified person and saved. For deeds and
works in christian men be testimonies and witnesses of our iustifyeng faith and
that we do understand ryghtly and truly gods word. For (as saint Augustine
affirms) Augus.
faith ought to go before works. Yea he declares plainly yt works without
faith can not be good, and he allegeth for his purpose that text of saint
Paul: Omne quod non est ex fide peccatum est. To. iiij.
That is to say, what so ever is not of faith, the same is sin. Hereunto
also agrees Chrysostom Chrysostom de fide et Lege. True religion.
where he says: Faith ought to shine before works, and works must be the
handmaydes or waiting servants and folowers of faith.

Second, in this epistle saint James does teach us (good people) what the
right and perfyte religion of a christian man or woman is. If any man (say eth
saint James) woll seem to be religiouse among you, not refraynynge his tongue,
but seducynge and deceyuynge his own heart, this man's religion is vain. Pure
and undefiled religion before
God the father is this: to vysite the fatherless and wedowes in their
adversity, and to keep thy self unspotted in the world. Lo good people here
ye have a true definicion of religion. It is not to be locked up in stone
walls and to depart from the company of the world, as those disguysed and
false religi ouse persons lately in this realm did, bu^^t is to be
conuersaunt among men without spotte or re proof, it is to vysite orphans
and fatherless children, to go and succor the poor wydowes, to go about and
to win ye people to Christ, to fysh men's souls and to bring them into the
kingdom of Christ out of the tyranny and raygne of Antichriste. I call
Antichrist whosoever teaches other devotions and holynesses then Christ did
ordeyne. For he that is not with Christ is against Christ. Wherefore good
brethren and systers, let us be according to saint James monition here, not
only hearers but also doers of the word, but of what word* of the bishop of
Romes word, of Antichrists word which is contrary to Christ's unspotted and
sincere word? no but of gods word, to the intent we may look into the persyte
law which breaks out of fre spirit and faith into works of charity. Let
us embrace ye true religion that is here prescribed and set forth unto us Let
us vysite the orphans, the desolate wydowes and our poor neighbors that be
destitute of comfort and relyfe. This let us do of a fre and frank heart not
as constraynedly but wyllyngly and gladly.

This doing we shall declare by our deeds that we have the lively faith that
shall justify us in gods sight. In these our deeds, but not by these our deeds
nor through these our deeds, we shall as saint James assures us be happy, and
so happy that noma^ shall be able to take our joy and bliss from us. For we
shall not only live here in this world in peace of conscience and in the
kingdom of Christ, but we shall also in an other world inherit the
unspeakable ioy^ and felicity of heaven, where lives and rayg neth the father
the son and holy ghost perpetually

Amen.
The Gospel on the. v. Sunday after Ester day which is the next sunday before
the cross days, the. xvi. Chapter of Ihon.
Thargument
Prayers are hard through Christ.

Jesus said to his disciples, after a while ye shall not se me, and again
after a while ye shall se me, for I go to the father. Tha^ said some of his
disciples between them selves: what is this that he says unto us, after a
while ye shall not se me, and again after a while ye shall se me: and that I go
to the father? They said therefore: what is this that he says; after a while?
we can not tell what he says. Jesus perceived that they would ask him, and
said unto them. Ye inquyre of this between your selves, because I said after a
while ye shall not se me, and again after a while ye shall se me. Verily,
verily I say unto you: ye shall weep and lament, but contrary wise, the world
shall rejoice. Ye shall so row, but your sorrow shall be turned to joy. A woman
when she traueyleth has sorrow, because her hour is come. But as soon as she
is delivered of the child she reme^breth no more the anguyshe for joy that a
man is borne into the world. And ye now therefore have sorrow: but I will se
you again, and your hearts shall rejoice, and your joy shall no man take
from you.

IN the first part of the Gospel of this day (good people) is a commau^deme^t
and promise set forth unto us whereby we be allured and sturred to pray. ^^ The
virtue of prayers
And surely since a christian person can no when have better coumforte in such
things as he is troubled in, and in time of necessity and adversity, then
instantly to pray and to open his affliction and great with ardent peticion and
humble suit to God, who only will and can help him in his distres and give
him comfort, undoubtedly it is right necessary that we thoroughly perceuie and
know the institucion and intent of this present gospel, to the intent we might
be the more inclined and disposed unto prayer. For who would reiecte and
despice prayer as a thing lytie necessary, seeing it is so much auaunced and
commanded by Christ unto us? Yea this commandment does as straytly bind
us, as the first commandment of the Decalogie does. This to be true ^u.
xviij.
we may se in another place where Christ byddeth us always to pray and that
without ceasing or intermission. Mark that it is necessary then and con
uenient that we should pray. Wherefore as we be by special word and
commandment of Christ drawn and enforced to pray: So also this gospel
allureth us to the same with a special promise. For it is here promised us by
Christ that our prayers that is to we^e the prayers of christen persons shall
not be vain ne frustrate, but that we shall be surely herd and shall obtain
our suits. For why else would Christ have bound this his word and promise
with an oath, saying, verily verily, What so ever ye ask the father in my name
he shall give it you. Also ask and it shall be given you. Do ye not hear how
our prayers shall not be vain nor frustrate? Who then would now be slothful
to pray seeing Christ by his ^^^ciall commandment has wylled us to the same.

Forthermore, ye shall here understand that because we should not think that
the labor of our prayers should be in vain: therefore does Christ here in this
place allure us with a notable and special promise as is before remembered. But
herin are two things to be considered and pondered of us. The one is yt we we
must pray on ly in the name of Christ.
should pray in none other name the^ in only Christ's name. Now we pray in the
name of Christ when we approach to god in the faith of Christ and do comfort
our selves with the trust and affiaunce in him, that is to were, that he only
is our mediator or advocate, by whom all be forgyuen us, and without whom we
can deserve nothing but gods indignacion and wrath. For I pray you what saint,
what holy man is there either in heaven or earth which sueth makes
intercession and is mediator to the father of heaven for us in such wise as
Christ is? Assuredly it is Christ only by whose merit and intercession not
only we obtain pardon of our sins and ryghteousnes but also he takes us in
the place of his brethren communicating unto us the rouine or of fice of
presthoode as testifyeth also S. Peter in his ^^. Pet. ij.
first epistle so that we also by authority and virtue hereof may likewise have
access to the father and seek of him in our afflictions grace help and
comfort. This thing confirms also Christ himself where he says I say not
unto you that I shall be an intercessour or suter for you to my father. For the
father himself loves you because ye have loved me in beleuyng that I am come
from the father. Wherefore good christen brethren sith we have such an advocate
and mediator for us yea sith we also our selves be admitted by Christ to the
function and office of prestes: I pray you why should we so much depe^de upon
confidence of others to be means and suitors for us? This thing also does the
ancient and holy father S. Chrysostom full well declare in his homely
Chrysostom.
De profectu euangelij Where he writes in this wise. Thou shall need no
patrones or aduorates with god, neither shall thou need to run hither and
thither to flatter other that they may entreat for the, but albeit thou be
alone and have no patron or intercessour, but prayest to god by thy self
alone, yet shall thou thoroughly obtain thy suit and demand. For god does not
so easily grant when other men pray for us as when we pray our selves
although we be full of many vices and sins. Lo what this holy doctor says.
He certifieth the that thou art sooner herd when thou praiest for thy self
then when thou make other to pray for the. Which thing Theophilactus in Io
han. ca. xv.
Theophilactus affirms also, where he says. Mark that albeit saints or
holy men pray for us, as the Apostles did for the woman of Cananee, yet we be
rather herd when we pray for our selves.

Furthermore we must take heed good people that we be suitors unto god in our
prayers for nothing that is repugnaunt to the glory of god to our own
salvation and to gods will. For in this behalf that god almighty will neither
admytte nor hear our prayers it is manifestlye showed by that he teaches us
in our pater noster to say. Fiat voluntas tua, thy Math. v.
will be done. Wherefore we shall then be hard when in our necessities we desire
and require gods help having respect ever and casting our eyes to his will to
his commandment and promise and not alleging own worthynes (which is
nothing at all) but only the merit of Christ, then I say our petition and
suit shall surely be admitted and hard. Forasmoch as all the promises in Christ
be est and amen that is to say most certain and sure, as Paul in his second
ij. cor. i.
epistle to the Corinthians wrytcth. Moreover because oftentimes we be so
untoward and folyshe, that we cannot espy our own necessity and need:
Therefore Christ will likewise teach us what manner To. viij.
thing our petition ought to be, (pray says he) that your joy may be full.
What joy I pray you is this? undoubtedly it is no worldely or corporal
leaping or daunsing and reioising, but it is a spiritual joy whereof saint
Paul makes mention where he says. Phi. iiij.
Reioise in the lord. And again I say reioise. From whence then proceeds
this joy? Surely of faith. But how is this? Truly if at any time I hear the
gospel taught wherein is offeryd by Christ to all men remission of synue: I
must believe it if I woll that that sermon or preaching of Christ should do me
good. But believe it I cannot, onles by the word the holy ghost be given me
which may work such feith in me. That if the word and the spirit workethe
in me faith, I need not to doubt any thing at all herein, but that Christ
has not only perdoned me my sins in such wise that they can no more be
From whence the peace of co^ science springs.
called into judgment and condemn me, but also that he has reconciled the
father in heaven unto me and made him my special good lord and father in such
sort as he now knowledgeth and reputeth me for his son and that he wol
preserve and conserve me unto everlasting liefe, and from hens afterward
spryngeth out peace of conscience unto me and the spiritual joy whereof in
this gospel our savior Christ speaks, but such joy ought alweyes to
grow and to be increased if it wolbe made perfect ij. pe. iij.
and full. Wherefore that it may grow and with perpetual increase wax greater
and greater, undoubtedly god of his most bountiful mercy will bring to pass,
^f so be we instantly call upon him with co^tynuall prayers. Sith therefore
(good christen people) Christ has given us in commandment that for such joy
of heart we should pray to thentente it might be made consu^mate and fully
perfect, we must here obey him that we may truly say with ye blessed virgin
Marye. Et exultauit spiritus meus in deo Luce. ij.
salutari meo. That is to say. My spirit reioyseth in god my savior.

Finally (my brethren) Christ does here again setoute the rudenes and
ignorance of his apostles before their eyes, and confesses that his lessons
and teachinges have been hitherunto but as ridles and parables unto them, and
that to the understanding of such things as he taught them it was necessary
that he should not speak unto them in parables and ryddelles, but that he
should speak of his father unto them openly and freely, that is, that it was
necessary that he should send them the holy ghost who might make them able to
attain his words.

And suerly good people this kind of ignorance and blyndnes was not only in
the apostles before Psa. xiij Ioh. iij.
they were confirmed with the holy ghost, but it is also naturally planted in
all men in so much that there is not one which can either understand or work
any thing that good is, onles he be transformed by the spirit of god unto a
new creatu^e. We think our selves nevertheless very prudent and wise even as
the apostles did in this gospel saying, ^o now thou speak este freely and
openly, neither speak thou any parable, now I know that thou know al thin
^^s. etc. But no doubt this was a very folyshe rashness and arrogauncie even as
that was, that Peter did when he would go with Christ both into prison and into
death by which rash promise he shamed himself when before the cock crewe he
denied his Master Christ thryse.

Wherefore all this hole thing is written for our cause that we should not
arrogau^tly presume to take any thing upon us rashely and temerariously, but
that we should rather walk in an humble mind and spirit, confessinge and
knowledginge continually that we be both miserable and ignoraunte persons in
such things as concern Christ's glory, forasmoche as without the spirit of
god we can never understand the mystery of the gospel. For assuredly the
wisdom of the flesh is folly before god, and the more knowledge it boasts
and pretendith in spiritual and divine things, so much the more is the folly of
it declared and uttered. Let us then my good brethren and sisters in all our
necessities and troubles pray according to the words of this gospel, but to
whom? To the father of heaven. In whose name? In Christ's. And what shall we
pray for? that our joy
may be perfyte and full. What is this to say? that by Christ our sin being
taken away, our conscience may be quiet and sure of everlasting life, which
is a right perfect joy. Let us pray that we may be taught openly and
plainly without proverbs or parables, that is, yt we may receive the holy
spirit of comfort into our souls which in gods word may instruct us of
all troth. Which grant us God the father of heaven. Qui viuit et regnat in
secu la seculorum.

Amen.
A sermon in the Rogation weke or a brief instruc tion for the weak in the
faith what they ought to do in these days of Rogation.
GOod people this weke is called the Rogation weke, because in this weke we be
wo^te to make solemn and general supplycatio^s or prayers which in Greek be
called Lytanyes. Now therefore I exhort litanies.
you and in the Lords name I require you, that in all your Litanies or
supplications ye wol so do, that the thing may agree to the name, and that
this our Litanye, this our supplication and rogation may be made with such
true and ernest faith, that we may admonish god and put him in mind of his
fatherly promises. He that will not endeavor himself to do this, let him tarry
still at home, let him keep hun and absteyne from this holy processio^ lest he
happen to iritate and to anger god more, then other men shall be hable to pacify
and still him. Albeit The abuse of these days.
(alack for pity) these solemn and accustomable processions and
supplications, which we use commonly as in this weke to make, be now grown
into a right foul and detestable abuse, so that the most part of men and
women in these solemn days of supplication do come forth rather to set out
and show themselves and to pass the time with vain and unprofitable tales
and merry fables than to make general supplications and prayers to god for their
necessities. I let pass the other enormities and vices, which on these days
be customably perpetrate and done. I will not speak of the rage and furour of
these vplandysh processions and gangynges about, which be spente in ryottynge
and in belly chere. Furthermore the banners and badges of the cross be so
irreverently handled and abused that I maruayle greatly God destroy us not all
in one year. What shall I say? Surely they are now grown into such abuse that
there be far greter causes to take them away and utterly to abrogate them
with the other holidays, than there were in times past to institute and ordeyne
them. And assuredly it is the part of bishops, of parsons, of vycares, and
curates, yea and also of ye profane Magistrates to se that those unchristian
and ungodly abuses be^ avoided and taken away, or, if the thing be past
remedy, utterly to abolish and abrogate these letanies and supplicacio^s thus
abused. For assuredly it were much better and
more christian like, that christian men and women were gathered and assembled
together in the church there to make their supplications and prayers to god,
than after such an hethe^ and unruly fashion to mock God and his holy signs.
And (no doubt) such as be curates and herdmen of Christ's church shall render
a sharp reckoning and accomptes to God for wynkynge at these abuses.

Now in these Rogation days, two things are What is to be de mau^ded in
supplications.
to be asked of God and prayed for. The first is, that God of his goodness and
cleme^cy woll defend and save ye corn in the field, and that he woll purge
the air, to the intent that not only the lap of the earth may be replenished
with seasonable rain, and that the air may be tempered to the utility and
furthe raunce of the corn, but also that it be not infected and that by the
eating and drinking thereof neither we nor our bestes do catch any
pestilence, pox, fevers, or other diseases. For as testifyeth saint Paul i.
Tim^. iiij.
in his first epistle to Timothy, gods creatures as meat, drink, corn, and
such other things be sanctified
by the word of God, and by prayer. For from whence come pestilencies and the
other kinds of disea ses and of syckenesses than that the noisome spirits do
infecte the aier? And by reason hereof commonly our corn and grain be
peryshed, infected, and blasted, and so we (God permyttynge the same) by
eating and drinking our own grain do get us death and greuouse affections
of the body. For this cause be certain gospels read in the wide field among
the corn and grass, that by the virtue and efficacy of gods word, the power
of the wicked spi rites which keep in the air may be broken, and the air made
pure and clean, to the intent the corn may remain untouched and not infected
of the said hurtful spirits but serve us for our use and bodily sustenaunce.
Wherefore (my dear brethren) we ought to make these solemn processions with
ernest minds and with all reucrence, and in especial we ought to handle and
to hear the word of God with devout and religiouse minds. Thus doing,
doubt we nothing, but that gods word wol utter and ex ecute his virtue upon
the corn and air, that those noisome spirits of the air shall do no hurt
at all to our corn.

Second, this is also most of all to be desired and humbly to be prayed for
in these rogation days, that God woll vouchsaue to bless his creatures not
only (as before is said) for the commodity of our bodies, but also for our
souls health, lest our misera ble souls do herby catch unto themselves
pestiferous infection and damnable contagion. I mean as thus: The poison and
infection of the soul is sin. Now when God pours upon us plentyful croppes
and increase of all things: forthwyth we being most ingrate and unkind
persons do vylaynously give our selves to daily bankettes and feastynges and
to most beastly fyllynge of our pa^chies, hereof by and by ensues ydelnes, and
of it spring whordomes, adulteries, blasphemies, cursings, per iuries,
murders, wars, and all myschiefe, so that it were much better for us if our
corn and cattle did not so happily and plenteously prosper and take.

So the thing that we demanded in our processions and supplications we do
find, for god makes us here aboundauntly in this behalf to enjoy our
requests and desires and does minister al things to the body with a large
blessing, which thing nevertheless is most present poison and pestilence
to the soul and it is the occasion of great myschefe. For doubtless surfettynge
and ydelnes, of all nough tynes be the rotes, and the fountaynes of all euels.
But alake, alake, this goostly infection we nothing at all regard, we pass
not of it. The pestilence which No man regards the spiritual pestilence.
noyeth the body we eschew it with great care and we study to drive it away
with often prayers and sup plications laynge unto it all the medicines and
remedies we can deuyse. But in this spiritual pestilence we go still on and
proceed without care or thought and even for this purpose as it seems we
desire of God large sustentacion and abundance of ^l things and to be
delivered from the corporal pestilence and infections that we may the more
freely and aboundau^tly endure after a delicate sort in yt spiritual
infection. But assuredly (my friends) almighty god the sercher of hearts while
he seyth us slepynge in such careless wise and that we nothing regard this so
pestilent a pestilence: he also winketh at our destruction according to our
own vows and requests, he grants us copye and abundance of all things
and so blyndeth us with the prosperous success of all things and drowneth us
in the synke and puddell of sins till at last our sins by long use run
into a custom and that the name of sin be forgotten.

Wherefore most dearly beloved brethren and systers albeit every day we ought
to exhibit suppli cations and prayers to the Lord with a rough cha stisement
of our body to drive away from us so horrible floudes of all myschefe, namely
in this region most addict and given to co^messacions, to bankettynges, to
reuelynges, to surfettynges, to ydelnes, and to the vices that ^nsue of them to
the intent that god ones at last may lyghten us with his grace that we may use
his gifts to the health of our soul and to the holsomnes of our body, in such
sort, as these goods of the country, I mean our corn and cattle might be
auaylable as well to the tuicion and defense of our body as to our souls
health. But as I have said and say again God has made us so blind and so
unsavory, that we are waxen plain Epicures The abuse of gods gifts.
utterly void of all fear or care of God most shamefully abusing his
gifts to the riot of the body and destruction of the soul. And for as much as
this our detestable wickedness and abuse of this godly institucion is not
amended but waxes yerly worse and worse, therefore God has given us up in to a
disalowed mind so yt we make these letanyes Romans i.
and rogation days by our sins utterly vnprofy table and unfruitfully unto us.
Behold how angrye and how sore displeased God is with us, neither is there any
to aswage and appeace his fury, sith our letanyes, our supplications,
processions, and prayers wherewyth we rather mock god tha^ worship him,
spending our time and abusing his benefits in this wise: be rather
kyndlynges and nouryshmentes of gods indignation and vengeance, tha^
mitigacions and swagynges thereof. God grant therefore and be presently at hand
and assystent to us (good people) that ones at last we may come home again to
our selves and to return to the heart and that we may being instincted and
kyndled with ernest and sure faith put from us his wrath and displeasure, to
whom be praises and glory, in secula seculorum

Amen.
The epistle on the Ascension day. The first chapter of the acts of the
Apostles.
Thargument.
Christ's Ascension into heaven is here described.

IN the former treatise (Dear Theophylus) we have spoken of all that Jesus
began to do and teach, until the day in which he was taken up, af ter that
he, through the holy ghost, had given com maundemente unto the Apostles whom he
had chosen, to whom also he showed himself alive af Ioh. xx.
ter his passion (and that by many tokens) appearing unto them fourtye days,
and speaking of the kingdom of God, and gathered them to gether, lu. xxiiij
and commanded them, that they should not depart from Jerusalem: but to wait
for the promise Ioh. iiij.
of the father whereof (says he) ye have herd of me For ^hon truly baptized
with water: but ye shall be Ioh. i.
baptized with the holy ghost after these few days. When they therefore were
come together, they asked math. iij
of him, saying: Lord, wylt thou at this time restore again the kingdom to
Israel? And he said unto them: It is not for you to know the times or Math.
xxiij. lu. xxiiij
the seasons, which the father has put in his own power: but ye shall receive
power after that the ho ly ghost is come upon you. And ye shall be witnesses Ioh.
xv.
unto me, not only in Jerusalem, but also in all Iewry and in Samary, and even
unto the worlds end. And wha^ he had spoken these things, while they
beheld, he was taken up an hye, and a cloud Mar. xvi
received him up out of their sight. And while they looked steadfastly up toward
heaven, as he went, behold, two men stood by them in white apparel which also
said: ye men of Galilee, why stand ye Math. xxiiij. mar. xiij Apoc. i.
gasynge up into heaven? This same Jesus which is taken up from you into
heaven, shall so come, even as ye have seen him go up into heaven.

Well-beloved brethren and systers in our Savior Christ, this day is called
the Ascension day, because that as this day, Christ our Savior and redemer
mounted or styed up to heaven after his resurrection leaving his Apostles and
disciples upon the earth which thing is one of the ar ticles of our Creed or
believe. And albeit saint Luke the holy Evangelist does ascertayne us of this
thing in the end of his Gospel which he wrote of the acts and life of
Christ, yet for as much as he touched the thing but brefly and lightly there,
therefore he does here in the lesson of this day which is the be gynnynge of
an other book that he wrote for our instruction of the deeds and acts of the
Apostles, entreat the matter more at large.

First therefore ye shall mark and observe (good people) that the Euangelical
histories do paynt out Christ unto us as yet covered with the burden of ye
flesh, and as yet not glorified, how be it in the mean
season he declared himself as well by his heavenly doctrine as by many his
miracles which he showed that he was very God. But in the acts of the Apost
l^s he is described and set forth unto us as one that now raygneth and is
glorified. Thus therefore saint Luke begins his description. In the former
treatise or book which I wrote dearly beloved fre^d Theophilus.
Theophilus (which by interpretation sygnifyeth a lover of God) we have spoken
of all that Jesus began to do and teach. He says not of all that Ie sus
began to teach and do. For our Savior Christ first did practyse and work
such things as he afterward Mat. iij.
taught. He went to Ihons baptism. He wythdrewe himself for a season out of
the company of the world before he would take upon him to preach, and to teach
other. The spirit led him into Mat. iiij
wilderness, where he fasted forty days and four ty nyghtes. He suffered
there most sharp honger to arm himself with abstinence and patience. He
there endured the most bitter assaults and temtacions of our goostly enemy
the deuell, as appcareth manyfestly in the fourth chapter of Mathewe. Al this
he did to show us an exe^ple how we ought to do. We have many teachers but
few doers. Thou (says Paul) which teach another, teach Romans i.
not thy self. Thou preachest a man should not steal, and thou stealest thy
self. Thou that say a man should not commytte adultrye, co^mytteit horedome
thy self. Thou abhorrest images, and yet thou do rob God of his due
honor. Christ byddeth his Apostles and preachers that their light should shine
before men. He would have them to be the salt Math. v
of the earth. But if the salt (says he) be unsavory, wherewith shall it be
sauered? it is good for nothing but to be cast out of the doors and trode^
under fete. And in conclusion he says in this wise. Whosoever does and
teaches, the same shall be called great in the kingdom of heaven. Yea he
furthermore assures us, that onles our ryghtuousnes do pass the Math. v
ryghtuousnes of the scribes, and pharisees: we shall not enter into the
kingdom of heaven. But wol ye know good people what be scribes and pharisees?
Harken what Christ says in the. xxiij. chapter of Matthew. The scribes and
pharisees sit in Moses chair. All therefore that they bid you observe, that
observe and do, but do not ye after their works, for they say and do not. Yea
they bind together heavy burthe^s and grievous to be borne, and lay them on
men's backs, but they themselves will not heue at them with one of their
fyngers.

But let us now se, whether there be any such scribes and pharisees among
Christian men, as were Origene
in old time among the Iues. Origene that ancient doctor, writing upon
this place of Matthew, who be scribes.
says, that those be scribes, which depart not from the letter of the law.
These be such persons as teach nothing but the outward observing and as who
should say the bark of the law, where as To. vij.
according to saint Paul the law kylleth and the spirit quyckeneth. For as
saint Austine does very Austine.
well declare, the letter of the law without the spirit is not enough. It is
the spirit that quyckeneth, Ioh. iij.
of whom, onles a man be borne again, he can not enter into the kingdom of
God. This spirit is wont to lead men into al troth, he discloseth and opens
unto us the pyth of the law, that is to say, the lively and ernest faith in
Messiah that was pro mysed so long before by the prophets, even our sa uiour
Christ Jesus, for whose love we ought frelye to fulfill and work the law and
not constrainedly like slaves and bondmen, forasmuch as the spirit of God has
infranchised us and made us Christ's freemen. They than which teach not this
fredome and enfranchisement of christian men, that is to wit which teach not
the pyth or karnell of the law but the bark or houske, be no better than
scribes. Now The papists be scribes.
I pray you, what other be al papists but even such and worse, for they can
skant abide to teach so much as the letter of gods law, which nevertheless
being taught nakedly and alone does but kill, it quyckeneth not. Yea they wol
teach welnere nothing but their own traditions, customs and beggarly
eleme^tes. I have brefly showed you (my friends) which be scribes, according
to the definition of the ancient doctor Origene. Let us now se, what he
calls what origene calls pharisee.
a Pharisee. Such as professynge (says he) some greater thing do divide
themselves as better from the multitude and common sort of men, be called
pharisees, which by interpretacion be as much to say as diuisi or segregati,
that is to wit, divided or severed persons. For Phares in Ebrue is called a
division. Now according to this definicion whether there be any pharisees in
Christendom I report me to your selves. Lord God what divisions, what sects
what sundry suits of holy holy persons have we had in England now of late
which thought themselves better and holyer than the rest of people, yea which
would suffer none to be called religiouse but themselves, where as after the
diffinitio^ of saint James, they were as far wide and differed as much from
religiouse persons, as an ^^e differ from an owl.

But let us return to our lection. These scribes and pharisees did teach but
they did not ye things which they taught. Christ (as saint Luke does here
witness) first did the things, and after he taught them. And of all these
things (says Luke) which Jesus began to do and teach until ye time of his
ascension have we spoken in the former treatise. This treatise we call commonly
the Gospel of saint Luke. Now than when the Apostles were as on this day
assembled and come together they asked Christ, saying: Lord will thou at
this time restore again the kingdom to Israel? Lo (good people) here ye have
a right notable exemple of the Apostles infirmity and weakness. For albeit
they The we kenes of the apo stles.
had herd oftentimes that Christ's kingdom or raygne should be spiritual yet
they continued still to dream of a certain corporal Monarchy or rule. But
now what does Christ unto them? Albeit they thought and spoke foolyshly, yet
he rejected them not; but right gently he plucketh them away from those
carnal thoughts, saying: It is not for you to know the times or the seasons
which the father has put in his own power, as who should say, meddle ye with
your office whereunto ye be appointed. Your office is to testifye of me and of
my doctrine. Ye shall be witnesses (says Christ) unto me, not on ly in
Jerusalem, but also in all Jury and in Sama ry, and even unto the worlds end.
And here is to The office of a postles or preachers.
be noted that Christ woll not have his preachers cu riouse upon idle questions
or vain philosophy. For their only office and feate is to preach Christ and
his doctrine, that is to wit, to set forth and pro powne only such things as
Christ has taught and done to be believed of the ignorant people for which
cause also the holy ghost was given unto them, eue^
to the intent to make the Apostles mete to teach and us to receive their
teaching. Now when Christ had spoken these things, while his Apostles beheld
him, lo suddenly he was taken up on high, and a cloud received him up out of
their sight. Here (my brethren) The fru te of the asce^sion
ye shall mark the fruit and profit of our sa uiour Christ's Ascension. For
by his styenge or ascendynge up into heaven he wrought two things for us. The
one was, he had a most goodly and glo riouse triumph upon our mortal enemy
the deuell. The other was, he anon sent down the holy ghost to his Apostles,
as also the prophet David witnesses, saying: Ascendit in altum, captiuam
duxit captiuitatem, dedit dona hominibus. That is to say. He ascended up on
high, he led captivity captive, he gave gifts to men.

Finally, ye shall mark yt our Savior Christ at his departure from his
disciples when he mounted up to heaven, comforted them by his angels, su rely
promising them, that even such one as they saw him ascendyng now up to
heaven, they should in the last day se again, at which time undoubtedly he
shall render to every man his reward according to his deeds. They which have
done wyckedly, and would not believe, shall be condemned into hell fire, where
shall be weeping and gnashynge of teth. But they that have believed on Christ Jesus
and with worthy deeds have expressed and declared their faith to the world,
they shall inherit the kingdom of heaven and shall enter into the joy which the
father of hea uen has prepared for them. To whom with the son and holy
ghost be glory and laud in infinita secula.

Amen.
The Gospel on Ascension day, The xvi. chapter of Mark.
Thargument.
Of the commission that Christ gave to his Apostles to preach his gospel
through out the hole world. And how Christ ascended up to heaven.

AFter this Jesus appear edagayne unto the ele leue^ as they ^at at meat: and
cast in their teeth their unbelief and hardness of heart, because they believed
not them which had seen that he was risen again from the dead. And he said
unto them: Go ye into all the world, and preach the Gospel to al creatures:
he that believes and is baptized shall be sau^d. He that believes not shall be
damned.

And these tokens shall follow them that believe. In my name they shall cast out
deuels, they shall speak with new tongues, they shall drive away serpe^tes. And
if they drink any deadly thing, it shall not hurt them. They shall lay their
hands on the sick, and they shall recover. So then when the Lord had spoken
unto them he was received into heaven, and is on the right hand of God. And
they went forth, and preached every where: the Lord workynge with them and
confirmynge the word with miracles following.

THe Christian man's life in this present Gospel (good people) is set before our
eyes. For faith and charity are here propouned unto us as in all ye rest of
the gospels. Wherefore sith the Gospel brings ever these two with it, we
ought also continually to preach and entreat of them. For he says who so
believes and be baptized shall be saved, which things we shall now in order
peruse and consider.

First of all Christ vpbraydeth in this Gospel Incredu litie.
his Apostles of their faynte believe and hardenes of heart and consequently
blames them declaryng what they wanted and yet he rejects them not neither
is moved rygorously and hastily against them but he gently blames them none
other wise than if one of us would say to an other. Art thou not asha med to
do the thing thou go about? speaking after this sort to bring him to
know himself and to make him ashamed that he may leave of his euel enterprise
or work, and yet we reiecte him not nor hate him nor yet pluck our love from
him. Neither was it a light matter why the Lord rebuked his disciples, for
surely infidelity or lack of believe
is of all sins that can be named the greatest. And he expresses unto them
the manner of their mysbeleue when he says, that their hearts were hardened,
and yet notwythstandynge he handles them gently and myldely. All these things
were done to our comfort and consolation that we should not be discoraged
though we be any thing fautye in our faith as if we doubt, stomble, or fall,
but rather that we should quyckly rise again, establysh our faith and run to
God taking trust and affiaunce at him and constantly also retainynge it,
namely sith he de leth with us not according to rygoure, but can wynke at our
falls and infirmities. And he that repu teth him to be such shall also find
him such one: I say if he can take him for a merciful God he will suffer
himself to be found such one, he woll so declare himself toward him.
Contrary wise an evil conscience and an unfaithful heart does not so, he
bears no such affiaunce toward God, but flies from him, reputing him a
sore and rygorouse judge, and therefore also find him such one. The same we
must also do with our neighbors. If we se any swerve from the faith he is not
to be beloved in his malice but we ought to reprove and lay his fault and
shrynkynge before his eyes but yet not af ter such forte that we should hate
him or be against him or turn our frendshyp and love from him. For Gal. vi.
thus says saint Paul. Brethren although a man be found in any fault, you
that be spiritual redress
such a person with the spirit of mekenes. But the most holy father or god
rather, the bishop of Rome which wol be called Pope, his bishops, his prestes
his monks, his chanons, his freers, and his nonnes can not abide when that
they be found in any notable crime, to be reproved. For what so ever euel do
chance they pretend and allege for them that it come not through their fault
but through the fault of their subjects. Their subjects and such as be Evil
ought to be pu nyshed.
under their obedience shall be cruelly and roughlye handled. Summa summarum any
injury and wyckednes ought to be punyshed, but love and verity must be kept
toward every man. Neither ought we to suffer our mouth to be stopped. For
none of us all shall so live as long as we be in this flesh that we can be
found on every part blameles. But I am fauty in this thing, and an other in
that.

Namelye sithe it is right manifest to all men that even thapostles themselves
lacked that which was chyfe and the highest point of al, where as notwith
standing, they were the corner stones and the rocks of foundation, yea and
the best and the most ex cellent part of christendom. No man yet thinks
that thapostles were utterly and all together infide les. For they believed the
things that were written in the law and in the prophets, albeit they had not
yet the full perfection of faith. Faith was in them and it was not in them.
Faith therefore is a thing which always grows bygger and bygger according
to the parable of the mustarde sede. So the Apostles were not utterly void and
destitute of faith for they had a part of it. For it is with faith as it is
with a man that is sick and begins by little and little to crepe up and wax
strong. The lord than expresses and declares to his apostles where in they
believed not and what they wanted, which doubtless was that they perfytly
believed not his resurrection. For albeit they believed all the rest, yet in this
behalf they remained infideles. For happily they believed also this that God
would be merciful Christ vpbraydeth his apostles of their infidelity.
unto them, but yet this was not enough. For it was necessary also that they
should believe Christ's resur rection. Wherefore he vpbraydeth them of their
infidelity saying that albeit they had seen altogether yet they believed it
not, and that they yet wa^ted this article of resurrection. What is it than to
believe the What it is to believe the resurrec tion of Christ.
resurrection of Christ which bears so great a stro ke and is of such
importance that ye disciples were called infideles and mysbeleuynge persons
for the defaute of it? Certes, to believe the resurrection of Christ is nothing
else than to believe we have a reconciler before God which is Christ which makes
us at one with God the father and iustifyeth us in his sight. For what so ever
is in man of his own nature and birth without regeneration is but sin and
death whereby he heapeth upon himself gods vengeance. Again, God is the
eternal justice and clerenes, which of his nature hates sin. Hereof it
comes that between God and man is perpetual enmity neither can they be
friends or agree together. Christ therefore being incarnate did both translate
our sins upon himself and drowned ye wrath of the father in himself to
reconcile us to his father. Without this faith we be ye children of ve^geaunce,
we can do no good work that may be acceptable to God, neither will God hear
our prayers. For thus in the. xviij. psalm it is written. They cried and there
was no helper, to the Lord, and he answered them not. Yea the most excellent
work whereby we thought to obtain grace, help, and comfort of God was
imputed unto us for sin, as the prophet in the. cix. psalm says: Oration
eius in pec catum fiat. Be his prayer counted for sin, for surely we can not
with al our powers of our own na ture pacify god. We neded therefore Christ to
be me diatour for us to the father, and to make us at one with him, and finally
to obtain what so ever is ne cessary for us. By the same Christ it behooves us
to ask of God what so ever thing we need, as Christ Ioh. xvi
himself enstructeth us saying: What so ever ye ask the father in my name it
shall be done unto you. What soever we demand of God, surely by this Christ
(which has satisfied for our sins) we must obtain and get it. For Christ is
he which lays a garrison about us, he is the defense and bukler under lindx;
whom we be hydden, even as the chekens be nouryshed and hid under the
wings of the hen. By him only our prayer is allowed before God. By him only
we be herd and get the favor and grace of the father. This is now to believe
upon Christ's resurrection if as it is recited we believe that Christ has borne
upon him as well our sins as the syn nes of the hole world and has drowned
in himself the one and the other and also the ire of the father whereby we be
reconciled to God and made ryghtuouse before him. Now ye se your selves how
few christian men and women there be which have this faith whereby all men be
delivered from their sins All out ward christen men beloue not in the re
surrection.
and be made ryghtuouse. For they believe not in the resurrection of Christ,
that their sins be taken away also by Christ, but go about to be justified
by their own works. This man enters into the cloister and is made a monk or
freer, she a nonne some one thing, some another, that they may be de lyuered
from their sins, and yet they say they be leave in the resurrection of
Christ, where their works do show clean contrary. Wherefore this article have
the holy fathers preached and inculked specially before other. For thus saint
Paul in the. xv. chapter of his first epistle to the Corinthi. says. If
Christ has not risen from death to life tha^ vain is our preaching, vain
also is your faith, And a little after. If Christ have not risen vain is your
faith, ye be yet in your sines. What manner co^seque^s is this? how do this
follow? Thus truly, if Christ rose not from death to life, it follows, that
sin and death did swalowe him up and killed him. After that we could not ryd
our selves out of our sins, Jesus Christ took them upon him to tread under
his fete death and hell, and to be made Lord over them. Now if he rose not
again, than surely he overcame not sin, but was overcome of sin.

And if he rose not again, he redeemed us not, and so we be yet in our sins.
Furthermore in the tenth to the Romans he says thus. If thou confessest
with thy mouth Jesus to be the Lord, and beleuest in thy heart, that God has
raised him from death, thou shall be saved. Here unto agrees all
scripture both old and new. But it is not yet suffi cient to believe the
resurrection of Christ. For all wic ked persons believe this, yea Satan doubts
not but that God suffered and rose again. But we must
also believe the sum of the resurrection and also what fruit and profit we
have taken thereby, that is to say, pardon of our gylt and as it were a gayle
delyuerey of all our sins that Christ passed thorough death and by it
overcame sin and death, yea and what so ever could hurt us he trod under
his foot and is constitute and made at the right hand of the father in heaven
the mighty Lord over syn, Satan, death, hell, and what soever hurts us and
that all these things be done for our sake which thing the wicked persons
believe not. Ye se than (my fre^des) how much is laid in this article of
resurrection so that we may better want all the rest than this one article.
For what were it to believe all the artycles, as that God was borne of the
virgin Mary, that he dyed and was buried: if thou do not also believe that
he rose again? And this God Abac. i.
means in Abacuc where he says: I shall work a work in you which no man
shall believe when it shall be told. And this is the cause why Paul in all his
epistles handles no work or miracle of Christ so diligently, as he does the
resurrection of Christ.

Yea he lets pass all the works and miracles of Christ, and chefly
teaches us the fruit of it, so that none of thapostles has so painted Christ
unto us as Paul. Wherefore not without cause Christ said Actu. ix
to Ananias: This is my vessel of election to bear my name before the Hethen
people, and kings and the children of Israel. It follows in the text: Go ye
into the hole world, and preach the Gospel to every creature.

What shall they preach* none other thing, but that Christ is risen from
death, and that he has vaynquished and taken away sin and all mysery, what
is gospel.
he that believes this, is saved. For ye gospel (which in the Greek sounds a
glad tidings) is nothing else, but a preaching or showing of Christ's resur
rectio^, he that gives faith unto it is saufe, he that does not, is lost. And
here consider me the nature of Faith constray neth no man.
faith. Faith constrayneth none to the gospel, but leaves every man to his
own liberty and choice He that believes, may freely believe, he that comes
let him come, he that will not, chose him. And here again ye shall mark that
the Romysh bishop erreth and does naught, in that he goes about by violence to
draw men to the christen faith. For besides the preaching of the Gospel,
Christ gave nothing in commission unto his disciples. So they preached it
accordyngly to their commission and left it in men's free liberty to come to
it or not. They said not, either believe it or I will kill the. So ye se
yt infidels as turks, sarase^s, and Ieus ought not vio lently to be drawn to
our faith, but louyngly rather invited and allured. But here is a doubt, how
this text ought to be understand (go into all the world) sith the Apostles
never passed through out all the world. For none of the apostles came so far
as to us. Further more there be many Islands found out now in our time which
be inhabited with people to whom gods word was never preached, where as Ps.
viij
yet the scripture confirms, saying: In omnem terram exiuit sonus eorum,
that is, their sou^de went forth into all the world. I say their preaching
went out into al lands although it be not yet come into the hole world. And
this coming out is be gonne, albeit it be not yet fynished and ended, but it
spredeth continually more and more and shall do ty^ the last day. And it is
with this commyssion or am bassadie of preaching as it is with a stone, when
it is cast into the water, for it makes waves about it, and one wave dryueth
forth another, till they come to the shoore, and albeit there be in the mids
a great caulme, yet the waves cease not, but go continually forth. Even so it
is with the preaching of the gospel, it began by thapostles, and it still
goes forth, and by preachers it spreads further and further, it suffers in
the world persecution and chasynge away, yet it is always opened more and
more to such as herd not of it before, though in the mydde journey it be
driven down and be made stark herisie. Or it may be lykened to an embassage
that one sen death out, as if our soueraygne lord the king of England should
send his ambassadors into France, or Spain, we say that an ambassadie is
gone forth from our king thither, all be it the am bassadours be not in deed
as yet come thither. It follows in the text. He that believes and is baptized
shall be saved. Here ye shall note that god does Signs joined to the word.
hang an outward sign to his word which sign makes his word to be the
stronger unto us, so that it confirms our hearts and makes us not to doubt
thereof. Thus God did set ye rain bow for a sign to. Noye to assure him he
would no more destroy the world. with ^loudes. So that this rain bow is as it
were a seal or suretye both to Noye and to al us none otherwise than a seal
is put to wrytynges to make them sure. And like as princes and noble me^ he
known by their colors, badges, and arms: even so deals god with us and
has stablished his words as with a seal yt we should nothing doubt Ge. xvij
He gave to Abraham circumcision for a sign of Chri stes coming that should
bless the world. Likewise has he done here by putting to this promise of
salvation an outward sign, I mean baptism For baptism is as it were a
watchword to put god in remembrance of his promise, which if it can be had,
ought in any wise to be taken (as saint Austine Austine.
says) and not to be despised. But if it can not be had, or if it be denied a
man, yet he shall not be dam ned so that he believes the Gospel. For where the
Gospel is, there is baptism and all that pertayneth to christianity. And
therefore the Lord says. He that believes not shall be damned. He says not,
he that is not baptized. For baptism without faith is nothing worth, but it
is like to a paper that has a seal hanging to it and has no writing in
it. Wherefore they that have signs (which we call sacraments) without faith,
they have seals without wrytynges. Furthermore ye se here (good people) what
is thoffice of such as wolbe called Christ's apostles, that is to wit, to go
into the world and preach Christ's Gospel. And so here ye may judge whether the
bishop of Rome with his galant prelates which ride like princes upon their
moyles and never preach one word but rather stop the mouths of true
preachers, ought to be called Apostolyke persons or no. It follows in the
text.

And these tokens shall follow them that believe. In my name they shall cast out
deuels, they shall speak with new tongues, they shall drive away serpents. And
if they drink any deadly thing, it shall not hurt them. They shall lay
their hands on the sick, and they shall recoues. My friends how shall we
ver^fy this text, that he that believes shall have power to work all these
signs? for the Lord says that these tokens shall ^olowe the beleuers.
Moreover it is certayuly known unto us that not all ye Apostles wrought them.
For it is recorded of none to have dronken poison but of Ihon the Evangelist.
Furthermore if this saying of Christ must needs stand, few shall be saved for
very few of the saints have done al these. Some therefore to avoid this
inconvenience do ex A mystical inter pretacion.
pound these signs mystically, saying that they do speak with new tongues
which where as before they taught deuelysh doctrines, now they confess Christ
and so they be new men. By taking away of serpents they understand the
destroyenge of pe stiferouse doctrines, heresies and sects. By drinking of
poison without hurt, they understand that the readyng or hearing of false
doctrines shall not hurt them. By healynge and curing of sick persons they
understand the healynge of the soul. Albeit this interpretation is honest and
a matter of troth that such as believe shall work these feats, yet it is not
the right sense and meaning of this text. This than is the meaning. Where a
christian man has faith, he shall have power to work these signs and they
shall follow him, as Christ himself Io. xiiij.
says in an other place: Uerely verily I say unto you, he that believes in
me the works that I do he shall do, yea and he shall do greater then they be.
For the christen man has the same power with Christ, Christ is a co^munitie,
he is set in the same goods with Christ. Furthermore Christ gave them power
against wicked spirits to cast them out and to heal al manner of syckenesses
as it is read in the tenth of Matheu. Also in the. xix. psalm ye read: Thou
shall walk upon Lions and Dragons. Wherefore where a christen man is, the power
to work these signs and miracles is not taken away, as by many exemples it
has been proved. But no man ought to do them, onles it be necessary and the
case require it. For the Apostles themselves wrought not these miracles but
only to the testification of gods word that so by my racles the Gospel might
be confirmed, as the text says. They went and preached every where, the
Lord workynge with them and confirmynge the word with miracles following. But
now after ye the Gospel is spread abroad and opened to the hole world,
miracles be not necessary as they were in the Apostles time. (...)loweth: when
the Lord had spoken unto them, he was received into heaven. That is to say,
he went up to begin his spiritual and heavenly kingdom, and drew with him
our hopes into heaven that thither, whether we saw him ascend we should also
follow. And he sytteth on the right hand of God. This is a manner or figure of
speaking and it sygnifyeth, he is God, ^^all and of like power with the
father. And as the prophet says, he ascended up on high and has led
captivity a prisoner. So that now, we be no longer in thraldom, for Christ
has carried it away with him and made us the children of his father to live
eternally with him in heaven. To whom be glory for ever and ever.

Amen.
The Epistle on the sunday after the Ascension day. The. i. Epistle of Peter
the. iiij. chap.
Thargument.
An exhortacion to do good works according to thexemple of Christ.

Most dear beloved brethren. Be ye therefore sober, and watch unto prayer. But
above all things have fervent love among your selves. For love shall cover
the multitude of sins. Be ye herberous one to another, without grudgynge. As
every man has received the gift, even so minister the same one to another, as
good ministers of the manyfolde grace of God. If any man minister, let him do
it as of the ability which god ministers unto him, that god in all things
may be glorified through Jesus Christ.

GOod brethren and systers in our savior Christ the lection of the epistle of
this day read in ye church is taken forth of the. iiij. chapter of the first
epist^e of ye Apostle and messanger of Christ S. Peter. The occasion of this
epistle.


Ye shall therefore understand that forasmuch as this holy man S. Peter had now
in the chapters go ynge before this place sufficiently taught the Iues and
others whom he wrote this epistle unto, of the faith and justification which
comes by Christ, he does now in the chapters following monysh them of good
works, according to the manner of sincere
and pure preachers, which before they give any pre ceptes of good manners, woll
first entreat of ye causes of new life. Wherefore this present lesson is
nothing but an exhortation to good works after the exemple of Christ. Thus
than he says:

Be ye therefore sobre and watch unto prayer. This text contains a general
exhortacion to all such things as become christen men to do in Sobrenes and
modesty.
this life. For modesty and sobrenes be not so greatly good works, as they be
the self rules whereby al good works be tempered. Ye shall therefore
understand here by modesty and sobrenesse first those civil virtues which
have contrary vices, arrogan ^ye and pride. In like wise does also Paul under
stand them in the. xij. to the Romans where he writes. I say unto you by
the grace which is given me to every one of you, that none think proud ly of
himself above that it becomes him to think but let him so think that he
be demure and sobre even as God has bestowed to every one the measure of
faith. Second, ye shall understand by modestye and sobrenes here, also the
sou^dnes of mind so that ye think modestly and soberly of gods word, lest
through your own ymaginations and good in tencions ye go away from the true
understanding of gods word, or suffer your selves to be plucked away with any
manner wind of new doctrine. Now wha^ we be modest and sober as well in life as
in doc tri^e it follows consequently that we must needs watch and give our
selves to prayer. It follows.

But before all have fervent love among your selves, for love shall cover the
multitude of sins. As though saint Peter should say. It may hap pen
peradventure that a man may feign with him self that he is sober, modest, and
busye in prayer. Charity
Therefore before al things se ye have charity with out which, your
demurenes, your sobernes, your prayer may be but feigned and cloked works,
with out which charity also they be nothing worth nor yet thankful to God
according to the saying of Math. ^
Christ. When thou shalt offer thy offering at the altar and remembrest,
that thy brother have ought against the, leave there thy offering, and go and
be at one with thy brother first, and then come and of fre thy oblation.
Doubtless (my brethren) charity is to be preferred before all other works for
without it none of all our other works can please God as Christ himself
witnesses Math. v. And also the prophet Esaias in the first chapter. Thou shall
no more offer to me sacrifice and so forth, but learn to do right, help the
nedye. etc. And saint Peter will Vehement cha ritie.
that our charity be vehement or fervent, not cold and negligent such as
theyrs is, which with their mouth make as though they love a man, but with
their heart they hate him as euel as a tode. And he adds the cause, for love
or charity covers ye multitude
of sins. This sentence is taken forth of ye x. chapter of the proverbs. For
the most proper office of charity is to hyde the infirmities of the
neighbor. Furthermore hospitality and harbourynge without murmuring or
grudgynge is also one of the effects of charity. It follows in the text.

As every man has received the gift, even so minister the same one to another
as good dispensours or stewardes of the manyfold grace of god. Here good
people, the Apostle Peter exhorts every man particularlye to do his office in
his calling. He that is a preacher of gods word, ought to be content with
his gift and to execute his duty in his vocation, that is to wit, he ought to
preach
not his own dreams, but the sermons and words of God, and so of all other
offices in Christ's co^gre gation, which if they were done according to S.
Peter's advise here, we should both have gods word more purely set forth, and
also the church in better unity and concord. Then according to every ma^s
gift, and (as Paul says) even as God has allot ted every man according
to the measure of his To. xij.
faith, so let him serve in his calling. As good ste wards or dispensours let
them behave themselves Good stewardes.
in executynge their office. I pray you is not he a foolysh steward which of
other men's goods would
glory and take a pride, where he is but only ye steward and not the owner
of them? Now they be good stewardes which be faithful and prudente, which
know what, how, to whom and what time they ought to preach and lay out the
treasure of gods word, the treasure I say of the manyfolde grace of God
according to the sundry and manyfold gifts. He that speaks let him speak
the ser mons and words of almyghtye God, let him not preach his own gloses,
his own inuencions his own dreams and fausies. And to what so ever
ministracion he be called and appointed in the church, Ex virtute.
let him do it (says saint Peter) as of the virtue, po were, and ability
which God ministers unto him, and not as though he were able by his own wit
and prudence to execute his ministry. It follows.

That God in all things may be glorified tho row Jesus Christ.

Here saint Peter declares the principal end of all our gifts offices and
good works, which is that by them should rise contentions, stryfes, debates,
and discordes. Now God is glorified by our How god is glorified by our
gifts and works
gifts, offices, duties, and works, when we so use them that the congregation
may take profit and edificacion thereby, and may take occasion by the good
distribution of the same to glorifye God by Jesus Christ. For our Savior
Christ Jesus ascendynge up to heaven distributed and gave gifts unto men as
the prophet says. To Ps. lxvij
whom be all glory, al praise, all imperie and dominion as well to save as to
rule and govern his faithful ones, together with the father and the holy ghost
foreeuer and ever

AMEN.
The Gospel on the sunday after the Ascension day. The. xv. chapter of Ihon.
Thargument.
The holy ghost is promised to be sent by Christ to his Apostles.

Jesus said unto his disciples. But when the com forter is come whom I will
send unto you from the father (even the spirit of troth, which proceeds of
the father) he shall testifye of me. And ye shall bear witness also, because
ye have been with me from the beginning. These things have I said unto you
because ye should not be offended. They shall excommunicate you: yea the time
shall come, that whosoever kylleth you, will think that he does god service.
And such things will they do unto you, because they have not known the father
neither yet me. But these things have I told you that when the time is come,
ye may remember them that I told you.

FOr as much as our Lord Christ in his maundie (good people) with many promyses
had bequethed Paracletus.
and deputed the holy ghost to his Apostles, he does now at last name him more
plainly with his proper name of office, declarynge thereby what profit and
commodity he shall bring to the world. He says: when the comforter is
come. This propre and true name he gives the holy ghost calling him
paracletum, that is say a comforter. For who else certifyeth our conscience,
that we should believe yt To. viij.
by Christ we be the children of God and cry Abba father, but this only
comforter? I pray you, who makes us both desyrefull and also hardy to
confess this faith? Who comfort us in all such mysfortune and afflictions
as we suffer in this world for this confessions sake? Surely the same self
good spirit, which proceeds from ye father does al this, this is his feate
and office. For thobteynynge of which spirit, the prophet David so busely
prays in the. l. psalm. But ye may more lively behold the nature and
workynge of this holy ghost or spirit in the apostles, which before the
coming of the holy ghost, in tribulation fled from the Lord and utterly
denied him. For they hyd themselves in corners, some here some there. But wha
this spirit, this comfortour was ones confirmed in them: then they confessed
Christ freely and his resurrection in so much that they also took pleasure and
delight Act. v.
in the cross or affliction that was laid upon them as appears plainly in
the Acts. The spi rite of truth.


Now this comforter, because by the virtue of his office he makes men truth
tellers, yea and comfort and strengthens the faithful in the confession
of the troth, by the virtue also of his office he shall testify of Christ. So
ye must here mark that ye holy ghost ought to bear witness of Christ. But
what shall he testifye, what shall he teach of Christ? Undoubtedly none other
thing but yt which
Christ preached and taught before, that is to say, he shall make them which
before could not perceive Christ's doctrine, now to understand it, by writing
the gospel in their hearts. A man's own wisdom can here do nothing, it must
be this holy spirit and comforter which must do the deed, even as Jeremy The
pro phecie of Ieremye.
the prophet in the. xxxi. chapter says: I shall plant my law in the inward
parts of them and write it in their hearts, and wylbe their God and they shall
be my people. And from thence forth shall noman teach his neighbor or his
brother and say: know the Lord. But they shall all know me from the lowest
to the highest, says the Lord. Of all these things it is gathered
manyfestly that without the holy ghost we neither can know the truth nor bear
wytnes unto Christ Jesus.

Second, ye may espy here (good people) very plainly thoffice of Apostles or
Christ's messangers That is to wit, that they ought to bear witness of
Christ. For to testifye or bear wytnes in scripture
sygnifyeth to teach and speak not the thing that pleases us but the thing
that almighty god has commanded. After this sort is Christ named in the
psalm a faithful wytnes in heaven. Also Esaias the Psalm. lxxxviij. Esa. lv.
prophet speaks of Christ in the person of the father. I have set him for a
wytnes to the people for the prince and master of the gentyls. Wherefore sith
the record and wytnes of Christ and of his apostles ought to be egall and
agreeable togethers: surely they must have one tenure of their testimonies, and
furthermore it must needs follow that the holy ghost executed his testimony
and record by ye apostles as in the. x. of Matthew it appears. It is not you
(says Christ) which speak, but the spirit of my father which shall speak
in you. Where be now these fellows which here tofore have cried that the holy
ghost have reuelated and disclosed to thapostles and fathers certain secreter
and higher things which be not comprised in the gospel? To whom will ye give
more credence? To Christ or to these vain tryflers? Christ says that the
holy ghost shall testifye of him to the world and shall make me^ mete and apt
to receceyue his gospel and shall teach none other thing than that which he
himself has taught. But these tryflers babble that the holy ghost ought to
teach some thing of more excellencye than that which is comprysed in ye holy
gospel. Surely I would think it most conueuient that we should obey and
believe him to whom the father of heaven bare wytnes saying: This is math. iij
my well-beloved son in whom I am right well pleased hear ye him. But they that
can not be satisfied with Christ's doctrine to whom not only thapostles but
also the holy ghost has borne witness, let them at their parell chose them
other doctrines. Certes I will not counsel you like owls to wa^der in
darkness but rather to fyxe stedfastlye your fete in the ^yght.

Last of all ye shall consider and note (good chri sten brethren and systers)
in this gospel, yt the word and institution of Christ, of which the spirit
and the apostles do testifye, can in no wise b grateful and acceptable to the
world. For those that wol admyt this word, the world wolle cast them out of
al ho nest men's company (as they call honest men) they woll as heretykes drive
them out of their churches and assembles, they woll excommunicate them, they
woll curse them with book bell and candell. Yea if they may with all kind of
punishment and death persecute the true Apostles and messe^gers of Christ they
will think to do a high service to God, and that their zeal has hyghly
served gods will. But what says Christ in the mean season? Therefore I will be
with you. They shall so handle themselves towar des you, because they know
another me nor my father. Here ye se with what success and fortune in this
wicked world the most precious word of the gospel with the imbrasers thereof
be commonly received. For thou may not look to live a sweet an idle and a
delicate life if thou wolte confess Christ for he that woll live after a
godly sort (as says ij. tim. ij
saint Paul) must needs suffer persecution. And in an other place he says:
If I would please men I Gala. ij*
should not be the servant of Christ.

Wherefore if persecution shall invade us for co^fessynge of Christ: it is good
that we be armed with gods word that we may know how persecution hangs
over our heads by the proper will of God to thyntent our faith might thus by
such persecution be clarifyed, tried, and purged. For if we be full certifyed
hereof, we can not easily be offended with temptation but with a pacient mind
we shall suffer all the wrong that the world for Christ's cause woll put us
to. And surely this shall be a comfort unto us, that our persecuters for all
their proud bragges and vauntes neither know Christ nor his father. Finally we
be right well assured that ye trouble and affliction of this time (as Paul
says) can in no wise be compared with the glory to come that To. viij.
shall be disclosed unto us. With this our knowledge comfortynge our selves we
shall remain quiet in our conscience, still awaytynge with steadfast hope for
the immortal crown of the said glory which the father of heaven has
prepa^ed for us. To whom with the son and holy ghost be al glory and praise
for ever and ever.

AMEN.
The Epistle on wytsondaye. The. ij. chapter of the acts of the Apostles.
The holy ghost is here given according to Christ's promise before.

When the fyftye days were come to an end, they were all with one accord
together in one place. And suddenly there came a sound from hea uen, as it had
been the coming of a mighty wind and it filled all the house where they sat.
And there appeared unto them cloue^ tongues, like as they had been of fire, and
it sat upon each one of them: and they were all filled with the holy ghost, and
began to speak with other tongues, even as the same spirit gave them
vtteraunce. There were dwelling at Jerusalem, Iues, devout men, out of every
nation of them that are under heaven. When this was noysed about, the
multitude came together, and were astonnyed, bycuase that every man herd the^
speak with his own langage. They wondered al and marueled, saying among
themselves: behold are not al these which speak, of Galile? And how hear we
every man his own tongue wherein we were borne? Parthians and Medes, and
Elamytes, and the inhabyters of Mesopotamia, and of Jury, and of Capadocia, of
Ponthus and Asia, Phrygia, and Pamphilia, of Egypt, and of the parties of Ly
bia which is beside Siren, and strangers of Rome, Iues and Proselytes, Greeks
and Arabians: we have herd them speak in our own tongues the great works of
God.

CHrist had oftentimes (good people) promised unto his disciples the holy ghost
to confirm them in the true doctrine. For without ye holy ghost noman can
tyghtly either understand or certainly believe the word of God, neither can
stycke by it costantly without staggerynge or shrynkyng from it. Io. xiiij
It is the holy ghost doubtless that teaches al things and that puts men in
mind of gods will. And therefore Christ says in the.x. Chapter of Matthew. It
is not you that be the speakers, but it is ye spirit of your father which
speaks in you. Where fore this often promys^ of sendynge the holy ghost which
was made to the disciples, Christ now in this day of Pentecost perfou^neth.
But because it helps little to know that the disciples received the ho ly
ghost, oules we draw this receyuyng also to our profit, and auanntage,
therefore it were good to know the causes why the holy ghost was sent.

Ye shall therefore understand (good people) that the holy ghost was not sent to
thapostles nor at this day is sent as some men do dream, to teach a diverse
or strange doctrine from Christ's doctrine which Christ either taught not
before or had forgot The cau ses why the holy ghost is sent.
ten to teach: But he was sent and is sent for three causes. The first is
that he sh^^de teach and put in mind and expou^de all such things as Christ
taught And of this fynal cause and office of the holy ghost our Savior Jesus
Christ in the.xiii^. and.xv. chap ters of Ihon very co^iously and at length
speaks.

The second cause that the holy ghost is sent, is to confirm, strengthen,
and as it were to sease us and to make us full assured and certain of the
verity of gods word. Of this office the epistle of this day makes menc^^i^,
while it declares that the holy ghost sat upon every of them and filled them,
which thing betokens nothing else, but that the holy ghost confirined and
certifyed the minds of the Apostles upon the verity of gods word, and
therefore Ephe. i. 1. cor. i.
he is called of Paul the gage and the ernest.

The thyde cause that the holy ghost is sent, is that in temptation he might
comfort us and preserve us from desperacion, and therefore he is called
paracletus that is to say a comforter. Now therefore if ye couete to know, who
and what the holy ghost is which is called the third person in trinity,
consider well the foresaid offices of him, and ye shall right ly answer: The holy
ghost is God equal with the A descri ption of the holy ghost.
father and son, which was to this intent sent of them both, that he should
more clearly expoune the divine will of the father which was openly publisshed
to the world by Christ, and that he should put men in remembrance of the same
and confirm it in their hearts to the intent they might boldlye confess it. But
let us now approach to the text of this present lesson.

When the day of Pentecoste. Pentecost.


That is to say the fyftye day from Ester was a fulfyllyng which was one of
three solemn feasts in which all the Iues were wont to be assembled ac
cordynge to the law of Moses in Deuteromye in the.xvi. chapter, which feast we
christen men do observe with an other liberty and for an other respect then
it was kept of the Iues. For we do solemnize and keep this day only in
memory of the special and wonderful sendynge of the holy gooste as on this
day. When this feast (I say) of the Jews called Pentecost otherwise named
the feast of wekes was in the complyshynge and doing, the Apostles were all
with one accord together in one place, as Christ had commanded them before to
do, that they should Actu. ij*
not depart from Jerusalem but that they should awayte for the promise of the
father.

And suddenly there came a sou^de from heaven, as it had been the coming of a
myghtie wind, and it filled all the house where they sat.

My friends this soden coming of the holy ghost does admonyshe us of the
manner or form of his coming which is not humane nor chau^ceth after man's
fashion, but as the similitude declares in the third chapter of Ihon. The
spirit or wind blows where it woll, and thou hear his voice, but thou
know not whence it comes nor whether it goes. Now for as much as Christ
applies this similitude and says: So is every one that is borne of the
spirit, therefore ye must also understand here, that the holy ghost in deed
comes unto us, but how or after what sort it passes man's wit and capacity*
which neither can comprehend the manner of his coming neither yet the
quality of his ac cion, albeit of the accion and presence of the holy ghost we
be made certain even as we may be certain of the blowynge of the wind.

Finally it is here to be considered in what wise
the holy ghost is to be received of us. Surely he is not to be received
simpliciter as a dove that must be miraculously sent from heaven, (as certain
here tykes at this day do think) neither is he to be taken as a virtue of God
procedynge from the father and from the son (as Campanus thinks) neither
yet in a prescribed and divised form as the papists have prefixed hyin before
all their counsaylles were they never so contrary to gods word, but he is to
be received as very god of the self same essencie and godhed with the father
and son. It fo loweth in the text:

And there appeared unto them cloven tongues like as they had been of fire and
sat upon each one of them.

Here (good people) ye may learn the effects or fruits of the holy goostes
coming, for he comes not in vain but makes dispertite or cloven to^ges
and fyry, he makes men to speak with other tongues, that is to say, he
regendreth them, he creates in them new motions, he assures them of the word
that they hear, he opens their mouths and makes them boldly and without
fear to confess the troth. And al they that is to wit the Apostles that were
assebled together for this purpose were forthwyth and suddenly al at ones
replete and filled with the holy ghost in such strange sort that by and by
they began to speak with sundry and new tongues, Diverse tongues.
not with old tongues and such as the tongue of Moses the lawspeaker is
discribed to be that is to wit hard and unpleasant, as it is written in the
fourth chapter of Exodus. And here may ye note the dyuersitie and difference
of the law and gospel. Moses tongue was sengle and but one, for one certain
people. But the tongues of the gospel be soun dry, whereby is sygnifyed the
liberty of the gospel. They spoke therefore with sundry to^ges even as the
spirit gave them vtteraunce. The holy ghost gave To. xij. ^. cor. xi.
not all to all, but (as Paul says) according to the measure of faytli as it
seems good unto him. It fo loweth in the text.

There were dwelling at Jerusalem Jews devout men out of every nation of
them that are un der the heaven and so forth.

Here be contained the common and vulgate of fectes which be wont to follow
the works of ye holy ghost. These effects be stoynynge and wonderyng, and
they declare unto us ye power of the holy gooste in them which were moved with
the works of the holy ghost. For the rest of people were rather more and more
offended with the works of the holy gooste than kyndled to unbrace them. They
said then, how happens this yt we hear every one in his own tongue which be
of sundry nations, speak the great Magnalia Dei.
wonders and high works of God, that is to say, the things that God has
wrought in his Christ. For to this intent surely was the holy ghost come even
to expou^de and declare Christ to the disciples, and no doubt he exhorted them
freely and boldlye to preach him unto the hole world, which thing af terwarde
they* manfully executed, as the sermon of Peter immediately after made, does
declare and show. Surely the holy ghost sent from heaven make men freely to
confess the Evangelical troth before kyn ges and princes, which thing the
flesh otherwise is not able to do. For it is to much afraid, that it can
wyllyngly and gladly suffer the hatred of this world which is knyt and joined
with this confess sion. Finally ye shall understand that ye holy ghost was
given to the Apostles in a vysible form. But it is now given to the chosen and
elect persons inuisiblye only by the word. Wherefore good christen people I
heartily exhort you, that ye woll earnestly embrace and love gods word, and
not mock and deryde it as certain of the Iues here said that the apostles
were dronken and full of new wine. Neither do I exhort you only to read and
praise the word, but also to work after it, to declare by your deeds and
procedynges that ye have an unfeigned and right faith in Christ. So doing, no
doubt the holy ghost shall come and dwell within you and declare and open unto
you all truth necessary to your souls health, to the ex tirpacion of all
wicked doctrine and auauncement of gods glory. Unto whom be all honor and
praise world without end.

Amen.
The gospel on Wytsondaye. The xiiij. chapter of Ihon.
Thargument.
Of the word of Christ and of the holy ghost

Jesus said unto his disciples, If a man love me, he will keep my saynges, and
my father will love him, and we will come unto him, and dwell with him He that
loves me not, keeps not my sayenges. And the word which ye hear, is not
mine, but the fathers which sent me. These things have I spoken unto you,
being yet present with you. But the comforter which is the holy ghost whom my
father will send in my name, he shall teach you all things, and bring all
things to your remem brau^ce what so ever I have said unto you. Peace I leave
with you, my peace I give you. Not as the world gives, give I unto you. Let
not your hertes be grieved, neither fear. Ye have herd how I said unto you: I
go, and come again unto you. If ye loved me, ye would verily rejoice, because
I said: I go unto the father. For the father is greater then I. And now have I
showed it you before it come, that when it is come to pass, ye might believe
Hereafter will I not talk many words unto you. For the prince of this world
comes, and has naught in me. But that the world may know that I love the
father. And as the father gave me co^man^ dement, even so do I.

BEfore we touch the gospel (my brethren) we shall The ori ginal be gynning of
Pe^tecost.
speak somewhat of this days feast. This feast which they call Pentecost,
began in this wise. When God should lead the Israelites out of Egypt, ye
night before he ordained Passover which we call Ester to be solemnised, and
commanded that every year about that time yt day should be kept holydaye
for a memory of their departure out of Egypt. And from that day afterward
for the space of fyfty days they walked in the wyldernes, till at last they
came to the mount Sinay, where by Moses the law was given them of God. For
this cause they kept that solemn holydaye which we call in Greek Pentecost
that is to say the fyftye day and in Englysh Wytsonday. Now therefore fyfty
days from Ester being accomplyshed and the memory of the law which god had
promulgate to the people in the mount Sinay fulfilled: the holy ghost came and
gave an other law. Now therefore, this day is celebrate of us not because of
ye old fact but because of the new, I mean, of ye se^ndyng of ye holy
ghost. So we declare a certain difference between our Pentceoste, and the
Iues Pentecost. First the Iues kept this day, because the law written was
then given unto them. But we ought to celebrate our Pentecoste because the
law of God was then spiritually delivered unto us. For the better
understanding hereof, Saint Paul is to be brought ij. co. iij and iiij.
forth which also puts the same difference, where he speaks of two manner
prechynges. And as there be two manner preachynges, so be there two sorts of
people. First was the law written, which God commanded and comprised in
lettres and therefore it is called the law of the lettre, because it remains
in lettres and enters not in the breast, neither do any works follow it save
hypocritical and constreyned works, and therefore the people also remain still
but lyterall and fleshly. And because it was comprysed only in lettres and was
all together in dead writing, it killed and made a dead people, for the heart
was dead because it did not of the own accord the commandment of god. For
if every man should be left to his own will to do what him lusts without all
fear of punyshement there should be found none but would rather be fre and
louse from the law then bound thereto. For thus he naturally thinks. Lo God
will surely punyshe me, yea and drive me into hell, onles I keep his
commandments. Tha^ nature feleth it self vnwyllynge, and to do them with no
manner love or delectation, wherefore man is forth with made enemy to god by
reason of the penaltye when he fealeth himself a sinner, and that he walks
not ryghtly before God, so that he would rather that there were no God. This
bytternes is infixed in the heart against God, though nature goes about never
so much to garnysh her self with ^ayre works. It appears therefore how that
the law co^ prysed in scripture and letters does iustifye noman nor yet can
enter into the heart. The law spritual.


The other law is spiritual which is written not with pen or ynke, nor is
declared with ye mouth after the fashion as Moses wrought the matter in tables
of stone, but like as we se in this story. The ho ly ghost comes down from
heaven and fylleth them all together, making them to have clo^en and fyry
tongues and to preach frankely and freely far otherwise then it was done
before, so that all the peo ple was as^onnyed thereat and wondered. The holy
gooste I say comes and replenisheth ye heart, he changes the man which
loves God and does gladly all that ever is acceptable unto him. Wherefore al
things be there lively, quycke is the under standing, the eye, the mind, and
the heart, which brenneth and is rapte with the desire of all goodness. And
this is the true difference between ye law comprysed in letters and the
spiritual law, and here is it seen which be the works of God. Wherefore here
is all the craft set to discern and preach right ly of the holy ghost.
Heretofo^^ men have preached of him that he brings to pass and prompteth all
things what so ever either the counsayles decerne or the B. of Rome in his
canonic^l law co^^^^deth where as nevertheless al those things be only exter ne
and outward which he ordeneth or governs.

Wherefore this order of things is clean ouer^wharte and preposterous, in that
they make of the works of the holy ghost a lettered and a dead law where it
ought to be spiritual and lively, and so there is made of it a Mosaicall and
humane tradition. The cause is that they know not what ye holy ghost is,
wheru^to he was given, or what his f^^te and office is. Let us learn then and
consider well what he is, The office of the holy ghost.
to the intent his office may be discerned. In the epistle of this day it is
showed how the holy ghost is sent down from above, and fylleth the disciples
which before sat in heaviness and fear, he cleueth their tongues, he kyndleth, he
enflameth them, that they might take strength of heart and freely preach the
Gospel without fear of any man. Here thou see it is not the office of the
holy ghoost to make books and to enacte laws, but that he is such a God that
only writes the thing in ye heart, ye kyndleth it, that creates a new mind,
making man to rejoice before god and to be ravished with a new love toward
him, and consequently with glad mind to do his duty and service to all men
franckly. After this sort the parts of the holy ghost be ryghtly preached, he
that paynteth them otherwise, believe him not. For where he comes thus thou
see he takes away the letter and makes men fre from sin and from the
compulsion of the law so that he taynynge in their breast makes the^ in whom
he is resident to do with out compulsion all that the law commands. But
thou wylt ask whereby he brings to pass and what thing he uses thus to
change and renew the heart? Surely by that he shows and preaches of Jesus
Christ (as Christ himself in the.xv. chap. of Ihon says) when the comforter
comes whom I shall send you from my father I mean the spirit of troth
which proceeds from ye father he shall bear wytnes of me. Now oftentimes ye
have herd that the gospel or Euangel is the thing which god suffers to be
preached in the world and to be told to every man that is to wit that none
can be justified by the deeds of the law but rather yt a worse thing come
thereby, and therefore he sent down his most dear son to dye and to shede
his blood for us by cause we of our own powers could not rub out the spotte
of sin nor be delivered from it. But to the preaching hereof another thing
yet is required, even the holy ghost whom God must send. He printeth in the
heart this sermon and preaching to make it fixed and roted in it, for it is
most sure and certain yt Christ has done all this gear, he has taken
away our sin and ouerco^men all, that by him we might reign over al, and
even here in one heap is all the treasure hurded. This treasure we can not get
onles the holy ghost be given us which may put in our hearts and minds to
believe and say: And I also am of the nombre of them to who^
so great treasure does belong. When we have ones felt this, that God has
thus helped us and bestowed upon us so great treasure: then the matter goes
well forward, neither can it otherwise be but man's mind must be rauyshed with
a pleasure toward God and lift up himself and say: Oh good father, if this
thy will be that thou haste showed so great love and such exceeding kyndnes
toward me I must needs again love ye with my hole heart and reioise, and
gladly do what so ever thy pleasure is. Then the heart is no more waywarde nor
crooked in the meditacion of God, it thinks not to be driven down to hell of
him, as before the coming of the holy ghost it thought, when it felt no
goodness no love no fydelitie, but still a pace the wrath and indignacion of
God. Now therefore while the holy ghost prynteth into the christen ma^s heart
how he has God his merciful and graciouse Lord, it is a pleasure for him
for Gods sake boldly to execute and suffer any manner of thing. After this wise
thou shall learn to know the holy ghost and his office which is to distribute
ye great treasure Christ and all that in him is which is, given and declared
unto us by the Gospel to the intent thou may put him into thy heart to make
him thine own good. Hitherto I have declared unto you, the history of the
holy ghost. Now what we shall do in it, we shall know further in the gospel.
Thus says Christ

If a man love me he woll keep my saying, and my father shall love him. Lo good
people here ye may se (as I have often times preached unto you) that the fruit
of faith is Charity is the fruit of faith.
charity, which thing can not be denied. For chari tie or love perfourmeth
and does even of the own accord all that ever scripture commands. And
this does saint Paul declare Gal. v. He that loves his neighbor has
fulfilled the law. Wherefore they that have not faith and charity, do not
fulfill the law, albeit they seem in outward appearaunce to perform all the
works of the law. The word which Christ preaches he says is not his word
but his fathers word declarynge herby yt nothing ought to be added nor taken
away from it. And these things (says Christ) concerning as well your love
toward me, as the keeping of my word have I spoken unto you, being yet
present and dwell lynge among you. But that same comforter of whom I have
made so much mention unto you, I mean the holy ghost, whose feate and office
shall be to sanctifye and lyghten you unto all troth, which holy ghost my
father shall send in my name that is to say for my cause, he shall teach you
altogether and shall put you in remembrance of all that ever ye A question.
have herd of me. Thou wolt say unto me. Why? knew not the disciples all
before, which were so long time with Christ? I answer, that ye disciples
ought needs to have been taught by the holy ghost, for without him they were
yet imperfecte and carnal, for they understood neither Christ's glorificacion
by the cross nor yet his raygne or kingdom. Wherefore they neded the holy
goostes teaching, yt
is to say, his sanctifyenge and making the things lively in them which they
had learned of Christ For ye disciples were as yet but (litera) they perceived
not the things that were of the spirit of God, and therefore they neded the
holy ghost to quycken them, according to the saying of saint Paul.

The letter sleeth, but the spirit quickens. Ye may not then understand by
this word (teach) that the docebit
holy ghost shall set abroch a new doctrine that Christ had not taught before,
but ye must understand by it that the holy ghost shall interpret the doctrine
al ready taught by Christ and declare it to the spiritual understanding. And
therefore Christ expouneth himself and says he shall put you in remembrance
of all the things that I have showed you. So that ye can not gather herby that
ye holy ghost shall add any thing to Christ's doctrine, as the wicked
papists do wyckedly gather. It follows.

Peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you* not as the world gives,
give I unto you etc. My friends what is Christ's peace? Surely (to The peace of
Christ.
be short) it is nothing eis but the quiet and tranquillity of conscience.
This peace the world can not give, man's traditions can not give, ma^s own
voluntary works can not give, ^^ mo^kery, ^^ pylgrimage, no popysh pardons, no
pardon beads, no relyques, bre^^y no fleshly thing can give this pea ce of
conscience. It is only Christ that can give us this peace when we spiritually
eat him and drink him, that is to say, when we know wherefore Christ serves
us and so suffer him by true faith and cha ritie to enter into our souls and
to dwell within us which thing he promyseth us here in this gospel that he
woll do, in case we declare the fruit of our faith and keep his word.

Furthermore ye shall observe (good people) in
this gospel, that Christ here showed his disciples that he must go away
from them, but yet he says he woll come again. But I pray you when comes
Christ again unto us? Surely he comes again, when he sends his word and
his spirit unto us. For look where the word is and there is Christ most
presently. So in an other place he says: Lo I am with you even to the end of
ye world. Math. xxviij.
Finally where Christ says that the father is greter then he, ye shall
understand, that Christ otherwhyles speaks as a man, otherwhyles as God,
which thing ought diligently to be observed of such as woll study holy
scripture. For that he here says: My father is greater than I, ye must
refer it to his humanity. But of his divinity in an other Ioh. x.
place he speaks in this wise. I and my father be one. And now says Christ
calling back his disciples to his word whereby they might comfort
themselves after his departure, I have told you of it before hand, to
the intent that when it is come to pass ye might believe that I wolle surely come
unto you again. Herafter woll I not speak much unto you, that is to wit,
presently and in person with Priceps mundi.
man's voice. For the prince of this world comes that is to say, my mortal
enemy and yours Satan the deuel which treads upon my hele is at hand. Genesis
iij.
And he calls him the prince of the world of his effect, because he
commands and rules ye world after his will and pleasure, and draws it
whether he woll as he lust himself. But this prince of the world this Satan
(says Christ) has naught in me. As who should say, albeit the prince of ye
world is coming against me to utter and work all that ever he can devise to
put me down, yet sure I am that I shall overcome him. So he makes his
disciples afraid in that he tells them that the prince of this world is
marchyng forward against him, but again he comfort them when he says, he
has naught in him. And in these few words is ex pressed the ^yth of the hole
gospel. Wherefore to conclude, of this victory of Christ all we good christen
people shall be partakers, in case we believe according as in this Gospel we be
taught. And consequently the holy ghost who is the true and only comforter in all troubles and affliccion shall make his mansion and abode within us, and put
us in mind of all Christ's will and pleasure, to the glory of God the father
of heaven and his only begotten son Christ Jesus our Lord. Qui viuit and
regnat in infinita secula.

Amen.
The Epistle on the second day of Pentecost. The. x. chapter of the Acts.
Thargument.
How the Heythen received the holy ghost and were baptized.

PEter opened his mouth and said. Jesus commanded us to preach unto the
people, and to testifye, that it is he, which was ordained of God to be the
judge of quycke and dead. To him give all the prophets wytnes, that through
his name who so ever believes in him, shall receive remission of sins. While
Peter yet spoke these words the holy ghost fell on all them which herd the
preaching. And they of the circumcision which believed, were astonnyed, as
many as came with Pe ter, by cause that on the Gentyls also was shed out the
gift of the holy ghost. For they herd them speak with tongues, and magnifye
God. Then an swered Peter: can any man forbid water, that these should not be
baptized which have received the holy ghost as well as we? And he commanded
them to be baptized in the name of the Lord.

GOod people the sum of saint Peter's sermon The su^me of S. Peter's prechig
here is, that Jesus Christ which for his benefytes and wonderful virtues that
he showed amon ges the Iues, was crucified, that is to wit, nailed most
vilanously to the cross (which was the most paynfull and cruel death that
the Iues could ymagyne) did notwythstandynge rise again from death to life
and that who soever wol believe in him shall be saved. And he says furthermore
that God anointed this Jesus of Nazareth with the holy ghost and with power.
Whereby he declares him to be the true Messiah which was promised to the
fathers and of whom the prophet David spoke: I have anointed my king over
Zion my holy hyl He declares also that Christ's office is to do good to all.
Now this resurrection of Christ he confirms both with his own witness and
with the wytnes of all that saw the thing with their eyes. And lest a man
should reiecte them as parciall witnesses because they were his servants and
disciples, he fet cheth out a most sure record of scripture saying: that all
the prophets do testifye of this Christ. Finally lest a man woll find
cauillacion and say they cain forth of their own mind uncalled to bear wit
nes of this thing, he adds that they were commanded and sent by God to
preach to the people, and to testifye that it is this same Jesus Christ which
was ordained of God to be the judge of the quycke and dead. Which thing is
also an undoubted article of our faith. To this Christ (says Peter) give all
the prophets wytnes that through his name who so ever believe in him shall be
saved. And among other, the prophet Esaye who writes of Christ in this
wise. He only has taken on him our infirmity Esa. liij.
and borne our pains. The pain of our punish meant was laid upon him, and
with his strypes are we healed. Surely we have gone all astray like sheep,
every one has turned his own way. But through him, the Lord has pardoned
all our sins. Lo here ye may se plainly as well by the words of saint Peter
in this place as by this prophet Esaias how we get remission of sins by
beleuynge in Christ. This does also saint Paul in many pla ces declare and
namely through out his hole epistle to the Romans. Whereupon the ancient
doctoure Origene in epist. ad To. li. iij. ca. iij.
Origene writing, says: Man therefore is justified by faith, whom the works
of the law do nothing help to ryghtuousnes. For where faith is not which
iustifyeth the beleuer, although a man have works of the law, yet because
they be not builded upon the foundation of faith, albeit they seem to be good,
they can not iustifye the worker, if faith be away which is the seal of all
that be justified of God. Saint Ambrose agreyng her unto says, that Ambrose of
the calling of the gentyls.
the redemption of Christ's blood were very vile, if justification which is
done by grace should be due to the merits going before, so that it should be
not the gift of the gyuer but the reward of the worker. Also Jerome writing
upon the epistle to the Gala Jerome.
thians says: None is saved by the law, but we be all saved by faith.
Neither does saint Augustine Austine.
disagre from this, saying: Our faith that is to say the catholyke faith
discerns the ryghtuouse from the vnryghtuouse not by the law of works, but
by the self law of faith. But what go I about to allege a few doctors? All
the prophets (as Peter here says) Christ himself, all the Apostles yea all
the holy scripture through out, all the aun cient and ecclesiastical doctors
and holy expositours of scripture do give witness to Christ that through his
name whosoever believes in him shall receive forgyuenesse and pardon of their
sins. It follows in the text.

While Peter yet spoke these words, the holy ghost fell on all them which
herd the preaching And they of the circumcision which believed were astonnyed.
etc.

Brethren ye shall note that Christ was peculiarly promised to the Iues as he
himself also says in the. xv. Chapter of Matthew. I am not sent but to ye
lost sheep of the house of Israel. Howbeit the calling of the Gentyls was
long before prophesied of by the prophets, and here also it was opened to
saint Peter by a vision of a shete sent down from Actu. x.
above unto him. And therefore he began his sermon on this wise. Of a troth I
perceive that there is no respect of persons with God, but in all people he
that fears him and works ryghtuousnes is accepted with him. Now so many as
believed of the circumcision that is to wit, the Iues not knowing hereof but
being ignorant that the Gentyls also were to be admytted to the fellowship of
the Gospel wondered, when they saw that on the Gentyls also was shed out the
gift of the holy ghost, and herd them speak with tongues and magnifyed God.
Here ye shall also mark, yt this gift of tongues wherwyth at
the sendynge down of ye holy ghost ye Apostles and other were so endowed yt
they were understood of the people of al nations, is now ceased, but in ye
mea ne season the praise of gods name cease not nor ought not to cease. It
follows in the text.

Then answered Peter, can any man forbid water that these should not be
baptized which have received the holy ghost as well as we?

Here ye se manyfestly (good people) that ye Gentyls by Peter's preaching of
gods word were replenyshed with the holy ghost before they were out wardly
baptized with the water, for with the spirit it is plain that they were
baptized. Saint Peter therefore to confirm them, and as it were to seal them
with an outward sign, commands them to be baptized with water in the name
of the Lord for baptism is not only a sign of mortificacion what is baptism.
and of remission of sins, but it is also a badge or knowledge that we be
received into the no^b^r of the children of God. Wherefore as al holy doctous
and expositours do agree, there be two manner of baptismes. Now as also saint
Jerome affirms, man only Jerome sup Esa.
gives the water, but God gives the holy ghost whereby the fylthe is washed
away, and the sins of blood purgeb. The same Jerome also writing upon the
Epistle to the Galathians, says in this wise. If then they that be baptized
in Christ have done on Christ, it is manifest that they which have not put on
Christ, be not baptized in Christ. For it was said to them which were counted
faithful and which were supposed to have had the baptism of Christ: Put ye on
the Lord Jesus Christ. If a man takes only this corporal washyng of water
which is seen with the eyes of the flesh, he is not clad with the Lord Jesus
Christ. For albeit Simo^ Magus in the acts of the Apostles had received ye
washing of water, yet because he had not the holy gooste, he was not baptized
in Christ. Wherefore (as I declared unto you on the Asce^sio^ day) baptism
without faith is as who should say, a paper sealed without any writing in it.
But ye shall always understand that I except and speak not of the baptism
of infauntes or babes. For they (as saint Austine and the other expositours of
scripture do full well declare) be saved if after baptism they chance in
their infauncy to dye, by the faith of the catholyke church. And furthermore we
say against the wicked Ana baptistes that the baptism of children is not
vain but necessary to salvation. For no doubt the promise of salvation
perteyneth also to children or infauntes. But it pertayneth not to them that be
out of the church where is neither the word nor the sacraments. And here
upon do all learned men agree. Now therefore (good christen people) sith your bap
tisme woll not serve you without faith, no nor all the works ye can do, I
ernestly exhort you that according to saint Peter's declaracion here for the
obteynynge of remission of your^ sins ye woll fastlye believe in Christ. So
doing no doubt the holy ghost shall enter into your hearts and make you even of
love without compulsion of law, to work well to the glory of God, and health
of your souls eternally.

Amen.
The gospel on the second day of Pentecost. The. iij. chapter of Ihon.
Thargument.
The most comfortable glad tidings of Christ is here wonderfully well
described.

Jesus spoke unto a ruler among the pharisees. God so loved the world, that he
gave his only he gotten son, that whosoever believes in him, should not
perysh, but have everlasting life. For God sent not his son into the
world, to condemn the world, but that the world through him might be
saved. He that believes on him, is not condemned. But he that believes not, is
condemned already, because he has not believed in the name of the only begotten
son of God. And this is the condempnacion: that light is come into the
world, and me^ loved darkness more tha^ light because their deeds were evil.
For every one that evil does, hates the light: neither comes to the light,
lest his deeds should be reproved. But he that does troth, comes to the
light, that his deeds may be known, how that they are wrought in God.

THe Gospel of this day, good people, is in very deed an Euangell or gospel
that is to say a glad tydinges. For in few words it declares un to us the
sum of the Christen man's religion. First therefore it shows the cause that
moved God to send down his son to the earth. The words here spoken be
Christ's words unto Nicodemus. Thus he says: God so loved the world that he
gave his only begotten son that who soever believes in him should not perysh,
but have everlasting
life. Here ye se that the cause which moved God to send Christ to redeem us
was love and not man's merit, as also saint Austine notes. And surely the deed
self declared gods exceeding love toward us in that he sent his only son
to deliver us out of bondage. For true love stands not in fair worcester des and
amiable countenance or gesture, but in the deed self. Now the more mysery we
were in before Christ's coming: the greater is his benefyte and the more
bound be we unto him. God (as writes Romans v.
saint Paul) sets forth his love toward us, seeing that while we were yet
sinners, Christ dyed for us. Now Christ himself assures us that who so ever
believes in him thus sent of the father down unto us, shall not quayle, shall
not be confounded, shall not peryshe, but shall be sure to attain everlasting
life. Seeing Christ himself does assure us of everlasting life for our
belefe or faythes sake, why should we doubt? Why should we go about to seek
heaven by other ways than Christ appoints us? The sentence is universal,
all that believe in him shall not perysh. Wherefore let noman think him self
exempted as unworthy. Here is no respect either to thy worthynes, or to thy
unworthiness. If thou have faith, thou shall be sure to be of the chosen
company. Only take heed thou mockest not God, and dissemblest not before the
face of the world, saying thou have faith, and have it not in deed. If thou
have faith in deed, thou must needs bring forth the fruits of faith, thou
can not but declare thy faith with works of charity both to God and man,
whom for God thou can not but love as thy natural bro there. If thou beyst a
good tree, thou must needs bring forth good fruit. But a bad tree brings
forth bad fruit. Christ goes further and says: Math. ^.
For God sent not his son into the world to con dempne the world but to
save the world. Here ye se the fynall cause of Christ's coming which was to
save that was lost. Howbeit this text is to be understand of Christ's first
coming and of the time of grace, ye may not understand it of his second
aduent or coming which shall be at the last day, for tha^ he shall without
fail come to judge Ioh. v.
according to an other place where he says. The father has given all
judgment to the son. Nevertheless in the mean season whosoever believes
not is already judged and condemned, whereas on the contrary part they that
believe can in no wise be condemned. But why is the infidele already
condemned? Because (says Christ) he has not believed in the name of the
only begotten son of god. Lo here ye se again how faith saves, and lack
of faith condempneth. And this is the condempna cion that light is come into
the world, and men lo ued darkness more then light, because their deeds were
evil. Who is this light? Christ. Who is ye darkness? The world. The light then
shyned in ye darkness Ioh. i.
, and the darkness did not comprehend it. Do not men love still darkness more
then light? Had they not rather walk in their own fanseys and wylworkes then
in Christ's doctrine? Alack for pytie. Yea though the light never so much
shine, though the Gospel be never so much in the hand, if Christ by his holy
spirit do not teach the, thou art still but darkness, and why so? for thou
love still darkness better than the light, for thy deeds are evil, and
therefore thou must needs convince and damn thy self of infidelity. It
follows. For every one that does evil hates ye light, neither woll he come
to the light that is to say to Christ and his word lest the bryghtnes of the
light should reprove his deeds. This is the cause (good people) why these
papists are so loath that the scripture of God should be read of you lay
people, lest ye might happen to espy their hypocrisy and crafty iugelynge
against Christ and his troth. For scripture is the rule or touchstone whereby
ye may easily try and discern the chafe from the corn, the chalk from
chese, that is to say, hypocrisye from true religion.

They have (good people) long holden you in ignorance and in blyndenes to
auaunce them selves and to raygne like kings over you, contrary both to gods
law and man's law. Wherefore I blame them the less though they hate scripture,
which dis closes their hypocrisy and usurped authority, lest (as Christ
here says) their deeds should be rebu^ed and reproved. But he (says
Christ) that does troth, comes to the light, that his deeds may be
known, because they are wrought in God, as who should say. He that is
justified and declared a good person by his faith which he has in me and for
de^laracion thereof does the truth that my word mo ueth him to do, and works
not after his own fa^sey, this man comes to the light, that is to wit, he
gladly suffers his works and procedynges to be tried and examined by the rule
of my word, because they be do^e in God and be godly works.

Where as contrary wise the hypocrite does so much abhor from the judgment
of my word, that he fle eth by all means he can from it, and woll suffer none
other to look upon it. He woll neither enter into the Math. xxiii.
kingdom of heaven himself nor yet suffer others that would enter. Such
persons under pretense of holiness have long shut up the kingdom of heaven
from many men. But now thanked be God yt light has somewhat shone again.
Wherefore good people let us not hate this light and love darkness still as we
have done in times past, when we were decey ued by the iuglynges of these
papists. Let us believe in this Christ sent down from the father of heaven
to redeem us. And if gods word be true we shall surely be saved and raygne
with him in heaven, world without end. etc.

The Epistle on the third day of Pentecost. The. viij. chapter of the Acts.
Thargument
Peter and Ihon be sent into Samaria, where after baptism the Samaritanes
received the holy ghost.

WHen the Apostles which were at Jerusalem heard say, that Samaria had
received the word of god, they sent unto them Peter and Ihon Which when they
were come down, prayed for them, that they might receive ^he holy ghost. For
as yet he was come on none of them: but they were baptized only in the name of
Christ Jesus. Then laid they their hands on them, and they received the holy
gooste.

This lesson (good people) is taken forth of the eight chapter of the Acts of
thapostles, for a more perfyte understanding whereof, ye shall know that in the
self chapter a little before it is showed, how S. Philip thapostle entered into
a city of Sa maria and preached there to the Samaritanes the glad tydinges of
our Savior Christ Jesus, how he being the son of God came down for the
rede^pcion of mankind. This his preaching he did also confirm with miracles.
For (as the text also de clareth) the unclean spirits cryenge with loud
voice came out of many that were possessed of them And many taken with palse^s
and many that halted were healed. Now the people gave great head to the things
which Philip spoke. And as soon as they gave credence to Philips preaching of
the kingdom of God and of the name of Jesus Christ, they were baptized both
me^ and women. Here ye se (good people) how the Samaritanes which were Hethen
persons yea and such persons as the Iues which were the peculiar and proper
people of god took for very contempt and vile persons, received the gospel of
Christ forthwyth at the preaching of saint Philip and were by and by baptized.
Thus farforth are the Samaritanes brought* Now the lection red in the church
this day goes further and says, that when the Apostles which were gathered
together at Jerusalem herd say that the Samaritanes had received the word of
God, they sent unto the^ Peter and John, which when they were come down from
the high city of Jerusalem thither unto the^ they prayed for them, to
the intent they might receive the holy ghost. For as yet the holy ghost was not
come on none of the^, only they were baptized in the name of Christ Jesus. Tha^
laid these two Apostles their hands upon ye Samaritans, and anon they
received the holy ghost. This is the history read in the church as this day.
But now my friends what fruit and profit shall we bear away of this lesson?
What is here to be gathered? Nothing? Yes truly for there is nothing written,
says S. Paul: but To. xv.
it is written for our learning, that by patience and confort of scriptures we
should have hope. First there
fore ye shall^ note how glad the Apostles were to hear, that these
Samaritans were turned to the Gospel of Christ, and they were not only glad,
but also careful for them, lest they might happen to go back again to their
old baguage and blyndnes. And therefore in all have they sent these two
Apostles Peter and John to confirm and strengthen their faith. Here we be
taught what ye office of true and good Apostles, yea of all good Christen men
is. For we ought in likewise to be careful for our brethren yt they may be
brought to the perfeyte knowledge of gods word. And namely such as call them
selfs Apostolical persons and Apostles fellows and successors (as the
bishops of Rome do) ought in this behalf to follow there^ple of thapostles
charity. But they do clean contrary, they rather pluck me from the Gospel,
then allure them unto it.

Second, ye shall note, that before the resurrection of Christ, when as yet
the Iues and Gentyles were not joined together by all one faith, the Apostels
Math. x
were forbidden to enter into the cities of the Samaritanes. But after the
resurrection, when they were bydden for the spredynge abroad of the gospel to
go into all parts of the world, then that former commandment which was
but temporal and which did serve but for a time, was taken away and cessed.

Thyrdly, in this historye ye shall mark, that the Samaritanes received
forthwyth the holy ghost as soon as they believed and were baptized. For
assuredly true and perfect baptism can not be without the holy ghost.
Furthermore it is not possible that faith can be in that person where the holy
spirit of God does not inhabit, as many places as well of scripture, as of
ancient fathers do witness. Yea S. Austin affirms plainly in his book, de
presen^ia de^, that the holy ghost does dwell and inhabit Austine
in infauntes or children yt be baptized. Wherefore how much more is he
resident and abiding in persons of age and discretion which have faith and be
baptized? So it is no doubt, but these Samarit^nes at the preaching of S.
Philip received the holy ghost, except perchance ye woll say, that S.
Philippes preaching had less virtue and efficaciein it, then the preachynges
of the other Apostles had, which in no wise is to be granted. But peradventure
ye Question
woll marvel then, how it is that it follows in the historye red in the
Church this day, that after the Samaritanes had received the word of God,
the holy Ghost as yet was not come on none of the^. And therefore the Apostles
eue^ for that purpose sent Peter and Johan, which prayed for them that they
might receive the holy Ghost. My friends, what shall we say to this? Did the
Samaritanes receive gods word, did they believe, were they baptized, and yet
were they void of the holy ghost? How ca^ this be? Christ him self says,
he that believes and is baptized shall be saved. But onles a man be renewed mar.
xvi
with the holy ghost, he can not be saved, as the same Christ also testifyeth
in the thryde Chapter of John. Wherefore it must needs follow that the
Samaritaynes had received the holy ghost, forasmuch as true baptism can not be
without the holy Ghost How than says S. Luke here that the holy ghost was not
yet come on the Samarytanes. To this The solution.
doubt I answer in few words, that this text in this place that the holy
Ghost was not yet come upon them, is to be understand not o^ the substance
of the spirit or holy Ghost, but of those manifest and notable gifts of the
holy Ghost. They had the holy Ghost to comfort them, and to lead them to al
truth necessary to their salvation, but they had him not yet to do miracles
and speak strange ^onges as in the primatyue Church they had for the
confirmacion of Christ's doctrine. Neither is it at this day necessary, the
Gospel being now stablyshed, that men should have such wonderful gifts of
the spirit.

Wherefore good christen people I exhort you, and in the name of Christ I
require you, that according to the exemple of these Samaritanes here, ye wol
lay down your supersticion and blyndnes of heart, wherein ye have wandered,
and with glad min des receive the word of God, according to your profession
and promise which ye made at the fount stone, and put on Christ, renouncing ye
world, the flesh, and the deuell with steadfast and earnest faith. And no doubt
ye shall be endowed with ye holy ghost who in all your trouble and afflictions
shall comfort you and direct you in your way to heauenwarde where is our
dwelling place prepared with the father, son, and holy ghost. To whom be
all glory without end.

Amen.
The gospel on the third day of Pentecost. The. x. chapter of Ihon.
Thargument.
Christ is the true shepeherde.

Jesus said unto his disciples. Verily verily I say unto you: he that enters
not in by the door into the shepefolde, but clymmeth up some other way, the
same is a the^e and a murderer. But he that enters in by the door, is the
shepherd of the sheep: to him the porter opens, and the sheep hear his
voice, and he calls his own sheep by name, and he leads them out. And when
he has sent forth his own sheep, he goes before the^ and the sheep follow
him, for they know his voice. A stranger will they not follow, but will flee
from him: for they know not the voice of strangers. This proverb spoke Jesus
unto them, but they understood not what things they were which he spoke unto
them. Than said Jesus unto them again: Ve rely, verily, I say unto you: I am
the door of the sheep. Al (even as many as came before me) are the ues and
murderers: but the sheep did not hear them. I am the door: by me if any man
enter in, he shall be safe, and shall go in and out, and find pasture. A thief
comes not but for to steal, kill, and to destroy. I am come that they might
have life, and that they might have it more abou^dau^tly

IN the Gospel of this day (dear friends) our sa uiour Christ declares his
own property or office and he sets out unto us the exceeding love and
kyndnes which he bears to mankind by a very proper and feate parable or
similitude, whereby he resembles himself to a good shepeherde, and the false
preachers or prelates to thieves and murderers. Certainly all false doctors,
all false prophets, all proud pharisees that woll iustifye them selves by
their own works and all hypocrites be here wonderfully touched. And why?
Because they enter not into the shepefolde by the door, but clyme up an other
way. What call ye clymmynge up an other way? Surely it is to seek forgyuenes
of thy sins, ryghtuousmakynge, and everlasting life by other means then
Christ (which is the way, the Io. xiiij.
troth, and the life) has taught. Wherefore if thou enterest not in by the
door, that is to say by Christ, but an other way, I mean, if thou wylt
justify thy self and promise thy self soul health, bearing thy self bold of
thyn own proper works, and not cleaving to the mercy of God (according to
thexemple of the publicane) nor dependynge upon the merytes of Christ's
passion, art thou not, trowest thou, by Chri stes own judgment and sentence
here, a thief and a murderer? But what a great thief art you if thou also
teach other folk to think ye same that thou do? By me, says Christ,
he that enters in, shall be saved. But what is this shepefolde that he
speaks here of? surely the shepefolde is the church, it is the congregation
and assemble of Christen people. He that wol enter into this congregation, into
this church, into the holy communion and fellowship of christen persons any
other ways than by Christ, he is a thief and no christian person. He that also
woll teach any other doctrine in Christ's church than such as Christ has
taught, is no pastoure, no bishop, no true shepeherde, but a thief rather, a
murderer, a wolf. And it is much to be feared, lest there be at this day
many mo wolves and thieves, than be true herdmen and feders. I say, I am sore
afraid lest the prophecye of saint Paul be yet still veryfyed and in force in
christendom. For when S. Paul should depart from Ephesus, and knew by the
spi Act. xx.
rite of God, that his death approached, he called toge there the prestes or
elders of the congregation and among other words he says thus. Take heed un
to your selves and to all the flock wherein the holy ghost has made you
bishops that is to say ouerse ers, to feed or guide after the manner of good
shepeherdes the church of God, which he has purchased with his own blood.
For I am sure of this, that after my departing shall greuouse wolves enter in
among you, not sparynge the flock. But who is the porter of this shepefolde
which opens ye door to the good and faithful shepeherde of Christ's flock?
Surely it is yt holy ghost, for he opens unto him
the scriptures of God, he leads him into al troth And his sheep, that is to
say, his paryshners, hear his voice, and he calls his own sheep by name,
Prouer. xxvij.
according also to the counsel of Solomon in his proverbs, where he says:
Se that thou know the nombre if thy catell thy self, and look well to thy
flocks. Moreover this good shepeherde, this good curate, this bishop, this
ouerseer goes before his sheep and his sheep follow him. What is this to say?
Truly he that is a good bishop, a good pastoure, and curate woll make himself
comformable to his doctrine, he wol lead them the way, that by his steps
and good exemple of lyuinge, they may walk in Christ's grounds and pastures.
He woll not play the crabbe fysh which would have taught her daughter to go
straight, but would not lead her the way her self and teach her by her
exemple how to go, as it is in Esopes fables. I am afraid we have many
crabbes. Saint Paul would have a bishop yt is to say an ouerseer or curate to
give good exemple of living himself and to have a good and i. tim. iij Tit.
ij.
honest report of strangers, lest his lyuyu^ge be a slander to his
doctrine. So doing, his sheep shall follow him, and shall know his voice. For
assured ly, they that be godly persons woll knowledge none for their
shepeherde, but such as teach gods word True teachers of Christ's Gospel be
easily discerned of good christen men. And again the good chri sten me^ be
easily discerned and known of true prea chers. This proverb or parable
nakedly and vnap plied spoke Jesus to his disciples. But they under stood not
what things they were which he spoke unto them, and no maruayle. For (as
saint Paul says) the flesh perceyueth not yt things yt be ghost ly. The
disciples were as yet but carnal. And there fore our Savior Christ like a good
master decla reth unto them the meaning of his parable, and says, that he
himself is the door of the sheep, by him who soever enters in, shall be saved
and shall go in and out and find pasture, as who should say, whether so ever
he turns him, whyther so ever he casts his eyes, he shall find that shall be
for the behoufe and edificacion of his flock, brefley to speak, God shall be
with him, the holy ghost shall prompt him and put him in mind of such things
as he ought to teach his paryshners and flock that is commyt ted to his
charge. But (says Christ) as many as came before me are thieves and
murderers, and the sheep did not hear them. Here does our Savior Christ
show us the difference between the doctrine of the true preachers and the
doctrine of heretics,
of false prelates, and hypocrites. Now, they go before Christ which bear not
Christ with them and which woll seem wyser than Christ, as Peter did when he
Mat xvi
rebuked Christ because he said that he should suffer death. And therefore
Christ called him Satan. and bad him come after him: Wherefore mark the diffe
rence of Christ and of the false Apostles. Christ is Ioh. i.
the preacher of grace, the pscudapostles preach ma^s merytes. Christ is
careful for the fode of his sheep, Ioh. viij
the false Apostles seek their owue luere and gaynes Christ seeks the glory
of the father, the false Apost les steal from God his glory, Christ
quyckeneth Ioh. xi.
with his word, the false Apostles kyl men's souls with wicked doctrine. For
the thief comes not but to steal, to kill, and to destroy. Hitherto I have
brefly and plainly declared the parable of the sheep herd. Now it shall be your
parts (good people) so to acquaynte your selves with gods word, that ye may
know the voice of the shepeherde from the voice of the thief and murderer
according to our Savior Christ's words here. So doing ye shall at last be
conducted to the most sweet and pleasant grounds of the lyuinge, and shall
sit with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and with the angels in heaven, where ye
shall se God face to face and have fruicion of all joy with God. To whom be
al honor and glory world without end.

AMEN.
The Epistle on the. iiij. day of Pentecoste, that is to say, on the
wednesdaye in wytsonweke. The. ij. chapter of the Acts.
Thargument
The sermon of saint Peter, containing the prophecye of Iohel.

PEter stepped forth with the eleven, and lift up his voice, and said unto
them: Ye men of ^urye, and al ye that dwell at Jerusalem, be this known unto
you, and with your ears hear my words. For these are not droncken as ye
suppose, seeing it is but the third hour of the day. But this is that which
was spoken by the prophet Iohel: And it shall be in the last days, says
God: of my spirit I will pour out upon all flesh. And your sons and your
daughters shall prophecye, and your young men shall se visions, and your old
me^ shall dream dreams. And on my servants, and on my hand maidens I will
pour out of my spirit in those days, and they shall prophecye. And I will
show wonders in heaven above, and tokens in the earth beneth, blood, and
fire, and the vapor of smoke. The Son shall be turned into darckenes and the Moon into blood, before that great and notable day of the Lord come. And it
shall come to pass, that whosoever shall call on the name of the Lord, shall be
saved.

IN the lesson of this present day (good Christen people) is contained the
right godly sermon of ye holy Apostle saint Peter, wherein he soberly, coldly,
and lernedly makes answer and defense to the un reverent talking and hurly
burly of the people of all nations which when they herd Christ's disciples
speak with new tongues the great works and wonders of god, were partly abashed
and wondered thereat, and partly gested upon them and said they were dronken
and full of new wine.

Saint Peter therefore which of a fysherman is now become a great bishop and
pastor ryseth up, not alone yet, but the. xi. apostles standing up with him,
lest (as Erasmus does full well note) he might be Erasmus in paraphrasi.
thought to usurp any tyranny or raygne over his fellows. He only spoke ye
words, but he spoke them in the name of all his fellows, even as he alone did
also before Christ's passion in the name of al his fellows confess Jesus
Christ to be the son of the ly uynge God. Who would have thought that so
simple a creature and that a fysherman should have had such audacitie ones to
have looked upon so great a multitude. Oftentimes great Orators when they
bring their oration that they have long studied for before, to speak in a
great audience of people or be fore a great ruler, change colors, be
asto^nyed and utterly dismayed. Truly this was that heavenly dro^kennes which
they had caught of that heavenly cup whereof the prophet says. Calix meus
mebrians q^ praeclarus est. This fysher man I say stood before so great a
multitude, he joined with him in commission the eleven Apostles, not to aid him
but to accompany him, he fixed his eyes upon the people which were unknown
unto him, he lyfted up his voice and without any premeditacion at al, he spoke
unto them according as the Lord had commanded him to do. Neither speaks he
for himself, but being the shepherde he defends the flock, which thing
he does not with humane craft or eloquence, but with the aid of holy scripture.
Now ye hole multitude awayteth to hear what he woll say. Let us al so
attend, for asmoche as these things be spoken to all. First after he had
ones with mouynge his hand assuaged the murmuryng of the people, he be ganne
with such a proheme as might make them attente and desirous to hear without
any rhetorical flattery at all.

O ye men (says he) of the Iuysh nation, whom The or^ tion of Peter.
it behooves not to be ygnoraunte of the law and of the prophets and namely
you which be inhabitau^tes of the city of Jerusalem where the head of our
religion and knowledge of the law is: Ye have cause perchance to wonder, but
ye have no cause to sklau^der. Wherefore so many of you as be here, give
atte^tiue ears a little while unto me, and know ye matter as it lies. For it
stand you all upon so to do.

For these men of Galilie whom ye se here with me be not dronken nor full of
new wine, as some of you think, sith it is now morning and but ye third hour
from the son rysynge, at which time noma^ is wont to be drunk. But in these
men ye se now the thing accomplyshed which God long ago promised by Iohel
his prophet should come to pass. Harken to the prophecye, and consider
whether the thing be fulfilled or not. Sklaunder not, because ye se a thing
unwont, but receive rather the grace which Iohel. ij
almighty god offers unto you. For Iohel being inspyred with the holy ghost
and seeing, that the ty me should come that God which at sundry tyines be fore
had unparted his spirit to Moses and to many prophets for your comfort and
instruction would ones at last when his only begotten son should come,
pour out most plentefully the same spirit not upon one or two (as hertofore)
but upon all nations of the world even as many as with sincere faith should
receive this glad tidings which at his commandment we bring now unto you:
thus uttered the heavenly prophecye. It shall come to pass Erit in nouissimis
die bus.
in the last days, says the Lord. I shall pour out plentefully of my
spirit upon all flesh, and suddenly your sons and your daughters shall
prophecy and your young men shall se visions, and your old persons shall
dream dreams. And truly upon my servants and my handmaydens I shall pour
out of my spirit and they shall prophecy. And I shall give wo^ ders in heaven
above, and tokens in earth beneth, blood and fire, and the vapoure of smoke.
The son shall be converted into darkness and the moon into blood, before that
great and renowned day of the Lord come. And whosoever shall call on the name
of the Lord shall be saved. This my friends has ye prophet Iohel so long ago
prophesied unto us. And hitherto goes the lesson of this present day^ which
conteyneth the first part of S. Peter's sermon. Now as touching the first
part of Iohels prophecy concerning the sendynge down of yt ho ly ghost
after such a plentyful sort, the scripture tea cheth us that it was fulfilled
about this time of Pentecost, as in our sermons before we have fully and at
large declared unto you. And as for the rest of the prophecy concerning the
great calamity and terrible tokens that shall come against domes day, there
is no doubt but it shall come to pass, as out Math. xxvij. lu. xxiij.
savior Christ has also certifyed us. But my friends let us be nothing
dismayed nor troubled with the remembrance of this dradfull time, which no
doubt yet approaches nere and shall steal upon us or ever we be ware, we know
not how sone. Only let us do as the prophet teaches us here, and we shall not
need to fear. Let us call on the name of yt Lord and we shall be saved. Let us
tha^ in all our adversity woo, and trouble, yea and also in our wealth,
prosperitic and felicity remember God, love God, praise God, call on God with
faith. But let it be such faith as shall work by charity. Let it be a lively
faith and no dead faith, that may bring forth good works. If we thus do, we
shall not need to fear these terrible tokens, but we shall be sure to be
translated from this myserye unto immortal joy with God. To whom. etc.

The Gospel on the.iiij. day of Pentecost. The. vi. chapter of S. Ihon.
Thargument.
Christ teaches us here yt onles we be renewed by the holy ghost, we can not
come unto him.

Jesus said to his disciples, and to the company of the Jews. No man can come
to me, except the father which has sent me, draw him: And I will raise him
up at the last day. It is written in the prophets: and they shall be all taught
of god. Every man therefore that has herd, and has learned of the father,
comes unto me. Not that any man has seen the father, save he which is of
god: the same has seen the father. Verily, verily, I say unto you: he that
puts his trust in me, has everlasting life. I am that bread of life. Your
fathers did eat Mana in the wyldernes and are dead. This is that bread which
comes down from heaven, that a man may eat thereof, and not dye. I am that
living bread which came down from heaven. If any man eat of this bread, he
shall live for ever. And the bread that I will give, is my flesh which I will
give for the life of the world.

IN this Gospel (good people) our savior Christ making answer to the
murmourynge of yt people against him, because he said he was the bread of
life, and declarynge that their thoughts could not be hyd from him, expouneth
and also fortifyeth the word yt he spoke, saying unto them, yt they had no
cause to murmoure among themselves of the thing yt he spoke. For therefore
his word did not synke into their minds because of their mysoeleue Seeing,
they saw not: and hearing, they herd not: Nemo potest venite ad me.
and being present they were absent. Whosoever com meth to Christ shall
attain everlasting life. But there is no way to come unto him but by faith.

This faith is not lightly had, but comes by the in spiracion of the father,
who like as by yt son he draws men's minds unto him: so with secret
inspiracions of faith he draws them to the son. He bestows not so great a
gift but to such as be willing
and gredy. Whosoever then shall merit by his prompte will and devout mind to
be drawn of ye father, the same shall attain by Christ to everlasting life.
For our savior Christ shall also raise ye^ dead to life again in ye last
day. A great thing takes he that believes Christ, but without the help of
the heavenly father, he can not do it. Yet nevertheless they are not excused
because they be not drawn. For the father as much as in him is coueteth to
draw all. He yt is not drawn, is in fault himself, because he with draws
himself from him yt would draw him. Humane things be learned with humane
study, but this heauently learning is not perceived, onles ye secret
inspiracion of the father makes him an apt and teachable heart. And this is
it yt long sythens was pro Esa. liiij
phecied of the prophets to come to pass. And they all shall be taught of God.
But the desire of this world do make many unapt. I say it is the gift of god,
but the endeavor must be ours. A man hears with his bodily eyes Christ's
words in vain, onles he hear wtin first ye secret voice of ye father, which
breaths the mind with an insensible grace of faith. For god is a spirit and
is neither herd nor seen, but of spiritual persons. Many have seen and herd
Christ to their damnation. And albeit the Iues boasted yt god was both seen and
herd of Moses and of yt prophets: yet no mortal man ever saw or herd god
as he is. For this is only granted to the son of man ours savior Christ.
Let us then shake of the care of this life and not so much seek for the bread
whereby our bodies be fed, as this bread which gives everlasting life. We
count the old fathers happy which did eat Manna, yet this Manna preserved
them not from death, and why? Not because Manna Austine.
was evil (says saint Austine) but because of their evil eating. Christ
is the bread which descends from heaven, which is signified by Manna. He
that eats of this bread, shall live for ever. But ye wol ask who this is?
Saint Austine answers Augu. de ciuitate dei li. xxi. cap. xxv
in this wise: He that is in ye unity of Christ's body, that is to wit, in
the felowshipe of the christen me^bres: the sacrame^te of which body all faith:
full persons be wont to receive, when they communicate at the altar and come
to gods board, does truly eat the body of Christ, and drink the blood of
Christ. Now therefore let us by all endeavors we ca^, make ourselves mete and
apt to receive ye holy spirit of god, whereby we may be drawn to Christ.
Let us also take part of his passions, and follow the conversation which he
had in his flesh. Which Austine. Bernard
thing (as S. Austine and others expoune this place) is to eat his flesh and
drink his blood. To whom with the father and holy ghost be all glory.

AMEN.
Imprinted at London by Richard Banks, and are to be sold in Fletestrete at
the sign of the white Heart.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.


