THE GOSpels with brief sermons upon them for all the holy days in ye year.
On saint Andrews day.
The Gospel. Mat. iiij. Jesus walkinge by the Sea side of Galilee, saw two
brethren Simon named Peter and Andrewe his brother, castinge a net into the Sea (for they were fyshers) and says unto them. follow me, and I shall make you
fishers of men. And they forthwyth left their nets, and followed him. And
when he was gone forth from thens, he saw other two brethren, James the so^ue
of Zebedee and Ihon his brother in the ship with Zebedee their father,
mendinge their nets, and he called them. And they forthwith left the ship
and their father, and followed him.


The sermon upon this Gospel.
THe Gospel of this day (dear friends) declares that our savior Christ
when he was here conversant among us for our redemption sake, before he would
do or speak any notable thing (as the holy Chrysostom.
doctor Chrysostom says) called and chase unto him, his Apostles, to the intent
nothing might be hid from them of Christ's words and deeds, but that they
might afterward boldly affirm and say. We can not but speak the things
which we have seen and hard. As Christ therefore walked by the sea side, he saw
two brethren germans, the name of the one was Simo^ which also was called
Peter, the name of the other was Andrew, whose memory we do this day
solemnize. But what were these two, whom our Savior Christ chase to be his
apostles? Were they great worldly Clerks, were they philosophers, were they
pharisees or scribes, were they great rich persons, or men of high power and
authority? no verily, they were none of al these, they were but pore and
unlearned fishermen. And why did he chose these? Uerily (says saint Austine) if
Christ had chosen great learned me^ S. Austine.
or men of estimation, they might peradventure have said that they had deserved
to be chosen because of their lerning or wisdom. But our lord Jesus Christ
going about to break the necks of the proud, ^hase men of no lerning ne
reputation, which he did also Erasmus in paraphrasi.
for this purpose, that the glory of the gospel might not be diminished nor
shadowed with worldely succors and helps. So here Christ does manifestly
declare unto us in what kind of people he most delyteth, even in the humble
and contempt persons of the world and in such as be simple and as it were
babes in worldly wisdom, as in an other place he al so testifies, sayng. I
confess and give thanks unto the o father, lord of heaven and of earth, because
thou Mat. xi.
have hyd these things from the wise and prudent persons, and haste diselo^ed
them unto babes. And ye shall mark, that Christ calls babes here the^ which
laying a side al worldly wisdom, receive gods word without al deliberatio^, and
which prefer not their own judgment before gods word but submit themselves
unto it in all things. He called therefore two simple fyshers, and when did he
call them? Uerely even when they were in the mids of their work, Chrysostom.
meaning herby (as Chrysostom says) that we ought to prefer the following of
Christ before al other occupations in the world. For they were casting their
nets into the Sea, and this fishing was a shadow of the new fishynge,
whereby they should not take with material nets fishes for the fode of the
belly, but whereby they should with the net of gods word catch men (which be
browned with earthly cares) unto the desire of the heavenly life. Wherefore where
as they were busyed and toyling about their bodyly living (which nevertheless
was then their vocation or calling according to gods commandment Genesis ii^
which byddeth us that in the sweat of our face we should eat our bread)
from this general calling I say he plucked them to a special calling which
was to preach his holy gospel. And verily his word of calling had in it a
wonderful virtue, for it so wrought in their hearts, that they forthwyth
left altogether, and followed him. And here we have a nota ble exemple of
obedience in these apostles for us to fo low. Christ had not so sone called
them, but anou they followed. For he that loves father, or mother, wife or
children more then he loves the Savior Mat. ^^
Jesus Christ, is no mete man for Christ, that is to say, he may well call
himself a Christen man, but Christ wol surely refuse him for one of his men
and disciples when the terrible day of Dome shall comme, what time he shall
descend in Majesty to judge both the living and the dead.

Christ tha^ called these two brethern Peter and Andrew and also the other two
Iho^ and James, to what purpose? to follow him only by the heles whether so ever
he should go ydelly? No truly. But to teach and instruct the^ in such wise
as they might in time coming be made his apostles, his legates, his Orators,
his preachers. He chase them being young, rude, simple, unlearned, and nothing
but plain fishermen, and therefore they were the more apt and mete to receive
his heavenly, sweet, and pure doctrine, because they were not as yet infected
with the sower le ue^ of the pharisees. But ere they departed from him, he
replenished them with such wonderful wysdom and with such divine doctrine,
that they were hable to co^fou^de the great and witty clerks of the world. Of
fish catchers and bodily fyshers he made them men fyshers and catchers of
sowles. So God long Iere. 16.
before promised by his prophet Hieremye, saying I will send you fyshers and
they shall fyshe you. Such a worthy fysher of men sowles was this noble Apostle
saint Andrew. He spared for no persecution of tyrants to execute and fulfill
his masters commission which was to preach the Gospel and glad tidings of
man's redemption by Christ. He preached it purely and syncerely even according
to his commission. Yea for the feithfull executynge and witnessing hereof he
shranke not to suffer a very cruel death. Let us therefore follow him in feith
that we may also follow him to everlasting bless by Christ our Lord, who
be praised world without end.

Amen.
On the conception day of our Lady.
The Gospel. Mat. i. THe book of the generation of Jesus Christ the son of
David, the son of Abraham. Abraham begatte Isaac. Isaac begat Jacob. Jacob
begat Judas and his brethren. Judas begat Phares and Zaram of Thamar. Phares
begat Esrom. Esrom begat Aram. Aram begat Aminadab. Aminadab begat Naasson.
Naasson begat Salmon. Salmon begat Boos of Rahab. Boos begat Obed of Ruth. Obed
begat Iesse. Iesse begatte David the king. David the king begat Solomon of her
that was the wife of Urie. Salomo^ begat Roboam. Roboam begat Abia. Abia begat
Asa. Asa begat Iosaphat. Iosaphat begat Ioram. Ioram begat Osias. Osias begat
Ioatham. Ioatham begat Achas. Achas begat Ezechias. Ezechias begatte Manasses.
Manasses begat Amon. Amon begat Josias. Josias begat Ieconias and his brethren
in the transmigration of Babylon. And after the transmigration of Babylon
Ieconias begat Salathiel. Salathiel begat Zorobabel. Zorobabel begat Abiud.
Abiud begat Eliachun. Eliachim begat Azor. Azor begatte Sadoc. Sadoc begat
Achin. Achin begatte Eliud. Eliud begatte Eleazar. Eleazar begatte Matthan.
Matthan begat Jacob. Jacob begatte Joseph the husband of Mary, of who^ was
borne Jesus which is called Christ.


The sermon upon this Gospel.
IN this gospel (good people) many things are to be considered. First, how
that our savior Christ the son of god would for the great love he bare to
mankind be borne the son of David, that is, would take ma^s nature upon him
to succor and help us The cause of Christ's incarnation.
which were in flesh condemned and to pourge our spotted and synful birth. And
verily this is the final intent of Christ's incarnation, as it is well declared
in the epistle to the Hebrews, where it is written, that forasmoch Hebr. 2.
as the son of god vouchsaued to call godly persons his brethren, sayng by
the prophet David I will declare thy name to my brethren, and otherwhiles psalm.
2^.
also he calls them the children, as in Esaias. Lo here am I and the children,
whom god has given Esai. 8.
me: and because these children and these his brethren be men made of flesh
and blood: it pleased him to be parttaker of the same with the^, that by his
death he might wipe out him which had lordshippe over death that is to say the
devil, and deliver the^ which through fear of death were al their life time
subdued unto bondage. For he took not upon him angels but the sede of Abraham.
Wherefore in all things it becam him to be made like to his brethren, that he
might be merciful and a feithful high pressed in things towchinge God to
the intent to pourge the sins of the people. Now whereas Christ is called here
the son of David: ye must understand it that he desce^deth lineally from
David according to the flesh, as saint Paul declares in the beginning of his
epistle Romans i.
to the Romans, lest we ru^ne into y^ errors of certain heretics which say
that Christ was nothing else but a man and not the son of God, but merely
the son of David. Which error Christ himself discussed, Mat. 22.
where he propowned this question to the pharisees. What think ye of Christ,
whose son is he* And when they answered, the son of David, he asked them,
why tha^ did David in spirit call him lord psalm. no.
sayng, the lord said to my lord, sit on my right hand Meaning hereby, that
Christ was above David and not only a man but also god. So that ye must
understand him to be the son or issue of David according to the flesh, and
not according to his godhed. And ye shall also mark, that he is called the
son of David after the manner of speaking of the Hebrews, because he came of
the right line of Dauyd. For the Two lig nagies in scripture.
Hebrews do call al lineal nephues and nieces (be they never so long of)
sons and daughters. Uerely the hole petigrue of Christ, is here so drawn
and conveyed from his ancestors, that they only be put which were perttakers
of y^ promise which was made of Christ. Ye must therefore mark two manner lines
of men, which being well marked does discern of whom Christ would be borne
and was borne. For albeit the promise of Christ was made to Adam: yet from
Cain his son the petigrue of Christ is not conveyed. So that one line there
is which deriueth Christ's petigree from the me^bres of the true church, that
is to wite, from the holy fathers which were parttakers of ye promise. And an
other line there is which co^teyneth the children that grew out of kind not
following their fathers steps and therefore no perttakers of the promise, which
two lines if ye diligently mark through out the old testament ye shall se that
Christ proceeded of the feithful stock, and not of that which grew out of
kind, as Cain Esau and their offspring were. And verily it becam Christ the head
of ye church to come of the members of the true church.

Second, ye shall understand that our Savior Christ would be borne
according to the flesh of the royal blood of kings, to declare that he
should be a king, no worldly king, but a spiritual king for the rulyng and
guyding of men's consciencies. And forasmuch as kings were also anointed after
the manner of prestes: therefore Christ also would be borne of kings to show
himself an anointed king, that is to say, both a king and a pressed, a king to
rule and defend, a pressed to make intercession and prayer for us according as
saint Paul says of him. Which Rom 8.
also makes intercession for us. And the prophet ^ieremie says. He shall do
the office of a king and captain. Hiere. 11
But for the eschuing of errors, ye must know, that David whose son Christ
is according to the flesh, administered here his kingdom in the earth: and
therefore it is not to be thought that after that Christ is now ascended up to
heaven, he exercises no more his kyngly officies but that he sytteth ydelly in
heaven leauyng behind him, his deputy or vicare in earth the bishop of Rome.
Uerily Christ's kingdom is perpetual, and so is his presthode, according to
the sayng of the prophet. Tu es sacerdo^ Psalm. 109
inaeternum secu^dum ordinem Melchisedec. Thou art an everlasting pressed,
according to the order of Melchisedec. Thirdly, ye shall understand that
albeit Christ and also our Lady his mother (whose memory we solemnize this
day) and Joseph her husband, came of the right and blessed line or stock, and
not of the crooked and cursed line, as I have aforedeclared: yet many of the
persons as well men as wom^ of this blessed stock were sinners and therefore here
in their genealogy is mention made also of sinful persons. For who were so
wicked as king Manasses and his son Amon, which be here rekened in Christ's
petigree. Judas also committed fornication with Thamar. Salmon married Raab an
harlot. What shall I speak of Bethsabea, with whom king David committed
greuouse aduowtrie. And yet of this Bethsabea which was the wife of Urie did
king David begette Salomo^. So that if a man wol thoroughly consider the thing,
he shall find almost more evil men then good among the ancestors of
Christ, and all the women which be here named be none of the holy women, as
saint Hierom says, S. Hierom.
but such as the scripture disproueth. What other thing means this, but
that the holy ghost would signify, that like as Christ came of sinners: so he
also came into this world for sinners. He would be borne Hierom
(says this noble clerc saint Hierom) of sinners, yt he might wipe awey the
sins of all. Yea Christ Mat. ^.
himself says, that he came not to call the rightuouse, but sinners to
repentance. If then he came for sinners, why should thou o man despair for
cause of thy sins? Nay rather take heart unto the and repent. For then shall
the grace and favor of Christ be powered more ple^tifully upon the, in that
thou have the more offended according to the sentence of saint Paul.
Furthermore we may learn also here Exe^ple of modestic.
a moderation of mind and demurenes, that we hitte noman in the teeth of his
ancestors or kynsfolke. For if our Savior Christ had among his ancestors
very tyrants, harlottes and wicked persons, who is he that has not among
his ancestors and kinsfolk both good and badde? Fourthly, ye shall mark
that saint Mattheu here does call Joseph the husband of Marie, so that it is
certain, that between Joseph and Marye was a just and lawful matrimony,
under which, not without a singular cause, Christ would be borne, to show that
matrimony is the state which pleases God, and on the other side, to live in
aduowtrye and fornication is a kynoe of life abominable before God and man. Of a
virgin verily Christ would be borne, but yet under lawful wedlock. A virgin
to his mother becam him that was God, but in that she was married, is setforth
unto us the commendation of wedlock. Uirginitie I say becam her which by
secret inspiratio^ of the holy ghost being herself pure and undefiled,
conceived and brought forth him which was most pure and clean, but yet Joseph
was our blessed Ladies husband. Does not this thing then setforth unto us
the honor of matrimony, and condemn these wicked heretics which say that
matrimony ^. Tim. 4
is a thing fylthy and vnpure, of whom saint Paul speaks, calling them
spirits of errors, and deuelish teachers. For if Christ had would, he might
have been borne before Marye his mother was betrowthed to Joseph. If matrimony
also were a foul thing and disco^mended of god, as some heretics have said,
why went our Savior Christ to a wedding and wrought there the first miracle
that ever he did, by turnyng water into wine? So ye though ^^^. ^.
virginity be a high thing and mete for such as be of high perfection: yet
matrimony is an honest state. Last of all this Gospel does condemn those
heretics which deny yt Christ took flesh of the blessed virgin and say
either that he brought a spiritual flesh with him from heaven, or that the word
so was made flesh, that Christ is only of one nature and not of two natures.
For this heresy has been long since condemned of Christ's church. And
even with one text in this gospel it is overthrown where it is said, that
Jacob begatte Joseph the husband of Marie, of whom was borne Jesus, which is
called Christ. If of Marye Christ was borne: then it must needs follow that he
took flesh of her. The Gospel of Luke Luc. ^.
also proves the same, where the angel says to Ma rye. Thou shall conceive in
thy womb, and bear a child.. And Elizabeth says to our Lady. Blessed is the
fruit of thy womb. But how can she conceive Luc. ^.
Christ or how can Christ be called the fruit of her womb, if he took no
part of her? Finally Paul is Romans ^.
plain in this matter which says that Christ was borne of the sede of David
concerning the flesh. What ca^ be spoken more plainly? So ye se according
also to the flesh the great nobility of Christ's blood For he would be not only
according to the spirit but also according to the flesh the noblest of al me^.
Accor The nobility of Christ both spiritually and carnally
ding to the spirit he descended from god his father with out beginning, so that
he is the eternal son of the eternal god. What is higher tha^ this nobility?
And as to the flesh he is descended of most holy patriarchs, most mighty
Kings, and Dukes. In all the world was never found lignage, kynred, ne house
of more nobility then this lignage was whereof our Savior Christ descended
according to the flesh. But his spiritual lignage is without comparison.

This have I therefore set out, that Christian men should The nobility of christen
me^.
know their own nobility. For they that believe in Christ, be made by feith
the brethren and ioyntheires with Christ, according to the text before
rehearsed, where Christ says. I will show thy name to my brethren. psalm. 23.
And in an other place he says. These be my brethren which hear the word of
god and do it. Saint Paul also says. The spirit witnesses together we our
spirit that we be the sons of god, if sons, ergo heirs, heirs of God,
and felawe heirs with Christ. Now also with Christ we be made by feyth one
body, that we may be his members. What is left then, but that also we be
made parttakers of Christ's nobility? And therefore we be called Christians why
we be called chri stians.
which by interpretation signify kingly, that is to say, of a kings house and
nobility by Christ our king. But wherefore is this so great nobility to be
taken of us? for vayn glory and to despice our neighbor? No truly. For as
Christ the nobler he was both in spirit and also in flesh, the hu^bler and
^owlyer he made himself: So let us also follow Christ's exemple, and the more
noble we be made by Christ, so much let us bear our selfs y^ more lowly.
Nowbeit otherwhiles it is not only lawful but also necessary, to look alofte
and bear our selfs high of our nobility, not against men, but against
Satan. For it is a great villainy and shame for a noble personage, to subject
himself to vile services. For what be more vile or fylthy occupations, then the
works of the devil, which be sins. Here then let us look on high in Christ,
and be ashamed for our nobility sake, to humble our selfs to the fylth of
sins. Now ye have the lignage of Christ according to the flesh and the
nobility of him and of al Christians. It remains therefore, yt we also should
knowledge Christ by feith and garnishe our nobility with good works by Jesus
Christ our lord, which together with the father and holy ghost be praised
forever.

Amen.
On saint Thomas day the Apostle.
The Gospel Ihon. xx. THomas one of the twelve called Didymus was Didimus in
greek betokens in English a twynlynge.
not with them when Jesus came. The other disciples therefore said unto him. We
have seen the lord. But he said unto them. Except I se in his hands the printe
of the nails, and put my finger into the prynte of the nails, and thurst my
hands into his side, I will not believe. And after. viij. days, again his
disciples were within, and Thomas with them, Jesus comes, the doors being
shut, and stood in the mids, and said. Peace be with you. After that said
he to Thomas. Bring thy finger hither, and behold my hands, and reach hither
thy hand, and thurst it into my side, and be not vnfeithful, but feithful.
Thomas answered and said unto him. My lord and my god. Jesus says unto him.
Thomas, because thou have seen me: thou have believed, blessed are they which
have not seen, and yet have believed.


The sermon upon this Gospel.
THis Gospel (dear friends) declares unto us the history of saint Thomas,
how he would not believe Christ's resurrection til he had seen him, and felt
him with his hands. For as the history tells, Christ had appeared to the
rest of his felawes Luc. 24. John. 20
when he was awey, and when they showed him of it with one hole voice and
consent: yet he said he would not believe it, till he had seen the prynte of the
nails in Christ's hands, and felt his wounds. Uerely S. Gregory.
(as saint Gregory says) this was not done by casualtie, ye saint Thomas the
chosen disciple of Christ, was not then present. For the high clemency of god
wrought this thing, ye the doubtyng disciple while in his master he gropeth
the wounds of the flesh,
might heal in us the wou^des of infidelity. For the infidelity of saint
Thomas profyted more to the Christen feith, then did the feith of the believing
disciples. For while he by gropyng, is brought again to the feith: our mind
is (all doubt set apart) stablished in the feith. Three things then are here to
be considered in this history. First the hardness of belefe in saint Thomas,
which albeit he was one of the elect disciples of Christ and long
conversant with him, and continually instructed of his risyng again, yet he
doubts. Second, the goodness and tender mercy of Christ, which would not
thus leave him. Thyrdly, the constancy of this blessed Apostle in the feith
over after even til his life's end. It was doubtless a very gross infidelity
and hardness of be leave in saint Thomas, that after so long co^paning with our
Savior Christ and hearing him oftentimes before his passion say he should rise
again yet he would not believe his resurrection, n^ not when his felawes so
constantly had showed him how they saw him with their eyes and what he said
unto them. His felawes verily were gross til they had received the holy ghost,
for they would skant believe his resurrection Chryso stom.
til they had seen him. But saint Thomas was grosser tha^ they all. For he said
he would not believe y^ resurrection, till he had seen the prynt of the nails in
Christ's hands, and yet this was not enough to make
him believe, but he would also feel his wou^des with his own hands. And here
we have a lively image of the nature and disposition of the flesh. For the
flesh can not be brought to believe but by sensible signs and tokens. Neither
was this carnalitie in Thomas only, but it is in all me^, for we be made of one
mowld Romans 3.
and god has concluded all me^ under infidelity that he might have mercy of
all. Consider therefore the Chryso stom.
tender mercy of our lord, how for one of his disciples sake he showed
himself having wounds, and he did it not forthwyth, but after. viii. days,
to the intent he being among his felawes and certified of the^, might be
kyndled unto a greater desire, and that he might be made the more feithfull in
time coming. Our Savior Christ therefore eight days after he had appeared to
his felawes, ca^ where as they were gathered together, and Thomas with them. He
entered in unto them, the doors being shut, and with his accustomed salutation
greteth them, sayng. Peace be among you. And forthwyth turnyng himself to
Thomas, whose infidelity could not be hid from him, which because he
perceived proceeded not of malice but of weakness: he vouch saved to heal. He
had him behold his hands, and grope his side. Thomas according as Christ had
bid him, beheld the print of the nails, and thurst his hand into his side.
And forthwyth with an exclamation cried, my lord my God. Thus from a gross
and stubburne infidelity was he brought to a fast and constant feith.

So Paul at the beginning was a very fierce persecutour Act. 9.
of y^ church, but afterward he beca^ a right feithful Apostle and teacher of
the people. For these wonderful iugementes of god be for this cause described
forth unto us, that we should learn to know the exceeding goodness of god which
turns evil into good. My lord and my god says saint Thomas Uerily he yt
confesses god to be his god, has renou^ ced al ye be his, and possessed those
ye be gods. The earth psalm. 23.
is the lords, and all that is therein. We be the lords and the lord is ours.
Wherefore all the goods of god be ours through feyth in our savior Jesus
Christ. This high confession of saint Thomas truly our savior commended, but
yet he su^what towched him for his hardness of believe saing. Thomas because thou
have seen me thou have believed, blessed are they y^ have not seen and yet have
believed. Saint Thomas saw one thing and believed an other, he saw man and
confessed god He saw Christ in flesh, he felt him after his resurrection, which
was a great furthera^ce to his feith. But blessed be they yt never saw Christ
in flesh, and yet have believed on him. Certainly this kind of people be we
Gentiles as many of us as reteyne Christ in mind who^ we have not seen in
flesh, as writes saint Gregory, if so be yet that we follow and prosecute our
feith Gregory.
with good works. For that person does truly and unfeignedly believe which
practizeth in working ye thing that he believes. Such a true and ernest beleuer
was this blessed man saint Thomas. Let us then take exemple of him, that we may
have the reward that he has, everlasting joy, by Christ our lord, who be
praised for ever.

Amen.
On candelmas day otherwise called the purification of our Lady.
Gospel. Luc. ii. WHen the days of purification were come according the law
of moses they brought Jesus to Jerusalem to present him to the lord
(according as it is written in the lords law, that every male opening
matrice shall be called holy to the lord) Exodus xiii. and xxii. Number. viii.
and to give in sacrifice according to that is said in the lords law a pair
of turtyl doves or two young pygions. And behold, there was a man in Jerusalem
named Simeon, and this man was just and devout, awayting for the comfort of
Israel, and the holy ghost was upon him. And he had received an answer of the
holy ghost, that he should not se death before he Christ, that is to say,
annoyn ted
saw the lords Christ. And he came by the holy ghost into the temple. And while
the father and mother were bringing in the child Jesus, that they should do
according to the use of the law for him: he also took him in his arms, and
blessed god and said. Lord, now let thou thy servant depart according to
thy word Nunc d^ mittis.
in peace. For mine eyes have seen the savior sent from the, whom thou haste
prepared before the face of al peoples, a light for the revelation of ye
Gentiles and a glory of thy people Israel.


A sermon upon this Gospel.
WHen the purification day was comme (good people) that is to wite the. xlij.
day from the birth of our savior Christ, at which day ye old law of Moses
commanded, y^ if it were a man child that was born, it should be presented to
the lord, and for the purifieng of the childwife and also of the child
su^what should be offered: the most pure virgin Mary would fulfylle the law
also in this point though in her child birth she knew was nothing after the
manner of other women's byrthes contaminate or spotted, but al was full of heavenly
purity and holiness. For what spotte of uncleanness could she have which by the
work of the holy ghost conceived without man's knowledge only by imbracement of
the heavenly power? She goes therefore with Joseph, who as yet was thought to
have been father to Jesus, unto Jerusalem, bearing the child with them that
they might present him in y^ temple in the sight A figure of the old law.
of the lord to whom he was consecrate, not but that al be the lords, but that
we should be taught by this mystical figure, that those minds be most
acceptable to God, which with a manly strength of spirit have conquered the
lusts of ye flesh and so do auau^ce to things heavenly and everlasting. Moses
law intending Omne masculi number.
this, had commanded the Iues that every male so sone as by the openinge of
the mothers womb it was brought to light, should be taken as holy to the lord,
whether it were of mankind or of brute beasts, that herby also the first
fruits might go to the prestes, so yet that the first begotten of the mankind
should be redeemed out of the prestes hands, onles the child were of y^
Leuitical tribe. Now surely the self law openly delivers our Lady from the
bond of it, where it says in the leuiticall book: Mulier si suscep to semine
pepe ^erit ma sculu^.
The wife which receiving sede shall bring forth a ma^child. For the blessed
virgin our Lady was neither mulier, that is to say such woman as have lain
with man, neither received she man's sede. And as towching the opening of ye
matrice, surely this heavenly child did in no manner violate the chastity of of
ye virgins womb but rather preserved and hallowed it from al spot of uncleanness
during her life. He then was presented in y^ temple as subject to y^ law, which
was lord of al things both heavenly and erthly. He was redeemed with a small
price, which came to redeem the hole world with the price of his blood. For ye
law had appointed ye Iues to redeem their first begotten son with a lamb of
one year old, which was given in sacrifice. And tha^ should be added a dove or
a turtyll for y^ purifienge of al spot or uncleanness which might happen to be
committed in y^ begetting of y^ child, or after, to the intent y^ that which
should be offered to the lord might be thoroughly pure. Howbeit if they were not
of ability to give a lamb, the law suffered them to give instead thereof a
turtil dove or a pigeo^ for y^ redemption of ye child. The other bird was
offered for the purging of the sin. Our Lady therefore and Joseph offered the
pore men's oblatio^, and it is not to be doubted, but they would have made a
richer gift if their poverty had not let them. Allbeit their mind was
rich in godlynes, and to give us an exe^ple, ye profession of poverty was more
profitable. But lo, there was at this self time in Jerusalem one Simeo^ a
just man and such one as stood in awe of god, and surely he might well be
called a just man, for he Ambrose.
sought not his own but ye peoples weal, he awaited for him yt should redeem
out of bondage not him only, but al mankind And because he was endowed with this
justice and godliness, the holy ghost was in him and had inspired him that he
should not dye, till he had seen with his fleshely eyes him that he long
before had espied with the eyes of feyth.

As Mary therefore and Joseph were bringinge the child into the temple, this
Simeon also came by the guiding of the holy ghost into the temple and took Jesus
Origin.
in his arms. And here says Origene an ancient doctor of the church, if
thou Christen person wilt in like wise hold Jesus and embrace him in thy
hands, thou must with all labor attempt that thou may have the holy ghost to
thy guide and so come to y^ temple of god, as this holy Simeo^ did. Thou must
be a just person, a fearer of god, religiouse, devout and godly, as he was. But
what did Simeon ha uing this most blessed child in his arms? He blessed and
praised god, saying. Now, o lord, thou do license thy servant to depart in
peace out of this world according to thy word. For mine eyes have now
salutare tuum.
seen him, by who^ it has plesed the, to save mankind, whom I say thou have
prepared and ordained in the face of al peoples to be, unto y^ hethe^ persons
and Panyms (which hitherunto for defalt of true knowledge have worshipped false
gods) a light for to lighte^ them and to disclose thy troth unto them, and
again to thyn own people y^ Israelites a cause of most high glory This in
effect spoke Symeon in his manner.

Let us therefore (good people) for our perte also bless and praise god, that
whereas we y^ inhabitants of this Realm were before y^ coming of Christ
wicked Panims and ydolaters we now by y^ disclosing of his gospel ^ee his
people. Let us labor to be just and holy persons pore in spirit and rich in
godliness. Let us desire to be led with the holy spirit of God. So shall we at
last depart this world in true peace, by Christ our lord. To whom be praise
for ever.

Amen.
Saint Mathias day the Apostle
The Gospel. Math. xi. IN that time Jesus said. I confess unto the O father
lord of heaven and of earth, because thou haste hyd these things from wise
and prudent persons, and have disclosed them to yonglinges. Uerily father, for
so seemed it good before the. Al things be delivered up unto me of my father,
and noman knows the son but the father, neither knows any man the father
but the son and he to whom the son will disclose. Come to me all ye that
labor and be burdened and I shall quiet you. Take my yoke upon you, and
learn of me, for I am meke and lowly in heart, and ye shall find quiet to
your souls. For my yoke is pleasant and my burden is light.


The sermon upon this Gospel. The occasion of christ's words after Chrysostom.

Because our savior Christ (good people) what time he was conversant here in
earth among the Iues, had vpbrayded them for their misbeleue, declaring
unto them that the Hethen persons were redyer to receive him then they, at
which words some were offended: therefore he answers to their thoughts in
this wise. I confess (that is) I do thank and praise the O father, because
thou have Co^fessio inqt. August. no^ est solius peccatoris sed aliquando etia^
laudatorio,
kept close this heavenly doctrine from the wise and prudent men in their own
opinions, such as be the scribes and pharisees, and haste opened the same to
fools and babes after the judgment of the world, even to rude unformed and
rusticall persons. And here (says Chrysostomus) we be taught utterly to pluck
down our high stomakes, and to follow humility. And truly (says he) these
words which our Lord spoke to his disciples, occasioned them to be much
more diligent and lowly in heart. For because it was likely that they stood much
in their own conceytes for that they did cast out deuiles, therefore with these
words he abateth their courage and represseth them. For the thing that was
done unto them was a reave lation, that is to say a disclosing and opening from
god, and not their own propre study and labor. And therefore the scribes
and pharisees estemynge themselfes to be wise and prudent fell from the
knowledge of gods mysteries because of their pride and swelling minds.
Wherefore if the secret mysteries of god were hyd from them because of this: se
then that we be under fear and awe, and let us continewe as babes, for this
surely made the apostles of christ to enjoy this secret knowledge. For like as
wha^ Paul says, tradidit illos deus in reprobu^ sensu^, Romans i.
that is, god gave them up into a disalowed mind, he speaks not this,
inducing god as doing this,
but them which gave the cause: so we must understand in like wise this text
where Christ says, that his father has hyd this knowlegde from the wise
scribes and pharisees. And why were they hid from them? Harken what Paul
says, because going about to stably she their own justice, they were not
subject to the justice of god.

Al be delivered unto me (says Christ) from my father. This he spoke, les any
thing should be thought to be les in him than that which is in god. For as S.
Aug. contra Maximum.
saint Austin says, if our savior Jesus Christ the son of god has any
thing les in pour then has god the father, then surely all be not his that
the father has, for by begettinge did the father give the power to his son,
like as all that he has in his substance did he by begettynge *give to him
whom he begatte of his substance.

Furthermore in the interchaungeable or mutual Hilarious.
knowledge of the father and son, it is done us to wit, that none other
thing was in god the son, then was in God the father. For it follows in the
text, and no man knows the son but the father, nor noman knows the father
but the son. For Chrysostom.
surely by this that he only knows the father, he does us to understand
that he is of the self same substance that the father is of. As if he should
say unto us. What marvel* I pray you is it, if I be very Lord of all, since
there is yet a greater thing in me, even the knowledge of the father of heaven,
and that I am of y^ same substance y^ he is of? Thus by these words Christ our
savior declares himself to be not man only but also god and egal in power with
his father. And where he says that none knows the father but the son: he
means not y^ al men be utterly ignorant of him, but this he means, that by
that knowledge that he knows his heavenly father, noman else knows him. In
so much that that knowledge that men have either of the father or of the son
they have it by y^ sons disclosing. So ye the son discloseth not only his
father but also himself unto us. For as the holy doctor saint Austin says.
The word does not only open y^ thing that is declared by the word, Austin^
but also it declares it self. But how does y^ son disclose his fathers will
and pleasure unto us? Surely by his most comfortable word which is called his
gospel. Come therefore, says Christ, unto me al ye that travail and I shall
set you at rest. He says not come he and he, but come to me all ye that be in
cares, in Chrysostom.
heaviness and in sins, not that I might take punishment of you but that I
might losen your sins. Come, not that I need to be glorified of you, but that
I desire your health and salvation. Come, he says, not with fete, but with
manners, not with body, but with feyth. For this is the spiritual coming
whereby one approaches to god. And if ye thus come, I shall set you at rest, he
says not I shall save you, but that more is I shall set you in all quiet and
rest. Take my yoke upon you. What is Christ's Theophilactus
yoke? Surely his Gospel which as Theophilactus says, shows us glad news,
forgiveness of sins, justification, coming to heaven, and that we be made
the children of god. O how sweet, how pleasant and easy is this yoke? Only let
us put from us pride of heart and the care of worldely vanities and learn of
Christ to be meke and lowly, like as the holy Apostle Mathias following his
masters steps (whose memory we celebrate this day) left us exemple. So shall
we inioye that heavenly rest void of all greuance and replenyshed with all
solace which here is promised unto us. By Christ our lord. To who^ be all
glory.

Amen.
The Annunciacion of our Lady, commonly called our Ladies day in Lent.
The gospel Luc. i. IN the sixth month was sent the angel Gabriel of God into
a city of Galilee named Nazareth to a virgin spoused to a man whose name was
Joseph of David's house and the virgins name was Mary. And the angel being
entered unto her said. Hayle full of grace, the Lord is with the, blessed art
thou among women. When she saw him, she was troubled upon his word and
devised what manner greting this should be. And the angel said to her. Fear not
Mary* For thou haste found grace with God. Lo thou shalt conceive in thy
womb, and bring forth a son, and thou shall call his name Jesus. He shall be
great and shall be called the son of the highest, and the Lord God shall give
him the seat of his father David, and he shall reign over the house of Jacob
for ever, and of his reign shall be no end. Mary said unto the angel. How
shall this be, for I know not man. And the angel answered and said unto her.
The holy ghost shall come upon the, and the virtue of the highest shall
ouershadow the, and therefore the thing that shall be born holy, shall be called the
son of God. And lo Elizabeth thy cousin, she also has conceived a son in
her old age, and this is the sixth month to her which was called baren* for no
word shall be impossible with God. Ma ry said. Behold the handmayde of the
Lord, be it done to me according to thy word.


The sermon upon this gospel.
IF a Gospel (dear people) signifies a glad tidings, what Gospel can be
compared with this gospel which shows to the blessed virgin Mary yea and
unto us all, the gladdest tydinges that could come to mankind, that is that
she should bear the most blessed king of kings and Savior of mankind. Let
us then proceed to the declaracio^ of this so joyful gospel. In the sixth month
was sent to the blessed virgin Mary no common angel but Gabriel the Archangel.
For to this so high and solemn a message it was mete that an high angel
should be sent which should bring tidings of him that was highest of all.
Which aungel (as Origin says) is Origin.
therefore expressed by his propre name to the intent it might be signified by the
same what he is in operation. For Gabriell he says betokens the strength of
God. Wherefore by him that was the strength of God it was convenient that he
should be uttered and proclaimed which being the Lord of powers and mighty in
batell came to conquer and vanquishe the wicked powers of the air. And what
says this Archangell Gabriel unto her? Hail full of grace. Truly, Hiero^. in
sermo. de assu^p.
says saint Hierom, she is well called full of grace. For to other grace is
given by parts, but upon the virgin Mary did the fulness of grace altogether
infunde it self. She might well be cleped full of grace by whom every
creature is with a large shower of the holyghost ouersprede. Yea already was he
with the virgin which sent the angel to the virgin, I say our Lord went
before his messanger. And therefore it follows. The Lord is with the. He is in
thy heart, he is now also in thy womb, he replenisheth thy mind, he
replenisheth also thy body. And here Ambro se.
(says Ambrose) learn a virgin of her shamefastnes for she was abashed. It is
the property of true virgins to tremble, and at al approchinges of man unto
them to blushe, and with a reverent fear to eschew familiar talkyng with man.

Learn you virgin tha^ to eschew al wantonness of worcester des. The virgin Mary
feared even the greting of the angel. Yea she wondered at this strange manner
of gretinge, whereof the like was never herd before in any place, this was
reserved only for the virgin For (as Origin notes) if she had wist y^ the
like salutation Origin
had ever been made to any other in all y^ bible (for she had the knowledge of
the law) this gretynge should never have troubled ne dismayed her. But albeit
she was troubled and abashed at the sode^nes of this so strange a thing: yet
seeing she had deser Chryso stom.
ued such grace with God, she had no cause to fear. And therefore the angel
says unto her. Fear not O Mary, for thou have found favor and grace with god.
But how found she this grace? Surely (says the holy doctoure Chrysostomus)
through her humility. And so must al we find it. For as holy writ says, God
gives grace to the humble persons, And lo* says the angel, you shall conceive
in thy womb and be delivered of a son who^ you shall name Jesus. Jesus by
interpre tatio^ betokens a Savior. And in deed our lord is a right Savior
to so many as cleave unto him by feith. Yea there is none other Savior but he.
He is y^ only great one and is cleped ye son of ye highest. For albeit it was
spoken by Ihon Baptist ye he should be Ambro se.
great, yet, as S. Ambrose says, he was called great as a great man whereas
Christ is as great God. This Christ therefore shall reign in y^ house of
Jacob for evermore. He called y^ house of Jacob not on ly y^ outward Israelites
but the hole church of Christ be they Iues or Gentiles which believe upon him.
For as saint Paul says. Not al they which be of Israel be Israelites, but
such as be the chyldern of Romans ix.
the promise, be counted the sede. For, says he, they that be the children of
the flesh, be not the children of God. Now Mary to the intent she would be yet
fur there instructed of this mystery, asks how this should come to pas, she
doubted not of the angels words. Only she desires to know by what mean it
should be brought about that she should be a mother that never lay with man.
The angel answers The holy ghost shall come upon the, as who should say. Seek
not a natural order where the thing passes Chrxsostom.
nature. Thou ask how this shall be, thou not knowing man. Nay this thing
happeth unto the even because thou have not assayed wedloke. For if thou
had, thou should not have been thought worthy to this mystery, not y^
wedlok is a profane
thing, but because virginity is better. For it becam the common Lord of all,
both to be pertaker with us in birth and also to varye from us in it. In that
he should be borne of the womb, he takes part with us, but in that he should
be borne without carnal knowledge of man, he is declared to be no man but god.
Mary fully satisfied with his answer says in most humble wise, behold the
handmayde of our Lord, be it to me as thou have said. Let us then my friends
follow the humility of this blessed virgin. Let us embrace Christ like
feythful Christians that we may be of the nombre of his chosen people, and
inherit his kingdom. To whom be all honor

Amen.
On saint Georges day. And also on saint Marks day the Evangelist.
The Gospel. Ihon. xv. Jesus said to his disciples. I am the true vine and my
father is the husbandman. Every branch in me not bearyng fruit, he takes it
awey, and all that bears fruit, he purges it, that it may bear more fruit.
Now you be clean for the word y^ I have spoken unto you. Dwell in me and I in
you. As the brau^che can not bear fruit of it self, onles it abide in the
vine: no more can you, onles ye abide in me. I am the vine, and you the
branches. He that abides in me and I in him, this person bears much fruit,
for without me ye can do nothing. If one abide not in me, he is cast awey as
is the branch and is withered, and men gather them and cast them into the
fire, and they burn. If ye abide in me, and my words abide in you: whatsoever
ye woll, ye shall ask, and it shall be done unto you.


The sermon upon this gospel.
TO thinte^t (well-beloved christian people) we should thoroughly understand, how
little danger should hang over our heddes, in case we would feythfully abide in
the holy felawship and church of Christ, and on the contrary side in how
great peril and danger we be, if like false christian people and hypocrites we
shrynke and swerve from that most holy leage and testament, which our Savior
Christ made with us what time he was here co^uersant among us: our said
Savior in this Gospel brings forth a tyght goodly and mete parable or
similitude to paynt as it were before our eyes as well the commodity of the
one, as the inco^moditie and danger of the other, sayng in this wise. I am the
true vine and my father Ego su^ vi^is vera.
is the husbandmam. As who should say. I am as it were the root or stock of
the vine, you are my me^bres, and as who should say the bowghes growyng out of
the stock. My father of heaven has planted me, for he it is only that begatte
me. From him therefore as it were from the husbandma^ is the stock come, but
you be come of the stock, that is to wit of me. To the father as to the
fountaigne and head spring redoundeth the thank of the hole benefit, which
what soever he gives and bestows upon you, he gives through me and his holy
spirit. The sap and iuise of the stock which gives also to the brau^ ches
life and power of bearing of fruit is the spirit which is common to the
father and to me. This spirit both knytteth me to the father: and also
co^pleth you to me. Every brau^ch therefore which cleauyng to me and living by
my spirit, shall bring forth fruit accordyngly: him woll my father purge,
cuttyng of from him the superfluouse and void lusts, to the intent he may bring
forth more ple^teouse and also more gentle fruit. But on the other side, he y^
clea ueth unto me by the outward name of a christian person or by an outward
profession of feith, whereas in deed he brings forth no fruit of the christian
charity: this person wol my father cut of from the vine, as an un profitable
and void member of the same. For in vain is he in the vine which has no
fruit but leaves only, y^ is to say, he is a vain and no true christen person
which bosteth himself of y^ christian feith, and expresses not the same with
good works mete for a christen man. Now, says Christ, ye be clean for the
word that I Vos mu di estis.
have spoken unto you. Suerly (dear fre^des) we are purged and made clean by
Gods word whereunto we have given feith but we are still to be purged, to
the intent we may yet bring forth more ple^tiful fruit. For who is he (as says
saint Augustine) so clean S. Augustine.
in this life, which is not yet more and more to be made clean? Christ
therefore clea^seth those that be clean that they may be yet more fruitful.
But why says he not, ye be clean by baptism? Uerely, says this holy
doctor, because in the water also it is the word that cleanses. For pluck
awey the word, and what is the water but water? But let the word come to the
water and so is made a sacrament. Let us than take heed, that we abide in
Christ, that he also may work in us hanging upon him. For like as the
branch, if it be plucked from the vine, can bring forth no fruit, no more
can we bring forth the fruit of any good work, onles we cleave to Christ by
feith and charity, from whens comes whatsoever makes to the true and
everlasting health. I say, let us look that we be continually knitte and joined
to Christ, as we have exemple of this holy man whose memorial we halowe this
day, which was an undoubted lively branch of this vine, and brought forth
in the sight of the world most pleasant and acceptable fruit to god. He
remained ^nyt to Christ, and therefore Christ was joined to him, whereby he both
wanne everlasting salvation to himself, and procured unto god (for whose sake
he did al things) glory among men. For without Christ (as Christ him self
here says) undoubtedly we ca^ do nothing. Surely if any branch, by his own
fault pluck himself awey from the true vine: not only he brings forth no
fruit, but as an unprofitable bowghe being cut of with the knyfe wythereth
awey, and anon after is gathered with the other baren bowghes and thrown into the
fire to be burned, and thus being destitute and void of the lively moisture
and spirit of Christ, he dies in the mind, though he yet live in body, and
after this life being separated and pared awey from the vine without recovery,
he is cast in to everlasting fire, alweys there to brenne for his punishment
because he would not still remain in the vine as a good brau^ch hereafter to
have brought Et verb a mea in vobis ma^serit.
forth and inioyed the fruit of everlasting joy. And verily we shall abide in
Christ, if so be that his words be believed of us, if the things that we have
be leued we keep still in mind, and fulfill the same in our deeds. If we do this,
there be no worldly storms that we need to fear, for Christ shall be with us,
the father of heaven shall be with us, the holy ghost shall be with us, and what
thing so ever we shall ask, we shall without doubt obtain it. For as Austine
says, if Chri Augustine.
stes words remain fresh in our mouths or in our memories and be not found
in our life (y^ is if we live not according to the gospel) we be not counted as
bra^ ches in the vine, because we draw not life out of the ro^e. Let us tha^
(good people) be right branches of this vine and bring forth worthy fruit, to
the intent we may remain in Christ in this world, and in the next inherit the
everlasting joy, by Christ our Lord. To whom with the father and holy
ghost be praise and glory euerlastyngly.

Amen.
On Philip and Jacobs day.
The Gospel. Ihon. xiiij. Jesus said to his disciples. Let not your heart be
troubled. Believe in god and believe in me. In the house of my father be many
dwellinges. If it were not so, I would say unto you, I go to make ready a place
for you and if I go to make ready for you, I will com again and take you to my
self, that where I am, ye also may be. And whether I go ye know, and the way ye
know. Thomas says to him. Lord we know not whither thou go, and how can
we know the way? Ie sus says to him, I am the way and the troth and the
life. None comes to y^ father, but by me. If ye knew me ye should know my
father also. And now ye know him, and ye have seen him. Philip says to him.
Lord, show us the father and we have inoughe. Jesus says to him. So long time
am I with you and have ye not known me? Philip, he that has seen me, has
seen the father, and how say thou, show us the father? Be leuest not, that I
am in y^ father and the father in me? The words that I speak to you, I speak
not of my self. But y^ father which dwells in me, he does the deeds. Believe
me that I am in the father and the father is in me. Else for y^ self deeds
believe me. Ueryly verily I say unto you, he that believes in me, the works
that I do he shall also do, and greater also then these shall he do, because I go
to my father, and whatsoever ye shall ask in my name, that will I do.


The sermon upon this gospel.
Because our lord had said before to Peter. that Chysostome.
whether he went he could not follow now, but he should follow afterward, lest y^
other disciples should think that this promise was given only to Peter, our
savior now to comfort them says. Be not troubled, but believe steadfastly. In
my fathers house be many mansions, that is, the self same Region shall receive
you that shall receive Peter. For there is great plenty there of mansions, and
ye shall not need to say that it is necessary, that they were made ready for
you, albeit if I go and prepare you a place, yet will I com again and take you
with me. Here my friends ye wol ask, how can Christ go and prepare us a place,
since there be already many ma^sions in heaven? Saint Austin answers to this
doubt in this wise. Troth S. Augustine.
it is, that there be many ma^sions, but they be not yet as they are to be
prepared. For the self same mansions which Christ prepared before in
predestinating, he prepares now in working. In predestination therefore they be
already. Else he would have said, I will go and prepare, that is, I will
predestinate, but because they be not yet in operation, he said. If I go and
prepare you a place. And surely he now prepares ma^sions by preparing tenantes
for the mansions. For where he says, in my fathers house be many mansions,
what think we is the house of God, but the temple i. Cor. iij templu^ dei
sa^ctum est quod estis vos
of god, of which the apostle says. The temple of god is holy, which temple be
you. This house of god therefore is yet in building, is yet in preparinge. But
what is that which to prepare he goes away, if he prepare our selfs, which
how can he do if he leave us? Surely (says this holy Doctor) he means
this, that to the preparinge of these mansions, the Romans i. Abac. 2
rightuouse man ought to live by feythe. But if he should see, it were no feith,
Christ therefore goes awey that he may not be seen, he withdraws himself from
us, that he may be believed. For then is a place prepared for us, if we live by
feith. This is the wey that our savior Christ here speaks of.

Yea Christ himself (if we believe in him) is the very wey for us to heaven, he
is y^ troth, he is the life. Let us not then be troubled (good people) in our
hearts For he that is the way, will not surely lead us a wilsom Hilarious.
wey if we stik unto him, neither will he deceive us and put us in foles
paradise, since he is the self troth, neither yet wol he leave us in the
error of death since he is the self life. And therefore Christ says further,
that no man can come to the father but by him, and he says, that he that
knows him, knows also the father, forasmoche as the father and he be one.
Yea, says Christ, ye that be my disciples do also know my father and ye have
seen him. Undoutedly my friends, the disciples of Christ saw god the father
after a certain manner in Christ, commaundynge the wyndes and the sees,
commau^ding deuilles, driuinge out diseases with a word were they never so
incurable, raisinge with a word the dead to life again. Howbeit y^ novelty
of Christ's words did sumwhat trouble the Apostle Philip (whose memory
together with his fellow saint Jacob the church does this day solemnize) as
it troubled also the rest of the Apostles. Wherefore saint Philip more gready
than the other to learn, desires Christ to show to them the father and they
should be satisfied. But what says Christ to them again? Have I been so long
with you and do ye not yet know me? Philip, he y^ sees me, sees also the
father. Surely if the father of heaven should have spoken unto his Apostles, he
should have spoken none other thing tha^ that Christ spoke, if the father should
have wrought, he should have wrought the same y^ Christ did work. The same
mind is in them both, the same will* the same power and nature. If we believe
this, though the corporal presence of Christ as he was here co^uersant
among his disciples be taken from us, yet we shall se him absent much better
with the eyes of feith then y^ misbeleuing Iues saw him presently with their
fleshly eyes. Thus did these two holy Apostles Philip and Jacob see him after
he was ascended up to his father, and therefore the things that they saw y^
father work by him, the same by him did they because they cleaued fast unto
him by feith and charity. Yea Christ vttred also more clearly the power of
his godhed after he wtdrew his corporal presence from them. Insomoch whosoever
joins himself to Christ by y^ Eua^gelical feith shall by Christ work also as
great things yea or greater tha^ Christ him self did work wha^ so ever the
glory of god shall require Saint Austine.
a miracle. The Apostles therefore healed disea ses even with their shadows,
they converted to the feith not a few persons as Christ did when he was here
in earth, but hole nations, but yet they did this by Christ, or rather Christ
did these things in them. Let us then have in us this strong feith, and
this brenning charity, and than without fail what so ever we shall desire in
Christ's name, he woll perform it. To whom with the father and holy ghost be
rendered thanks and praysynges for ever and ever.

Amen.
On saint Ihon Baptistes day
Gospel. Luc. j. ELizabethes time was fulfilled that she should be delivered,
and she brought forth a son. And her neighbors and cousins herd, how the lord
had showed his great mercy upon her and they reioysed with her. And it
fortuned the eight day they came to circu^cise the child and called him
Zachary by the name of his father. And his mother answered and said, not so,
but he shall be called Iho^. And they said unto her. There is none in thy kindred
that is named by this name. And they made signs to his father, how he would
have him called. And he asked for writing tables, and wrote sayng. Ihon is his
name. And they al merueled, and forth with his mouth was opened and his tongue, and
he spoke blessing god. And fear can upon all their neighbors. And in all the
hylly country of Iewry were al these words spread abroad, and al they that
herd them did put them in their heart saying. What manner child shall this be?
And the lords hand was with him. And Zachary his father was filled Benedictus
dominus deus Israel.
with the holy ghost and prophesied saying. Blessed be the lord god of Israel,
for he has visited and made redemption to his people.


A sermon upon this Gospel.
GOod people the church this day does sole^nize the birth of saint Ihon
Baptist, who^ god had ordained to be a messanger to make ready the way against
the coming of our savior Christ. This holy prophets mother named Elizabeth
was thought to have been baren. But it pleased god so to work with her to set
forth his own glory and power. He sent to her therefore now in her old age
this blessed child to take the reproach of barennes from her. He prolonged for
this intent her child bearing, that the Chry sostom.
joy hereof might be the greater, and she be made the more renowined and
notoriouse. For all her neighbors and kynsfolke which before had known her ba
rennes, were now made witnesses of the heavenly grace wherwt God had endowed
her. For none that saw the child, departed with silence, but blessed and praised
god which unlooked for had sent this blessed child unto her being of this age.
The eight day therefore they went to circumcise the child according to Moses
law. And because Zachary his father was by gods provision made du^me and
spechles, they supposing Luc. i.
that the father would so have been best ct^en* ted named him Zachary by his
fathers name. But Elizabeth his mother said he should not be so called, but Ihon
should be his name, which name she had learned not of her husband which at
this time was Bid. S. Ambrose. Origin.
become spechles, but by inspiratio^ of the holy ghost, signifieng that he that
was born should be the bedel or messanger of the new law, which should abrogate
the old traditions and turn the carnal worship into a spiritual grace. For
Zacharias betokens in Hebrew a reme^brer of god, and Ihon is named the grace
of God. The justice of the law stood in appointed
works: the justice of the gospel stands by faith through grace and
favor. Howbeit, the kinsfolk would not be ruled by the mother to give him this
strange name, because there was none in all their kindred so called, but they
would in any wife have him called Zachary by his fathers name. And yet at this
day there be some better pleased with the name of Zachary, Erasmus in paraphra.
then with the name of Ihon, these be they that can not yet suffer that the
ceremonies of y^ old law should be abolished, so that in effect they cry we will
none of this new name of Ihon, but we will have still the old Zachary. wherefore
for asmoch as the childwife and the cousins could not agree in the name, it was
necessary that the authority of the father should come between to break the
strife. But he had not as yet the use of his tongue, where now neded speech. With
signs therefore they signified unto him what name would pleace him that his
child should have. He understanding y^ matter required writing tables to declare
that thing by dombe letters which by lively voice he could not bring forth.
The tables brought he wrote in this wise, Ihon is his name. Now came the time,
that Moses law should speak, which before had after a fashion described with
figures the grace of the gospel. The time now was com, that the mouth S.
Ambrose. Luc. i.
which vnfeithfulnes had locked, should now through feyth be opened. He had not
therefore so sone written, but y^ bond of his tongue was loused. Neither did he
begin his speech with any other thing, than with the praysinge of God, by
whose goodness so great joys were heped upon him. Let us in like manner S.
Ambrose.
(good people) believe, as saint Ambrose exhorts us, to the intent our tongue
which is bound with the bands of vnfeithfulnes may be loused. And surely
Exasmus.
onles the Iuishe tongue be put to silence, which preaches carnal
observations, the tongue of the gospel can not speak which preaches grace,
feythe, and charity.

Al these things of y^ old childwife, of the novelty of the name, of the son
born by y^ promise of the angel, of the father made first of a speaker dombe
and again of dombe a speaker: were blown abroad not only in the neighbors and
cousins mouths but also through out all the hylly country of Iewry, so that
they did not only wonder, but also were astonyed and aghast at the strangnes of
the thing, saying wtin themselfes. What manner of person shall this child be?
None of al y^ prophets was so wonderfully born, which things declare, that
this is done by gods power which is with the child being ordained for high
purposes. And they thought not thus without cause. For in deed gods hand had
vttred his heavenly virtue in the child. And to the intent al things might be
full of miracles and reple nished with joy, Zachary also Ihons father being
inspired with the holy ghost brasted forth into this song Blessed be y^ lord god
of Israel, for he has visitted and redeemed his people of Israel. Doubtless,
god visited Chrysostom.
his people of Israel both ways, whether we understand the material
Israelites, for he came to the lost sheep of the house of Israel, or the
spiritual Mat. xv To. ix. Bid.
Israelites, that is, the feithful persons, which were worthy of this
visitation. He visited the^ which were now by long sickness consumed, he redeemed
them being sold under sin, with the blood of his only begotten son. He called
them his people not because at his coming he found them his, but because by
visitting he made them his. Let us then praise almighty god that he vouchsaued
to make of us which were not Osec. ij
his people, his people. Let us embrace y^ justice not of y^ Iuish law, but of
y^ gospel of Christ. Who be etc.

On saint Peter's and saint Paul's day.
The Gospel. Mat. xxi. Jesus came into the parts of Cesarea Philippi and
asked his disciples sayng. Who^ say men that I the son of man am? They said,
Some say thou art Tho^ the baptist, some Helias some Hieremye or one of the
prophets. He says unto them. But who^ say you that I am? Simon Peter answered
and said. Thou art Christ the son of the lyuinge God. And Jesus answered and
said unto him. Happy art thou Simon the son of Iona, for flesh and blood
have not disclosed this unto the, but my father which is Tu es Petrus et super
hanc pe tra^ aedificabo ecclesia^ meam.
in heaven. And I say unto the, that thou art Peter and upon this rock I will
build my church, and the gates of hell shall not prevail agynste it. And I
will give to the, the keys of the kingdom of heaven, and what soever thou
byndest in earth shall be bound in heaven, and what soever thou losest in earth,
shall be losed in heaven.


The sermon upon this Gospel.
THis Gospel (my friends) declares how our Savior Christ after he was com
into ye parties of Cesarea Philippi, would prove, how much his disciples had
profeted by so many his sermons and miracles which they had now herd and
seen, and whether they thought any higher thing of him then the common people
did. He demands therefore of them saying. Whom say men that I am? They
answered. Some say thou art John the baptiste (for so thought the Herodians)
other say thou art the prophet Helias, (because he was ravished up and
therefore they thought now that he appeared according Origin.
to the prophecy of Malachie) other some say, Malach iiij.
you art Hierimie (because he bare the figure of Christ and because upon him it
was said. Lo I have co^stituted Hiere. i.
the this day over peoples and kings, that thou should pluck up, disseuer,
build, and plant, which things in very deed were to be accomplished in
Christ. Jesus hearing this, to the intent he would wrynge out yet a more certain
and higher confession of his disci ples who ought best to have known him,
asked the^ saying, But who say you that I am? Then saint Vo^ aute^ que^ me
esse dicitis?
Peter made answer for him and his fellows (for of al them was the question
asked) and said. Thou art Christ the son of the lyuinge god. Jesus answered.
Blessed art thou Simon the son of Iona, for flesh and blood has not opened
this unto the, but my heavenly Bar Iona.
father. And I say again to the, thou art Peter (or Cephas in the Hebrew that
is to say a rock) and upon this rock shall I buyld my church, that is to
say, upon this rock of thy confession I shall build my church. For this
confession contains the su^me of the christian feith, according to the Apostle
Paul, sayng. Romans x.
If thou confess with thy mouth our lord Jesus and with thy heart believe, that
god raised h^^ from death to life, thou shall be saved. So the christian church
is buylt, not upon the person of Peter, but upon the feith, Chryso stom.
as Chrysostom says. And this is the confession of feith? Thou art Christ the
son of the living god. Wherefore Peter (as saint Augustine affirms) does
Aug. libro. i. retract. cap. xi.
here represe^t the hole church to who^ the keys were delivered. For if we
would say the church were buylt upon the person of Peter, we should put an other
foundation of the church then Christ, which is against Paul. For he says none
may put any other fundation but that which is put already Christ Jesus. For
Austine
men wylling to be buylt upon men said. I hold of Paul, I hold of Apollo,
another said I hold of Cephas which is Peter. But other which would not be
built upon Peter but upon the rock said, I hold of Christ. Wherefore says
Erasmus I do much marvel Erasmus in anno ta.
of some which do wrest this text to the bishop of Rome, since it is meant not
upon him but upon all Christen persons, which thing, Origin the ancient
Origines homilia prima.
Doctor does excellently declare saing. If therefore we in like wise (by the
revelling of the father which is in heaven for in heaven is our conversation)
woll confess that Jesus Christ is the son of the living god: it shall be also
said unto us. Thou art Pe ter etc. For every one that is a follower of Christ is
a Peter that is to say a rock. But there be some men which can be contented
with nothing, onles it be un measurable. Christ therefore did call him Peter,
that is to say a sure stone or rock, which wauereth not hither and thither,
with ^ondry opinions, and upon this rock of thy confession, says Christ, woll
I build my church, yt is to wit, my house and palace, which I will so
establishe upon a sure and immouable fundatio^, ye no force nor power of the
Helly kingdom shall be hable to co^quere it. The devil layth sege to us with many
engyns, he labors to bring against us the hole rowte of wicked spirits,
but by Christ's help his church shall stand, let us only take heed this
confession remain with us. The heavenly kingdom is the church, the kingdom of
the devil is the world, which noman needs to be aferde of, so he be a Peter.

And for this thy confession, says Christ, I will give the the keys of the
kingdom of heaven. Behold (says Origin) how great power the rock has upon
which Origin.
Christ's church is buylt, that also her iugementes shall remain sure even as
God him self iugynge by the same. Let him therefore be faultles which shall
bind or lose an other, that he may be found worthy to bind and to louse in
heaven. And that Christ gave this authority as well to other as to the person of
Peter: it is very plain by other places of scripture, John xx.
and namely in the. xx. chapter of Ihon, where the evening after his
resurrection he said to all his disciples. As my father has sent me: so I send
you. And after he had so said, he breathed upon the^ sayng. Whose sins so
ever ye shall forgive, be forgiven, and whose sins ye shall retain be
retained. And in like manner before his death, he said to them all. What so
ever ye shall bynd upon earth, shall be bound Math. xviij.
in heaven, and what so ever ye shall louse upon earth shall be loosed in heaven.
Let us not tha^ attribute that to one which was spoken to many. Let us not
buyld Christ's church upon the person of any mortal man Mat. vij
(which is to buyld it upon the sand) but let us build it upon the sure rock,
that is to wit upon the confession of feith, that these holy Apostles saint
Peter and Paul made and preached, whose memory we solemnize this day. Let us
confess with our mouth and believe with our heart that God raised Christ from
Romans x.
death to life, and y^ he is the true Messiah and Savior. And no doubt we
shall enjoy the heavenly enheritau^ce prepared for us before the making of the
world, by Christ our lord, to who^ be praise everlastingly.

Ame^.
On Mary Magdalens day.
The Gospel. Luc. vij. ONe of the pharisees desired Jesus that he would eat with
him. And being entered into ye pharisees house, he sat down. And behold a
woman in the city which was a sinner, knowing that Jesus sat in y^ pharisees
house, brought an Alabaster box of ointment and standing at his feet behind
weping, began to water his feet with the tears, and with the hear of her head,
she wiped and kyssed his feet, and with the oyntme^t anointed them. The
pharisee seeing this which had called him, spoke wtin himself saying. If this
were a prophet, he should have known, who and what manner person is this woman
which towcheth him, for she is a sinner. Jesus answered and said unto him Simon
I have sumwhat to tell the. He said, master say on. A certain lender had two
dettours, the one ought five hundredth pens, the other fyfty. They not having
wherwt to make payment, he forgave them both. Which of them now tell me will love
him more? Simon answered and said, I suppose yt he who^ he forgave the more
su^me. He said unto him. Thou haste rightly iuged, and turning himself to the
woman, he said to Simon. See you this woman? I entered into thy house, water to
my feet you gaueste me none, but this woman has watered my feet with tears,
and with the hears of her head she has wiped the^. Kiss you gave me none,
but this woman from the time I entered, has not left kyssing of my feet. Thou
anoyntedst not my head with oil, but this woman has anointed my feet with
oyntme^t. For which thing I tell the, many sins be forgiven her, because she
loved much. But he to who^les is forgiven, loves les. And he said to her. Thy
sins be forgiven the. And they y^ sat at meat with him began to say
within themselfes. who is this which also forgiueth sins? But he said to y^
woman. Thy feith has saved y^, go in peace.


The sermon upon this Gospel.
THe gospel red in the church this day (good peo Gregorius Nicenus.
ple) is right comfortable to all christian men and women and co^teineth a very
holsom doctrine. For the most part of them which justify themselves be puffed
up with a vain opinion of godlynes before they have atteyned to the true
judgment, separatyng themselves as la^bes from gootes, not vouchesauing ones to
be co^uersant in the same house nor yet to eat the same meats with other, but
abhorring al which be not of like perfection as they think themselves to be
of. Saint Luke therefore a phisicio^ more of the soul tha^ of the body,
shows us here, how Christ our Savior most tenderly did visit other. He
entered therefore in to a pharisees house, not so much to take bodily sustenau^ce
of the pharisee, as to give goostly fode and instruction to the pharisee, and
to heal him of his vain opinion whereby he justified himself. For lo, as he
sat at meat with the pharisee, Mary Magdalen (for that Augusti nus de concordan.
Euangel.
was her name after the mind of ancient doctors) being at y^ time a notable
synful woman hearing y^ Christ (which of his most te^dre mercy was ready to
receive al sinners) was there, came most penitently thither into the house, to
bewail her synful life and to hear some comfort of her salvation. She had
already herd of the great miracles yt he did, and specially how merciful he
was to al repentant sinners. She therefore moved with this fame, came and with
great humility standing behind him at his feet wept so ple^tifully that even
with the tears which fell from her eyes she washed Christ's feet, which she
wiped again, not with any cloth, but with the very hear of her head, and she
thought not this enough, but she also kyssed them and anointed the^ with a very
preciouse oyntme^t, which she brought with her. The pharisee saying this,
despiceth this deed, and in his heart reproves not only the synful woman, but
also our lord which suffered her thus to do. Sayng wtin him self, if this man
were a prophet, doubtless he should have known, what manner woman this is, for
she is a notable sinner. By like if Gregorius in homilia
she had come thus to the pharisees feet, he would violently have spurned her
awey with his feet. And in like manner, it is to be feared (says saint
Gregory) y^ some persons which be endowed with the office of presthod, if they
have done any thing in outward apparau^ce justly, anon they despice their
underlings, and have great skorn and indignation at al y^ common sinners in
the world. Howbeit not only the religious persons and such as have divided
themselves from the common sort of people have been infected with this vice, but
also ge Mat. vij
nerally every man is readier to espy a mote in his bro there is eye, tha^ a
beam in his own. Thus he despiced y^ miserable sinner which was infected him
self Erasmus in paraphrasi.
with envy, with presu^ptio^, with the sickness of bacbyting and skla^dering of other
and was so much y^ more incurable y^ he acknowleged not his disease. For it
comes commonly so to pas, y^ me^ be sooner converted from notable and open
vices as aduowtry ydolatry and such like than from such as cloak themselves
under y^ color of holiness. Our Lord therefore not hearing the pharisees worcester
des, but espyeng his inward thoughts, answers him and shows himself to be
lord of the prophets. He asks y^ pharisee, when a creditour forgiueth two
dettours the one a greater su^me y^ other a les, whether of the^ welloue him
best? He answered, he yt has more forgiven him. Tha^ said Christ, see you
this woman? Thou baddest me home to thy house, water to my fete you gave me
none, this woman has washed the^ with tears and dried the^ again with her hear.
She never ceased kyssinge of them syns I came into thy house. Yea and moreover
she has anointed them with oyntme^t. Wherefore I tell the, many sins be
forgiven her, because she has loved much, and speaking this, he turned him to
the woman and said, thy feith has sa ued the, go in peace. Oh how comfortable
is this exemple to all sinners? Christ came to call sinners to Mat. ix.
repentance, and not those that thought themselves holy and just. So here in
the person of the pharisee may very S. Ambrose. Erasmus in paraphrasi.
well be figured the people of the Iues, which looked for Christ and wha^ he
came, of presu^ption they would not know him. But in Mary Magdale^, may be
figured the synful Gentiles* which unlooked for of the^ lovingly received him.
Let us then good people follow this holy woman and not despair though we be
never so great sinners. Only let us come to Christ and with strong feith
desire forgiveness lamenting and wailynge our offenses, brastynge out into
works of love and charity as she did, and no doubt we shall be forgiven as she
was and at last en joy everlasting bless by Christ our Lord, who be
praised.

Amen.
On saint James day the Apostle.
The Gospel Matthew. xx. THere came to Jesus the mother of Zebedees The sons
of Zebedee be Iho^ and James christ's Apostles.
sons with her sons worshypping and demanding somewhat of him. But he said
unto her. What will thou have? She says unto him. Say that these my two
sons may sit, one on thy right hand, and one on thy left in thy kingdom.
Jesus answered and said. Ye wot not what ye ask. Can ye drink the cup that
I shall drink? They say to him. We can. He says to them. Ueryly, my cup ye
shall drink. But to sytte on my right hand and on my left, it is not mine to
give but to them for whom it is prepared of my father.


A sermon upon this Gospel.
Friends, the gospel of this day declares unto us how the mother of saint
James and saint Ihon (which were called the sons of Zebedee) came to Christ
to ask a certain petition of him. Saint Mark the Euangeliste tells the
tale, as though the sons themselves asked the peticion. And in deed it was
their petition and suit to Christ, but to August. de concordantia Eua^gel.
the intent they might the sooner obtain it, they took their mother with them
and had set her to speak for them, as appears well by Christ's answer. This
woman's name was Salome which by interpretation betokens peaceful, and truly
she begat the children of peace. And a great praise of this woman is gathered
out of this text as says C^rysostom. Chryso stomus. sup Man thaeum.
For not only her sons had left their father but she also did leave her
husband to follow Christ. For he without her might live, but she without Christ
could not be saved, oules perchance a man will say, that between the time of
the calling of these two Apostles and the passion of Christ, Zebedee her
husband dyed, and so she being a lone woman, and aged, followed the steps of
Christ, which is also much to her praise and commendation. For feith never
waxes old, and devotion feleth no werines. She comes therefore to Christ with
her two sons. They had herd Christ say Mat. 19.
a little before, that they which would follow him in the new birth, wha^ he should
sit in ye seat of his majesty should also sit upon xij. seats iuging the
xij. tribes of Israel. And that al they which had left house, or brethren and
susters, father or mother, wife or children or their lands for his name sake,
should receive an hundred times as much, and should enjoy everlasting life.
They therefore being as yet imperfect, and having little understanding of the
spiritual kingdom, but thinking rather that Christ's kingdom should be a
worldly and temporal reign, came with their mother, beseching him, that the one
of them might sit on the right hand of him in his kingdom, and the other on
the left, meaning, that they might be in some high authority with him. For since
in a worldely kingdom Origin.
they do seem to be in honor, which sit with the king, it was no marvel,
though a woman being led with a woman's simplicity or ignorance, thought, that
such things ought to be demanded, and her sons also thinkinge yet nothing
highly upon Christ's kingdom, ymagined such things of the^ that should sit
with Christ. Then our lord the knower of hyd Chryso stom.
things, answered not to the words of the woman which was made peticioner,
but to the counsels of her so^ues which had set her to do this. Surely our
lord Jesus Christ oftentimes suffered his disciples both to do, speak and
think many things unrightly, to the intent that by their oversight and blame,
he might find occasion, to expowne the rule of godliness, knowing full well that
their error hurted not, so long as he was present with the^, but the doctrine
and instruction of the same was profitable both for that time present and also
for time coming. He says
therefore unto them, ye wot not what ye ask, as who should say. I have called
you from the left side unto the right, and ye by your counsel will ru^ne to
the left side again. And happily y^ thing was therefore done by a woman. For
the devil gatt him to his wont armours Gen iis.
of women, that as Adam was spoiled by a woman: so he might also separate and
destroy these by their mother. But now destruction could not enter by a woman
into saints, since from a woman proceeded the salvation of al men. The
auauncement of honor delited them, but first it behooved them to exercise the
way of labor. And therefore he says unto them. Can ye drink of y^ cup that
I must drink of? As who should say, if ye will deserve the sweet, ye must also
taste of y^ sour. If ye will have pleasure with me in my kingdom, ye must take
perte of my pain, and passion. The crown of righteousness is given not 1. Cor.
9.
to al but to them that ru^ne in the course, and which do use themselfes in
such sort, that they may obtain the maistrye. If then he that proves
maistryes in worldly games, keeps himself sobre and absteyneth from al
things* to thinte^t to get a crown ye perishes, what ought they be, y^ seek
for an everlasting crown Truly (as says Chrysostom) our Lord knew* that
Chryso stom.
they could follow his passion, but he asks them this, to the intent all we
might hear and know, that none can reygne with Christ, onles he follow his
passion. For a preciouse thing is not gotten but with a preciouse price. We
call the passion of the Lord,
not only the persecuting of the Hethen, but also all violence which we suffer
stryuyng against sin. This passion and cross we be all bound to abide, if
we will be counted to be of Christ's flock. Yea and when the glory of Christ
requires, we must also not refuse to suffer corporal death for his sake.
Thus did the holy Apostle saint James (whose memory we do this day
celebrate) follow him, for he was beheded of Herod for preaching and
executynge of his masters commission. And therefore it is no doubt of him, but
according to Christ's own Mat. 19.
promise, he has received an hundred times as much, and does now enjoy the
everlasting life, and that he is one of them, that the kingdom of heaven is
prepared for. Wherefore (good people) let us follow this blessed Apostle, and
as he did, so let us, leave the love of all worldly vanities, and follow our
Savior Christ, to the intent we may be heirs of god and joint heirs with
Christ. For if we suffer with him (says Paul) we shall also be glorified with
Romans 8. i. Timo ij.
him and reygne together with him. If we dye with him, we shall also live with
him and enjoy the crown of everlasting bliss by him, to whom with the father
and holy ghost be glory and praise for ever and ever.

Amen.
On the Nativity of our Lady
The Gospel. Mat. i. THe book of the generation of Jesus Christ. etc.


Ye shall find this Gospel and the sermon upon it before, on the conception
day of our Lady. fol. v.

On saint Mathews day.
The Gospel Math. ix. AS Jesus passed by, he saw a man sittynge at Of the
calling of saint Matheu
the receite of custom, Matheu by name, and says to him. Follow me. And he
rose and followed him. And it chanced as he satte at meat in the house ^o many
publicanes and sinners came and satte down with Jesus and his disciples. The
pharisees seeing this, said to his disciples. Why eats your master with
publicanes and sinners? When Jesus herd that, he said to them. The strong have
no need of a phisician, but they that be sick. Go and learn what this means.
Mercy will I, and not sacrifice. For Osee. vi
I am not come to call rightuous persons, but sinners.


The sermon upon this Gospel.
THe Gospel red this day in the church (good people) shows unto us, how
the blessed Apostle saint Matheu was called of our Savior Christ from a
customer to be his disciple and Apostle, and how ready he was at his calling to
follow him, which readynes of mind as it is hyghlye for his praise and
commendation, so it is also set forth, as an exemple for us to follow. Let us
then brefely consider the manner of this thing. As our Savior Christ passed
by the custom house, he saw this Matheu which was otherwise called Leui the
son of Alpheus sit there, for he was at that time one of the custom house,
which persons be called in latin publicani. And surely this kind of me^,
because they what be publicans.
did exercise an occupation or office of fylthy gains and of violent
rapacitie, were many ways infamed noted and evil spoken of, and specially
among the Jews. But our Savior Jesus Christ, which had called a little
before unto him Simo^ and Andrewe, Iho^ and James from a base (though yet not
unlawful) kind of living, to the intent he would openly declare unto the world,
that he abhorred no sort of men at al, so they would convert themselfes to
better: he calls this Mattheu unto him, and commanded him to follow him.
Mattheu casting no perilles or at Remigius.
lest wey despising al perilles which might happen of Rulers forthwyth without
delay, leaving his accomptes imperfect, and leaving his gaynfull office,
began to follow Jesus, being suddenly made of a publicane a disciple. And
because he forsook earthly gaynes, he was ryghtly made a stuard of the Lords
talentes. Truly the very brightness and majesty of Hieronimus.
the hid godhed of our Savior Christ, which also glystered in his humane
face, had power to pluck unto him with the first sight those that beheld him.
For if the Magnes stone has (as they say) such Christ is likened to a
Magnes stone.
virtue and efficacy in it, that it ca^ draw up iron unto it: how much more
could he that is the Lord of al creatures, draw unto him whom he would? And
it happened afterward, that this Matheu, being now called to be Christ's
disciple, desired him that he would vouchesaue to take a repast with him at his
house. Our Lord neither disdayned to do this thing at his new disciples
request, to the intent he would give us instruction, that the company and
felawshyp of wicked persons ought not to be eschued of preachers and holy men,
if there be any hope that by their company Chryso stom.
they woll amend there nawghty life. Mattheu therefore being honored by
Christ's coming into his house, made unto his master a great and sumptuouse
feast, whereunto he also had bydde^ many men of his order and faculty, that is
to wit, even a bourde full of customers, publicans, and sinners, whom by his
exemple and words he had allured and drawn into admiration and love of Jesus.
The pharisees therefore which were ever hunting and seking occasions how to
sklaunder and trappe Christ, espyeng him now with his disciples, syttyng and
eating with these synful sort of men, durst not yet rebuke Christ to his
face, lest he should peradventure taunt them again as he had oftentimes done
before, but went about to draw and train his disciples from him. Wherefore
they come to them and say. Why does your master eat with these publicans and
synful persons? Troth it is (good people) that the evil talks of evil men do
corrupt the good manners i. Cor. ^5 Corrum pu^t mo res bonos collo quia mala.
of good me^. But Christ's communication with these evil men, was not to catch
the evil ma^ners of them, but by his heavenly medicine to pluck the evil
ma^ners from the^. He came to call the sheep yt were lost and strayed out of the
right pathe of godliness being seduced and led out thereof by such hypocrites
and pharisees as these were which were here offended with Christ These be they
that Paul speaks of, which glorieng in the law, do disworship god by the
tra^gressio^ Romans ij.
of the law, vaynly reputing themselfes to be the guydes of y^ blind, and the
light of the^ ye be in darkness. Our Savior therefore hearing the pharisees thus
disputing with his disciples which as yet were but weak, he defe^deth them in
this wise. The hole need Esaias. 4. i. Pet. ij.
no phisician, but the sick. Christ calls him self a phisician, which by
a wonderful kind of surgery was wounded for our iniquities that he might
heal the wounds of our sins. He calls them hole, which wyllyng to
stablyshe there own justice were Romans 4.
not subject to the true justice of God. And he calls them sick and diseased
which being overcome in their conscience do acknowledge their frailty, and
espi yng how by the law they be not justified, do submit themselfes by
penance to the grace of God. But go your weys (says Christ) and learn what
this sentence of the prophet Osee means, where Osee. vi
God says. I require mercy and not sacrifice, as who should say, Why accuse
ye me, when I releue Chryso stom.
and correct sinners? Why do ye not rather accuse God the father of heaven
which speaks this sentence by his prophet? He admonishes us than, that by
works of mercy, we should get us the reward of the heavenly mercy, and not
that despising the necessities of the pore and nedye we should trust to please
God by the oblation of sacrifices. Wherefore (good people) let us follow this
blessed Apostle saint Matheu, let us leave al fylthy gaynes and come to
Christ, when he calls us by the preaching of his word. Let us be charitable
and do the works of mercy, as Christ teaches us, that we may be of the
Man. 24.
nombre of those which shall inheritie the kingdom of heaven prepared from the
beginning of the world by the father of heaven, to whom be al praise.

Amen.
On the Assumption of our Lady.
Gospel. Luc. x. Jesus entered into a certain town. And a certain woman named
Martha received him into her house, And this woman had a sustre named Mary,
which also sitting at Jesus fete herd his word. But Martha was combred about
much serving, and stood and said. Lord have thou no regard that my sustre has
left me alone to serve? Bid her therefore that she help me. Jesus answered and
said unto her. Martha Martha, thou carest and art troubled about many things,
but one is necessary. Mary has chosen the best part, which shall not be taken
from her.


The sermon upon this Gospel.
What time our savior Christ walked here upon earth with his disciples, which
leaving the cares of earthly things gave themselves only and holly to the
gospel, it chanced so, that he entered into a certain village. In this village
there dwelled two women the name of the one was Martha, the others name was
Mary, which women joyfully received Christ and his disciples into their house.
The love and zeal of either of them toward the lord was egal, but their
form and manner of life was diverse, i. Co^. ^^
like as in one body be sundry uses of the parts and members of the same, and
as also in the body of Jesus which is the church be diverse and sundry gifts
of the spirit. For Mary making as it were holyday from al busynes of the house
now at Christ's coming, sat her down at his fete, hearing his words,
wherewith she was so ravished, that forgettinge all other things, she could
not be plucked thens. Contrary wise, Martha being careful for the purueaunce
of the feast, ran about hither and thither al busye, that nothing at al should
lack, that perteined to the welco^ming and feasting of such a gest. Wherefore
not being sufficient of her self alone, to do al ye she would have done and
made ready, and seeing her suster unoccupied sitting at Jesus fete, she thought
it lost labor to chide her suster, who^ she knew could not be plucked awey but
she su^what blamed our savior which held her with his words from the
necessary busynes as she thought. Lord, says she, have no regard ye my sustre
suffers me to do al alone? Command her therefore ye she rise and help me. Our
lord being much delyted in the zeal and affection of either of these women,
disco^mendeth not the diligent sturring about the house of Martha, neither does
he chyde her for murmuring at her suster, but he gently excuses Mary, saying
Martha Martha, verily thou art troubled and vexed about many things. But
there is one thing most nedeful, which is alweys to be done if it may be, as
who should say. Do thou thy fu^ction and office what soever the purueiance be.
But Mary has chosen a far bettre part which forgettinge the things of the
body, is holly vusied in the things of the mind. It is not mete that she should
be called awey from the bettre things which she has chosen and be thurst to
lower and vyler services. Thy love and zeal is tha^kfull unto me in that thou
preparest a repast for the time for me and mine, but I am more swetely repasted
of the^ which convey my words into the bowels of their sowles that they may
be saved. For this is y^ meat which does singularly feed me this is the
drink Iho^. iiij.
which does singularly refresh me. He that regards the things of ye body is
distracted into sundry cares, and of these officies there shall be then an end,
when immortality appearing y^ necessities of mortal persons shall cease where with
the weakness of humane nature is now accombred. But he goes the nerest wey i.
Cor. 1^
to work which casting awey al such cares is altogether ravished unto heavenly
things, settling himself to one only thing, but which one is bettre tha^ all the
other things, the felicity whereof shall not be taken awey but augmented, when
that thing shall be abolished which is imperfect and that opened which is
perfect. Neither ought we to murmr against them as though they were idle
persons, which have sequestered themselfes from corporal ministeries and do
for the same purpose attend and give themselves to heavenly doctrine following
and ensuing the steps of Christ, lerning the thing that they may teach
others, and thoroughly transposing into the intrailes of the mind the things
that they may instruct their even christen, to the intent they may profette the
moo to the winning of everlasting salvation. And yet in the mean season they
shall not lack their reward which with a godly zeal do releue (according to
the exemple of this Martha) the bodily necessities of the preachers of gods
word, which feade the hungry, clooth the naked, viset the sick and prisoners,
harbrough and receive the nedy, for in that they do this to Mat. ^^.
their euenchrist^, they do it to Christ himself. And he that gives but a
drawght of cold water to a prophet, y^ is to say to a precher in y^ name of a
prophet, shall have the same reward that the prophet has.

Wherefore (as ^aint Austine says) our lord rebukes S. Augustine.
not the work and corporal service of Martha, but ^e distinct^th y^ office,
sayng, Mary has chose^ the best perte which shall not be taken from her, as if
he should say. Thou Martha have not chosen an evil perte, but she has chose^ a
better, and why a bettre? because it shall not be taken from her, but from the
shall be ones taken the burden of necessity. For when thou co^mest to the
heavenly country thou shall find there no gest ne stranger to receive by
hospitality, but for thy ^pfette it shall be taken from the, to the intent the
thing that is better might be given unto the, labor shall be taken from the,
that rest might be given unto the in the stead. Thou sailest in y^ midde sees,
she rests in the haven or port. For the swetnes of y^ troth is euerlastig,
yet in this life it is augme^ted, but in that life to com it shall be
accomplished and shall never be taken awey. Now surely there was neuerwoma^, no
noryet man that ever atteined here in this world to y^ high perfection and
heavenly kind of living, as did the most blessed virgin Mary y^ mother of
Christ, who was Luc. i.
replenished with all graces most plentuously as also testified Gabriel gods
angel. Mary which was this Marthas suster in deed was much to be commended, but
nothing to be compared with the perpetual virgin Mary Christ's mother. Wherefore
as she was here in earth replenished with all virtues, so is she now in heaven
replenished with all joys. Let us then follow the divine contemplatio^ and godly
meditation of these Mary's, that we may also enjoy that bless that shall
never be taken from us through Christ our lord. To whom be al praise and
honor.

Amen.
On saint Bartilmews day.
The Gospel. Luc. xxij. THere was a contention among the disciples ^acta e^
co^te^tio
of Jesus, which of them was thought to be greater. But Jesus said unto them.
The kings of the Gentilles do reign over them, and they that have power upon
them be called graciouse. Be not ye so, but let the greater among you, be
made as the younger, and the chief as the seruitour. For which is greater, he
that sytteth down at the bourd, or he that serves? Is not he that sytteth
down? Uerily I am in mids of you, as he that serves, and ye are they which
Et ^^^ dis^^^
have abode with me in my temptations. And I dispose unto you, as my father
has disposed unto me, a kingdom, that ye may eat and drink at my bourde in
my kyngdon, and sit on seats judging the. xij. tribes of Israel.


The sermon upon this Gospel.
FOrasmuch as our Savior Christ at his mau^dy or supper before his passion had
made mention of the kingdom of God, his disciples which were at that time
sumwhat weak and not thoroughly spiritual, but smellyng yet a little of the
flesh, fell at contention and variaunce among themselfes, which of them should
after his departure have the primacie or head rule in the kingdom of god. For in
the hole busynes of the blessed sacrament and mystery of his mau^dy, he seemed
to take them al as egal not preferryng one above an other, sayng unto the^.
Take and divide Luc. 22.
among you. But Jesus albeit at diverse other times he had challenged them for
this affection, yet at his departure upon this occasion he specially,

(...)reth to pluck it clean from them, co^mau^ding them that they should not
ymagen any such thing in the kingdom of heaven as they saw in worldly
kyngdoms. For this is a far other manner thing, it stands in benefits and
not in force, it is obtained and also mainteyned we ghostly garrisons and not
with violence, and is enlarged by persuasion and not by compulsion. The princes
of this world do practice Lordlines over such as be under the^, they persuade
not their subjects to love honesty, but by fear of punysheme^t they fraye
them from wrongs, and they compel men to honor them, though they have never
so evil deserved it. Yea the nerer they approach to tyranny, the more wol they
be honored of the people with high tytles. Uerily such is for most part the
kingdom of seculare and worldly rulers. But among the clergy, the disciples
of Christ, and preachers of his gospel, to whom he bequethed his spiritual
kingdom, ought to be an other fashion of liuyuge. The greater one be among
them, the les violent power or glory he ought to challenge to him self.
Wherefore (says Basilius that ancient doctor Basilius magnus
of the church) let not the dignity extolle the prelate of the church, lest
he fall from the bless of humility. But let him* rather know this, that true
humility is servant of very many. For like as he which ministers to many
wounded persons and wypeth awey the fylth of every wound, takes not this
office upon him to extolle and vawnte him self thereupon: so much rather he to
whom is committed the cure and charge of maladies and diseases of his goostly
brethren and susters ought to cast, and be careful with himself as the
minister of all which must render accomptes for all. Neither is it to be
feared (says he) that the purpose of humility should be broken of the
subject, while his better serves him. Let prestes therefore and the prelates
of Christ's church not be ashamed to show that sobrenes and modesty to the
world which Christ tawght his Apostles to use. And the more Apostolical that
men wol be counted and vicares of Christ's church: so much the more ought they
to follow Christ and his Apostles in lowlynes and sobriety. It is not enough
truly to be called by a vain title of name the servant of God, or the servant
of servants, and in deed to practice all Lordilnes, skant vouchsauyng y^ men
should kiss there feet. If there be any of this sort, surely they be no
vicares of Christ, but of Antichrist, they be not apostolical, but diabolical,
no good herdmen, Ioh. x.
but false hyrelynges, no feaders of Christ's flock, but deuourers, no
buylders but destroyers, no pyllers of his church but pollers. If they wol
needs be counted for me^ apostolical, let the^ follow the exemple and steps of
Peter and Paul and resemble the^ in deed of whom they woll be counted the
vicares. Let Tit. 2. 1. Tim. 3
the^ be irreprehenlible, sobre, chaste, modest, lovers of hospitality, full of
holsom doctrine, no drunkerdes, no warryours, no lovers of fylthy merchandise,
no bruers of gods word, but pure prechers. Let the^ attend Act. 20 2. Pet 5.
to y^ hole flock, and (as Peter commands) feed it as much as in the^^s,
taking charge of it, weout desire of fylthy lucre, vsinge themselves, as they
may be esteemed ministers of Christ and feithful stuardes of y^ heavenly
mysteries of god, as Peter and Paul were. ^. Cor. ^


You (says Christ to his disciples) be they which have abode with me in my
te^tations, as who should say. He that begins to be pacient and anon leaves
of, is not rewarded with the crown of glory, but he that holds on to the
end. For (as Bede says) Bid.
perseueraunce which is called a constancy or strongnes of mind, is full
well cleped the pyller of all virtues. The son of God therefore leads with him
to his everlasting kingdom such as stycke by him and be no starters awey from
him at every puff of wind. For if we by planted in him and be partakers with
him of his death, doubtless we shall also be pertakers and companions of his
resurrection. Christ says here that he has disposed or bequethed to his
disciples the kingdom, which his heavenly father ordained and disposed to him.
The kingdom of Christ Ioh 18.
surely, is not of this world. Neither is there any equality to the lord,
but only an emulation of likeness, Ambrose.
For only Christ is the full image of God, whereas the just man is according to
the likeness or image of God, if according to the same, he despiceth this
world, and for this cause also we do eat the blessed body of Christ, that we
may be pertakers of the heavenly life. Such a sticker by Christ in all his
temptations was this holy Apostle saint Bartilmew, he was a true prelate of
Christ's Church, neither was he a minister or servant of other in name and
title only, but in deed, he preached truly and syncerely not his own
co^stitutions and decrees, but Christ's gospel, him let us follow, that we also
may be made pertakers of that heavenly joy by Christ our lord* To whom be
rendered al thanks and praises.

Amen*
On Michelmas day.
The Gospel Matthew. xviij. IN that time the disciples came to Jesus, sayng. Who
is the greater person in the kingdom of heaven? And Jesus calling unto him a
child, did set him in the mids of them, and said. Uerily I say unto you,
onles ye turn, and become as children, ye shall not enter into the kingdom of
heaven. Who soever therefore shall humble himself, as this child, he is the
greater person in the kingdom of heaven. And he that receives such a child
in my name receives me. But he that greueth one of these little ones, which
believe in me, it were bettre for him, that a mylstone were hanged about his
neck, and that he were drowned in the depth of the sea. Woe be to the world
because of offenses. For it is necessary, offenses to come. Yet nevertheless woe
be to that man, by whom the offense comes. Uerily if thy hand or thy foot
offend the, cut it of, and cast it from the. Bettre it is for the, to enter
into life, halt, or maimed then thou should, having two hands or two fete,
be cast into everlasting fire. And if thine eye offend the, pluck it out, and
cast it from the. Bettre it were for the, with one eye to enter into life, than
having two eyes, to be cast into hell fire. Se ye despice not one of these
little ones. For I say unto you, that their angels in heaven do alweyes see the
face of my
father which is in heaven.


The sermon upon this Gospel.
NOt without great cause and consideration (good people) the church has
appointed a certain day in the year for the solemnization of saint Michael
the Archangel and by him of all the angels of heaven, since in them is put no
small comfort in earth to al good and devout persons. First therefore by the
help of god we intend sum what to entreat of their nature and office, which
done, we will brefely declare the gospel of this day. Wherefore ye shall
understand A division of angels.
that there be two sorts of angels, some be good, and some badde. The good
angels do continually ministre unto god and serve for our behouf, and their
delight is to do men good, because they themselfes be good of nature, and their
office is to execute gods busynes and to take charge and cure of us mortal
men. They defend and protect I say al good folk from the assaults and
violence of the devil, they nourish concord, peace, virtues, good studies,
arts, sciencies, polecie, common welthes, discipline, and shortly to speak,
man's health and salfgard. That these be the properties and offices of good
angels, appears very plainly by innumerable places of holy writ, wheare
the good fathers were helped and be nefited of them, as in the old testament
were Abraham, Genesis 3^. Exo. 14. Tob. v. Daniel. iij.
Jacob, Loath, Tobie, the children of Israel being in the wilderness, the three
children which were cast into a hot furna^e, Eleas, Elizeus, and many others.
In the new testament saint Peter which was led out of prison by an angel,
also saint Paul Act. 12.
which was certifyed of the shypwrake and of salvation, and diverse other. But
let us mark how great their power and virtue is. One angel in one Exodus ^^
night struck all the firstbegotten of the country of Egypt. One angel in one
night struck down the hole 4. Regu^ xix.
army of Sennacherib as appears in the fourth book of the kings. One
angel in a plage of pestilence destroyed thousands of men, as appears in 2.
Regu^, xxiiij.
the second book of kings. I let pas the visions of the prophets Esaye,
Elie, Elizeus, Ezechiel, Daniel and the rest, where the Lord by his angels
did speak and teach things which were to be done and taught. Also the
reuelacions of saint Ihon setforth in the book of the Apocalipse. Furthermore
when so ever almighty god would set out any singular thing to mankind, he
showed it before by his angels, as for exemple, of Sampson, of John Baptist, yea
and of Christ himself to be borne. The angels were present at Christ's birth,
at his death, at his resurrection, and at sundry other times. Ye shall morouer
understand, that there be angels and also archa^gels that is to say, chief or
principal angels, and they have distinct officies and several functions
whereby god almighty exercises his wonders. The Apostell Paul therefore
teaches, that there be powers, dominatio^s, virtues. And according to their
officies and properties they have names, as saint Michaell (whose memory the
church does this day celebrate) as Gabriel, as Raphael, which for their high
kind of ministration be called Archangels. For like as a king has under him
princes, dukes, capitans lieutenantes, co^stables and other officers to defend
men from injuries, to keep the peace, to brydell and punish* ^auenours and
evil disposed persons, even so has god (who is king of kings) his angels
under him of diverse officies for man's sauegarde and defense against noysom
spirits. The angels I say of god, whether they be seen or not* seen be alweyes
ready and assistent to good persons and be their kepers, which thing the
ladder that Jacob saw reaching up to heaven, by which ladder the angels of
Genesis 28.
god ascended and descended, does manifestly declare. But here peradventure ye
woll ask this question, A puestion.
why angels do not so often now appear, as they did in old time? To this
question the apostle makes answer in the first chapter of the Epistle to the
Hebrews, The solution.
where he says, that the lord in times paste spoke to y^ fathers by his
angels, but to us he have spoken by his only begotten son, whom the father
commands us to hear, whose commandments and teachinges be set forth unto
us by the four Evangelists, Matthew, Mark, Luke and Ihon. Howbeit an other
cause also why the angels appear not as often to us, as they did in old time
to the ancient fathers, may be very well forbicause the world is now set all in
naughtines and men be commonly nothing so pure, so bertuouse, nor so devout,
as they were in times passed. Yet it is manifest and plain by Christ's own
words in the gospel of this day, that every good person has his angel which
beholds the face of god the father in heaven. Such an angel no doubt had
Paul whom he called his angel, as Act. 1^.
appears in the Acts of the Apostles. Such peculiare angels had the good
ancient fathers, and finally such angels have al good men and women at this
day appointed unto them of almighty god.

Wherefore the more fuller and replenished a man be with feyth and godly awe,
the more often and also the nerer be the angels to him, for according to the
common proverb, like delyteth in the like. And on the Simile simili gaudet.
contrary side, know we for certain they be offended with fylthynes, with
uncleanness with malice and wickedness, and for this cause forthwyth they depart
from the persons who soever they be which be spotted with the same. If we be
then pure and good, doubt we not, but god has given commandment to his
angels over us, that they should keep us in all our Psalm. 90.
ways. Herunto also do the ancient doctors of the church full well agree.
Saint Hierom, writing upon Hierom
the gospel of Matheu, says. The worthiness surely of souls is great,
forasmoch as every one has his angel appointed unto him for his keeper even
from Origenes homil. 71.
his birth. The noble clerk Drigen also says, there is at hand to every one
of us yea even to the least of us al which be in the church of god, a good
angel the lords messanger, to direct us, to rule us, to monish us, to govern
us, which sees daily the face of the heavenly father for the correcting of our
doings and obteyning of mercy for us. Neither does saint Gregory disagre
from this, which writes, that every Grego rye.
one of us have a propre and peculiar angel appointed to the keeping of him,
and one evil angel to his exercise. Also saint Bernard exhorts us to be
Barnarde.
devout* loving and kind to so worthy kepers.

Hithersito, my friends, we have spoken of the good angels. Now wol we entreat
sumwhat of the evil of evil angels.
angels, to the intent we may the bettre espy, what great commodities and
benefits our lord does give unto us by his good angels, when on the contrary
side we shall behold the incommoditie and mischief that comes of the badde
angels. For how can a man so well know what a good thing peace is, as when
it is compared with batel which is the contra ry? They be therefore called badde
angels, because they bring to pas nothing that is good, and they have sundry
names, otherwhile in scripture they be called evil spirits, Satan, Deui^les,
cacodemones, and Satan.
feendes. Satan in the Hebrew betokens an aduer sarie, because he is against
god, against his word, Diabolus.
and against our health and ^aluatio^. Diabolus, that is to say, devil
betokens a sklaunderer and an accusour, forasmoch as he accuses us and does
euyil interpret al things be they done never so well and godly. Cacodemon
signifies a crafty knower and Cacodaemo^.
full of suttelcie and deceit al set on mischief. They be also called by a
resemblan^ce of properties, roaring lions, dragons, serpents, Leuiathan, wolves
evil beasts, thieves and such like, of their evil properties Also spirits of
the air flyeng about, bound with the chains of darkness until the day of
judgment condemned to everlasting damnation. They cast such men as be
without the fear and thought of god into al kinds of vices, some into
couetise, some into pride, lechery, intemperance, craft, deceit, infidelity,
contempt of god, rechlesnes, despair, dissolute and loose living, dronkennes,
glotony, surfettinges aduowtries, blasphemies, they raise dissentions,
seditions, wars, debates, and all unhappiness. Yea and under the visour of
angels of light and under the clooke of religion and of godliness they induce ^.
Cor. 2.
idolatry, men's dreams, sects, heresies and al false doctrines, they devise
and drive into men's heddes inchauntmentes, evil affections, nawghty opinions
and wicked counsels, as they did to David in his aduowtry, in the slaughter
of Urias and in nombring of the people, and as they did to Czechiell, when he
disclosed the treasure to the Babylonians. To be 4. Reg. xx.
short, they do labor al they can, to bring us to vttre shame and destruction.
And this we se by open testimonies signs and deades, how myghtyly they Ephe. 2*
reygne (as Paul says) upon the children of disobedience and upon such as wol
not believe gods word nor fear the lord. They confirm therefore the ungodly in
their ungodliness with signs and wonders which they show by their lymmes and
ympes Exodus iiij. v.
the false prophets, as appears in the. xxiiij. chapter of Matthew, or by
inchaunters and ^uglers, for it is not impossible but the devil may by art
Magik and sorcery work many wonders and maystres. For surely if witchcraftes
sorceries and inchauntementes were not made ne could not be done, God would
never have forbidden them. Thus these evil spirits lie contynually in awayt of
mankind, their propertye is to speak deceypte and lies, for Ihon. ^.
that is (as Christ says) their own and they be fathers thereof, they
falsifye and corrupt gods word with wicked doctrine, as appears by the
parable of the sower of good sede and of the devil which Mat 13. Mat. 4. 1.
Cor. 1^
sows among it darnel, they wreste and allege holy scripture wrong, they
transfigure themselfes into angels of light, finally they seek to syfte us as
men would fyfte wheat.

And verily good people y^ the wicked spirits have these effects powers and
operations, it is plain and manifest also by the witness of holy doctors of
the church. First the excellent clerk saint Augustine in The words of saint
Austine
his sermons writes in this wise. All the euilles of the world be wrought by
the falshode of the devil, which has set war in heaven, and in paradise
deceit, hatred among the first brethern, and in all Lacta^tius lib. 3. diui.
instit.
our works has sown darnelles. Lactantius also that noble writer is not
behind with his record, sayng. There is a certain wicked and deceiptful
spirit, which is enemy to man, and foe of justice, this spirit lies in
awayte of al mankind. And such as know not God them does he entangle and
wrappe in errous, he drowneth them in folly, and shadoweth them in darkness. Also
saint Gregory writes* that S. Gregory.
the will of Satan is always wicked, but his power is never vnrightuouse or
unlawful, for of himself he has his will, but his power he has of God. Where
fore (good christen people) since we stand in this state and condition, that if
we be evil and void of virtue and of the true fear of God, we be in danger
of these so noysom and wicked spirits, and again if we love and serve God, we
be protected and fensed with the good angels, whose benefits I have heretofore
brefely remembered: it shall be our parts evermore to serve God and to stand in
awe of him, lest by any means we might offend and displease him, and so
through our fault it should come to pas that we might be deprived of these good
angels and the evil should have power upon us. But now let us proceed to the
declaration of our gospel. First therefore ye shall understand that an exemple
of the natural An exe^ple of man's in firmitie
ignorance blindness and infirmity of mankind is here set forth in the
disciples of Christ, which as yet measured the kingdom of heaven after the
fashon of the kingdom of the world. The disciples come therefore to Christ and
ask him, who is the greater man in the kingdom of heaven? Surely according
Chryso stom. Hierom
to the mind of ancient doctors, this was a certain humane affection,
which crept into the Apostles minds and as it were a prick of envy and of
ambition. They had herd of the kingdom of heaven, they had seen. iij. Apostles
led aparte with Christ in Mat. 17. Luc ix.
to the mountain that is to wit, Peter, James and Ihon, they had herd, how
the keys of the kingdom of heaven were given to Peter, and how it was said Mat
16. Mar. 8. Luc. ix.
to him. Blessed art thou Simon the son of Iona, and I say to the, thou art
Peter and upon this rock wol I build my church, they espied Peter also to
talk more familiarly and more boldly with the lord, Mat. 17.
and lately also they saw him preferred before the rest of the Apostles in
paynge of the tribute and in manner matched with Christ. For these and such
other things which as yet they did no perfectly understand, they had a little
preuye grudge and envy at Peter sith to him as they thought the principality
of the kingdom of heaven was appointed where nevertheless they perceived he was
younger in years then they. They came therefore as I said to Jesus and asks
him, who shall have the chief authority in the kingdom of heaven. For it
could not be yet dreuen out of their heddes, but that there should be such
like dignities and powers in the heavenly and spiritual kingdom, as they saw
in princes courts of this world. Our savior Christ therefore, to the intent he
would clean banish this carnal affection and utterly expel the same out of
their minds, calls a certain child unto him, who^ he sets in the mids
of his disciples, the child being yet very tender of age and ^ut a babe, void
of all affections either of ambition or of envy, simple, pure, innocent, and
living by the only guide and conducte of nature. This child being thus set
among them, our Savior says in this wise unto them. Uerily, onles ye be
converted and be made as childern: it is not possible for you to come into the
kingdom of heaven. For declaration of this text, ye shall understand, Hierom
that Christ did not here command the Apostles, that they should have the age
of children but the innocence, and the thing that the children do possess
because of their chyldhod, they should possess by their industry, so that in
malice they might be children, but not in wisdom, as who should say, like as
this child, of whom I give you an exemple, does not continue in anger, neither
thinks he one thing and speaks an other: so you also, onles ye have such
innocence and pureness of mind, ye ca^ not enter into the kingdom of heaven.
Wherefore my friends by Christ's own words here we may be right well assured,
that onles we cease from all malice and rancour toward our Christian brothern
and susters and become Christen me^ not in name only, but also in deed and
work, being made as it were new men and newly regenerate Ihon. 3.
not fleshly but spiritually, utterly casting awey as much as may be al
carnal and worldly affections, and be tra^sformed into the hauour and
simplicity of young chyldern, we shall never be received in to the kingdom of
heaven. Let us humble and abase our selves and make us like to these little
babes whom we se clean void of malice and of ambition. For he that thus woll
humble and lowly him self, shall be Mat. 23. Luc. 14.
doubtless auau^ced, and shall be called great in the kingdom of heaven. Who so
ever verily is by modesty and buksomnes the lest: the same person is through
virtue the greatest. Troth it is, that worldly Emperors kings and princes do
for most parts love such as be like to themselves, and among them such be in
most price and reputation, which can shyft out other and set forth themselfes.
Christ in semblable wise delyteth in such persons as resemble him, who what
time he was here conversant among us in Phili. 2.
earth humbled himself and became obedient unto the death, even the death of
the cross. When he was reviled, he reviled not again, he suffered to be bound
to be bobbed, to be spitted at, to be strike^, to be scourged, and finally to
be cruc^fied being himself without spotte of sin to thinte^t to purge us of
our sins. Wherefore for his humility he has received auaunment and most high
exaltation, for his obedience he has received most high honor to have a name
above al names, for his patience and sufferinge he has received power over
all, for his infinite charity he has received praise glory and thanks of
al. Let us Mat. ^.
learn therefore of Christ to be meke and humble in heart Let us remember what y^
prophet David says. The lord is nere to the^ y^ be of co^trite heart, and he
wol save such as be humble in spirit and which fear his words. Psalm. 32^*
Truly (good people) those that be lowly and meke in spirit be most highly
auau^ced, protected and tendered of almighty god. He throws down the mighty
from Luc.i.
their proud seats and exalts the humble, he fills the hungry with good
things, and lets the rych depart i. Pe.iij.
emptye. He resists the proud, and gives his graces to the lowly persons.
Let us then be humbled under Iac.ij.
the mighty hand of the lord. For (as saint James says) has not god chosen
the pore? Certainly the pore in spirit and lowly persons be they, whom God
has in his special favor and grace. For like as in the great men's courts of
this world, y^ prince or great man takes the vyllanye or displeasure as done
to himself, when one does a displeasure to one of his great lords or special
servants, and again takes a good turn and benefit as done to himself,
when it is bestowed upon them, even so the great king of kings and lord of
lords god almighty does so tender and love his humble and meke servants
though in the face of the world they seem as persons despised and not regarded,
that who so ever receives one of the^ in Christ's name he cou^teth the thing
done to himself, and as though the party had received Christ himself. And on
the other side, he that offends any one of these simple and base persons
which trust upon the lord and which depend hole upon him, shall be more
grievously punished, then if a mylstone were hanged about his neck and he cast
into the deep see. For what a more shameful and wicked part can be showed,
than to grieve and hurt them which will noman no hurt, which envy noman, which
prefer themselfes before noman, which love al persons indifferently?

Woe be to the world therefore for greuynge of such ones. Howbeit the malice of
men is so great, that these greues must needs be. Wherefore who soever coueteth
to come to heaven, let him beware how he hurt them, yea let him take heed he
hurt not him self. Let no affection be so dear to us but let it be forthwyth
karued and cut awey, if it should hindre us in our journey to heauenwarde. Our
hand, our foot, our eye be necessary members, yet rather then they should
hindre us, Christ byddeth us cast them awey. For were it not better says he
to go to heaven maimed or lame, or with one eye, tha^ with hole me^bres to be
cast into hell fire? But sayng this he meant Hierom Chryso stom.
not, that any membre of the body should be cut awey but he would have the
affections cut of, which call us awey from the study of eternal salvation.
For a friend which a man can skant want is as it were his one hand. Thy father
whom thou do trust on, is thy foot. Thy wife or son whom thou tenderly
love is thine eye. And as there is nothing so preciouse that ought to pluck
us from heaven: so noma^ be he never so low and pore ought to be despised but
rather helped. Let us then offend none of those little ones, namely since there
angels which have charge over the^ do continually behold the face of
almighty god in heaven, so yt by this we may know in what reputation they be with
god, seeing he has given the^ such kepers and co^ductours. Let us tha^ endeavor
our self to be such lowly and humble persons as our Savior Christ here
speaks of, yt we may have such angels to co^ducte, lead, defend, and keep
us in all our weyes, by Christ our lord, who be praised and glorified.

Ame^*
On saint Lukes day the Euangeliste.
The Gospel Luke.x. THe Lord appointed also other seue^tye, and he Of the
verity of this number of.lxx. read the a^notations of Erasmus.
sent them two and two before his face in to every city and place whether he
himself would come, and he said unto them. Uerely the harvest is much, but the
laborers are few. Pray therefore the lord of the harvest, that he wol thurst
out laborers into his harvest. Go your weyes. Lo I send you as lambs among
wolves. Bear ye no wallet nor scrippe nor shoes, and salute noman by the wey.
In what house ye enter, first say, peace be to this house. And verily if the
son of peace be there, your peace shall rest upon him* if not, it shall
return to you. But se ye abide in the same house, eating and drinkinge such
as they have. For worthy is the laborer of his reward.


The sermon upon this Gospel.
SAint Luke (god people) whose memory y^ church does this day solemnize, though
he was none of the.xii. Aposteles of Christ nor of the country of the Iues but
a Grecian, borne at Antioche, and at the beginning of Christ's preaching in
Iurye not being Luc. 1.
with Christ, as he himself witnesses in the preface of his Gospel: yet after
he had ones tasted of Lege Theophylactu^ in argumento suo super E ua^geliu^
Lucae.
Christ's heavenly doctrine, he forsook al worldly vanities, and gave him self
holly to the preachinge and setting forth of Christ's Gospel, in so much that
diverse of the ancient fathers be in opinion that he was one of the seventy
Apostes which our Savior Christ sent forth into the cou^tres to preach. By
reason whereof he has inerited to be called an Evangelist of Christ in more
excellent wise then the most part of his felawes be, considering that he has
so much helped the Christian feith not only with his prethinges, but also with
his large writings. The gospel therefore of this day is of the sendynge forth
of these seventy prechers and of the co^missio^ and charge that Christ gave
them. In the chapter before this gospel it is written, that our Lord sent
forth.xij. Apostles into Galilee to preach the glad tidings of the kingdom of
God, and to confirm it with miracles. But now when he came out of Galilee into
Iewry and perceived the great desire of the people to hear the gospel, beside
the.xii. apostles he chase out of all the nu^bre of his disciples threscore
and.x. more whom he sends forth to preach. Let us hear therefore with what
co^missions, and with what prerogatives these threscore and.x. were sent to the
executynge The nu^bre of 70. among the Iues.
of this business. After this (says saint Luke) did the Lord appoint also
other seventy. Truly in the election of the number both of the Apostles, and
also of the seventy preachers Christ observed the sole^pe usage of his
country people. For among the Iues not only the number of.xii. but also the
nu^bre of seventy was as who should say hallowed appropred and consecrate to a
public authority, which thing had his co^mencement and original beginning
either of that, that Jacob with seventy sowles (as the scripture speaks)
went into Egypt, or of that that seventy elders of all the tribes were chose^
which with Number. ^^
Moises should govern the people of Israel. Christ sends therefore seventy,
not severally but two and two together, for one man alone, were as noman, and
of no strength nor authority in the law which co^mau^ death yt in the mouth of
two or three, all witness should stand. And he adds a reason why he sent forth
so many, sayng. The harvest is great, but the laborers are few. Pray therefore
the Lord of the harvest to send forth laborers into his harvest. Certainly
these be few words, but many things in them com here to be marked. First the
multitude of them which desire the Gospel is here expressed with a very
ha^dsom resemblau^ce by the name of harvest. For in husbandry be certain due
seasons and goinges forward till at last the corn wax ripe, and the harvest
is at hand. First of all the ground is broken up with the plough, tha^ it is
sowed, after that the sede springs up into grass, and shoteth up into blades
and stalks, and at last the fruit ripeth, is cut down, and brought into the
barn. In semblable wise the tyllage of the Lords ground has his certain
times, his procedinges and growinges. At the beginning Moses brake up the
Lords ground with the ploughe of the law. Then came the prophets and did
sow the sede. After that in the time of Ihon Baptist appeared the blades. And
at last wha^ Christ came and sent forth his Apostles came also the harvest, and
the weate began to be conveyed into the barn of God. Of this harvest Christ
in an other place precheth to his Apostles sayng. Lift up your eyes and be
hold the Ioh. iiij
countries, for they be white already unto harvest. And he that reapeth,
receives a reward and gathers fruit into everlasting life, so that both he
that sows may be glad and also he that reapeth. For herein is the word true,
that there is one that sows and an other that reapeth. I have sent you to
reap that which ye have not labored. Other have labored, and ye have entered
into their labors. For this purpose also makes that which Ihon the baptist
preaches saying that a fan is in Christ's hand and he shall make clean his
floor, and gather his corn into the Mat. 3.
barn, but the chafe he shall burn with fire unquenchable. Wherefore sith the
time that the gospel of Jesus Christ is preached is the time of harueste, it
must be seen, what the corn is that is brought into the barn of god. The
corn therefore is partly the
men themselves which by the preaching of the gospel be gathered into y^ barn
of Christ's church, partly it is the riches which men by feyth do gather of
the gospel. This riches is no worldly goods, but spiritual goods. It is first
of al, righteousness before god and man, whereof the one is wrought by feith in
Christ (for the rightuouse man lives through feith) Abac. ^. Romans 1.
the other is gotten by obedience and the fruits of feyth. Finally it is
everlasting life and heavenly joy. These be the goods, riches, and corn which
be gathered of the spiritual harvest. But like as in the corporal harvest, the
corn is not gathered into the barnes with out great sweat and labor, so who
soever will gather the gostly corn must abide many adversities. And y^ more we
labor and suffer adversity, the more corn shall we gather into our barnes.
Wherefore (dear friends) while it is now the time of our harvest, let us not
play, let us not trifle, but with glad minds let us take the labors of the
harueste. He that gathers (says Salomo^) in the harvest is the Salomo^
child of wisdom, but he that slepeth in somer, is the child of confusion. Go
(says Christ) lo I send you as lambs among wolves. Uerily wolves be
naturally disposed to hurt and vex sheep, and sheep against y^ cruelty of
wolves be altogether unarmed. Wherefore when Christ says. I send you as la^bes
among wolves, it is asmoche to say, as I send you utterly unarmed among
most cruel and hurtful enemies. What peace, what rest, what health, can one
look for Objection.
among such enemies? But ye will say, this is not to comfort his disciples,
but rather to discourage them from imbrasing the gospel. Troth it is that this
is a very hard word, I send you as lambs in mids of wolves, but yet it was a
word necessary to be spo ken unto the apostles and disciples to monish them of
the troubles and persecutions that they should suffer, lest they should dream;
that the kingdom of Christ in earth should be a corporal thing. For if the
kingdom of Christ had been of this world, he would not have sent forth his
disciples as sheep among wolves, but rather he would have brought to pas, that
they should have been received of al men with high reverence and honor, whereas
now he layth them out to exceeding dangers and perilles. They shall (says he)
deliver Mat. ^0.
you up unto councelles, and in their assembles they shall scourge you, yea and
ye shall be led unto princes and kings for my sake, for a witness to them and to
the Gentiles. And in an other place he says. The Ihon. 16
time is coming, that who soever kylleth you, woll think he has done high
service to God.

Truly this that Christ speaks to his Apostels, he speaks to al right
christen men and women. For they also must enter into the kingdom of god by
many afflictions. Let us go then eueryone in his calling armed with the only
protection of Christ. The evil disposed persons wol fume and chafe against
the pure doctrine of Christ, but with these does Christ couple us unarmed and
naked. He sends us not to hurt any man, but like simple and harmeles
persons to help al men. He commands his preachers and disciples not to
seek succors of men to defend them against the violence of wicked persons nor
yet to be careful for their living. He byddeth them go light and vncombred
to the office of preaching,
bearing with them neither wallet nor scrippe that is, nothing that perteyneth
to the necessity of nature, for all things shall be cast unto them. Neither to
care for their harbroughe, for there shall be ever some to receive them into
their howses, only let them do their duties, and show themselfes true
preachers of his word. And into what city or place so ever they enter, he
byddeth them first desire peace who is the son of pea^
to the hole family. And if the child of peace be there that is to say, a meke
man and desirouse of the heavenly doctrine, then shall their prayer do him good,
Question
if not it shall return to them again. But here ye will ask, why Christ
commanded his disciples to salute noman in the way? Ye shall understand, that
in the fourth book of kings, the prophet Elizeus 4. Reg. iiij.
gave like commandment to his servant Giezi sending him on an hasty
message. Christ therefore means by this, that he would not that his preachers
Cyrillus. Ambrose
should under pretense of greting and interteining of their carnal friends, be
by any means hindered from the executing of their office.

But what were these seventy disciples commanded to preach? that the kingdom
of god drew nigh. Why (ye will say) is it enough for to know this? No verily for
the devil also knew this, and yet is damned. What then? This is necessary to be
preched, that we might be warned to repent, and so atteyne to the kingdom of
Christ. Wherefore, go we to, let us imbrase this gospel by feith, let us repent,
that when Christ shall com in Majesty: we may reign with him which with the
father and holy ghost is to be glorified for ever

Amen.
On saint Simon and Iudes day.
The Gospel. Ihon. xv. Jesus said to his disciples. This co^mau^d I you, that
ye love together. If the world hates you, know ye, yt it hated me before you.
If ye were of the world, the world would love his own. Howbeit, because ye
be not of the world, but I have chosen you out of the world: therefore the
world hates you. Remember the word that I told you. The servant is not
greater then his master. If they have persecuted me: they will also persecute
you. If they have kept my sayng, they wol also keep yours. But al these things
woll they do to you for my names sake, for they know not him that sent me. If I
had not com and spoke to them: they should have had no sin. But now have they
no clooke for their sin. He that hates me: hates also my father. If I had
not done the works among them which none other man did: they should have had no
syn. But now have they seen and also hated both me and my father. But psalm. 35.
and, 69.
this comes, that the word might be fulfilled which is written in their law.
They hated me without cause.


The sermon upon this Gospel.
OUr Savior Christ (dear friends) gives us here a special commandment,
that we should love one an other. First, because he by so many ways has
declared his love toward us. Second because in the world, if we be true
folowers and lovers of him, we shall have none that will heartily love us, but
rather the world woll surely hate us. And why woll the world hate us? because
the verity of the gospel is brought unto us out of an other world into this
world by Christ, and Christ as a stranger came into this world. Wherefore it is
no marvel, though he has many haters and despicers. For a stranger among
strangers can not easily find friends. Besides this, whatsoever is in this
world, it is nawght else but lust of the flesh, lust of the eyes and pride
of life, as saint Ihon writes. Yea the 1. Iho^. 2.
chief renownes of this world (as carnal justice, carnal wisdom, carnal
power) be stark nawght. For the Iues were rightuouse in flesh, but seking to
stablish their own ryghtuousnes they were not subject to the righteousness of
god. The Greeks were esteemed Romans 2.
the wisest men of the world, but the wisdom of this world was folly before
god. Christ by his gospel repreueth the world of sin, and utterly rejects
the wisdom, justice, and power of this world teaching them to be falshode and
no trouthes, and he sets up an other kind of justice that must be obtained
by feythe, an other kind of wysdom to be learned of gods word, and an other
kind of power to be gotten by trouble, cross, affliction and suffraunce. The
worldly men therefore not abydyng their things to be either repreued or
rejected do hate Christ, they persecutel his gospel and stamp against his
word. And look how much the world hates Christ and his gospel: and even so
much they hate so many as purely and syncerely do either preach or set forth
by any means the same. They persecute them they kill them. And for this cause
Christ armeth al his true preachers and disciples by his own exemple that
they shrynke not, when they be persecuted troubled or vexed, sayng. If the
world hates you, know ye that it hated me first ere it hated you, as who
should say. Let it not seem strange that ye be hated of the world, for the
servant is not in better ease than his Mat. 20.
master, they hated me first, wherefore how should they not but hate you also?
Uerely all that be the true folowers of Christ be not of the world first
because Christ has plucked them aweye by feyth from the ma^ers of this world
and has clothed them with the new heavenly man, and secondly because they
allow not the things of the world but count all worldly things mere folies
and vanities, and (as Paul says) the world is crucified to them and they to
the world. The world therefore can not but hate them, but persecute them, but
exclude them out of their companyes, yea, and if they can, put them to death.
And al these things (says Christ) shall they do unto you for my names sake.
But what is this to say, for my names sake? Surely says saint Austine, Saint
Austin.
Christ here means, that they woll hate him in his disciples and true
folowers, they woll persecute him in them, and wol not follow nor keep their
word because it is his word. Wherefore says this holy doctoure, so much the
more wretched be they which do these things forbicause of this name, as they
be the more blessed which suffer these things for this names sake. Howbeit
the evil do these things to the evil but both be wretched, as well the doers as
the suffrers. And why wol they do these things in spite of Christ's name?
Ueryly (says Christ) because they have not known god the father of heaven
which sent me. For if they had known God the father which sent Christ, they
should have known Christ to have preached by the commandment and authority of
his father a far other justice then was preached or practysed of the world.
If Christ had not comme and spoken to the world, it should have had no sin.
It is the preachinge of the gospel verily that discloseth all ungodliness and
the unrighteous of the world, and which also sets open the justice of
god. Let us not then my friends be ashamed of the gospel of Christ. For as
(the Apostle says) it is the power of God to the Romans ^.
health and salvation of all that believes. For the righteousness of God is by it
opened out of feyth into feyth. Now therefore since the gospel is preached unto
us which discloseth sin, we have no excuse no clooke to hyde our sin with.
We know god, and yet we do not glorify ne worship him as god, we be not
thankful unto him for the great and inestimable benefits which from time to
time we have received at his hands. We be called by the ministres of his holy
word, but we wol give no ear. We be tawght, and we will not attend. Wherefore
it is much to be feared that like as we have not regarded to know god: so god
will give us up into a disalowed mind. If a man would hate him that he knew not,
he might peradventure seem worthy of pardon and forgiveness, because he can not
find in his heart to favor him whom he never saw. But we have seen Christ
and have hard him though not personally as the Iues saw him and hard him,
yet by the preaching of the gospel we know his power and ryghtuousnes, and we
espy our infirmity and unrighteous. I say in his word we se him and hear
him as well and as perfectly as the Iues did. We have seen his great benefits,
we have hard of his wonderful deeds, and yet I fear lest there be many worldly
persons among us which do hate Christ and his word in very deed though they
pretend never so much to love him, and they hate him and his word even for
the same things, for which they ought to love him and the preachers of his
word. For in that they hate the preachers of his word, they hate his word, and
in that they hate his word, they hate him. And verily who so ever hates
Christ and his preachers or his word, does hate also in very deed god the
father by whose authority and special commandment al is done. Wherefore this
very thing does heap damnation upon such worldly persons because they abuse
so lewdly and so stubbernly the offered and open goodness of God. If Christ by
the preaching of his most holy word had not uttered among them such
miracles and wonders as none of all the prophets ever uttered, whether we woll
consider the greatness or the multitude of them, they should not have been in
danger of so heynouse a sin. But now have they both herd and seen the
troth, and the more they have herd and seen, the more they have hated both it
and the preachers thereof. So that the Psalm. 35. and. 69.
saying of God by his prophet is in them fulfilled, where it is written, they
have hated me without cause. It might be borne if one did hate one being
sturred and provoked by displeasure and unkindness showed unto him to hate him.
It might be perdoned if a man would hate one he knew not: but how can it be
borne, that one should hate him whom he knows and which studyeth to do him
all the good he can for his sauegarde and soul health? In this sort did our
savior Christ eo^forte his Apostles and by them us all, to suffer tribulation
and hatred for his sake. Let us then follow them and namely the blessed
Apostles Simon and Jude whose memory we do this day celebrate, which had
experience of these counfortes in their cross which they bare for Christ's
sake, neither would they suffer themselfes to be plucked awey from the troth
of Gods word for all the hatred malice and trouble that the world could
practice against them. If by their exemple we do the same, we shall undoubtedly
with the^ be crowned eternally by Jesus Christ our Lord which together with
the father and holy ghost is world with out end to be praised.

Amen.
On all halowe day
The Gospel. Mat. v. WHen Jesus saw the people, he went up into a montaigne,
and when he was set, his disciples came to him, and after he had opened his
mouth. he taught them saying. Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is
the kingdom of heaven. Blessed be they that mourn, for they shall be cou^forted.
Blessed be the meke, for they shall inherit the earth. Blessed be they that
hungre and thyrst after ryghtuousnes, for they shall be satisfied. Blessed be the
pytifull, for they shall be pytied. Blessed be the pure in heart, for they shall
se God. Blessed be the peace makers, for they shall be called the children of
God. Blessed be they that be persecuted for ryghtuousnes, for theirs is the
kingdom of heaven. Blessed be ye when they shall ^euile and persecute you, and
speak every evil word against you making lies because of me. Be glad and
rejoice, for much is your reward in heaven.


The sermon upon this Gospel.
THis day (good people) is called all halowe day and is instituted of the
Church of Christ, that there might be some certain time to celebrate the
memory of all holy persons or saints, which in this life lived a godly and
perfect life, and therefore do now enjoy eternal bliss in heaven, according
as in this Gospel is promised unto them and unto us al which wol do the same
by our savior Christ. Let us then se what this Gospel speaks. Ye shall
therefore understand, that our Savior Christ Jesus, when he was walkyng here
in earth among us, and espied the people more and more to gather about him
of al sorts of me^, he withdrew him self as it were from a low place, and
going up to an high hylle, began there to set abroche his heavenly Chryso
stom. Hierom
doctrine, declarynge by the very height of the place that he would teach no
low ne common thing but al high and heavenly things. His disciples whom he had
specially chosen, followed up with him, but so yet that the common sort of
people were not forbyden to follow, if any among them had so great affection
and grace. When he was come to the top of the hylle, he satte him down not as
weary but as going about to teach high and seriouse things, which would
require diligent hearers. His disciples therefore perceyuyng that, began to
draw nerer unto him, that nothing of his heavenly doctrine might fall to
grownde. Beginning then to teach his divine and most holsom lernyng, not out
of the proud pulpit of the philosophers neither out of the arroga^t chair of
y^ phar^sees, but out of a seat of grass he did cast his eyes upon his
disciples, and opening his most holy mouth, vttred the Euangelical doctrine
concerning the felicity of man, as yet unknown to the world and altogether
disagreing from the opinion of all them which thought themselfes most wise in
the world. This doctrine his disciples yea and al holy men and women imbrased
and so obtained the eternal bliss and beatitude here promised unto them. Let
us therefore hear also this doctrine (for to us also he spoke) that we also
may be made blessed. All the sins of the life do spring of false opinions
and persuasions. Above all things therefore we must study to pluck these out
by the hard ^ootes, if we woll be his true people.

Because the most poisoned and noysom sickness of the mind is pride and
arrogance which is a let to man that he can not receive the true doctrine, or
rather it is the fountaigne of all head vices: our Savior first heals this
disease, saying. Blessed be the pore Beati pauperes spiritu.
in spirit, for the realm of heavens is theirs. Assuredly the slender living,
the lownes of birth, the obscuritye of estate, the aduersitye of fortune makes
many men abiecte, lowly, and to set no stoore by themselves. And verily these
be y^ nerer to the bless that the gospel speaks of, if they follow in mind
thither as fortune has called them. But this lownes and humility of spirit
that is here commended, stands in Objection.
the affection, and not in outward things. Ye woll say, how can these men
reign which take nothing upon them, which give place to al, which set naught
by themselves, which suffer themselves to be trodden under foot, and finally
whom noman sets by, but al men despice? I answer, that it is yet true that
the Answer.
self truth has spoken, the kingdom perteyneth only to them, the kingdom I
say of heaven. For think ye y^ these wild fyerse and cruel persons do
reign? Nay they serve a servitude, they be very villains and bondmen, they
suffer many lords and tyrants over them. They be tormented and crucified with
couetise, with ire, with envy, with lust of vengeance, with fear, with hope.
They skant live, they reign not. But the holy person, the saint, the godly and
devout man or woman steyng himself upon his innocence, upon god, and upon the
reward^ of the world to com, is free and void of all these cares and troubles,
for with a quiet heart he despises the things of this world, and follows the
heavenly goods. Does not I pray you this man obtain a reign or a kingdom
far more goodly and more excellent, then is the reygne of tyrants? He is
not under the commandment and rule of the lust nor of couetise neither of
none of the other most noysom pestilencies of the mind. But this holy person
being armed with feith, as often as the case requires, does lay his
commandment upon diseases and they flee awey, he commands the sees, and
they be still, he commands deuilles and they depart. Of this force and
power is the kingdom of that heart which is godly and sets naught by it
self, distrusting al humane helps and socours, and depending holly of God.
The wordly kingdom is gotten by violence and defended by high courage. But this
kingdom is gotten by modesty, and stablished by humility. The world iugeth
none mete to a lorship or reign but such as be of hault and high courage. But
god calls those chiefly to his kingdom, which do most of al humble and
deiecte themselfes.

Jesus goes forth and adds a another lesson like to this, sayng. Blessed be
the meke, for they shall inherit Beati mites.
the earth. Who be meke? which enforce noman, which being wronged do easily
pardon the wrong, which had rather loose a thing then strive for it, which
set more by co^corde and quietness of mind, then great and large possessions,
which chouse rather a quiet poverty then troublesome riches. But this sort of
me^ be commonly for their patience by one or other disturbed and wyped of that
they have. Uerily it is troth, but this is a new manner of enlarging
possessions. The vnpitiful and cruel lord possesses no not that which he
has, whereas the mylde and gentle person, which had rather depart with his
right, then co^tende for it has land in so many places as he finds lovers of
the Gospel of Christ, and if he finds none in this world: yet is he sure of
the possession of the heavenly land, out of which he cannot be excluded. The
world bewaileth them as unhappy which be briue^ out of their country and
compelled to live in strange places, but Christ calls them happy, which be
banished for the Gospels sake, being made citizens of heaven. They be driven
from the frau^chise of one city, and expulsed out of one country, but to true
disciples Phil. iij. Hebr. ^3
of Christ the hole world is their country, and to such as be godly persons
heaven is their home. The death of friends is miserable to the common sort of
people in so much that some when they have been deprived of their wifes,
fathers, mothers, husbands, children have killed themselves. And for this
cause men come unto them to aswage the bytternes of their sorrow Beati qui
lugent.
with words of comfort. But blessed be they which mourn for the love of the
Gospel, which be also plucked awey from their affections, which se their
most dearly beloved troubled for the justice of the gospel, which despising
the pleasures of this world pass their life in weping, watching, fasting,
giving almoise, prayng, visiting the poor, and in such like occupations. For
with such woll that heavenly spirit ve present, secretly co^fortyng and
rewardyng the short mournyng with in estimable joy of mind, and translatinge
the^ to everlasting bless. Man's cou^fortyng ofte^tymes increases the grefe
while it labors to swage it. But the holy ghost the true co^forter so
chereth the godly mind, that in most bitter afflictions Beati qui^e suriunt.
of the body it reioyseth. By the common opinion of al men, hungre is a
peynful thing, and nedy poverty is the thing that every man eschueth, neither
is there any man but cou^teth them happy which have augmented their living and
so established their things as they may now live in high wealth and abundaunce.
But assuredly it is not the heapynge up of goods which satisfyeth the mind,
nor the wealth of man is not to be mesured by the fylling of the belly. Whom does
Christ then in this kind call blessed? Blessed (says he) be they which be
hu^grye and thursty after righteousness. The things wherewith the body is fed,
ought but lightly to be desired, and yet in caring for them, the people be
most vexed, and many times when they have gotten the^ with much traueile, they
be most disquieted. But the godly persons which be contented with little and
seek not carefully for things, lack nothing, God so provides for them which
fedeth also the sparows and the lylies. Happy be they then which translate this
bodily hungre and thurst to the hungryng and thurstynge after the justice of
the Gospel, where they shall ever find sumwhat to be hungrye, and thursty of,
where is a blessed fyllynge and satisfyeng, yea and it is a great part of
^^on. 6.
the Christian man's bless and felicity is to hungre after that bread of the
mind whereof the eater shall live euerlastynglye, and to thurst after that
lively ^^on. 4.
drink, of which the drinker shall have in him a fou^taigne of water springynge
up to everlasting life. Wherefore my dear friends this bread let us specially
hungre for, and this drink let us thurst for.

The people also estemeth the^ happy which be promoted and helped by other men's
liberality and they rejoice rather at them that be helped, then at them Beati
misericordes.
that help. But I (says Christ) do pronounce them happy which be merciful,
and which of a Christian charity do think an other man's miserye to be their
miserye, which be sorrowful for the hurtes of their neighbor, which weep for
other men's myshappes, which of their own cost do feed the hungry, cloth the
naked, monish the straper, teach the ignorant, pardon the offender, and shortly
to speak, which do bestow all the talentes and gifts that God has lent them
upon the soucouring and releuyng of others. For they that thus do, be no
loosers but gayners, for as much as who so ever is merciful and beneficial to
his neighbor, shall feel god much more merciful and much more beneficial to
him again. Thou have forgiven thy neighbor a certain light offense, god shall
forgive the al thy sins. Thou have released to thy brother a temporal
punishment, god shall release unto the, everlasting pain. Thou have releued
with thy money thy brothers need, god shall render unto the, his heavenly riches.
Among men the pitiful persons perchance do wax poor, while by giving to
the nedy they waste their riches, but with God they wax rich, while by empting
their cofers they fylle and garnyshe their soul with the fruits of godlynes.

The common sort of people do call them unhappy which be deprived of their
eye sight, and they that Beati mu^do cord.
lack this most dear sense do count themselfes half dead and to walk in
darkness. So sweet a thing it seems with the eyes to se light, and to
contemplate this most goodly syghtes of the world. Wherefore if it seems a
thing so pleasant to behold the Sun with bodily eyes, how much more blessed
is it, with the eyes of the mind to behold God the maker of the Sun and of
all things? We se how joyful they be which have been in danger of losing
their sight and have recovered it again, we se how highly they rejoice eue^ as
though they were returned out of hell. But much more happy be they, from whom
the blindness of the mind is taken awey and have now the grace inwardly to se
God well of al joy, whom to se is most high wealth and felicity. That thing
that the Su^ne is unto pure eyes, the same is god unto pure minds. That matter
or gu^me is to the eyes, that is sin to the soul. Blessed be they than whose
heart is pure and without wemme and spotte of al fylthynes. For to these shall be
granted the thing which surmounteth all worldly pleasures. And what is that?
Uerily to se God. But how be men's hearts made clean? verily by feith in Christ
August. in primo de trinitate.
as holy scripture witnesses. This syghte therefore (says saint Austine) is
the reward of feith, as it is written in the Acts of the Apostles, purifyeng
the hearts by feith. For it is not to be thought, that god which is most
clean, wol be seen but of clean hrates as writes saint Hierom, for the
temple of god may Hierom Beati pacifici
not be polluted. The world iugeth them happy, which setting all their things
in a stey according to their mind, do live in ^uyet and rest having noman to
put them to trouble and busynes. But them both Christ call happy and blessed,
which after they themselves have ones compressed in their mind the Hierom
rebellion of all their lusts: do apply themselfes to set unity, concord
and peace between their euenchriste^, not only having no purpose to revenge,
when any man does them displeasures, but also of their Chry so stomus.
own swing and mere motion sturring and exhortyng other men to peace, of whom
they have sustained displeasures. If this shall seem an hard thing to any man,
let him hear the reward, such shall be called (says our Savior Christ) the
sons of god. What is more honorable then this commendation? Nay what is more
blessed? For it is no vain title. He that is the son of god: must needs be
also heir. But the vnlykenes of manners and conditions does Augustinus.
utter and bewrey a bastard child, and on the contrary side, resemblaunce of
manners and of conditions does declare the true natural son. God freely
pardonynge all our sins does allure us all, of whom he has been offeded, to
peace and amity. Of his own bounty and mere goodness he shows him self
merciful to all which do repent them. Wherefore he wol knowledge none for his
children, but those that show themselfes such to their brethern, as he has
showed himself toward al uniuersally. Carnal fathers do disherite such
children as will not agree with the rest of their brethren, so in likewise the
heavenly father woll refuse for his chyldern such as be haters of peace and
makers of debate. And because the more part of men and women be naughtyly
disposed: peace can not frame with all perso^nes onles it be by suffrau^ce of
wro^ges. It is the part of them that be good, to apply themselfes by all the
means they can possible, that they have variaunce with no manner persons
whether they be good or bad, yea they must provoke al as nere as they ca^ to
love and concord by gentleness, by softnes, by doing good turns and benefits.
But there be some so froward and so ungracious, that with good turns they be
the more kyndled to mischief, and which for pleasures do men displeasures
again, they rage upon their well wyllers, and count them for extreme enemies
which labor to save them. If peace can not here take hold on both sides,
yet nevertheless they shall be blessed eue^ for their desire and study of peace,
when the wicked do persecute and trouble them for none other cause, but for the
justice sake of the Gospel, which hurts none, and helps all. For even
this self thing sturreth up their hatred for which they ought to have showed
their love, neither for any other cause do they render wrong, then for the
which they ought to have given thanks. Christ says not, blessed be they
that suffer persecution of the Hethen people. For though a man suffer
persecution Chrysostom.
(as the holy Doctor Chrysosto^ says) of he retikes or of me^ of power which
seem and be called christians, he is blessed with saint Tho^ Baptist and with
innumerable other holy martyrs. For if it be true
that the prophets be martyrs, which were stayne of their own nation, without
doubt, he yt for gods cause, suffers any thing, though he suffer of his own
nation, has the reward of martyrdo^. And therefore the scripture has not put
the persons of y^ persecuters, but the cause only of the persecution, that we
should not look, who it is that psecuteth, but for what cause.

But ye wol say: who can love such as for pleasures re^ore again displeasures,
hatred, and euel turns? It is an hard thing I grant, but the reward is
great. And what is the reward? not a garlande of flowers or bay leaves, not an
ox or a goote, but the kingdom of heaven. Unto this turnament we must prepare
our selfs so many as woll be Christ's disciples, if we desire to win the
crown of the Eua^gelicall felicity. Man's cruelty is nothing yt ought to
fraye us from it. Noman can hurt us, if we cleave to justice. The persecution
of the evil shall not pluck awey our innocence, but it shall rather
increase our bless. Yea in the mydde storms of the persecution we shall be
blessed. Let us call to mind (my friends) the valiant martyrs and holy both
me^ women and children which have been before our time, the memory of all
whom, the church does this day solemnize, how constantly how patiently they
suffered B^ati es it is* quu^.
al vilanouse words, al mockes, skornes, unworthy punishementes yea and many
of them death for the trouthes sake. When men cursed them with bitter curses,
when men assawted them with all kind of mischief, when men falsely accused
them and laid to their charge all the crimes they could, because they were
true folowers and disciples of Christ: they bewailed not themselves as unhappy
and miserable, but rather they reioysed and triumphed therein, forasmuch as the
more their enemies and persecutours did rage against them, the more did their
reward increase in heaven. Their hurt God turned to their good. The damage
that they suffered of men, he turned to their lucre. The reproach, he turned
into ever lasting and true glory. The crimes and vpbraydynges which men
brought falsely against them, he turned into the titles and triumphs of true
godliness, men's cursinges he turned into praises and reioysinges, not only before
God (whom to please they thought it enough* though they displeased the hole
world besides forth) but also before men. For of wicked and ungodly men to be
dispraised for godliness is to be praised: and to be tormented of the haters of
god, is to be crowned. Praise and glory among men they sought not for, and
yet nevertheless it followed the true virtue of the own accord. Thus the holy
prophets which have been before us, thus the blessed martyrs, the
confessors, the virgins, the devout wydowes, and (brefely to speak) all the
halowes and godly personagies before our time, be rewarded and crowned now
with the crown of immortality. Let us therefore (dearly beloved frcendes)
follow them in living that we may also follow them thither, where they now be in
perpetual joy, with the father son and holy ghost three persons and one god,
who be praised forever

Amen.
On the day of weddyng.
The Gospel. Mat. xix. THe pharisees came to Jesus temptynge him and sayng. Is
it lawful for man to put awey his wife for all manner of causes? He answered and
said unto them. Genesis i. and ii.
Have ye not red that he that made man at the beginning made them man and
woman? and said, for this cause shall man leave father and mother and cleave to
his wife and they two shall be one flesh? Wherefore they be no more two, but one
flesh. Let not man then put a su^dre that which god has coupled together.


The sermon upon this Gospel.
Forasmoch as (welbiloued audience in our Savior Jesus Christ) we be assembled
at this present tune for the solemnizatio^ of matrimony between these two
persons in the face of the church, according to the laudable custom and
rites of the same: I inte^d with your favors first ere I expownd this gospel
brefely to declare y^ first institution and ordinance of matrimony, to
thinte^t not only these two persons here cou The first institution of marriage
pled together, but also al other which be here gathered together, as well married
as to be married, may be admonished and instructed of their office and duty
herin. First therefore ye shall understand, that almighty god what time he first
made and created man in paradise, consydering of his botomles wisdom, how
necessary, mete and convenient it was, to couple man and woman together in
wedlok, both for the comfort, aid and help of one an other, and for the
multiplicatio^ and meyntenaunce of mankind in lawful succession and also to
the intent that thereby generation of issue might after man's fall be continually
from time to time maynteined until the end of the world without sin or
offese toward god: did not only even than at the beginning and in paradise
knytte Adam and Eve together in matrimonye, and did ordeyne and bless the same
by his holy word, but also did declare and set forth the virtue and strength
thereof S. Austine.
by the mouth of Ada^, for he being inspired (as saint Austine and other holy
doctors say) with the holy Genesis ^.
ghost, when he was by almighty god which made him, knytte and coupled in
lawful marriage with Eve his wife, spoke as a prophet these words follow yng.
Loo now these bones of Eve my wife be fourmed of my bones and this her flesh of
my flesh. She shall be called a woman because she is taken forth of the man. And
for this cause shall man leave his father and his mother, and cleave fast unto
his wife, and they tweyne shall be one flesh. By which words it is meant, that by
the strength and virtue of marriage ryghtly made, the man and wife which before
were two bodies, be now made one body, during their lives, so that herafter
the husband (as saint i. Cor. v
Paul says) has not power over his own body, to use it as him lusts, but
it is his wives, neither has the wife power of her own body, but her body is
her husbands body and with him only may she use the act of matrimony. And
therefore they two so knytte and conjoined by gods ordenaunce, may in no wise ^e
divided for any affection either to father or mother, or for any earthly thing
in the world.

Secondly dear friends, ye shall understand that god renewed his said
ordinance of matrimony and sanctified it with his holy word immediately after
Noes floude. At which time being al y^ people of the world destroyed with the
said floude (except Noe his children and their wifes) god calling them out of
the arc said unto them. Crescite and multiplicamini, et Genesis ix.
replete terram. that is th say. Increase and be ye multiplied and fulfill you
the earth again. And albeit this law and commandment of matrimony given
again to Noe and to his children was a sufficient instruction unto them and to
all their offspring how to use it in all clennes and purity: yet god perceiving
man's natural inclination to sin and malice, did afterward further stablish
and declare the same by his other laws written more at large showing the
degrees of co^sanguinitie and of affinity which nature abhorred to marie in,
as appears in the book of Leuiticus the. xviij. and. xx. chapters. Which
laws of prohibition al we christen men and women be vonden to observe and
keep. For who so ever marieth within the degrees there expressed and prohibited
of God in the said book, be cursed by Gods mouth, and their marriage is of no
force ne strength neither before God ne man, but detestable, abominable,
deuelishe, and damnable. And on the contrary side all marriages made between
kynsfolke or alyes that be not within the degrees which be in that book
forbidden of God (though the bishop of Rome has never so much forbidden
them) be without any dispe^sation of man good, holy, godly, and approved not
only of God, but also authorized by act of parlime^t made in the.xxxij. year
of the reign of our most drad Sovereign lord the king that now is Henry
the eight.

Thyrdly ye shall understand, that this conjunction between man and wife in
matrimony was ordained, that thereby also might be represented unto us not
only the perfect and indissoluble union of the nature of God with the nature
of man (which was fulfilled, when the second person in trin^tie took upon him
the form and substance of our nature) but also the like conjunction in
perfect love between Christ and his church, as the holy apostle Paul
witnesses in Ephe. 5.
his epistle to the Ephesians, where going about to prove, that al women which
be married, ought to love and to be subject unto their husbands in all
things, even as the church is subject to Christ, and likewise that al
husbands be bound to love their wives, even as Christ loves the church his
spouse: he brin geth in the first ordinance of matrimony: as it was ordained
by god in paradise, and the words before rehearsed, wheruppon he infers and
says, that this co^^unction of man and woman in marriage whereby they are knitte
and made one flesh and one body is the sacrament, that is to say, the figure,
the signification, the mysterye, or the prophecieng before of that great and
meruelouse conjunction which is between Christ and his church. For like as by
the virtue of this first ordinance of matrimonye, the man and wife be made as
one body whereof the man is the head: even so the exceeding love of Christ
toward his spouse the church knytteth and makes Christ and his church to be
but one body, whereof Christ is the hedde. And like as the woman was fourmed of
the rybbe of man: so of Christ sprang forth the church
which is purified by water and blood. The rybbe is the harder part of the
body, and the husband is the strength of the wife, and even so is Christ the
strength of the church. Out of the rybbe and mids of the body was the wife
brought forth: and eue^ so Christ took flesh of our substance, borne of the
undefiled virgin, made like unto us in all things, sin only excepted.
Wherefore we be called the members of one body of his flesh and of his bones,
me^bres I say, not according to the nature of the everlasting divinity, S.
Hierom.
but according to that he vouchsaued to take, man's nature upon him. Howbeit
this coniuncton may not be taken carnally but spiritually. For albeit Christ
took our real flesh: yet we be his spiritual S. Ambrose.
members. For we be one body, because we be partakers of one spirit. And
forasmuch as there is so great a conjunction between Christ and his church:
we ought for his sake to leave the dearest things we have, if they would pluck
us awey from Christ whose spouse we be. For we must cleave to him without
seueraunce, sith we be one body, and one flesh with him. And verily this is a
great sacrament, mystery, and secrecy, which if it be rightly po^dered,
plucketh up our minds into most high and heavenly joys. Hitherunto we have
brefely spoken of the first ordinance of marriage, now let us come to the
declaration of this present Gospel.

The pharisees which amo^nges y^ Iues were taken for me^ of great holiness, and
therefore ought best to have magnified Christ and his doctrine, were ever most
busye against him, inue^ting al they could, to trippe him in his words, that
they might have some pretense to accuse him, and put him down. For they had no
little envy at him, pertly because he shadowed their estimation, and pertly
because he disclosed their hypocrisy. They came therefore on a time and craftily
did set upon him, taking occasion of the words he had spoken concerning that a
man ought not to put awey his wife. They propounde a suttil sophisme, whether
it were lawful for every cause for a man, to put awey his wife. For if he
should answer, it were lawful, he S. Hieronimus.
should seem to be against himself, where he tawght dyuorses not be lawful. If
he should deny it, he should seem to be against Moses law, which suffers Deuteronomy.
24.
a man for any manner cause to give her a libel of diuorcement and to let her
go. But Jesus so tempereth his answer, that neither he diminishes the
authority of Moses, neither reca^teth his own teachinge, and with the
authority of the law he stops the pharisees mouths which were lawyers.
Have Genesis ij.
ye not read (says Christ) that when God created the world he formed the
man and women, that by there co^ioynyng, mankind should be co^tynued? And
forthwith expressing the vnpartable couple of them added. For this loves sake,
shall man leave father and mother and stycke to his wife. And this knotte is so
straight ye of two be but one person. So ye it is as much against nature, that
the one should be plucked from the other, as it is for one part of ye body to be
severed from an othher. Wherefore ye God has thus coupled, let not man sever.
Meaning herby, ye it is both a Chrysostom.
against nature and also ye law a man to cast up his wife. Here the pharisees
thinking that they had now gotten a good quarrel against our savior Christ
Jesus to snach him up said unto him. If it be thus as objection.
thou say that god would have wedlock so inuiolabely kept: why then did
Moises make it lawful to the husband, for any manner cause to put from him
Deuteronomy. 24
his wife, so that he give her a libel of diuorcement? as who should say, how
durst Moses be so bold to license that thing which god would not have done. To
this objection our savior answered. Moses did The solutio^ of Christ.
not permit ne license this thing unto you, because the thing of the own
nature was honest and rightfulle but forasmoch as he knew the stubbornenes and
hardness of your hearts: therefore he granted unto you the lesser and lyghter
inconvenience that ye should not commit the greuouser offense. For assuredly
Moses did not allow al kinds of divorces, in that he had lever y^ the same
were suffered or rather winked at, then murder should ensue and be committed.
Neither did the libel of diuorcement among the crooked Iues which Moses
their lawmaker inacted that it should be given to the woman, make the divorce
good and lawful, but rather that same libel was a witness and testimony of the
hard heart of the Iues, which for every light cause and tri^le, would put away
their wives, and for this cause the law of moses gave commandment, that such
stubburne and hard husbands which would needs for such light occasions put
awey their wives or else do worse and commit further inconvenience, to give
them the said libelle of diuorcement for a certain record and witness that
she is now free from his yoke and at her liberty.

But at the beginning (says Christ to these pharisees) Ab instio autem no^
fuit sic.
when as yet the malice of m^ was not grown into such an excess, nor as yet
ma^s nature was not infected with so many vices (for the hatred was not so
fervent, that either poisoning or murdering was feared) there was no such
license of divorces. Wherefore neither now is the same license to be suffered
among christen men, after that the doctrine of the gospel has brought again
the christen man to his former state and perfection of nature by regeneration
or new birth. And no doubt (my friends) Moses among the Iues wished in his
heart the same perfect love and fast knot in wedlock to be observed and kept,
that our savior Christ has tawght us, but (as I have declared) the corrupt
and nawghty manners of the Iues, which for every light grefe were ready to
commit murder and all mischief, feared him that he durst not require that of
them. So that our savior Christ did not abrogate the ancient law of Moses,
but he made it more clear and perfect, declaring unto the froward Iues, that it
was unlawful both for them and for all other and against the mind of god and
the will of Moses their lawmaker, that they should for every light occasion put
away their wives whom they ought to love and to embrace as their own bodies and
their own flesh. For
a thing that a man does, is not forthwith lawful for him to do because he is
not punished in this world for the same. For there be many things abominable
and stinkyng before the face of god, which be not punished by man's laws.
Hitherto have we entreated the gospel of this day. Now we woll sum what towche
the officies as well of the wife toward her The office of the wife
husband as of the husband toward his wife, and so make an end. Ye wifes
(says saint Paul) be ye subject to your own propre husbands as unto the
Lord. For the man is head of the wife, even as Ephe. 5.
Christ is the head of the church, and it is he which gives health to the
body, Wherefore like as the church is subject to Christ: so let the wifes be
subject to their husbands in all things. Likewise saint Peter i. Pe. iij.
in his first epistle commands christen wives to be in subjection to their
husbands, to the intent that even they which obey not gods word, may without
the word be won by the conversation of the wives, when they behold their
chaste conversation joined with reverence. Whose outward apparel he would not
should be gorgeouse nor much glysteringe to the eye, but rather he would have
them inwardly garnished in the heart, being there full of al cle^nes and without
corruption, in such sort as they may have a gentle and quiet spirit, which
spirit he says in gods eye is a thing most gorgeouse and sumptuouse. For
after this manner in old time (says this holy Apostle saint Peter) did the
holy women, which trusted in god, attire themselves, and were obedient to their
husbands even as Sara obeyed Abraham her husband, calling Genesis 16.
him lord, whose daughters al ye be, as long as ye do well. Saint Paul also
says, that the woman is 1. Cor. 11
the glory of the man. For the ^na^ came not of the woman, but the woman of the
man. Neither was the man created for the woman's sake: but the woman for the
man's sake. Women therefore ought to employ their diligence upon the virtuous
bringinge up of their children and to look well to their household. Yea they
shall be (says saint Paul) saved by bearing of i. timo. ^
children and bringing them up in feith, love of god, and in holiness. For this
is their office, this is their fu^ction and calling wherein they ought to pleaee
god, and to atteine everlasting bless. They ought to be no ta^glers, no
disputers, no teachers in common assembles but herers, but lerners and kepers
of silence with al subjection. These be the officies and duties of christen
wives. Ephe. 5.
The office of the husband (as Paul says) is to love his wife even as Christ
loved the church. He is bounden to love her, as his own body. He that loves
(says he) his wife loves himself. For noman ever yet hated his own flesh,
but nowrisheth and cheris^^eth it, even as the lord does the church. He must
dwell (says saint Peter) with his wife, according 1. Pet. 3.
to knowledge giving honor unto her, as unto the weker vessel, and as unto her
which is heir also of the grace of life. He may not be bitter to his wife, but
Coloss. 3
gentle, courteouse, and loving. Yea finally he must so in^i^rly love her yt
god commands him to leave Genesis 2. Mat. 19.
al other his affections, yea even his own father and mother, and cleave to
his wife. But let man and wife take heed, that god couple them together and not
the devil. Let them be coupled for procreatio^ of children, 1. Cor. 7
for avoiding of fornication, in all te^perancie holiness and godly shamefastnes.
Let the^ not join either for riches, for bewtye, for great aliau^ce or (which
is more fylthy) only for the lust of the body, lest they be greuous^ly punyshed
for their intemperauncie, as it chau^^ed to y^ seven husbands of Sara before
she married Tob. 6. and. 7.
with Thobie the younger and to innumerable other. Wherefore my dear friends let
every man and woman take heed they join in holy wedlock by gods coupling with all humble reverence and godly fear. So doing, they shall be blessed of gods
holy hand, they shall increase and multiplye, they shall replenish the earth and
have it subject unto them, according to the saying of scripture. If they
fear the Lord Genesis 1.
and walk together in his ways, god shall surely bless them, prosper, and
further them in all their doings. psalm. 127
Wherefore thou man which art head of thy wife, so love, maynteyne, cherishe and
tender thy wife, even as Christ has loved and most tendrely imbrased his
spouse, the church. If thou so do, thou shall eat the labors of thy hand (as
the prophet writes) thou shall be happy and it shall be well with the. Thy wife
shall be as a plentiful vine tree upon the walls of thy house. Thy children as
olive branches rownd about thy table. Loo (says he) thus shall the man be
blessed which fears the lord. This is gods institution of marriage, these be
the officies of married persons. In these if ye walk like feithful and right
christian persons, though through the malice of the world ye suffer affliction
here: ye shall be sure after this frail life perpetually to raygne with Christ
our lord, which with the father and holy ghost three per sons and one god is
to be glorified and praised world without end

Amen.
At burienges.
The Gospel. Ihon. xi. MArtha said unto Jesus. Lord if thou had been here,
my brother had not dyed. But now also I know, y^ whatsoever thou ask of
god, god wol give it the. Jesus said unto her. Thy brother shall rise again.
Martha said unto him. I know y^ he shall rise at the resurrection in the last
day. Jesus said unto her. I am the resurrection and the life. He that believes
on me, though he were dead, yet shall he live. And every one which lives and
believes in me shall never dye. Beleuest thou this? She says unto him. Yea
lord, I believe that thou art Christ the son of god, which cammest into the
world.


The sermon upon this Gospel.
Well-beloved people in our savior Christ, this gospel is right comfortable to
al feithful and true christian folk. For in it is contained the glad and swear
tydinges to al unfeigned Christians, that is to wit, how Christ is our
resurrection and our life, if we believe unfeignedly upon him. and verily this is
one of the chiefest articles of our religion, to believe that though we dye here
bodily for a time or rather sleep, for so the scripture calls it: yet we shall
rise again and live everlastingly with God in heaven, through Christ, in case
we have had steadfast feith in him, and be found cladde and adourned with the
Mat. ^^.
wedding garment at the day of the great Solempnitie, that is to say, at the
general resurrection of the chosen people of god when Christ the son of God
shall be in full and most perfect wise knitte and conjoined Chryso stom.
in marriage to his loving espouse the church or congregation of the feithful
persons. But ye wol ask, what this wedding garment is? Ueryly after the mind
of saint Gregory, it is charity. And that per Gregory.
sone enters to the marriage but without the wedding garment which being in the
church, has feith but lacks charity. Truly this man's feith is not the true
and lively feith, but it is a feyned feith, and a dead feith, as saint James
calls it, because it is Ia. 1^.
without works. For what avails it o my brethren (says this holy Apostle
Saint James) if a man would say he had feith, and has no works. Trow you
that this feith shall save him? if your christian brother or suster be naked and
lacking daily sustena^ce, and one of you would say unto them. Go your way in
peace, warm your selves and fylle your belyes: and yet nevertheless ye give
them not the things necessary for the body, what wol this help? So also
feith if it has not deades it is of it self dead. By these words of saint
James we may learn (my friends) that it is not enough for a christian man or
woman to say he believe in Christ, but he must also show us his feyth (as saint
James says) by his deeds and works. Wherefore the weddinge wede that we must
be cladde with, is not bare faith, but it is charity which is the fruit of
feyth, or if ye wol needs have it feyth, let it be that lively f^yth which is
garnished with this charity, that is to wit, with such zeal love and
affection which ye bear to god that for his sake ye freely aid and releue
your even christian according to your power. And verily these be the works
that almighty God requires of us, if we wol be counted his children and the
inheritours of everlasting bless. He commands that our light Mat. 5.
should shine before men, that they may se our good works, and glorifye the
father of heaven. Finally the doers (of these as himself does wytnes) shall be
Mat. 25.
called the blessed children of his father at the general resurrection, and
shall be ^ydden to come and enter into the unspeakable joys of heaven which were
prepared for the^ since the beginning of the world. The ^^terpretation of
saint Hierom
Neither does the most excellent clerk saint Hierom disagree from this
interpretation, saying, that the wedding garment may very well be called the
commandments of the lord and the works which be accomplyshed and
fulfilled at the bidding of the law and gospel, and he says that these works
do in a christen person make the garment of the new man, which garment verily
who soever in the drad full day of judgment, shall be found under a christen name
not to have, shall be forthwith taken and cast into utter ^arknes, where
according to the sentence of Christ shall be weping and gnashing of teethe. This
by occasion (dear free^des) have I spoken of the weddyng garment, where with must
that soul be cladde and adourned, which at ye general resurrection and
vprising again of al mankind in flesh according to y^ article of our believe
shall by Christ live everlastingly. But yet for the better and more clear
understanding of this gospel, I think it very expedient to repete and declare
unto you the very beginning of the history which is red in this gospel,
according as saint Ihon the Evangelist does report it in the beginning of the
xi. chapter namely since in it is contained the most comfortable and chefest
article of the christen man's believe. The history is this. As our Savior
Christ abode at Jordan, it chanced that in a town named Bethania, a certain
man called Lazarus lay sick. This town was the natyue place and country
both of the sick man, and of his two susters Mary and Martha. Uerely this Mary
was she, which with a notable record of love toward our savior Christ had
anointed his head as he sat at meat with a right preciouse ointment and with
her hear had wyped his feet which she had washed with the very tears that
ran down from her eyes. By reason whereof we may very well understand, that
there was a singular and a right special amity and friendship between this
family and our savior Christ. Where Chryso stom.
fore when Lazarus was in great paryll of death, his susters, for the
familiarity which they had with Jesus, sent word unto him, how his friend
Lazarus was sore sick, they nothing doubting, but that he of his wonderful
humanity which he bare toward al men, would help his friend being in such
danger. Lo, say they, he whom thou love is sick. They thought it enough
only to give him knowledge of his friends sickness, and therefore they add no
prayers to desire his help. To whom Jesus ma keth answer in this wise. Ueryly
this syckenes is not deadly, but it is therefore chanced unto him, that by
occasion thereof gods glory might be set out, to the intent that wha^ by his
virtue the disease shall be drive awey, the son of god might also be
glorified. A like answer did Christ make to his disciples of him y^ Ihon. 9.
was borne blind, sayng ye it was not his offe^se y^ he was so, but ye gods
works should be showed in him. Certes our savior Christ loved very entierly
Mar tha and Mary, and their brother Lazarus and yet not withstanding his great
love, he suffered him to fall into sickness yea and into death, to the intent we
should Chryso stom.
not count it an unworthy and heuye case i^ ^^ any time the virtuous and good
persons and s^^^^^^s be imbracers of true godliness and the freendess (...) be
otherwhyle assaulted with the troubles and (...)s of this world, god wynking
at the matter, e^^^^er because it is so expedient for them that suffer the same
or because it is so auaylable to the settinge forth of gods glory, not that
god with man's euilles procures his own glory, but that for man's cause he is
wont to turn the euylles which do chance unto us, either to our soul
health, or unto his glory. He knew full well that his friend was sick, yea
before it was told him, but for a plain declaration of the greatness of the
miracle which he went about to utter, it was requysite to have his disciples
minds prepared. After then that tidinges was brought un to Jesus of his
friends death, he went not forth with, but in the self same place he tarried still
for the space of two days, not that he regarded not the danger of his friend,
but because he awayted a more convenient and plentiful occasion of vtteringe
the miracle, and also that he himself whose time was almost comme to dye for
mankind, might herby raise up the minds of his disciples which as yet were
but weak to the hope of the rysyng again herafter. But his disciples for
fear, holding their peace, because their master Christ had but a little before
esca ped out of the Iues hands and therefore thinkinge him to be in more
sauetye in wyldernes, where he now was, Jesus said unto them. Let us go again
into the country of Iewry. The disciples hearing mention made of Iurye, and
calling to their remembrance the deadly hatred which the pharisees bare
against Christ, and also how often they had taken up stones to cast at him and
went about to lay hands ^n him, feared not only their master, but also
themselfes. For they had not as yet received y^ holy ghost and they followed
Jesus yet but with a certain humane affection, themselfes also abhorring death
because of their frayltie and weakness. Wherefore they laboring all that they
could to dissuade him from returning again to Iurye, said unto him. Lord have
thou forgotten how that a few days passed, the Iues thy mortal enemies would
have stoned y^ to death if thou had not the sooner wythdrawen thy self from
their fury? And again wolt thou now go thither, and cast thy self in an open
danger? But Jesus counforted them, putting away their fear with
a certain diffuse parable signifieng, that such persons ought nothing to
fear, which cleave fast to Christ, who is the light of the world. For it is
the Ihon. i.
night which brings with it the vain fears. The day knows them not. Has
not the day (says he) twelve hours? The night shall not come before the time
appointed. In the mean season, who soever walks in the day, stombleth not,
forasmoch as the Sun, which he beholds, makes him to se, and by seeing to
beware the occasion of stomblynge. But who soever, when the Sun is wythdrawen
from him, walks in the night, he stu^bleth, and why? verily because he
lacks light. This did our savior Christ speak meaning, that he is the
light of the Ihon. ^.
world (as saint Ihon in the beginning of his gospel does testify) and
therefore it behooved his disciples to follow his guiding, and not to go before
the light S. Austine.
neither yet to fear before the time come, for so long as they have Christ to
show them light, there is no danger. But when he must be taken from them, the^
comes night upon them, then let them fear. So Erasmus in a^nota.
that according to the exposition of some Doctors, the twelve hours of the
day do betoke^ the appointed time of his life, as like wise he answered to the^
which came from Herod, and counseled him to sle, Theophilactus
because king Herod sought to slay him. It behooves me (says he) this day and
to morrow, and the next Luc. 12.
day to walk about, for it is not possible that a prophet should perysh in any
other place but in Jerusalem. And the time of his passion he calls the power
of darkness and the hour of the wicked persons. As though Christ should heresay
to his disciples. Ye need not to fear my going into Iurye now at this present
time, for I certify you, that the time of my death and passion for mankind is
not yet comme. The day verily has her due hours appointed her of almighty
god, which we at our own choice and pleasure, can neither make shorter, nor
yet longer: so I also have my time prescribed and appointed unto me of my
heavenly father, wherein I must accomplish the busynes, y^ I com for, which is to
redeem the world. This time ca^ not be shortened, ne yet preu^ted by the malice
of y^ Iues. Wherforye have no cause to fear my going at this time into the
parts of Iewry.

With these words after that our Savior Christ had mitigated the fear of his
Apostles, he opens the cause of his going. Lazarus (says he) our friend The
death of godly persons is but a sleep*
slepeth. But I go to awake him out of his sleep. Ue rily my fre^des this is a
new preaching never ere openly herd of in the world, yt death is no death, but
rather a sleep. For without doubt by the goodness and benefit of Christ death
is now made but a sleep to al feithful Christen men and women* for Christ our
redemer by his death has va^nquyshed death and made it but a sleep unto us.
And if it be but a sleep, why do we thus bewail the sleep of our dear
fre^des? why do we fear it our selves? Nay why do we not rather desire it for
the quyetnes therein? Why do we not count them happy and well at ease which have
gotten it? And with this Gospel, do also the words of saint Paul which be
read in the epistle of this i. Tessa. iii^.
day agree which he wrote to his Christen brethern the Thessalonians, sayng. I
would not (brethren) have you ignorant as concerning them which be fallen a
sleep, that ye mourn not as the rest of me^ do, which have no hope. For if we
believe, that Jesus dyed and rose again: even so will god bring again with him
them also which sleep by Jesus.

But Christ's disciples being troubled with fear and suspecting that Jesus
spoke not of the bodily death in deed which after a new manner of speaking he
called a sleep, but rather of the common manner of sleping, answered and said.
Lord if he sleep, he shall do well enough. Uerily the disciples were yet still
afraid to resort again to Iurye and therefore as much as they could, they cut
of the causes of going thither. But Jesus by little and little prepared their
minds to the beholding of the miracle which he would show. For first of all
he had rather call him a sleep than dead, that according to the manner of holy
scrip ture he might show the hope of resurrection. For they sleep, rather
then be dead, which lie in rest, and shall live again. For it is not so easy for
any of us to S. Austine.
raise him that slepeth, as it is for Christ to call the dead again to life.
The disciples therefore not understanding that he spoke of sleep and of waking
again, to the intent they might perceive yt he knew al things, said openly
unto them after the common manner of speaking* Lazarus is dead, and I am glad
Lazarus mortuus est.
for your sakes that I was not there, because ye may believe. Nevertheless let
us go unto him. Christ does not here tell his disciples that he would raise
him again, for he had rather have it signified than expressed, and he had
rather perform it, then promise it, in this behalf also giving us an exemple
of Exemplu^ modesty.
demurenes and to flee vain glory. And he says that he is glad for their
sakes that he was not there. Why so? For if he had been present at his friends
Chryso stomus.
departure and had forthwyth returned him to life, the pharisees and other
which were ever ready to sklaunder all that Christ did, would have said that
he was not dead in deed, but in a trau^ce for a time, as by diverse sickenesses
it has chanced to many one. But now, he being so long dead yea and buried in
his grave, they could not make that cauillation. Christ therefore was glad for
his disciples sake, that they might believe. But what should they believe? Vt
^redatis.
First, that Christ was the true Savior of the world, which raises the dead
out of their graves, yea and out of everlasting damnation and hell, if he had
not dyed for us. Second, that he is ready even in the mids of our troubles to
help us, and cares for our sauetie, as we have exemple in Lazarus, which was
sick, yea and dyed, he felt not Christ's help and yet Christ cared for him,
and his care was not vain. For he raised him again from death. Thomas therefore
which in the Greek is called didymus and in English a twyn, one of Christ^
Apostles perceiving that Christ would needs go into Iurye again among his
enemies, said to his felawes. Let us go to, that we may dye with him, as who
should say, since our master woll needs ^eopard himself among the pharisees
which seek his death, let it not be said, that we wol leave our master, let us
dye with Chryso* ^tomus.
him. Uerily this exhortation of Thomas has in it more rashenes, than feith.
For albeit he is now ready to dye with Christ, yet he would not believe his
resurrection, if he had not seen in his hands the printe of the nails. So
also Peter boldly promised that he Iho^* xx*
would dye with Christ, but it was not feithfully and truly, and therefore
forthwyth he denied his master. But afterward both saint Thomas and also
saint Luc. 22. Mat. ix. Mat. 29.
Peter were two of the stro^gest and surest af all their felawes in their
feith, as appears by their acts. And here we have exemple, that saints and
the cho sen people of God do otherwhiles fall by gods suffraunce into
frayeltie, wherefore let not us despair, though we have been wretched sinners,
yea though we have denied Christ with Peter. Only let us play Peter's part,
and by repentance rise again, and no doubt, god wol take us again unto his
grace. But to our Gospel. Christ with his disciples goes forth and fyndeth,
that Lazarus had lain in his grave four days already. And Bethanye, where
Lazarus and his susters dwelt, was nighe unto Jerusalem, about. xv. furlo^ges
of, and many of the Iues came to Martha and Marye, to comfort the^ over their
brother. Truly, it is the work of charity, to comfort the heavy and troubled
persons, yea it is the work of the holy ghost, and for this cause is the holy
ghost called in scripture a cou^forter, because in adversity he comforts the
beleuers and feithful christen persons. And therefore Gala. v.
the Apostle Paul does nu^bre gentleness, goodness and kyndnes toward the
neighbor among the works of y^ spirit. And albeit it may be, that the
work of co^forting other* in wyelted and ungodly persons, does not proceed of
the holy spirit of the lord, but rather of a curtesy, neighberhode, or
neren^s of blood, as appears in these Iues, which came to comfort the two
su^ters Martha and Marye, and as also the love and charity of Hethe^ persons,
whereby they embrace Mat. vi.
their welwillers, comes of a carnal affection: yet in the godly persons it
comes of feyth and true charity and is the work of the holy ghost, and not
of the flesh. Fr^ thermore we do se here, that many Iues came to comfort these
two susters not without the great providence of god, yt many might be witnesses
of the great mira cle of raising Lazarus from death. For this is y^ cast of of
gods work^, yt they show ^ far otherface in y^ beginning,
tha^ in y^ end. Many of y^ Iues were gathered to comfort these susters, and
loo beside their loking for, they be made witnesses of Lazarus resurrection,
Martha as soon as she herd that Jesus was coming, went and met him, but Mary
sat still in the house. Martha therefore so sone as she came into Jesus sight,
said unto him. Lord if thou had been here, my brother had not dyed. But now
I know, that what soever thou ask of god: god wol surely give it the.
Uerily this Martha believed in Christ Chryso stom.
but not as it behooved her to believe. For she knew not yet that he was god*
and that he wrought his miracles by his own propre power and virtue as
appears by that she puts to, but now also I know that whatsoever thou
ask of god, he woll give it the. So that she took Christ but for a prophet
and a very virtuous and holy man. Christ therefore answers her. Thy brother
shall rise again. I wot, quod Martha, that he shall rise again in the
resurrection at the last day. Here we se that Martha was a good woman and
believed the general resurrection. Wherefore our savior Christ to the intent he
might yet augment the woman's feith and opinion in him, and that he might
declare that he could not only as an holy man and prophet obtain of god life
to the dead, but also that he himself is the fountaigne and giver of life to al
men, and that no death is to be feared of them which put their trust and hope
in him, because that although death comes yet it can not hurt him that
believes on him which is fountaigne of al life, he answered Martha in this
wise. I am the resurrection Fgo su^ resurrectio et vita.
and the life. Ueryly my friends this is the gospel* this is the Euangel, this
is the glad and joyful tydinges most pleasant and comfortable to al Christen
men and women. In this word Christ opens himself unto us, and gives us
resurrection and life which be the greatest and best gifts that ca^ be given
to ma^kynd. But whereby is Christ made unto us our resurrection and our life?
Uerily by feith. And therefore he goes further and says. He that believes in
me, although he be dead, yet shall he live. By feith doubtless the dead man
lives, and by feith the quick man never dies. For ye may not think, that
Christ spoke this only of Lazarus. But who so ever he be that believes, and
has the lively and unfeigned feith in Christ which in the beginning of this
sermon* I spoke of, he shall never dye, albeit that the body for a time shall
sleep. This I say is the Gospel, wherewith in the straightes of death ours
co^sciencies must be fensed and made strong against all the gates of hell and
of death. For against this sure feith, this Mat. 16.
rock, whereupon Christ's church is buylt, not all the gates of hell (as Christ
himself promises) can prevail. And to the intent we should believe this the
better that Christ is our resurrection, he confirmed it with the raisyng of
Lazarus from death to life, he confirmed it also with his own resurrection.
Why do we then mourn the death of our friends? Harken what Christ says. I am
the resurrection. What do we fear things we wot not what in an other world?
Let us believe in Christ which says. I am the life. Truly he gives himself
hole unto us by this gospel, only let us take heed lest by our vnfeithfulnes
we put from us so high and excellent a gift. If Christ had never been made
man: we could have hoped of no risyng again. By our first father Ada^ we were
al made thral unto death, according to gods word in Genesis unto Ada^. What
day so ever thou shall Genesis ij.
eat of the tree of knowledge of good and evil, thou shall surely dye a death.
By Adam verily as witnesses saint Paul death entered first, and again by
Christ came resurrection and life. Wherefore truly these words of our Savior
Christ have a right great comfort in them unto all christen men, forasmuch as
they declare most high virtue and power to be in Christ* that is to wit,
that by him chances to mankind the virtue and power to rise again into
everlasting life. Both the good and bad shall rise again, but not a like, for
the good shall rise unto To who^ Christ is a resurrection.
life* and the badde shall rise unto judgment and everlasting death, and
therefore Christ to them is no resurrection. For which they be that shall be
made pertakers of everlasting life, he shows when he goes on and says in
this wise. He that believes in me, shall live, that is to say, he shall not dye
the second death. We have therefore (good people) two manners two sorts of
resurrection.
of risynge again, for first we rise again here by grace, out of the doungeon
of sin, when we ^e renewed into a new life, and be regenerate by Christ as it
is declared in the third chapter of Ihon. And Ihon. 3.
who soever after this sort does rise again out of sin here in this life*
shall never taste of the second death, which is everlasting damnation, but
shall be pertaker of the second resurrection through Christ at the day of
judgment, which shall be life everlasting and endless joy. This in effect were
Christ's words to Martha, and after he had thus opened himself unto her, he
asked her whether she believed this? Whereunto she answered and said. Yea Lord I
believe that thou art Christ the son of God, which have come into the
world. Uerily this confession of feith that this blessed woman Martha makes
here of Christ, seems to be like unto that, which saint Peter and the rest
of thapostles made, when Christ asked them, whom they said that he was, and
saint Peter in all their names answered. Thou art Christ Mat. 16 Mat. 8. Luc. ix.
the son of the living god, that is to say, thou art the Messiah or Savior
of the world which was so long before promised by the prophets and looked for
of the fathers. And like as flesh and blood disclosed not this feith to saint
Peter, but the heavenly father: so this like confession that Martha made,
proceeded not of any carnal love, but of the holy ghost But what do these words
betoke^, thou art Christ? Uerily to be Christ, is to be the lord and
co^querour
over sin, afflictions, death and hell. And for this cause was he promised,
even to vanquish all the adverse powers in heavenly things. I say he is that
sede of the woman which should break the serpe^tes head, that is to wit, the
power of the devil. For the devil Genesis 3.
rules in the world through Gods permission and sufferaunce by sin,
afflictions, death, and hell. But all these things in the feithfull persons
be overcome and vanquished through Christ. Christ is Gal. iij. psalm. 1^^ Hier.
ij. i. Pe. ij. Coll. ij. Ihon. x. Iho^. ^4. i, Cor. ^5
our mediator and our peace. He is the head, and foundation of the church, he
is our pressed, our bishop to make suit to his father for v^, and to save us his
people from our sins. Yea there is none other lucy to heaven but by him for he
is the door. He is our lucy, he is the troth, he is the life, for like as all
were dead by Adam, so by Christ must they he reuiu^^.

This have I spoken concerning the declaration of this present Gospel. Now
dear fre^des, according to the instruction which we have rehearsed here out of
holy scripture, let us not fear nor lament this bodily death, but rather the
spiritual death of the soul, both in this world and in the next. And on the
contrary, as often as we fall into sin, let us by due repentance, rise
again here in this life, let us believe steadfastly, that Christ is our
resurrection and life, and no doubt, after this sleep of the body, we shall
rise again at the general rising into life everlasting, by Christ our lord.
Which with the father and holy ghost three persons and one god be glorified and
lauded for ever and ever.

Amen.
finis.
Imprinted in Fletestrete next to the white heart by Richard Banks.

cu^ priuilegio ad imprimendu^ solum.


