THE NEW TESTAMENT OF JESUS CHRIST, TRANSLATED FAITHFVLLY INTO ENGLISH, out of
the authentical Latin, according to the best corrected copies of the same,
diligently conferred with the Greek and other editions in diverse languages:
With ARGVMENTS of books and chapters, ANNOTATIONS, and other necessary
helps, for the better understanding of the text, and specially for the
discovery of the CORRVPTIONS of diverse late translations, and for clearing the
CONTROVERSIES in religion, of these days: IN THE ENGLISH COLLEGE OF RHEMES.

Psalm. 118. Da mihi intellectum, and scrutabor legem tuam, and custodiam illam
in toto cord meo.

That is, Give me understanding, and I vvil search thy law, and vvil keep it
with my whole heart.

S. Aug. tract. 2. in Epist. Joan. Omnia qua leguntur in Scripturis sanctis, ad
instructionem and salutem nostram intent oportes audire: maxim tamen memoria
commendanda sunt, qua aduersus Hareticos valent plurimum: quorum insidia,
infirmiores quosque and negligentiores circumuenire non cessant.

That is, Al things that are readde in holy Scriptures, we must hear with
great attention, to our instruction and salvation: but those things specially
must be commended to memory, which make most against Heretics: whose
deceites cease not to circumuent and beguile all the weaker sort and the more
negligent persons.

PRINTED AT RHEMES, by John Fogny. 1582. CVM PRIVILEGIO.

THE CENSVRE AND APPROBATION.
CVM huius versionis ac aeditionis authors, nobis de fide and eruditione sint
probe cogniti, aliique S. Theologiae and linguae Anglicanae peritissimi viri
contestati sint, nihil in hoc opere reperiri, quod non sit Catholicae Ecclesiae
doctrinae, and pietati consentaneum, vel quod vllo modo potestati ac paci
civilly repugnet, sed omnia potius veram fidem, Reip. bonum, vitaeque ac morum
probitatem promouere: ex ipsorum fide censemus ista vtiliter excudi and
publicari posse.

PETRVS REMIGIVS Archidiaconus mayor Metropolitana insignis Ecclesia Rhemensis,
Iuris Canonici Doctor, Archiepiscopatus Rhemensis generalis Vicarius. HVBERTVS
MORVS, Rhemensis Ecclesiae Decanus, and Ecclesiastes, and in sacratissimae
Theologiae facultate Doctor. IOANNES LE BESGVE, Canonicus Rhemensis, Doctor
Theologus, and Cancellarius Academiae Rhemensis. GVLIELMVS BALBVS, Theologiae
professor, Collegij Rhemensis Archimagister.


S. August. lib. 1. c. 3. de sermon. Do. in monte. Paupertate spiritus peruenitur
ad Scripturaru^ cognitionem: vbi oportet hominem se mitem praebere, ne
peruicacibus concertationibus indocilis reddatur. We come to the understanding
of Scriptures through poverty of spirit: where a man must show himself
meeke-minded, lest by stubburne contentions, he become incapable and unapt to
be taught.
THE PREFACE TO THE READER TREATING OF THESE THREE POINTS: OF THE TRANSLATION
OF HOLY SCRIPTVRES INTO THE vulgar tongues, and namely into English: of the
causes why this new Testament is translated according to the ancient vulgar
Latin text: and of the manner of translating the same.
THE holy Bible long since translated by us into English, and the old Testament
lying by us for lack of good means to publish the whole in such sort as a
work of so great charge and importance requires: we have yet through Gods
goodness at length fully finished for thee (most Christian reader) all the NEW
TESTAMENT, which is the principal, most profitable and comfortable piece of
holy vvritte: and, as well for all other institution of life and doctrine, as
specially for deciding the doubts of these days, more propre and pregnant
then the other part not yet printed.

Which translation we do not for all that publish, Translation of the
Scriptures into the vulgar tongues, not absolutely necessary or profitable,
but according to the time.
upon erroneous opinion of necessity, that the holy Scriptures should alvvaies
be in our mother tongue, or that they ought, or were ordained by God, to be
read indifferently of all, could be easily understood of every one that reads
or hears them in a known language: or that they were not often through
man's malice or infirmity, pernicious and much hurtful to many: or that we
generally and absolutely deemed it more convenient in it self, and more
agreeable to Gods word and honor or edification of the faithful, to have them
turned into vulgar tongues, then to be kept and studied only in the
Ecclesiastical learned languages: Not for these nor any such like causes do
we translate this sacred book, but upon special consideration of the present
time, state, and condition of our country, unto which, diverse things are
either necessary, or profitable and medicinable now, that otherwise in the
peace of the Church were neither much requisite, nor perchance wholy
tolerable.

In this matter, The Churches wisdoms and moderation concering vulgar
translation.
to mark only the wisdoms and moderation of holy Church and the governors
thereof on the one side, and the indiscerete zeal of the popular, and their
factious leaders, on the other, is a high point of prudence, These later,
partly of simplicity, partly of curiosity, and specially of pride and
disobedience, have made claim in this case for the common people, with
plausible pretenses many, but good reasons none at all. The other, Mat. 24, 45,
1 Cor. 4, 1.
to whom Christ has given charge of our souls, tho dispensing of Gods
mysteries and treasures (among which holy Scripture is no small store) and the
feeding his family in season with food fit for every sort, have neither of
old nor of late, ever wholy condemned all vulgar versions of Scripture, nor
have at any time generally forbidden the faithful to read the same: yet they
have not by public authority prescribed, commanded, or authentically ever
recommended any such interpretation to be indifferently used of all men.

The Armenians say they have the Psalter and some other pieces translated by S.
Chrysostom into their language, The Scriptures in the vulgar languages of
diverse nations.
when he was banished among them: Bib. Sa^ct. li. 4.
and George the Patriarch, Hiero, ep. 134.
in vvriting his life, signifies no less. The Saluonians affirm they have
the Scriptures in their vulgar tongue, turned by S. Hierom, and some would
gather so much by his own words in his epistle to Sophronius, Bib. Sa^ct.
lib. 4.
but the place in deed proves in not. Vulpilas surely gave the Scriptures to
the Goths in their own tongue, and that before he was an Arrian. Ancient
Catholic translations of the Bible into the Italian, French, and English
tongue.
It is almost three hundred years, since James Archbishop of Genua, is said to
have translated the Bible into Italian. More then two hundred years ago, in
the days of Charles the fifth, the French king, was it put forth faithfully
in French, the sooner to shake out of the deceived peoples hands, the false
heretical translations of a sect called Waldensis. Li. 1 hist. Angl. c. 1.
In our own country, notwithstanding the Latin tongue was ever (to use
Venerable Bedes words) common to all the provinces of the same for meditation
or study of Scriptures, and no vulgar translation commonly used or occupied of
the multitude, yet they were ^xtant in English even before the troubles that
Vvicleffe and his folovvers raised in our Church, as appears, as well by some
pieces yet remaining, An ancient prouincial co^stitution in England concerning
English translations. See Linvvod li. 5 tit. de Magistris.
as by a prouincial Constitution of Thomas Arundel Archbishop of Canturburie,
in a Council holden at Oxford. where strait provision was made, that no
heretical version set forth by Vvicleffe, or his adherentes, should be
suffered, nor any other in or after his time be published or permitted to be
readde, being not approved and allowed by the Diocesan before: alleging S.
Hierom for the difficulty and danger of interpreting the holy Scripture out of
one tongue into an other, though by learned and Catholic men. So also it is
there insinuated, that neither the Translations set forth before that Heretics
time, nor other afterward being approved by the lavvful Ordinaries, were ever
in our country wholly forbidden, though they were not (to say the truth) in
quiet and better times (much less when the people were prone to alteration,
heresy, or novelty) either hastily admitted, or ordinarily readde of the
vulgar, but used only, or specially, of some devout religious and
contemplatiues persons, in reverence, secrecy, and silence, for their
spiritual comfort.

Now since Luthers revolt also, The like Catholic and vulgar translations in
many countries, since Luthers time.
diverse learned Catholics, for the more speedy abolishing of a number of false
and impious translations put forth by sundry sects, and for the better
preservation or reclaim of many good souls endangered thereby, have published
the Bible in the several languages of almost all the principal provinces of the
Latin Church: no other books in the world being so pernicious as heretical
translations of the Scriptures, poisoning the people under color of divine
authority, and not many other remedies being more sovereign against the same
(if it be used in order, discretion, and humility) then the true, faithful,
and sincere interpretation opposed thereunto.

Which causes the holy Church not to forbid utterly any Catholic
translation, The Churches order and determination concerning the reading of
Catholic translatio^s of the Bible in vulgar tongues.
though she allow not the publishing or reading of any absolutely and without
exception, or limitation: knowing by her divine and most sincere wisdom, how,
where, when, and to whom these her Masters and Spouses gifts are to be
bestowed to the most good of the faithful: and therefore neither generally
permits that which must needs do hurt to the unworthy, nor absolutely
condemns that which may do much good to the worthy. Whereupon, the order
which many a wise man wished for before, was taken by the Deputies of the late
famous Council of Trent in this behalf, Ind. lib. prohibit. regula 4.
and confirmed by supreme authority, that the holy Scriptures, though truly
and Catholikely translated into vulgar tongues, yet may not be indifferently
readde of all men, nor of any other then such as have express license
thereunto of their lawful Ordinaries, with good testimony from their Curates
or Confessors, that they be humble, discrete and devout persons, and like to
take much good, and no harm thereby. Which prescript, though in these days
of ours it can not be so precisely observed, as in other times and places,
where there is more due respect of the Churches authority, rule, and
discipline: yet, we trust all wise and godly persons will use the matter in the
mean while, with such moderation, meekenes, and subjection of heart, as the
handling of so sacred a book, the sincere senses of Gods truth therein, and
the holy Canons, Councels, reason, and religion do require.

Wherein, though for due preservation of this divine work from abuse and
profanation, and for the better bridling of the intolerable insolency of
proud, curious, and contentious wits, the governors of the Church guided by
Gods Spirit, The holy Scriptures never read of al persons indifferently, at
their pleasure.
as ever before, so also upon more experience of the malady of this time the^
before, have taken more exact order both for the readers and translatours in
these later ages, then of old: yet we must not imagine that in the primitive
Church, either every one that understood the learned tongues wherein the
Scriptures were written, or other languages into which they were translated,
might without reprehension, read, reason, dispute, turn and toss the
Scriptures: or that our forefathers suffered every schole-maister, scholar, or
Grammarian that had a little Greek or Latin, straight to take in hand the holy
Testament: or that the translated Bibles into the vulgar tongues, were in the
hands of every husbandman, artificer, prentice, boys, girls, mistress,
maid, man: that they were sung, plays, alleged, of every tinker, tauerner,
rimer, minstrel: that they were for table talk, for alebenches, for boats and
barges, and for every profane person and company. No, in those better times
men were neither so ill, nor so curious of them selves, so to abuse the blessed
book of Christ: neither was there any such easy means before printing was
invented, to disperse the copies into the hands of every man, as now there is.

They were then in Libraries, Where and in whose hands the Scriptures were
in the primitive Church.
Monasteries, Colleges, Churches, in Bishops, Priests, and some other devout
principal L^y men's houses and hands: who used them with sear and reverence,
and specially such parts as perteined to good life and manners, not meddling,
but in pulpit and schools (and that moderately to) with the hard and high
mysteries and places of greater difficulty. The poor ploughman, could then in
laboring the ground, sing the hymns and psalms either in known or unknown
languages, How the (...) of those days did read them, with what humility
and religion, and enformation of life and manners.
as they heard them in the holy Church, though they could neither read nor
know the sense, meaning, and mysteries of the same. Such holy persons of both
sexes, to whom S. Hierom in diverse Epistles to them, commends the reading and
meditation of holy Scriptures, were diligent to search all the godly histories
and imitable examples of chastity, humility, obedience, clemency, poverty,
penance, renou^cing the world* they noted specially the places that did breed
the hatred of sin, fear of Gods judgment, delight in spiritual cogitations:
they referred them selves in all hard places, to the judgment of the ancient
fathers and their masters in religion, never presuming to contend, control,
teach or talk of their own sense and fantasy, in deep questions of
divinity. Then the Virgins, did meditate upon the places and examples of
chastity, modesty and demureness: the married, on coniugal faith and
continency: the parents, how to bring up their children in faith and sear of
God: the Prince, how to rule: the subject, how to obey: the Priest, how to
teach: the people, how to learn.

Then the scholar taught not his master, The fathers sharply reprehend as an
abuse, that al indifferenly should read, expound, and talk of the Scriptures.
the sheep controuled not the Pastor, the young student set not the Doctor to
school, not reproved their fathers of error and ignorance. Or if any were in
those better days (as in all times of heresy such must needs be) that had
itching ears, tikling tongues and wits, curious and contentious disputers,
hearers, and talkers rather then doers of Gods word: such the Fathers did ever
sharply reprehend, counting them unworthy and unprofitable readers of the holy
Scriptures. S. Hierom in his Epistle to Paulinus, after declaration that no
handy craft is so base, nor liberal science so easy, that can be had without a
master (which S. Augustine also affirms, Hiero. ep. 103^. 6.
De vtilitate cred. cap. 7.) nor that men presume in any occupation to teach
that they never learned, Only (says he) the art of Scripture is that which
every man chalengeth: this the chatting old wife, this the doting old man,
this the brabling sophister, this on every hand, men presume to teach before
they learn it. Again, Some with poise of lofty words devise of scripture
matters among women: othersome (phy upon it) learn of women, what to teach
men, and lest that be not enough, by facility of tongue, or rather audacitie,
teach that to others, which they understand never a whit them selves. to say
nothing of such as be of my faculty: who stepping from secular learning to
holy scriptures, and able to tickle the ears of the multitude with a smothe
tale, think all they speak, to be the Law of God. This he wrote then, when
this malady of arrogancy and presumption in divine matters, was nothing so
outrageous as now it is.

S. Gregory Nazianzene made an oration of the moderation that was to be used
in these matters: In orat. de moderatio. in disputa. seruanda.
where he says, that some in his time thought them selves to have all the
wisdom in the world, when they could once repeat two or three words, and
them ill couched together, out of Scriptures, but he there divinely discourses
of the orders and differences of degrees: how in Christ's mystical body, some
are ordained to learn, some to teach: that all are not Apostles, all Doctors,
all interpreters, all of tongues and knowledge, not all learned in Scriptures
and divinity: that the people went not up to talk with God in the mountain,
but Moses, Aaron, and Eleazar: nor they neither, but by the difference of
their callings: that they that rebel against this ordinance, are guilty of the
conspiracy of Core and his co^plices: that in Scripture there is both milk
for babes, and meat for men, to be dispensed, not according to every ones
greedines of appetit or vvilfulnes, The Scriptures must be delivered in measure
and discretion, according to each man's need and capacity.
but as is most meet for each ones necessity and capacity: that as it is a
shame for a Bishop or Priest to be unlearned in Gods mysteries, so for the
common people it is often times profitable to salvation, not to be curious, but
to follow their Pastors in sincerity and simplicity: whereof excellently
says S. Augustine, De ^^gone Christ. c. 33.
Fidei simplicitate and sinceritate lactati, nutriamur in Christo: and cum
parui sumus, maiorum cibos non appetamus. that is, Being fed with the
simplicity and sincerity of faith, as it were with milk, so let us be
nourished in Christ: De bono persevere. c. 16.
and when we are little ones, let us not covet the meats of the elder sort.
Who * in an other place testifies, that the word of God can not be preached
nor certain mysteries uttered to all men alike, but are to be delivered
according to the capacity of the hearers: 1 Cor. 3.
as he proves both * by S. Paul's example, who gave not to every sort strong
meat, but milk to many, as being not spiritual, Io. 16.
but carnal and not capable: and * by our lords also, vvhho spoke to some
plainly, and to others in parables, and affirmed that he had many things to
utter which the hearers were not able to bear.

How much more may we gather, that all things that be written, are not for
the capacity and diet of every of the simple readers, but that very many
mysteries of holy vvritte, be very far above their reach, and may and ought to
be (by as great reason) delivered them in measure and mean most meet for
them? which in deed can hardly be done, Ia orat. de modera. in disp. serua.
in fine. Hiero. in prooem. co^. mentar. in Ezachi.
when the whole book of the Bible lies before every man in his mother
tongue, The Jews law for not reading certain books of holy Scripture until
a time.
to make choice of what he list. For which cause the said Gregory Nazianzen
wishes the Christians had as good a law as the Hebrews of old had: who (as
S. Hierom also witnesses) took order among them selves that none should read
the Cantica Canticorum nor certain other pieces of hardest Scriptures, till
they were thirty years of age.

And truly there is no cause why men should be more loath to be ordered and
moderated in this point by Gods Church and their Pastors, then they are in the
use of holy Sacraments: for which as Christ has appointed Priests and
ministers, at whose hands we must receive them, and not be our own caruers:
Ephesians. 4.
so has he given * us doctors, prophets, expou^ders, interpreters, teachers
and preachers, to take the law and our faith at their mouths: because our
faith and religion comes not to us properly or principally by reading of
Scriptures, To. 10, 17.
but (as the Apostle says) by hearing of the preachers lavvfully sent: though
reading in order and humility, much confirms and aduanceth the same.
Therefore this holy book of the Scriptures, is called of S. Ambrose, Liber
sacerdotalis, the book of priests, at whose hands and disposition we must
take and use it. Li. 2. ad Great.

The wise vvil not here regard what some willful people do mutter, The
popular objections of vvithholding the Scriptures from the people, ansvvered.
that the Scriptures are made for all men, and that it is of envy that the
Priests do keep the holy book from them. Which suggestion comes of the
same serpent * that seduced our first parents, Genesis 3.
who persuaded them, that God had forbidden them that tree of knowledge, lest
they should be as cunning as him self, Why the Church permits not every one
at their pleasure to read the Scripture.
and like unto the Highest. No, no, the church does it to keep them from blind
ignorant presumption, and from that which the Apostle calls falsi nominis
scientiam knowledge falsely so called: 1 Timothy 6, 20.
and not to embarre them from the true knowledge, To. 12, 3.
of Christ. She would have all wise, but vsque ad sobrietatem, unto
sobriety, as the Apostle speaks: she knovveth the Scriptures be ordained for
every state, as meats, elements, fire, water, candle, knives, svvord, and the
like: which are as needful (most of them) for children as old folks, for the
simple as the wise: but yet would mar all, if they were at the guiding of
other then wise men, or were in the hands of every one, for whose
preservation they be profitable. She forbids not the reading of them in any
language, enuieth no man's commodity, but gives order how to do it to
edification, and not destruction: The holy Scriptures to carnal men and
Heretics, are as pearls to swine.
how to do it without casting the holy to dogs, Mat. 7, 6.
or pearls to hogs: (See S. Chrysostom. ho. 24 in Matthew, declaring these
hogs and dogs to be carnal men and Heretics, that take no good of the holy
mysteries, but thereby do both hurt them selves and others:) how to do it
agreably to the sovereign sincerity, majesty, and depth of Mystery contained
in the same. She would have the presumptuous Heretic, notvvithstanding he
allege them never so fast, flying as it were through the whole Bible, and
coting the Psalms, Prophets, Gospels Epistles, never so readily for his
purpose, as Vincentius Lirinensis says such men's fashion is: Li. de
prescriptionibus.
yet she would according to Tertullians rule, have such mere usurpers quite
discharged of all occupying and possession of the holy Testament, which is her
old and only right and inheritance, and belongs not to Heretics at all,
Orig. in 2 ad To.
whom Origin calls Scripturaru^ fures, thieves of the Scriptures. She would
have the unworthy repelled, the curious repressed, the simple measured, the
learned himbled, and all sorts so to use them or abstain from them, as is
most convenient for every ones salvation: with this general admonition, that
none can understand the meaning of God in the Scriptures Luca 24.
except Christ open their sense, and make them partakers of his holy Spirit in
the unity of his mystical body: and for the rest, she commits it to the
Pastor of every province and people, according to the difference of time,
place, and persons, how and in what sort the reading of the Scriptures is more
or less to be procured or permitted.

Wherein, S. Chrysostoms exhortations to the reading of holy Scriptures, and
when the people is so to be exhorted.
the variety of circumstances causes them to deal diversely: as we see by S.
Chrysostoms people of Constantinople, who were so delicate, dull, vvorldly,
In vita Athanasij.
and so much given to dice, cards, specially stage-plaies or theaters (as S.
Gregory Nazianzene witnesses) that the Scriptures and all holy lections of
divine things were loathsome unto them: whereby their holy Bishop was forced Ho.
2 in Mat. and ho. 3 de Lazaro. et ho. 3 in 2 ad These. and alibi sape.
in many of his sermons to cry out against their extreme negligence and
contempt of Gods word, declaring, that not only Eremites and Religious (as
they alleged for their excuse) but secular men of all sorts might read the
Scriptures, and often have more need thereof in respect of them selves, then
the other that live in more purity and contemplation: further insinuating,
that though diverse things be high and hard therein, yet many godly histories,
lives, examples, and precepts of life and doctrine be plain: and finally, that
when the Gentiles were so cunning and diligent to impugn their faith, it were
not good for Christians to be to simple or negligent in the defense thereof. as
(in truth) it is more requisite for a Catholic man in these days when our
Adversaries be industrious to empeache our belief, to be skilful in
Scriptures, then at other times when the Church had no such enemies.

To this sense said S, Chrysostom diverse things, S. Chrysostom makes nothing
for the popular and licentious reading of Scriptures used among the Protestants
now a days.
not as a teacher in schole, making exact and general rules to be observed in
all places and times, but as a pulpit man, agreably to that audience and his
peoples default: nor making it therefore (as some peruersely gather of his
words) a thing absolutely needful for every poor artificer to read of study
Scriptures, nor any whit favoring the presumptuous, curious, and contentious
iangling and searching of Gods secrets, reproved by the foresaid fathers, much
less approving the excessive pride and madness of these days, Every simple
artificer among them reads much more the deepest and hardest question^s of
holy Scripture, then the moral parts.
when every man and woman is become not only a reader, but a teacher,
controuler, and judge of Doctors, Church, Scriptures and all: such as either
contemn or easily pass over all the moral parts, good examples, and precepts
of life (by which as well the simple as learned might be much edified) and
only in a manner, occupy them selves in dogmatical, mystical, high, and hidden
secrets of Gods counsels, as of Predestination, reprobation, election,
prescience, forsaking of the Jews, vocation of the gentiles, and other
incomprehensible mysteries, 1. Tim. 6.
Languishing about questions of only says, fiduce, new phrases and figures,
2 Timothy c. 3
ever learning, but never coming to knowledge, reading and tossing in pride
of vvitte, conceit of their own cunning, and upon presumption of I can tell
what spirit, 2 Pet. 3.
such books specially and Epistles, as S. Peter foretold that the unlearned
and instable would deprave to their own damnation.

They delight in none more then in the Epistle to the Romans, They presuppose
no difficulties, which all the learned fathers felt to be in the Scriptures.
the Cantica canticorum, the Apocalypse, which have in them as many mysteries
as words. they find no difficulty in the sacred book Apoc. 5, 1.
clasped with seven seals. they ask for no expositor Act. 8. Confess. lib.
12. cap. 14.
with the holy Eunuch. they feel no such depth of Gods science in the
scriptures, as S. Augustine did, when he cried our, Mira profunditas
eloquiorum tuorum, mira profunditas (Deus meus) mira profunditas: horror est
intendere in eam, horror honoris, and tremor amoris. that is, O wonderful
profoundnes of thy words: wonderful profoundnes, my God, wonderful
profoundnes: it makes a man quake to look on it: to quake for reverence, and
to tremble for the love thereof. they regard not that which the same Doctor
affirms, See ep. 3. Aug.
that the depth and profunditie of wisdoms, not only in the words of holy
Scripture, but also in the matter and sense, is so wonderful, that, live a man
never so long, be he of never so high a vvitte, never so studious, never so
serue^t to attain the knowledge thereof, yet when he ends, Hiero, ep. 13.
c. 4.
he shall confess he does but begin. they feel not with S. Hierom, that the
text has a hard shel to be broken before we come to the kirnel. they will
not stay them selves in only reading the sacred Scriptures thirtene years
together, Ruff. Ec. hist. li. 2. c. 9.
with S. Basil and S. Gergorie Nazianzene, before they expound them, nor take
the care (as they did) never otherwise to interpret them, then by the uniform
consent of their forefathers and tradition Apostolic.

If our new Ministers had had this congitation and care that these and all
other wise men have, Manners and life nothing amended, but much worse, since
this licentious tossing of holy Scriptures.
and ever had, our country had never fallen to this miserable state in
religion, and that under pretense, color, and countenance of Gods word:
neither should virtue and good life have been so pitifully corrupted in time of
such reading, toiling, tumbling and translating the book of our life and
salvation: whereof the more precious the right and reverent use is, the more
pernicious is the abuse and profanation of the same: which every man of
experience by these fevv years proof, and by comparing the former days and
manners to these of ours, may easily try.

Look whether your men be more virtuous, your women more chaste, your
children more obedient, your servants more trusty, your maids more modest,
your friends more faithful, your laity more just in dealing, your Clergy more
devout in praying: whether there be more religion, fear of God, faith and
conscience in all states now, then of old, when there was not so much
reading, chatting, and iangling of Gods word, but much more sincere dealing,
doing, and keeping the same. Look whether through this disorder, women teach
not their husbands, children their parents, young fools their old and wise
fathers, the scholars their masters, the sheep their pastor, and the People
the Priest. Scriptures as profanely cited as heathen poets.
Look whether the most chaste and sacred sentences of Gods holy word, be not
turned of many, into mirth, mockery, amorous ballets and detestable letters of
love and leudnes: their delicate rimes, tunes, and translations much increasing
the same.

This fall of good life and profaning the divine mysteries, every body sees:
but the great corruption and decay of faith hereby, Scriptures err^neously
expounded according to every wicked man's private fancy.
none see but wise men, who only know, that, were the Scriptures never so
truly translated, yet Heretics and ill men that follovv their own spirit
and know nothing, but their private fantasy, and not the sense of the holy
Church and Doctors, must needs abuse them to their damnation: 1 Cor. 2,
and that the curious simple and * sensual men which have no taste of the things
that be of the Spirit of God, may of infinite places take occasion of
pernicious errors. for though the letter or text have no error, yet (says S.
Ambrose) the Arrian, or (as we may now speak) the Caluinian interpretation
has errors. lib. 2 ad Gratianum ca. 1. and Tertullian says, The sense
adulserated is as perilous as the style corrupted. De Praescript. S. Hilarie
also speaks thus: Heresy rises about the understanding, not about the
vvriting: the fault is in the sense, not in the word. lib. 2 de Trinit. in
principio. and S. Augustine says, that many hold the scriptures as they do
the Sacraments, ad speciem, and non ad salutem: to the outvvard show, and not
to salvation. de Baptis. cont. Donat. lib. 3 ca. 19. Finally all Sect-maisters
and ravening wolves, Mat. 4.
yea * the devils them selves pretend Scriptures, Al Heretics pretend
Scriptures.
allege Scriptures, and wholy shroud them selves in Scriptures, as in the
wool and fleese of the simple sheep. Whereby the vulgar, in these days of
general disputes, can not but be in extreme danger of error, though their
books were truly translated, and were truly in them selves Gods own
word in deed.

But the case now is more lamentable: The Scriptures have been falsely and
heretically translated into the vulgar tongues, and sundry other ways
sacrilegiously abused, and so given to the people to read.
for the Protestants and such as S. Paul calls ambulantes in astutia, 2 Cor.
4.
vvalking in deceitfulnes, have so abused the people and many other in the
world, not unwise, that by their false translations they have in steed of
Gods Law and Testament, and for Christ's written will and word, given them
their own wicked vvriting and fantasies, most shamefully in all their
versions Latin, English, and other tongues, corrupting both the letter and sense
by false translation, adding, detracting, altering, transposing, pointing, and
all other guileful means: specially where it serves for the advantage of
their private opinions, for which, they are bold also, partly to disauthorise
quite, partly to make doubtful, diverse whole books allowed for Canonical
Scripture by the universal Church of God this thousand years and upward: to
alter all the authentical and Ecclesiastical words used sithence our
Christianity, into new profane novelties of speeches agreeable to their
doctrine: to change the titles of works, to put out the names of the authors,
Bezaan not. in c. 1. Lu. v. 78.
to charge the very Evangelist with follovving untrue translation, to add
whole sentences proper to their sect, into their psalms in meter, See the
tenth article of their Creed in meter.
even into the very Creed in rhyme. All this their dealing is noted (as occasion
serves) in the Annotations upon this Testiment: and more at large in a book
lately made purposely of that matter, called, A DISCOVERY etc.
al which the poor deceived people say and sing as though they were Gods
own word, being in deed through such sacrilegious treachery, made the
Devils word.

To say nothing of their intolerable liberty and license to change the
accustomed callings of God, Angel, men, places, and things used by the Apostles
and all antiquity, in Greek, Latin, and all other languages of Christian
Nations, into new names, sometimes falsely, and alvvaies ridiculously and for
ostentation taken of the Hebrews: to frame and fine the phrases of holy
Scriptures after the form of profane writers, sticking not, for the same to
supply, add, alter or diminish as freely as if they translated Liuie, Virgil,
or Terence. Having no religious respect to keep either the majesty or sincere
simplicity of that venerable style of Christ's spirit, as S. Augustine
speaks, which kind the holy Ghost did choose of infinite wisdoms to have
the divine mysteries rather uttered in, then any other more delicate, much
less in that meretricious manner of vvriting that sundry of these new
translators do use: of which sort Calvin him self and his pue-fellovves so
much complain, Calvin co^plaineth of the new delicat tra^slators, namely
Castalion: him self and Beza being as bad or worse.
that they profess, Satan to have gained more by these new interpreters
(their number, Pref. in nouu^ Testa. Gal. 1567.
leuitie of spirit, and audacitie increasing daily) then he did before by
keeping the word from the people. And for a pattern of this mischief, they
give Castalion, adiuring all their churches and scholars to bevvare of his
translation, as one that has made a very sport and mockery of Gods holy word.
so they charge him: them selves (and the Zuinglians of Zuricke, Iost^ Sim lerus
in vita Bullingeri.
whose translations Luther therefore abhorred) handling the matter with no
more fidelity, gravity, or sincerity, then the other: but rather with much
more falsification, or (to use the Apostles words) cauponation and
adulteration of Gods word, then they, besides many wicked gloses, 2 Cor. 2.
17.
prayers, confession of faith, containing both blasphemous errors See the 4
article of their Creed in meter, where they profess that Christ descended to
deliver the fathers, and afterward in their confession of their faith, they
deny Limbus patrum.
and plain contradictions to them selves and among them selves, all priuileged
and authorized to be joined to the Bible, and to be said and sung of the poor
people, and to be believed as articles of faith and wholy consonant to Gods
word.

We therefore having compassion to see our beloved country men, with extreme
danger of their souls, to use only such profane translations, and erroneous
men's mere fantasies, for the pure and blessed word of truth, much also moved
thereunto by the desires of many devout persons: have set forth, for you
(benign readers) the new Testament to begin vvithal, The purpose and
commodity of setting forth this Catholic edition.
trusting that it may give occasion to you, after diligent perusing thereof, to
lay away at lest such their impure versions as hitherto you have been forced to
occupy. How well we have done it, we must not be judges, but refer all
to Gods Church and our superiors in the same. to them we submit our selves,
and this, and all other our labors, to be in part or in the whole, reformed,
corrected, altered, or quite abolished: most humbly desiring pardon if through
our ignorance, temeritie, or other humane infirmity, we have any where
mistaken the sense of the holy Ghost. further promising, that if hereafter we
epsy any of our own errors, or if any other, either friend of good vvil, or
adversary for desire of reprehension, shall open unto us the same: we vvil not
(as Protestants do) for defense of our estimation, or of pride and contention,
by wrangling words vvilfully persist in them, but be most glad to hear of
them, and in the next edition or otherwise to correct them: for it is truth
that we seek for, and Gods honor: which being had either by good intention,
or by occasion, al is well. The religious care and sincerity observed in this
translation.
This we profess only, that we have done our endeavor with prayer, much
fear and trembling, lest we should dangerously err in so sacred, high, and
divine a work: that we have done it with all faith, diligence, and
sincerity: that we have used no partiality for the disadvantage of our
adversaries, nor no more license then is sufferable in translating of holy
Scriptures: continually keeping our selves as near as is possible, to our text
and to the very words and phrases which by long use are made venerable, See
S. August. li. 3. confess. c. 5.
though to some propsiane or delicate cares they may seem more hard to
barbarous, * as the whole style of Scripture does lightly to such at the
beginning: acknowledging with S. Hierom, that in other writings it is enough to
give in translation, sense for sense, but that in Scriptures, lest we miss
the sense, we must keep the very words. Ad Pammach. epistola 101. ca. 2 in
princip. We must, says S. Augustine, speak according to a set rule, lest
license of words breed some wicked opinion concerning the things contained
under the words. De ciuitate lib. 10. cap, 12. The ancient fathers kept
religiously the very barbarismes of the vulgar Latin text.
Whereof our holy forefathers and ancient Doctors had such a religious care,
that they would not change the very barbarismes of incongruities of speech
which by long use had prevailed in the old readings or recitings of
scriptures* as, Mat. 22.
Neque uubent neque nubentur, in Tertullian li. 4. in Marcion. in S. Hilarie in
c. 22 Mat. Mar. 8.
and in all the fathers. Qui me confusus fuerit, confundar and ego eum, in S.
Cyprian ep. 63 nu. 7. Talis enim nobis decebat sacerdos (which was an elder
translation then the vulgar Latin that now is) in S. Ambrose c. 3 de
fugaseculi. Hebr. 7.
and S. Hierom him self, who otherwise corrected the Latin translation that
was used before his time, yet keeps religiously (as him self professes
Praefat. Mat. 6. 10. 22.
in 4 Euang. ad Damasum) these and the like speeches, Nonne vos magis pluris
estis illis? and, filius hominis non venit ministrari, sed ministrare: and,
Neque nubent, neque nubentur: Lu^. 13.
in his commentaries upon these places. and, Non capit Prophetam perire extra
Jerusalem, in his commentaries in c. 2. Joel. sub finem. And S. Augustine,
who is most religious in all these phrases, counts it a special pride and
infirmity in those that have a little learning in tongues, and none in things,
that they easily take offense of the simple speeches or solecismes in the
scriptures. de doctrina Christ. li. 2. cap, 13. See also the same holy father
li. 3 de doct. Christ. c. 3. and tract. 2 in Euang. Joan. But of the manner of
our translation more anon.

Now, though the text thus truly translated, might sufficiently, in the sight
of the learned and al indifferent men, Of the ANNOTATIONS, why they were
made, and what matter they co^teine.
both control the adversaries corruptions, and prove that the holy Scripture
whereof they have made so great vauntes, make nothing for their new opinions,
but wholy for the Catholic Churches belief and doctrine, in all the points
of difference betwixt us: yet knovving that the good and simple may easily be
seduced by some fevv obstinate persons of perdition (whom we see given over
into a reprobat sense, to whom the Gospel, 2 Cor. 2.
which in it self is the odor of life to salvation, is made the odor of
death to damnation, over whose eyes for sin and disobedience God suffers a
veil or cover to lie, whiles they read the new Testament, even as the Apostle
saite the Jews have til this day, 2 Cor. 3.
in reading of the old, that as the one sort can not find Christ in the
Scriptures, read they never so much, so the other can not find the Catholic
Church nor her doctrine there neither) and finding by experience this saying of
S. Augustine to be most true, De doct^. Christ. lib. 3. cap. 10.
If the prejudice of any erreneous persuasion preoccupate the mind, whatsoever
the Scripture has to the contrary, men take it for a figurative speech: for
these causes, and somevvhat to help the faithful reader in the difficulties of
diverse places, we have also set forth reasonable large ANNOTATIONS, thereby to
show the studious reader in most places perteining to the controversies of
this time, both the heretical corruptions and false deductions, and also the
Apostolic tradition, the expositions of the holy fathers, the decrees of the
Catholic Church and most ancient Councils: which means whosoever trusts
not, for the sense of holy Scriptures, but had rather follow his private
judgment or the arrogat spirit of these Sectaries, he shall vvorthily through
his own wilfulnes be deceived. beseeching all men to look with diligence,
sincerity, and indifferency, into the case that concerns no less then
every ones eternal salvation or damnation.

Which if he do, we doubt not but he shall to his great contentment, find the
holy Scriptures most clearly and inuincibly to prove the articles of Catholic
doctrine against our adversaries, which perhaps he had thought before this
diligent search, either not to be consonant to Gods word, or at least not
contained in the same, Heresies make Catholics more diligent to search and
find the senses of holy Scripture for refelling of the same.
and finally he shall prove this saying of S. Augustine to be most true. In
Psalm. 67. prope finem.
Multi sensus etc. Many senses of holy Scriptures lie hidden, and are known to
some fevv of greater understanding: neither are they at any time avouched more
commodiously and acceptably then at such times, when the care to answer
heretics does force men there unto. For then, even they that be negligent in
matters of study and learning, shaking of sluggishnes, are stirred up to
diligent hearing, that the Adversaries may be refelled. Again, how many
senses of holy Scriptures, concerning Christ's Godhead, have been avouched
against Photinus: how many, of his Manhod, against Manichaeus: how many, of
the Trinity, against Sabellius: how many, of the unity in Trinity, against
the Arrians, Eunomias, Macedonians: how many, of the Catholic Church
dispersed through out the whole world, and of the mixture of good and bad in
the same until the end of the world, against the Donatistes and Luciferians
and other of the like error: how many against al other heretics, which it
were to long to rehearse? Of which senses and expositions of holy Scripture
the approved authors and auouchers, should otherwise either not be known as
al, or not so well known, as the contradictions of proud heretics have made
them.

Thus he says of such things as not seeming to be in holy Scriptures to the
ignorant or heretics, yet in deed be there. But in other points doubted of,
that in deed are not decided by Scripture, he gives us this goodly rule to be
followed in all, as he exemplifieth in one. Then do we hold (says he) the
verity of the Scriptures, when we do that which now has seemed good to
the Universal Church, which the authority of the Scriptures them selves does
commend: so that, forasmuch as the holy Scripture can not deceive, whosoever
is afraid to be deceived with the obscurity of questions, let him therein
ask counsel of the same CHVRCH, which the holy Scripture most certainly and
evidently shows and points unto. Many cause^ why this new Testament is
translated according to the ancient vulgar Latin text.
Aug. li. 1. Cont. Crescon. c. 13.

NOW TO GIVE thee also intelligence in particular, most gentle Reader, of such
things as it behooves thee specially to know concerning our Translation: We
translate the old vulgar Latin text, not the common Greek text, for these
causes.

1. It is so ancient, It is most ancient.
that it was used in the Church of God above 1300 years ago, as appears by
the fathers of those times.

2. It is that (by the common received opinion and by all probability) which
S. Hierom afterward corrected according to the Greek, Corrected by S. Hierom.
by the appointment of Damasus then Pope, as he makes mention in his preface
before the four Evangelists, unto the said Damasus: and in Catalogo in fine,
and ep. 102.

3. Consequently it is the same which S. Augustine so commends and allows
in an Epistle to S. Hierom. Ep. 10.
Commended by S. Augustine.


4. It is that, Used and expounded by the fathers.
which for the most part ever since has been used in the Churches service,
expounded in sermons, alleged and interpreted in the Commentaries and
vvritings of the ancient fathers of the Latin Church.

5. The holy Council of Trent, Only authentical, by the holy Council of Trent.
for these and many other important considerations, Sess. 4.
has declared and defined this only of al other latin translations, to be
authentical, and so only to be used and taken in public lessons,
disputations, preachings, and expositions, and that no man presume upon any
pretense to reject or refuse the same.

6. It is the grauest, Most grave, least partial.
sincerest, of greatest majesty, least partiality, as being without al
respect of controversies and contentions, specially these of our time, as
appears by those places which Erasmus and others at this day translate much
more to the advantage of the Catholic cause.

7. It is so exact and precise according to the Greek, Precise in following
the Greek.
both the phrase and the word, that delicate Heretics therefore reprehend it of
rudene^. And that it follovveth the Greek far more exactly then the
Protestants translations, beside infinite other places, we appeal to these.
Tit. 3. 14. Curent bonis operibus praeesse. (...). Engl. bib. 1577, to
maintain good works. and Hebr. 10, 20. Viam nobis initiatut, (...). English
Bib. he prepared. So in these words, Iustificationes, Traditiones, Idola etc.
In all which they come not near the Greek, but avoid it of purpose.

8. The Adversaries them selves, Preferred by Beza him self.
namely Beza, prefer it before all the rest. Inpraefat. no. Test an. 1556. And
again he says, that the old Interpreter translated very religiously. Annot.
in 1. Luc. v. 1.

9. In the rest, there is such diversity and dissension, and no end of
reprehending one an other, All the rest misliked of the Sectaries them selves,
each reprehending an other.
and translating every man according to his fantasy, that Co^hla. c. 11 de
Cano. Script. authorit^^^.
Luther said, If the world should stand any long time, we must receive again
(which he thought absurd) the Decrees of Councels, for preserving the unity of
faith, because of so diverse interpretations of the Scripture. And Beza (in the
place above mentioned) notes the itching ambition of his fellovv-translators,
that had much rather disagree and dissent from the best, then seem them selves
to have said or written nothing. And Bezas translation it self, being so
esteemed in our country, that the Geneua The new Test. printed the^ year
1580. in the title.
English Testaments be translated according to the same, yet sometime goes so
vvide from the Greek, and from the meaning of the holy Ghost, that them selves
which protest to translate it, dare not follow it. For example, Luc. 3, 36. They
have put these words, The son of Cainan, which he wittingly and wilfully
left out: and Act. 1, 14. they say, With the women, agreably to the vulgar
Latin: where he says, Cum vxoribus, with their vviues.

10. It is not only better then al other Latin tra^slations, It is (...) then
the vulgar Greek text it self.
but then the Greek text it self, in those places where they disagree.

The proof hereof is evident, because most of the ancient Heretics were
Grecians, and therefore the Scriptures in Greek were more corrupted by them, as
the ancient fathers often complain. Tertullian notes the Greek text which
is at this day (1 Cor. 19. 47) to be an old corruption of Marcion the Heretic,
The ancient fathers for proof thereof, and the Adversaries them selves.
and the truth to be as in our vulgar latin, Li. 5 cont. Marciono^.
Secundus homo de coelo coelestis, The second man from heaven heavenly. So
read other Ambrose. Hierom.
ancient fathers, and Erasmus thinks it must needs be so, and Calvin him
self follows it Instit. li. 2. c. 13. parag. 2. Li. 1, cont. louin. c. 7.
Again S. Hierom notes that the Greek text (1 Cor. 7, 33) which is at this
day, is not the Apostolical verity or the true text of the Apostle: but that
which is in the vulgar Latin, Qui cum vxore est, solicitus est quae sunt mundi,
quomodo placeat vxori, and diuisus est. He that is with a wife, is careful of
vvorldly things, how he may please his wife, and is divided or distracted.
The Ecclesiastical history called the Tripartite, Li. 12 c. 4.
notes the Greek text that now is (1 Io. 4, 3) to be an old corruption of the
ancient Greek copies, by the Nestorian Heretics, and the true reading to be
as in our vulgar Latin, Omnis spiritus qui soluit IESVM, ex Deo non est. Every
spirit that dissolueth JESUS, is not of God: and Beza confesses that Socrates
in his Ecclesiastical history reads so in the Greek, Li. 7. c. 32.
(...) etc.

But the proof is more pregnant out of the Adversaries them selves. They
forsake the Greek text as corrupted, and translate according to the vulgar
Latin, namely Beza and his scholars the English translatours of the Bible, The
Caluinistes them selves often forsake the Greek as corrupt, and translate
according to the ancient vulgar latin text.
in these places. Hebr. chap. 9, verse. 1. saying, The first covenant, for that
which is in the Greek. (...)
The first tabernacle. where they put, covenant, not as of the text, but in an
other letter, as to be understood, according to the vulgar Latin, which most
sincerely leaves it out altogether, saying, Habuit quidem andprius
instificationes etc. The former also in deed had iustifications etc. Again,
To. 11, verse. 21. They translate not according to the Greek text, (...)
Temporiseruientes, serving the time, which Beza says must needs be a
corruption: but according to the vulgar Latin, Domino seruientes, serving our
Lord. Again, Apoc. 11, verse. 2. they translate not the Greek text, Atrium
quod intra templum est, the court which is within the teme: but clean
contrary, according to the vulgar Latin, which Beza says is the true
reading, Atrium quod est foris templum, the court which is without the
temple. Only in this last place, one English Bible of the year 1562, follows
the error of the Greek. Again, 2 Timothy 2. verse. 14. they add, but, more then
is in the Greek, to make the sense more commodious and easy, according as it
is in the vulgar Latin. (...)
Again, Ia. 5, 12. they leave the Greek, and follow the vulgar Latin, saying,
lest you fall into condemnation. I doubt not (says Beza) but this is the true
and sincere reading, and I suspect the corruption in the Greek came thus etc.
It were infinite to set down al such places, where the Adversaries
(specially Beza) follow the old vulgar Latin and the Greek copy agreeable
thereunto, condemning the Greek text that now is, of corruption.

Again, Erasmus the best translatour of all the later, Superfluities in the
Greek* which Erasmus calls trifling and rash additions.
by Bezas judgment, says, that the Greek sometime has superfluities
corruptly added to the text of holy Scripture. as Mat. 6. to the end of the
Pater noster, these words, Because thine is the kingdom, the power, and the
glory, for euer-more. Which he calls, nugas, trifles rashly added to our
Lords prayer, and reprehendeth Valla for blaming the old vulgar Latin because
it has it not, likewise To. 11, 6. these words in the Greek, and not in
the vulgar latin: But if of works, it is not now grace: otherwise the
work is no more a work. and Mar. 10, 29. these words, or wife, and such
like. See No. Test. Graec. Rob. Stephani in folio, and Cris^ins.
Yea the Greek text in these superfluities condemns it self, and justifies
the vulgar Latin excedingly: as being marked through out in a number of places,
that such and such words or sentences are superfluous, in all which places out
vulgar Latin has no such thing, but is agreeable to the Greek which remains
after the superfluities be taken away. For example, that beforementioned in
the end of the Pater noster, has a mark of superfluity in the Greek text
thus (...)* and Marc. 6, 11 these words, Amen I say to you, it shall be more
tolerable for the land of Sodom and Gomorrhe in the day of judgment, then for
that city. and Mat. 20, 22. these words, And be baptized with the baptism
that I am baptized with? Which is also superfluously repeated again verse.
23. and such like places exceeding many: which being noted superfluous in the
Greek, and being not in the vulgar Latin, prove the Latin in those places to
be better, truer and more sincere then the Greek.

Whereupon we conclude of these premises, that it is no derogation to the
vulgar Latin text, which we translate, to disagree from the Greek text, whereas
it may notwithstanding be not only as good, The vulgar Latin translation
agrees with the best Greek copies, by Bezas own judgment.
but also better, Beza prafat. No. Test. 1556 See him also Anno. in 13. Act. v.
20.
and this the Adversary him self, their greatest and latest translatour of the
Greek, does avouch against Erasmus in behalf of the old vulgar Latin
translation, in these notorious words. How vnvvorthely and without cause
(says he) does Erasmus blame the old Interpreter as dissenting from the
Greek? he dissented, I grant, from those Greek copies which he had gotten:
but we have found, not in one place, that the same interpretation which be
blames, is grounded upon the authority of other Greek copies, and those most
a^ncient. Yea in some number of places we have observed, that the reading or
the Latin text of the old Interpreter, though it agree not sometime with our
Greek copies yet it is much more convenient, for that it seems be followed
some better and truer copy. Thus far Beza. In which words he unwittingly,
but most truly, justifies and defends the old vulgar Translation against
him self and al other cauillers, that accuse the same, because it is not
always agreeable to the Greek text: Whereas it was translated out of other
Greek copies (partly extant, partly not extant at this day) either as good and
as ancient, When the Fathers say, that the Latin text must yield to the
Greek, and be corrected by it, they mean the true and uncorrupted Greek text.
or better and more ancient, such as S. Augustine speaks of, calling them
doctiores and diligentiores, the more learned and diligent Greek copies,
whereunto the latin translations that fail in any place, must needs yield. Li.
2. de doct. Christ. c. 15.

And if it were not to long to exemplify and prove this, which would require a
treatise by it self, we could show by many and most clear examples through out
the new Testament, these sundry means of justifying the old translation.

1 First, if it agree with the Greek text (as commonly it does, and in the
greatest places concerning the controversies of our time, it does most
certainly) so far the Adversaries have not to complain: The vulgar Latin
Translation, is many ways justified by most ancient Greek copies, and the
Fathers.
unless they will complain of the Greek also, as they do Ia. 4. v* 2. and 1
Pet. 3. v. 21. where the vulgar Latin follows exactly the Greek text, saying,
Occiditis: and* Quod vos similis formae, etc. But Beza in both places
corrects the Greek text also as false.

2 If it disagree here and there from the Greek text, it agrees with an other
Greek copy set in the margent, whereof see examples in the foresaid Greek
Testaments of Robert Steuens and Crispin through out* namely 2 Pet. 1, 10.
Satague vt per bona opera certam vestram vocationem faciatis. (...). and Marc.
8. v. 7. Et ipsos benedixit, (...).

3 If these marginal Greek copies be thought less authentical then the Greek
text, the Adversaries them selves tell us the contrary, who in their
translations often follow the marginal copies, and forsake the Greek text: as
in the examples above mentioned To. 11. Apoc. 11. 2 Timothy 2. Iac. 5. etc. it is
evident.

4 If al Erasmus Greek copies have not that which is in the vulgar Latin, Beza
had copies which have it, and those most ancient (as he says) and better. And
if al Bezas copies fail in this point and will not help us, Gagneie the
French kings preacher, and he that might command in all the kings libraries,
he found Greek copies that have just according to the vulgar Latin: and that
in such place as would seem otherwise less probable* as Iac. 3. verse. 5. Ecce
quantus ignis quam magnam silum incendit! Behold how much fire what a great
vvood it kindles! A man would think it must be rather as in the Greek text,
Codex veronensis. (...).
A little fire what a great vvood it kindles! But an approved ancient Greek
copy alleged by Gagneie, has as it is in the vulgar Latin. And if Gagneis
copies also fail sometime, there Beza and Crispin supply Greek copies fully
agreeable to the vulgar Latin. as ep. Iudae verse. 5. Scientes semel omnia,
quoniam JESUS etc. and verse 19. Segregant semetipsos. likewise 2 Ephesians 2. Quod
elegerit vos primitias: (...) in some Greek copies. Gagn. and 2 Cor. 9. Vestra
amulatio, (...). so has one Greek copy. Beza.

5 If al their copies be not sufficient, the ancient Greek fathers had copies
and expounded them, agreeable to our vulgar Latin as 1 Timothy 6, 20. Prophanat
vocum nouitates. (...)
So reads S. Chrysostom and expounds it against Heretical and erroneous
novelties. Yet now we know no Greek copy that reads so. Likewise Io. 10,
29. Pater meus quod mihi dedit maius omnibus est. The Greek fathers.
so reads S. Cyril and expounds it li. 7 in Io. c. 10. likewise 1 Io. 4, 3.
Omnie spiritus qui soluit IESVM, ex Deo non est. so reads S. Irenaeus li. 3.
c. 18. S. Augustine tract. 6. in Io. S. Leo epist. 10. c. 5. beside Socrates in
his Ecclesiastical history, li. 7. c. 22. and the Tripartite li. 12. c. 4.
who say plainly, that this was the old and the true reading of this place in
the Greek. And in what Greek copy extant at this day is there this text Io.
5, 2. Est aute^ Hierosolymis probatica piscina? and yet S. Chrysostom, S.
Cyril, and Theophylacte read so in the Greek, and Beza says it is the better
reading* and so is the Latin text of the Roman Mass book justified, and
eight other Latin copies, that read so* for our vulgar Latin here, is
according to the Greek text, Super probatica. and To. 5. v. 17. Donationis and
iustitiae. so reads Theodorete in Greek. (...)
and Lu. 2. v. 14. Origin and S. Chrysostom read, Hominibus bonae voluntatis,
and Beza likes it better then the Greek text that now is.

6. Where there is no such sign or token of any ancient Greek copy in the
fathers, yet these later Interpreters tell us, that the old Interpreter did
follow some other Greek copy. as Marc. 7, 3. Nisi crebro lauerint. Erasmus
thinks that he did read in the Greek (...), often: and Beza and others
commend his conjecture, yea and the English Bibles are so translated. whereas
now it is (...) which signifies the length of the arm up to the elbovv. And
who would not think that the Evangelist should say, The Pharisees vvash
often, because otherwise they eat not, rather then thus, Unless they vvash up
to the elbovv, they eat not?

7. If al such conjectures, The Latin fathers.
and all the Greek fathers help us not, yet the Latin fathers with great
consent vvil easily justify the old vulgar translation, which for the most
part they follow and expound. See Annot Lenan. in No. Test. and Annot. Luca
Brugensis in biblia.
as, Io. 7, 39. Nondum erat spiritus datus. so reads S. Augustine li. 4 de
Trinit. c. 20. and li. 83. Quaest. q. 62. and tract. 52 in Joan. Leo ser. 2 de
Pentecoste. Whose authority were sufficient, but in deed Didymus also a
Greek Doctor reads so li. 2 de Sp. sancto, translated by S. Hierom, and a
Greek copy in the Vaticane, and the Syriake new Testament. Likewise Io. 21,
22. Sic eum volo manner. so read S. Ambrose, in Psalm. 45. and Psalm. 118.
octonario Resh. s. Augustine and Ven. Bid upon S. John's Gospel.

8. And lastly, if some other Latin fathers of ancient time, read otherwise,
either here or in other places, not al agreing with the text of our vulgar
Latin, the cause is, the great diversity and multitude that was then of Latin
copies, (whereof S. Hierom complains) til this one vulgar Latin grevv only
into use. Praefat. in 4. Euang. ad Damasum.
Neither does their diverse reading make more for the Greek, then for the
vulgar Latin, differing oftentimes from both. as when S. Hierom in this last
place reads, Si sic eum volomanere, li. 1. adu. Iouin. it is according to no
Greek copy now extant. And if yet there be some doubt, that the readings of
some Greek or Latin fathers, differing from the vulgar Latin, be a check or
condemnation to the same: let Beza, that is, let the Adversary him self, tell
us his opinion in this case also. Praefat. citata.
Whosoever, says he, shall take upon him to correct these things (speaking of
the vulgar Latin translation) out of the ancient fathers vvritings, either
Greek or Latin, unless he do it very circumspectly and advisedly, he shall
surely corrupt al rather then amend it, because it is not to be thought, that
as often as they cited any place, they did alvvaies look into the book, or
number every word. As if he should say, We may not by and by think that the
vulgar Latin is faulty and to be corrected, when we read otherwise in the
fathers either Greek or Latin, because they did not alvvaies exactly cite the
words, but followed some commodious and godly sense thereof.

Thus then we see that by all means the old vulgar Latin translation is
approved good, The fevv and final faults negligently crept into the vulgar
Latin translation.
and better then the Greek text it self, and that there is no cause why it
should give place to any other text, copies, or readings. Marie if there be any
faults evidently crept in by those that heretofore wrote or copied out the
Scriptures (as there be some) them we grant no less, then we would grant
faults now a days committed by the Printer, and they are exactly noted of
Catholic vvriters, namely in all Plantins Bibles set forth by the Divines of
Louan: Sess. 4.
and the holy Council of Trent wills that the vulgar Latin text be in such
points thoroughly mended, and so to be most authentical. Such faults are
these, Inside, for in fine: Praescientiam, for, praesentiam: Suscipiens, for,
Suspiciens: and such like very rare. which are evident corruptions made by the
copistes, or grown by the similitude of words. These being taken away,
which are no part of those corruptions and differences before talked of, we
translate that text which is most sincere, and in our opinion and as we have
proved, incorrupt. The Adversaries contrary, translate that text, which them
selves confess both by their vvritings and doings, to be corrupt in a number
of places, and more corrupt then our vulgar Latin, as is before declared.

And if we would here stand to recite the places in the Greek which Beza
pronounces to be corrupted, The Caluinists confessing the Greek to be most
corrupt, yet translate that only, and hold that only for authentical Scripture.
we should make the Reader to vvonder, how they can either so plead
otherwise for the Greek text, as though there were no other truth of the
new Testament but that: or how they translate only that (to deface, as they
think, the old vulgar Latin) which them selves so shamfully disgrace, more
then the vulgar Latin, inuenting corruptions where none are, nor can be, in
such universal consent of al both Greek and Latin copies. For example, Mat.
10. The first Simon, Who is called Peter. I think (says Beza) this word
(...), In Annot. No. Test. an. 1556.
first, has been added to the text of some that would establish Peter's
Primacie. Again Luc. 22. The Chalice, that is shed for you. It is most likely
(says he) that these words being sometime but a marginal note, came by
corruption out of the margent into the text. Again Act. 7. Figures which they
made, to adore them. It may be suspected (says he) that these words, as many
other, have crept by corruption into the text out of the margent. And 1 Cor.
15. He thinks the Apostle said not (...), victory, as it is in all Greek
copies, but (...), contention. And Act. 13. he calls it a manifest error,
that in the Greek it is, 400 years, for, 300. And Act. 7. v. 16. he reckeneth
up a whole catalogue of corruptions. namely Marc. 12. v. 42. (...), Which is
a farthing: and Act. 8. v. 26. (...), This is desert. and Act. 7. v. 16 the
name of Abraham, and such like. Al which he thinks to have been added or
altered into the Greek text by corruption.

But among other places, he labors excedingly to prove a great corruption
Act. 7. v. 14. where it is said (according to the Septuaginta, that is, the
Greek text of the old Testament) that Jacob went down into Egypt with 75
souls. And Luc. 3. v. 36. he thinks these words (...), Which was of
Cainan, They standing precisely upon the Hebrew of the old, and Greek text of
the new Testament, must of force deny the one of them.
to be so false, that he leaves them clean out in An. D^. 1556 and 1565.
both his editions of the new Testament: saying, that he is bold so to do, by
the authority of Moses. Whereby he vvil signify, that it is not in the
Hebrew text of Moses or of the old Testament, and therefore it is self in the
Greek of the new Testament. Which consequence of theirs (for it is common
among them and concerns al Scriptures) if it were true, al places of the
Greek text of the new Testament, cited out of the old according to the
Septuaginta, and not according to the Hebrew (which they know are very many)
should be false, and so by tying them selves only to the Hebrew in the old
Testament, they are forced to forsake the Greek of the new: or if they vvil
maintain the Greek of the new, they must forsake sometime the Hebrew in the
old. but this argument shall be forced against them else where.

By this little, the Reader may see what gay patrones they are of the Greek
text, They say the Greek is more corrupt then we vvil grant them.
and how little cause they have in their own judgments to translate it, or
vaunt of it, as in derogation of the vulgar Latin translation, and how easily
we might answer them in a word, why we translate, not the Greek: forsooth
because it is so infinitely corrupted, But the truth is, we do by no means
grant it so corrupted as they say, though in comparison we know it less
sincere and incorrupt then the vulgar Latin, and for that cause and others
before alleged we prefer the said Latin, and have translated it.

If yet there remain one thing which perhaps they will say, when they can not
answer our reasons aforesaid: to wit, that we prefer the vulgar Latin before
the Greek text, We prefer not the vulgar Latin text, as making more for us.
because the Greek makes more against us: we protest that as for other causes
we prefer the Latin, so in this respect of making for us or against us, we
allow the Greek as much as the Latin, yea in sundry places more then the
Latin, being assured that they have not one, and that we have many advantages
in the Greek more then in the Latin, as by the Annotations of this new
Testament shall evidently appear: The Greek text makes for us more then the
vulgar Latin.
namely in all such places where they dare not translate the Greek, because it
is for us and against them. as when they translate, (...), ordinances, and not,
justification, and that of purpose as Beza confesses Luc. 1, 6. (...),
ordinances, or instructions, and not traditions, in the better part. 2 Thessalonians.
2, 15. (...), Elders, and not Priests: (...), images rather then idols. and
especially when S. Luke in the Greek so makes for us (the vulgar Latin being
indifferent for them and us) that Beza says it is a corruption crept out of
the margent into the text. Luc. 22. (...), ^0.
What need these absurd diuises and false dealings with the Greek text, For
the real presence.
if it made for them more then for us, yea if it made not for us against them?
But that the Greek makes more for us, For fasting.
see 1 Cor. 7. In the Latin, Defraude not one another, but for a time, that you
give your selves to prayer. in the Greek, to fasting and prayer. Act. 10, 30.
in the Latin Cornelius says, from the fourth day past until this hour I was
praying in my house, and behold a man etc. in the Greek, I was fasting, and
praying. 1 Io. 5, 18, in the Latin, For free vvil.
We know that every one which is borne of God, sins not. but the
generation of God preserves him etc. in the Greek, but he that is borne of
God preserves him self. Apoc. 22, 14. in the Latin, Blessed are they that
vvash their garments in the blood of the lamb etc. Against only faith.
in the Greek, Blessed are they that do his commandments. Romans 8, 38.
Certus sum etc. Against only faith.
I am sure that neither death nor life, nor other creature is able to separate
us from the charity of God. as though he were assured, or we might and should
assure our selves of our predestination, Against special assurance of salvation.
in the Greek, (...), I am probably persuaded that neither death nor life etc.
In the Evangelists about the Sacrifice and B. Sacrament, in the Latin thus:
This is my blood that shall be shed for you: and in S. Paul, This is my body
which shall be betrayed or delivered for you: both being referred to the time
to come and to the sacrifice on the cross. For the sacrifice of Christ's body
and blood.
in the Greek, This is my blood which is shed for you: and, my body which is
broken for you: both being referred to that present time when Christ gave his
body and blood at his supper, then sheading the one and breaking the other;
that is, sacrificing it sacramentally and mystically. Lo these and the like
our advantages in the Greek, more then in the Latin.

But is the vulgar translation for all this Papistical, The Prota^tats
condemning the old vulgar translation as making for us, co^demns them selves
and therefore do we follow it? (for so some of them call it, and say it is
Against D. Sand. Rock page 147. See Kemnis. in exam. Co^c. Trid. (...). 4.
the worst of al other.) If it be, the Greek (as you see) is more, and so both
Greek and Latin and consequently the holy Scripture of the new Testament is
Papistical. Again if the vulgar Latin be Papistical, Papistrie is very
ancient, and the Church of God for so many hundred years wherein it has used
and allowed this translation, has been Papistical. But wherein it is
Papistical? forsooth in these phrases and speeches, Mat. 3. and 11. Ephesians. 5.
Luc. 1. Heb. 13.
P^^nitentiam agite. Sacramentum hoc magnum est. AVE GRATIA PLENA. Talibus
hostiis promeretur Deus. and such like. First, does not the Greek say the
same? see the Annotations upon these places. Secondly, could he translate these
things Papistically or partially, or rather prophetically, so long before they
were in controversy? thirdly, does he not say for p^^nitentiam agite, in an
other place, p^^nitemini: Mar. 1. (...). Luc. 16. v. 20.
and does he not translate other mysteries, by the word, Sacramentum, as Apoc.
17, Sacramentum mulieris: and as he translateth one word, Gratia plena, so
does he not translate the very like word, plenus vlceribus, which them selves
do follow also? is this also Papistrie? When he said Heb. 10, 29. Quanto
deteriora merebitus supplicia etc. and they like it well enough: It is void of
al partiality.
might he not have said according to the same Greek word, Vigilate vt
mereamini fugere ista omnia and stare ante filium hominis. Luc. 21, 36. and,
Qui merebuntur saculum illud and resurrectionem exmortuis etc. Luc. 10, 35.
and, Tribulationes quas sustinetis, vt mereamini regnum, Dei, pro quo et
patimini. 2 Thessalonians. 1. 5. Might he not (we say) if he had partially affecteted
the word merit, have used it in all these places, according to his and Na.
Test. 1580.
your own translation of the same Greek word Hebr. 10, 29? Which he does
not, but in all these places says simply, Vt digni habeamini, and, Qui digni
habeb^^tur. and how can it be judged Papistical or partial, when he says, in
ep. ad Hebr.
Talibus hostiis promer^tur Deus, Heb. 13? Was Primasius also S. Augustines
scholar, a Papist, for using this text, and all the rest, that have done the
like? Was S. Cyprian a Papist, Ep. 14 and 18.
for using so often this speech, promereri Dominum justice operibus,
po^nitentia, etc.? or is there any difference, but that S. Cyptian uses it as
a deponent more latinly, the other as a passive less finely? Was it
Papistrie, to say Senior for Presbyter, Ministrantibus for sacrificantibus or
liturgiam celebrantibus, simulacbris for idolis, fides tuaete saluum fecit
sometime for sanum fecit? Or shall we think he was a Caluinist for translating
thus, as they think he was a Papist, The Papistrie thereof (as they term it)
is in the very sentences of the Holy Ghost, more, then in the translation.
when any word sounds for us?

Again, was he a Papist in these kind of words only, and was he not in
whole sentences? as, Mat. 16. 10. 20.
Tibi dabo claues, etc. Quicquid solueris in terrae, erit solutum and in
coelis. and, Quorum remiseritis peccata, remittuntur eis. and, Tunc reddet
vnicuique secundum operasua. and, Mat. 16. la^. 2.
Nunquid poterit sides saluare eum? Ex operibus iustificatur homo and non ex
fide tantum. and, 1 Timothy 5.
Nubere volunt, damnationem habentes, quia primam fidem irritam fecerunt. and,
1 Io. 5.
Mandata eius grauia non sunt. and, Aspexit in remunerationem. Heb. 12.
Are al these and such like, Papistical translations, because they are most
plain for the Catholic faith which they call Papistrie? Are they not word for
word as in the Greek, and the very words of the holy Ghost? And if in these
there be no accusation of Papistical partiality, why in the other? Lastly, are
the ancient fathers, General Councels, the Churches of all the west part, that
use al these speeches and phrases now so many hundred years, are they al
Papistical? Be it so, and let us in the name of God follow them, speak as they
spoke, translate as they translated, interpret as they interpreted, because we
believe as they believed. And thus far for defense of the old vulgar Latin
translation, and why we translated it before al others: Now of the manner of
translating the same.

IN THIS OUR TRANSLATION, The manner of this translation, and what has been
observed therein.
because we wish it to be most sincere, as becomes a Catholic translation,
and have endeavored so to make it: we are very precise and religious in
following our copy, the old vulgar approved Latin: not only in sense, which we
hope we always do, but sometime in the very words also and phrases, which
may seem to the vulgar Reader and to common English cares not yet acquainted
therewith, rudeness or ignorance but to the discrete Reader that deeply
weighs and considers the importance of sacred words and speeches, and how
easily the voluntary Translatour may miss true sense of the Holy Ghost, we
doubt not but our consideration and doing therein, shall seem reasonable and
necessary: yea and that al sorts of Catholic Readers will in short time
think that familiar, which at the first may seem strange, and will esteem it
more, when they shall See the last Table a^ the end of the book.
otherwise be taught to understand it, then if it were the common known
English.

For example, Certain words not English nor as yet familiar in the English
tongue.
we translate often thus, Amen amen, I say unto you. Which as yet seems
strange. but after a while it will be as familiar, as Amen, in the end of al
prayers and Psalms. and even as when we end with, Amen, it sounds far better
then, So be it: so in the beginning, Amen, Amen, must needs by use and custom
sound far better, then, Verily verily. Which in deed does not express the
asseueration and assurance signified in this Hebrew word, besides that it is
the solemn and usual word of our Savior See annot.
to express a vehement asseueration, and therefore is not changed, neither in
the Syriake nor Greek, Amen.
nor vulgar Latin* Testament, Io. c. 8. v. 34. and Apoc. c. 19. v. 4.
but is preserved and used of the Evangelists and Apostles them selves, even
as Christ spoke it, propter sanctiorem authoritatem* as S. Augustine says of
this and of Allelu-ia Alleluia.
for the more holy and sacred authority thereof, li. 2. Doct. Christ. c. 11.
And therefore do we keep the word Allelu-ia, Apoc. 19, as it is both in Greek
and Latin yea and in all the English translations, though in their books of
common prayer they translate it, Praise ye the Lord. Again, if Hosanna, Raca,
Belial, and such like be yet untranslated in the English Bibles, why may not we
say, No, Test. an. 1580. Bib. an. 1577.
Corbana, Parasceue.
and Parasceue: specially when they Englishing this later thus, the preparation
of the Sabbath, put three words more into the text, then the Greek word does
signify, Mat, 27, 62. And others saying thus, After the day of preparing, make
a cold translation and short of the sense: as if they should translate,
Sabbath, the resling. for, Mar. 14. v. 42.
Parasceue is as solemn a word for the Sabbath eve, as Sabbath is for the
Jews seventh day. and now among Christians much more solemner, taken for
Good Friday only. These words then we thought it far better to keep in the
text, and to tell their signification in the margent or in a table for that
purpose, then to disgrace both the text and them with translating them. Pasche.
Such are also these words, The Pasche. The feast of Azymes. Bib. 1577.
The bread of Proposition. Mat. 26. 17.
Which they translate The Passover, Azymes.
The feast of svvete bread, The show bread. But if Pentecost Act. 2 be yet
vntra^slated in their bibles, and seems not strange: why should not Pasche
and Azymes so remain also, being solemn feasts, as Pentecost was? or why
should they English one rather then the other? specially whereas Passover at
the first was as strange, as Pasche may seem now, and perhaps as many now
understand Pasche, as Passemer. and as for Azymes, when they English it, the
feast of svveete bread, it is a false interpretation of the word, and nothing
expresses that which belongs to the feast, concerning unleavened bread. And
as for their term of show bread, it is very strange and ridiculous, Again,
if Proselyte be a received word in the English bibles Mat. 23. Act. 2: Neophyte.
why may not we be bold to say, Neophyte. 1 Timothy 3? specially when they
translating it into English, do falsely express the signification of the word
thus, a young scholar. Whereas it is a peculiar word to signify them that were
lately baptized, as Catechumenus, signifies the newely instructed in faith not
yet baptized, who is also young scholar rather then the other* and many that
have been old scholars, may be Neophytes by differring baptism. And if
Phylacteries be allowed for English Mat. 23, we hope that Didragmes also,
Prepuce, Paraclete, and such like, will easily grow to be current and familiar.
And in good sooth there is in all these such necessity, that they can not
conveniently be translated. Phil. 3.
as when S. Paul says, concisio, non circumcisi^: how can we but follow his
very words and allusion? And how is it possible to express Euangelizo, Why
we say, our Lord, not, the Lord (but in certain cases) see the Annotations 1 Timothy 6. page 585.
but as we do, Euangelize? for Euangelium being the Gospel* what is,
Euangelizo or to Euangelize, but to show the glad tidings of the Gospel, of the
time of grace, of al Christ's benefits? Al which signification is lost, by
translating as the English bibles do, I bring you good tidings. Luc. 2, 10.
Therefore we say Depositum, 2 Timothy 6. and, He exinanited him self, Philip. 2.
and, You have reflorished, Philip. 4. and, to exhaust, Hebr. 9, 28, because we
can not possibly attain to express these words fully in English, and we
think much better, that the reader staying at the difficulty of them, should
take an occasion to look in the table following, or otherwise to ask the full
meaning of them, then by putting some usual English words that express them
not, Catholic terms proceeding from the very text of Scripture.
so to deceive the reader. Sometime also we do it for an other cause. as
when we say, The aduent of our Lord, and, Imposing of hands, because one is
a solemn time, the other a solemn action in the Catholic Church: to signify
to the people, that these and such like names come out of the very Latin text
of the Scripture. So did Penance, doing penance, Chalice, Priest, Deacon,
Traditions altar, host, and the like (which we exactly keep as Catholic
terms) proceed even from the very words of Scripture.

Moreover, we presume not in hard places to mollify the speeches or phrases,
but religiously keep them word for word, and point for point, for fear of
missing, Certain hard speeches and phrases.
or restraining the sense of the holy Ghost to our fantasy. as Ephesians. 6.
Against the spirituals of wickedness in the celestials. Io. 2.
and, What to me and thee woman? whereof see the Annotation upon this place.
and 1 Pet. 2. As infants even now borne, reasonable, milk without guile
desire ye. We do so place, reasonable, of purpose, that it may be indiffe^t
both to infants going before, as in our Latin text: or to milk that follows
after, as in other Latin copies and in the Greek. Io. 3 we translate, The
Protestants presumptuous boldness and Iibettie in translating.
The spirit breaths where he vvil etc. leaving it indifferent to signify
either the holy Ghost, or vvinde: which the Protestants translating, vvinde,
take away the other sense more common and usual in the ancient fathers. We
translate Luc. 8, 23. They were filled, not adding of our own, with water,
to mollify the sentence, as the Protestants do. and c. 22. This is the
chalice, the new Testament etc. not, This chalice is the new Testament,
likewise, Mar. 13. Those days shall be such tribulation etc. not as the
Adversaries, In those days, both our text and theirs being otherwise Iac. 4,
6. And gives greater grace, leaving it indifferent to the Scripture, or to the
holy Ghost, both going before. Whereas the Adversaries to to boldly and
presumptuously add, saying, The Scripture gives, taking away the other
sense, which is far more probable. likewise Hebr. 12, 21 we translate, So
terrible was it which was seen, Moses said etc. neither does Greek or
Latin permit us to add, that, Moses said, as the Protestants presume to do.
So we say, Men brethren, Avvidovv woman, A woman a sister, James of Alphaus,
and the like. Sometime also we follow of purpose the Scriptures phrase. as, Mat.
5.
The hell of fire, according to Greek and Latin. which we might say perhaps,
the fiery hell, by the Hebrew phrase in such speeches, Gehenn^ ignis.
but not, hell fire, as commonly it is translated. Likewise Luc. 4, 36. What
word is this, that in power and authority he commands the unclean
spirits? as also, Luc 2. Let us pass over, and see the word that is done,
Where we might say, thing, by the Hebrew phrase, but there is a certain
majesty and more signification in these speeches, and therefore both Greek and
Latin keep them, although it is no more the Greek or Latin phrase, then it is
English. And why should we be squamish at new words or phrases in the
Scripture, which are necessary: when we do easily admit and follow new
words coined in court and in courtly or other secular vvritings?

We add the Greek in the margent for diverse cause^. The Greek added often
in the margent for many causes.
Sometime when the sense is hard, that the learned reader may consider of it
and see if he can help him self better then by our translation. as Luc 11.
Nolite extolli. (...). and again, Quod superest date eleemosynam. (...).
Sometime to take away the ambiguitie of the Latin or English, as Luc. 11. Et
domus supradomum cadet. Which we must needs English, and house upon house,
shall fall. by the Greek, the sense is not, one house shall fall upon an other.
but, if one house rise upon it self, that is, against it self, it shall perish
according as he speaks of a kingdom divided against it self, in the words
before. And Act. 14. Sacerdos Iouis qui erat. in the Greek, qui, is referred
to Jupiter. Sometime to satisfy the reader, that might otherwise conceive the
translation to be false as Philip. 4. v. 6. But in every thing by prayer, etc.
(...), not, in all prayer, as in the Latin it may seem. Sometime when the Latin
neither does, nor can, reach to the signification of the Greek word, we added
the Greek also as more significant. Mat. 4.
Illi foli seruies, him only shall thou serve, (...). And Act. 6. Nicolas a
stranger of Antioche, (...), and, To. 9. The service, (...). and Ephesians. 1. to
perfect, instaurare omnia in Christo, (...). And, Wherein he has gratified
us, (...). and Ephesians. 6. Put on the armor, (...). and a number the like.
Sometime, when the Greek has two senses, and the Latin but one, we add the
Greek. 2. Cor. 1. By the exhortaion vvherevvith we also are exhorted. the
Greek signifies also consolation etc. and 2 Cor. 10. But having hope of your
faith increasing, to be etc. where the Greek may also signify, as or when
your faith increases. Sometime for advantage of the Catholic cause, when the
Greek makes for us more then the Latin. as, Seniores, Act. 15. 2 These. 2.
(...). Vt digni habeamini. (...). Qui effundetur, (...), Praecepta, (...). and
Io. 21. (...), Pasce and rege. And sometime to show the false translation of
the Heretic, 1. Cor. 11.
as when Beza says, Hoc poculum in meo sanguine qui. (...). Luc. 22. and, Que^
oportet coelo co^tineri. (...), Act. 3. Thus we use the Greek diverse ways,
and esteem of it as it is worthy, and taken al commodities thereof for the
better understanding of the Latin, which being a translation, can not always
attain to the full sense of the principal tongue, as we see in all translations.

Item we add the Latin word sometime in the margent, The Latin text sometime
noted in the margent.
when either we can not fully express it, (as Act. 8. They took order for
Steuens funeral, Curauerunt Stephanum. and, Al take not this word, Non omnes
capiunt.) or when the reader might think, it can not be as we translate. as,
Luc. 8. A storm of wind descended into the lake, and they were filled, and
complebantur. and Io. 5. when Jesus knevv that he had now a long time,
quiaiam multum tempus haberet. meaning, in his infirmity.

This precise following of our Latin text, in neither adding nor diminishing,
is the cause why we say not in the title of books, in the first page, S.
Matthew, S. Paul^ because it is so neither in Greek nor Latin. In the
beginning of books, Matthew, Paul etc. not S. Matthew. S. Paul etc.
though in the tops of the leaves following, where we may be bolder, we
add, S. Matthew etc. to satisfy the reader. Much unlike to the Protestants
our Adversaries, which make no scruple to leave out the name of Paul in the
title of the Epistle to the Hebrews, Bib. an. 1579. 1580. an. 1577 1562.
though it be in every Greek book which they translate. And their most
authorized English Bibles leave our (Catholic) in the title of S. James
Epistle and the rest, which were famously known in the primitive Church by
the name of Catholicae Epistolae. Eusebius. hist. Eccl. li. 2 c. 22.

Item we give the Reader in places of some importance, An other reading in the
margent.
an other reading in the margent, specially when the Greek is agreeable to the
same. as Io. 4. transiet de morte ad vitam. Other Latin copies have, transiit,
and so it is in the Greek.

We bind not our selves to the points of any one copy, print, or edition of
the vulgar Latin, in places of no controversy, but follow the pointing most
agreeable to the Greek and to the fathers commentaries. The pointing sometime
al^e^ed.
As Col. 1, 10. Ambulantes digne Deo, per omnia placentes. Vvalking worthy of
God, in all things pleasing. (...). Ephesians. 1, 17. We point thus, Deus Domini
nostri Jesus Christi, pater gloriae. as in the Greek, and S. Chrysostom, and S.
Hierom both in text and commentaries. Which the Catholic reader specially
must mark, lest he find fault, when he sees our translation disagree in
such places from the pointing of his Latin Testament.

We translate sometime the word that is in the Latin margent, The margent
reading sometime preferred before the text.
and not that in the text, when by the Greek or the fathers we see it is a
manifest fault of the writers heretofore, that mistook one word for an other.
As, In fine, not, in side, 1. Pet. 3. v. 8. praesentiam, not, praescientiam, 2
Pet. 1. v. 16. Heb. 13. latuerunt, not, placue^unt.

Thus we have endeavored by all means to satisfy the indifferent reader, and
to help his understanding every way, both in the text, and by Annotations: and
withal to deal most sincerely before God and man, in translating and
expounding the most sacred text of the holy Testament. Fare well good Reader,
and if we profit the any whit by our poor pains let us for Gods sake be
partakers of thy devout prayers, and together with humble and contrite heart
call upon our Savior Christ to cease these troubles and storms of his derest
spouse: in the mean time comforting our selves with this saying of S.
Augustine: That Heretics, when they receive power corporally to afflict the
Church do exercise her patience: but when they oppugn her only by their
evil doctrine or opinions. then they exercise her wisdoms. De ciuit. Dei li.
18. ca. 51.

THE SIGNIFICATION OR MEANING OF THE NVMBERS AND MARKS used in this New
Testament.
THe numbers in the inner margent of the text, show the number of verses in
every Chapter.

The numbers in the Arguments before every Chapter, point to the same numbers
of verses in the text, treating of the same matter.

The numbers in the beginning of the Annotatio^s, signify, that the Annotation
is upon such a verse of the text.

The numbers in the inner margent, or else where, joined to the citations of
Scripture, if they be written thus, Genesis 4, 16. the first is the chapter, the
second is the verse. If thus, Genesis 4. 16. both are the Chapters. If thus, Genesis
4, 16. 17. 18. the first is the chapter, all the rest, the verses. If thus, Genesis
4, 16. 5, 7. it signifies, chap. 4. verse. 16. and chap. 5. verse. 7.

This cross signifies the beginning of every verse.

This mark in the text, signifies that there is an Annotation upon that word
or words which follow the said mark.

* This star in the text, or in the Annotations, signifies the allegations
cited over against the same in the margent, or some other thing answering
thereunto.

` ' This mark shows an other reading in the margent. And if there be
nothing in the margent, it signifies that those words are not in some copies.

:; a b These notes in the text, refer the reader to the self same in the
margent.

Mt. for Matthew.

Mr. for Mark.

This mark signifies the ending of Gospels and Epistles.

Their beginning is known by the margent, where directly at the beginning of
them, is set, The Gospel, or, The Epistle upon such a day. And if it could not
be so set directly (because of other marginal notes) then b is the mark of
their beginning. And if some fevv by oversight be not noted in the margent, it
is supplied in the table of Epistles and Gospels, at the end of this book.

THE BOOKS OF THE NEW Testament, according to the count of the Catholic
Church.
4 GOSPELS.
The Gospel of S. Matthew. The Gospel of S. Mark. The Gospel of S. Luke. The
Gospel of S. John. The ACTS of the Apostles.
S. PAVLES EPIST. 14.
The Epistle to the Romans. The 1 Epistle to the Corinthians. The 2 Epistle to
the Corinthians. The Epistle to the Galatians. The Epistle to the Ephesians.
The Epistle to the Phillppians. The Epistle to the Colossians. The 1 Epist. to
the Thessalonians. The 2 Epistle to the Thessalonia^s. The 1 Epistle to
Timothee. The 2 Epistle to Timothee. The Epistle to Titus. The Epistle to
Philemon. The Epistle to the Hebrews.
THE 7 CATHOL. EPISTLES.
The Epistle of S. James. The 1 Epistle of S. Peter. The 2 Epistle of S. Peter.
The 1 Epistle of S. John. The 2 Epistle of S. John. The 3 Epistle of S. John.
The Epistle of S. Jude. The APOCALYPSE of S. John.
1 The infallible authority and excellency of them above al other writings.
S. Augustine li. II. cont. Faustum. cap. 5. THe excellency of the Canonical
authority of the old and new Testament, is distincted from the books of later
writers: which being confirmed in the Apostles times, by the succession of
Bishops, and propagations of Churches, is placed as it were in a certain
throne on high, whereunto every faithful and godly understanding must be
subject and obedient. There, if any thing move or trouble thee as absurd, thou
may not say, The author of this book held not the truth: but, either the
copy is faulty, or the Translatour erred, or thou understand not. But in
the works of them that wrote afterward, which are contained in infinite
books, but are in no case equal to that most sacred authority of CANONICAL
SCRIPTVRES: in which soever of them is found even the same truth, yet the
authority is far unequal.

2 The discerning of Canonical from not Canonical, and of their infallible
truth, and sense, comes unto us, only by the credit we give unto the
CATHOLIC CHVRCHE: through whose commendation we believe both the Gospel and
Christ him self. Whereas the Sectaries measure the matter by their fantasies
and opinion.
S. Augustine cont. Epist. fundamenti cap. 5. I for my part, would not believe
the Gospel, unless the authority of the CATHOLIC CHVRCH moved me. They
therefore whom I obied saying, Believe the Gospel: Luther, Calvin.
why should I not believe them saying, Believe not * Manichaeus? Choose
whether thou vvilt. If thou will say, Believe the Catholic: lo they vvarne
me that I give no credit unto you: and therefore believing them, I must needs
not believe thee. If thou say, Believe not the Catholics: it is not the right
way, by the Gospel to drive me to the faith of Manichaeus, because I believed
the Gospel it self by the preaching of Catholics.

Again li. de vtilit. credend. cap. 14. I see the concerning Christ him self,
I have believed none, but the confirmed and assured opinion of peoples and
nations: and that these peoples have on euey side possessed the mysteries of
the CATHOLIC CHVRCH. Why should I not therefore most diligently require,
specially among them, what Christ commanded, by whose authority I was moved
to believe, that Christ did command some profitable thing? Vvilt thou (o^
Heretic) tell me better what he said? whom I would not think to have been
at al, or to be, if I must believe, because thou say it. What gross madness
is this, to say, Believe the Catholics, the Christ is to be believed: and
learn of us, what he said.

Again cont. Faustum li. II. cap. 1. Thou see then in this matter what force
the authority of the CATHOLIC CHVRCH has, which even from the most grounded
and founded seats of the Apostles, is established until this day, by the line
of Bishops succeding one an other, and by the consent of so many peoples.
Whereas thou say, This is Scripture, or, this is such an Apostles, that is
not: because this sounds for me, and the other against me. Thou then art the
rule of truth. whatsoever is against thee, is not true.

3 No heretics have right to the Scriptures, but are usurpers: the Catholic
Church being the true owner and faithful keeper of them. Heretics abuse them,
corrupt them, and utterly seek to abolish them, though they pretend the
contrary.
Tertullianli. De praescriptionibus, brings in the CATHOLIC CHVRCH speaking
thus to all Heretics. Who are you, Luther, Zuinglius, Caeluin.
when, and from whence came you? what do you in my possession, that are
none of mine? by what right (Marcion) do thou cut down my wood? who gave
the license (o Valentine) to turn the course of my fountains? by what
authority (Apelles) do thou remove my bounds? and Their scholars and
folovvers.
you the rest, why do you sovv and seed for these companions at your
pleasure? It is my possession, I possess it of old, I have assured origins
thereof, even from those authors whose the thing was. I am the heir of the
Apostles. As they provided by their Testament, as they committed it to my
credit, as they adjured me, so do I hold it. You surely they disherited
alvvaies and have cost you of, as forainers, as enemies.

Again in the same book. Encountering with such by Scriptures, avails
nothing, but to ouerturne a man's stomach or his brain. This heresy receives
not certain Scriptures: and if it do receive some, yet by adding and taking
away, it peruerteth the same to serve their purpose: and if it receive any, it
does not receive them wholy: and if after a sort it receive them wholy,
nevertheless by diuising diverse expositions, it turns them clean an other
way etc.

4 Yet do they vaunt them selves of Scriptures excedingly, but they are never
the more to be trusted for that.
S. Hierom aduersus Luciferianos in fine. Let them not flatter them selves, if
they seem in their own conceit to affirm that which they say, out of the
chapters of Scripture: whereas the Devil also spoke some things out of the
Scriptures, and the Scriptures consist not in the reading, but in the
understanding.

Vincentius Lirinensis li. cont. prophanas haeres^^^ Nouationes. Here perhaps
some man may ask, whether heretics also use not the testimonies of divine
Scripture. Yet in deed do they, and that vehemently. For thou shall see them
fly through every one of the sacred books of the Law, through Moses, the
books of the kings, the Psalms, the Apostles, the Gospels, the Prophets. For,
whether among their own fellows, or strangers: whether privately, or
publicly: whether in talk, or in their books: whether in bankets, or in
the streates: they (I say) allege nothing of their own, which they endeavor
not to shadow with the words of Scripture also. Read the works of Paulus
Samosatenus, of Priscillian, of Eunomian, of Iouinian, Of Calvin, of ^uel, of
the rest.
of the other plagues and pestilences: thou shall find an infinite heap of
examples, no page in a manner omitted or void, which is not painted and
colored with the sentences of the new or old testament. But they are so much
the more to be taken heed of, and to be feared, the more secretly they lurk
under the shadows of Gods divine law. For they know their stinkes would not
easily please any man almost, if they were breathed out nakedly and simply them
selves alone, and therefore they sprinkle them as it were with certain
precious spices of the heavenly word: to the end that he which would easily
despise the error of man, may not easily contemn the oracles of God. So that
they do like unto them, which when they vvil prepare certain bitter potion^
for children, do first anoint the brimmes of the cup with honey, that the
unwary age, when it shall first feel the svvetnes, may not fear the
bitterness.

5 The cause why, the Scriptures being perfect, yet we use other
Ecclesiastical vvritings and tradition.
Vincentius Lirinensis in his golden book before cited, aduersus prophanas
haeres^^ Nouationes. Here some man perhaps may ask, for as much as the Canon of
the Scriptures is perfect, and in all points very sufficient in it self, what
need is there, to join thereunto the authority of the So he calls the
Churches sense, and the fathers interpretations of Scriptures.
Ecclesiastical understanding? for this cause surely, for that all take not the
holy Scripture in one and the same sense, because of the deepenes thereof. but
the speeches thereof, some interpret one way, and some an other way, so that
there may almost as many senses be picked out of it, as there be men. for,
Nouatian does expound it one way, and Sabellius, an other way, otherwise
Donatus, otherwise Arius, Eunomius, Macedonius, otherwise Photinus,
Apollinaris, Priscillianus, otherwise Iouinian, Pelagius, Celestius, lastly
otherwise Nestorius. Otherwise Wiclesse Luther, Calvin, Puritanes.
And therefore very necessary it is, because of so great vvindinges and
turninges of diverse errors, that the line of Prophetical and Apostolical
interpretation, be directed according to the rule of the Ecclesiastical and
Catholic sense or understanding.

S. Basil li. de Spiritu sancto cap. 27. Of such articles of religion as are
kept and preached in the Church, some were taught by the written word, other
some we have received by the tradition of the Apostles, delivered unto us as
it were from hand to hand in mystery secretly: both which be of one force to
Christian religion: and this no man vvil deny that has any little skill of the
Ecclesiastical rites or customs. for if we go about to reject the customs
not contained in Scripture, as being of small force, we shall vnvvittingly and
vnavvares mangle the GOSPEL it self in the principal parts thereof, yea
rather, we shall abridge the very preaching of the Gospel, and bring it to a
bare name.

THE SVMME OF THE NEW TESTAMENT.
THAT which was the sum of the Old Testament, to wit, Christ and his Church,
Aug. de cat. rud. cap. 3. 4.
as S. Augustine says catechizing the ignorant: the very same is the sum of
the New Testament also. For (as the same S. Augustine says again) In the Old
Testament there is the occultation of the New: and in the New Testament there
is the manifestation of the Old. Super Exodus q. 73.
And in another place: In the Old does the New lie hidden, and in the New does
the Old lie open. And thereupon our Savior said: Mat. 5.
I am not come to break the Law or the Prophets, but to fulfill them. For
assuredly I say unto you, til heaven and earth pass, one jot or one title
shall not pass of the Law, till all be fulfilled. In which words he
shows plainly, that the new Testament is nothing else but the fulfilling of
the old.

Therefore to come to the parts: The Gospels do tell of Christ himself (of
whom the Old Testament did foretell) and that even from his coming into the
world, unto his going out thereof again. The Acts of the Apostles do tell of
his Church beginning at Jerusalem the headcitie of the Jews, and of the
propagation thereof to the Gentiles and their headcitie Rome. And, the
Apocalypse does prophecy of it, even to the consummation thereof, which shall be
in the end of the world. The Epistles of the Apostles do treat partly of such
questions as at that time were moved, partly of good life and good order.

The Sum of the 4 Gospels.
THe Gospels do tell historically the life of our Lord Jesus, shevving
plainly, Io. 20, 31.
that he is Christ or the king of the Jews, whom until then, all the time of
the Old Testament, they had expected: and vvithal, that they of their own
mere malice and blindness (the iniquity beginning of the Seniors, but at the
length the multitude also consenting) would not receive him, but ever sought
his death: which for the Redemption of the world, he at length permitted them
to compass, they deserving thereby most justly to be refused of him, and so
his Kingdom or Church to be taken away from them, and given to the Gentiles.
For the gathering of which Church after him, he chooses Twelve, and
appoints one of them to be the chief of al, with instructions both to them
and him accordingly.

The story hereof is written by four: Eze. 1.
who in Ezechiel and in the Apocalypse are likened to four living creatures,
Apoc. 4.
every one according as his book begins. S. Matthew to a Man, because he
begins with the pedigree of Christ as he is man. S. Mark to a Lion,
because he begins with the preaching of S. John Baptist, as it were the
roaring of a lion in the wilderness. S. Luke to a Calfe, because he begins
with a priest of the Old Testament (to wit, Zachary the father of S. John
Baptist) which Priesthood was to sacrifice calves to God. S. John to an Egle,
because he begins with the Divinity of Christ, flying so high as more is
not possible.

The first three do report at large what Christ did in Galilee, after the
imprisonment of S. John Bapist. Wherefore S. John the Evangelist vvriting
after them all, does omit his doings in Galilee (save only one, which they
had not written of, the wonderful bread which he told the Capharnaites he
could and would give, Io. 6.) and reports first, what he did vvhiles John
Baptist as yet was preaching and baptizing: then, after John's imprisoning,
what he did in Jury every year about Easter. But of his Passion all four do
write at large.

Where it is to be noted, that from his baptizing (which is thought to have
been upon Tvvelfthday, what time he was beginning to be about 30 year old,
Luke 3.) unto his passion, are numbered three months and three years, in
which there were also 4 Easters.

The argument of S. Matthewes Gospel.
S. Matthevves Gospel may be well divided into five parts. The first part,
as touching the Infancy of our Lord Jesus: Chap. 1 and 2.

The second, of the preparation that was made to his manifestation: chap. 3.
and a piece of the 4.

The third, of his manifesting of him self by preaching and miracles, and that
in Galilee: the other piece of the 4. chap. unto the 19.

The fourth, of his coming into Jury, tovvard his Passion: chap. 19. and 20.

The fifth, of the Holy week of his Passion in Jerusalem: chap. 21 unto the
end of the book.

Of S. Matthew we have Mat. 9. Mar. 2. Lu. 5: How being before a Publican, he
was called of our Lord, and made a Disciple. Then Luke 6. Mar. 3. Mat. 10:
How out of the whole number of the Disciples he was chosen to be one of the
twelve Apostle. And out of them again he was chosen (and none but he and S*
John) to be one of the four Evangelists. Among which four also, he was the
first that vvrote, about 8 or 10 years after Christ's Ascension.

THE HOLY GOSPEL OF JESUS CHRIST ACCORDING TO MATTHEW. THE FIRST part of this
Gospel, of the Infancy of our Savior Christ.

CHAP. I.
The pedigree of Jesus, to show that he is Christ, promised to Abraham and Genesis
12. 22.
David. 18. That he was conceived and borne of a Virgin, ^. Reg. 7.
as Esaias prophesied of him. Psalm. 131.


Luc. 3, 31.
generation of JESUS Christ, the son of David, This Gospel is most solemly
sung in holy Church at Mattins upon Christmas day.
the son of Abraham.

Genesis 21. 29. 38.
Abraham begat Isaac, And Isaac begat Jacob. As also it is the Gospel of the
Co^ception and Natiuiti^ of our B. Lady: because here is declared the pedigree
of her also.
And Jacob begat Judas and his brethren: 1 Par. 2, 5.
And Phares begat Esron. And Esron begat Aram. Ruth. 4, 18.
And Aminadab begat Naasson. And Naasson begat Salmon.

And 2 Re. 12, 24.
David the King begat Solomon of her that was the wife of Vrias. 1 Par. 3, 10.
Solomon begat Roboam. And Roboam begat Abia. And Abia begat Asa. 4 Reg. 24.
And Amon begat Josias. 2. Par. 36.
in the Transmigration of Babylon.

1 Par. 3.
Iechonias begat Salathiel. 1 Esd. 3.
And Salathiel begat Zorobabel. begat Joseph the husband of MARIE: de qua.
of whom was borne JESUS, who is called CHRIST.



The Gospel upon Christmas eve. and Upon S. Joseph's day the 19 of March.
When his mother MARIE was spoused to Joseph, before they came together, she
was found to be with child by the Holy Ghost. Deuteronomy 24, 1.
put her to open shame: was minded secretly to dimisse her. JESUS an Hebrew
word, in English SAVIOVR.
JESUS. For he shall save his people from their sins. Esa. 7, 14.
Behold a Virgin shall be with child, and bring forth a son, and they shall
call his name Emmanuel, which being interpreted is, God with us.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. I.
1. Thamar.] Christ abhorred not to take flesh of some that were il, as he
chose Judas among his Apostles: Let not us disdain to receive our spiritual
birth and sustenance of such as be not always good.

16. Joseph.] Joseph marying our Lady as near of kin (for so was the Nu. 36.
law) by his pedigree shows hers, and consequently Christ's pedigree from
David.

16. Husband.] True and perfect marriage, and continual living in the same,
without carnal copulation. Aug. lib. 2. Consen. Euang. c. 1.

20. Borne in her.] The triple good or perfection of marriage accomplished in
the parents of Christ, to wit, Issue, Fidelity, Sacrament. Aug. de nup. and
conc. li. 1. c. 11.

23. A Virgin.] Our Savior borne in marriage, Virginity preferred.
but yet of a Virgin, would honor both states: and withal, teaches us against
Iouinian the old Heretic and these of our time, that virginity and the
continent life are preferred before marriage that has carnal copulation, See S.
Hierom. adu. Iouin. and S. Greg. Nazianz. Ser. 20. de studio in pauperes, in
initio.

23. A Virgin.] As our Lady both a virgin and a mother, brought forth Christ
the head corporally: so the Church a virgin and a mother, brings forth the
members of this head spiritually. Aug. li. de Virg. ca. 2.

23. And bring forth.] The Heretic Ioulnian is here refuted, Our B. Ladies
perpetual virginity.
holding that her virginity was corrupted in bringing forth Christ. Aug. har.
28. Li. 1 cont. Julian. c. 2.

25. Til, Firstborn.] Heluidius of old abused these words, Tradition.
til, and, firstborn, against the perpetual virginity of our B. Lady. Hiero.
cont. Helu. which truth though not expressed in Scripture, yet our Adversaries
also do grant, and Heluidius for denial thereof was condemned for an heretic
by tradition only. Aug. har. 14.

CHAP. II.
The Gentiles come unto Christ with their offerings, and that so openly, that
the Jews can not pretend ignorance. 1 The Jews with Herod conspire against
him. 13 He thereupon flees from them into Egypt. 16 They afterward, seeing
their subteltie prevailed not, imagined to oppress him by open persecution. 19
But they at length dyed, and he returns to the land of Israel: al according
to the Scriptures.

Luc. 2, 7.
borne in Bethlehem of Judah in the days of Herod the King, behold, The holy
feast of the Epiphanie called Twelfth-day the 6 of January. upon which day
this is the Gospel.
there came Sages from the East to Jerusalem, And thou Bethlehem the land of
Judah, Mich. 5, 2.
art not the least among the Princes of Judah: for out of thee shall come forth
the Captain that shall rule my people Israel.

Psa. 71, 10.
gifts: gold, frankincense, and myrrh.

The Gospel of Childermas day.
behold an Angel of our Lord appeared in sleep to Joseph, saying: Arise, and
take the child and his mother, and flee into Egypt: and be there until I shall
tell the. For it vvil come to pass that Herod vvil seek the child to destroy
him. and his mother by night, and retired into Egypt: and he was there until
the death of Herod: Os. 11, ^.
saying, Out of Egypt have I called my son.

The Martyrdo^ of the holy Innocents, Whose holy day is kept the 28 of Decembre.
Was exceeding angry: and sending murdered all the men children that were in
Bethlehem, and in all the borders thereof, from two year old and under,
according to the time which he had diligently sought out of the Sages. A voice
in Rama was heard, Iere. 31, 15.
crying out and much vvayling: Rachel bevvayling her children, and would not
be comforted, because they are not.

The Gospel on Twelfth eve.


ANNOTATIONS CHAP. II.
1. Behold.] Our Lords apparition or Epiphanie to these Sages being Gentiles,
their Pilgrimage to him, and in them the first homage of Gentilitie done unto
him the twelfth day after his Nativity: and therefore is Twelfth day highly
celebrated in the Catholic Church for joy of the calling of us Gentiles. His
baptism also and first miracle are celebrated on the same day.

2. Star.] Christ's Nativity depended not upon this star, as the
Priscillianists falsely surmised: but the star upon his Nativity, for the
service whereof it was created, Grego. Ho. 10.

2. Come to adore.] This coming so far of devotion to visit and adore Christ
in the place of his birth, Pilgrimage.
was proprely a Pilgrimage to his person: and warranteth the faithful in the
like kind of external worship done to holy persons, places, and things.

4. Inquired of them.] The high Priests were rightly consulted in quaestion of
their law and religion, and be they never so il, are often forced to say the
truth by privilege of their v^ction: as here and after, they did concerning the
true Messiah.

11. Adored him] This body (says S. Chrysostom.) the Sages adored in the
cribbe. Let us at the least imitate them: thou see him not now in the cribbe,
Adoration of the ^. Sacrament.
but on the altar: not a woman holding him, but the Priest present, and the
Holy Ghost powered out abundantly upon the sacrifice. Ho. 24. in 1. Cor. Ho. 7.
in Mt. Ho. de sancto Philogonio.

11. Treasures.] These treasures are as it were the first fruits of those
riches and gifts, Psalm. 71.
which (according to the Prophecies of David and Esaias) Gentilitie should offer
to Christ and his Church, Esa. 60.
and now have offered, specially from the time of Constantine the Great. As
also these three Sages, being principal men of their Country, represent the
whole state of Princes, kings, and Emperors, Chrysostom.
that were (according to the said Prophecies) to believe in Christ, to humble
them selves to his cross, Theophyl.
to foster, enriche, adorn and defend his Church. Whereupon it is also a very
convenient and agreeable tradition of antiquity, The three kings.
and a received opinion among the faithful, Cic. de Diuinat.
* not lacking testimonies of ancient writers, and much for the honor of our
Savior, that these three also were kings: Pli^. li. 20.
to Wit, either according to the state of those Countries, * where the
Princes were Magi, Esther 1, 1^. 14.
and * Magi the greatest, about the Prince: or as we read in the Scriptures, of
Melchisedec king of Salem, and many other kings that dwelt within a small
compass: or as * Iobes three friends are called kings. Tob. 2.
These are commonly called the three kings of Colen, because their bodies are
there, Amb. 1.
translated thither from the East Country: their names are said to have been
Gaspar, Off. c. 1^.
Melchior, Baltasar.

11. Gifts.] These Sages were three, and their gifts three, and each one
offered every of the three, to express our faith of the Trinity. The Gold,
to signify that he was a King: the frankincense, that he was God: the myrrh,
that he was to be buried as man. Aug. ser. i. de Epiph.

15. Out of Egypt.] This place of the Prophet (and the like in the new
Testament) here applied to Christ, whereas in the letter it might seem
otherwise, reaches us how to interpret the old Testament, and that the
principal sense is of Christ and his Church.

16. Murdered.] By this example we learn how great credit we owe to the
Church in Canonizing Saints, and celebrating their holy days: by whose only
warrant, Canonizing of Saints.
without any word of Scripture, these holy Innocents have been honored for
Martyrs, and their holy day kept ever since the Apostles time, although they
died not voluntarily, nor al perhaps circuncised, and some the children of
Pagans. Aug. ep. ^^. Orig. ho. 1. in diuersos.

CHAP. III.
John Baptist by his Eremites life, by his preaching and baptism, calls al
unto penance, to prepare them to Christ. 10. He preaches to the Pharisees and
Sadducees, threatening to them (unless they truly do penance) reprobation here
and damnation hereafter: and so salvation sends them to Christ and his
baptism. THE SEcond part of this Gospel, Of the Preparation that was made to
the manifestation of Christ.
Which being far more excellent then John's, yet Christ him self among those
penitents vouchsafes to come unto John's baptism. where he has testimony
from heaven also.

Mr. 1, 4.
Luc. 3, 3.
Do penance: for the Kingdom of heaven is at hand. Es. 40, 3.
A voice of one crying in the desert, prepare ye the way of our Lord, make
straight his paths.



Ye vipers brood, who has shevved you to flee from the wrath to come? It is
not only damnable, to do il: but also, not to do good.
not yield good fruit, shall be cut down, and cast into the fire. Mr. 1, 8.
I in deed baptize you in water unto penance. Lu. 3, 16.
but he that shall come after me, Io. 1, 26.
is stronger then I, Act. 11, 16. 19, 4.
whose shoes I am not vvorthie to bear, Aug. Ser. 61 de temp.
he shall baptize you in the Holy Ghost and fire.



ANNOTATIONS CHAP. III.
1. Desert.] Magdeb. Cent. 5. c. 6. page ^11. Cent. 1. li. 1. c. 10.
Of this word desert (in Greek eremus) comes the name Eremitages, and
Eremites, that live a religious and austere life in deserts and solitatie
places, Eremites.
by the example of S. John Baptist, whom the holy Doctors therefore call the
Prince and as it were the author of such profession. S. Chrysostom. ho. 1 in Marcum
and ho. de Io. Baptista. Hiero. ad Eustoch. de e^stod. virg. Isid. li. 1. c. 15
de diu off. Bernardus de excel. Io. Baptista. Wherewith the Protestants are so
offended that * they say, S. Chrysostom spoke rashly and untruly. Cythraeus in
3. cap. Mat. Bucerus ibid.
And no marvel, for whereas the Evangelist himself in this place makes him a
perfect pattern of penance and Eremitical life, for desert or wilderness, for
his rough and rude apparel, for abstayning from al delicate meats (according
to our Saviors testimony also of him Mt. 11, 8* Luc. 7, 33) they are not
ashamed to pervert all with this strange commentary, See Canis. de verb. Dei
corruptelis Ii. 1. c. 2. 3. 4.
that it was a desert * full of towns and villages, his garment was * chamlet,
his meat * such as the country gave and the people there used: to make him
thereby but a common man like to the rest, in his manner of life: clean against
Scriptures, fathers (...) reason.

2. Do penance.) Mt. 4, 17.
So is the Latin, word for word, so reads al antiquity, namely S. Cyprian
ep. 52 often, Penance.
and S. Augustine li. 13 Confess. c. 12. and it is a very usual speech in the
New Testament, Lu. 13, 3. 5.
specially in the preaching of S. John Baptist, Lu. 24, 47.
* Christ him self, and * the Apostles: to signify perfect repentance, Act. 2,
38, 26, 20.
which has not only confession and amendment, but contrition or sorrow for the
offense, and paineful satisfaction: such as S. Cyprian speaks of in all the
foresaid epistle. But the Adversaries of purpose (as * namely Beza protests)
mislike that interpretation, Annot. in hunc locu^. Sermon. in fam. and siccit.
because it favors Satisfaction for sin, which they cannot abide. Where if
they pretend the Greek word, (...).
we send them to these places Mat. 11, 21. Lu. 10, 13. 1 Cor. 7, 9. where it
must needs signify, sorrowful, (...).
payneful, and satisfactorie repentance. we tell them also that * S. Basil a
Greek Doctor calls the Ninevites repentance with fasting and hearecloth and
ashes, by the same Greek word (...). And more we will tell them in other places.

8. Confessing their sins.) John did prepare the way to Christ and his
Sacraments, not only by his baptism, but by inducing the people to confession
of their sins. Which is not to acknowledge them selves in general to be
sinners, but also to utter every man his sins.

9. Fruit worthy.) He preaches satisfaction by doing worthy fruits or
works of penance, which are (as S. Hierom says in 2. Joel) fasting, praying,
alms and the like.

10. The axe.) Here preachers are taught to dehort from doing evil for fear of
Hell, and to exhort to do good in hope of heaven: which kind of preaching our
Aduer, do condemn.

11. In water.) John's baptism did not remitte sins, John's baptism and
Christ's.
nor was comparable to Christ's Baptism, as here it is plain and in many
other places. Hiero. adu. Lucifer. Aug. de Bapt. cont. Donat. li. 5. c. 9. 10.
11. Yet is it an article of our Adu. that the one is no better then the other.
which they say not to extol John's, but to derogate from Christ's baptism, so
far, that they make it of no more valor or efficacy for remission of sins,
and grace, and justification, then was John's: thereby to maintain their
manifold heresies, that Baptism takes not away sins, that a man is no
cleaner nor iuster by the Sacrament of Baptism then before, that it is not
necessary for children unto salvation, but it is enough to be borne of
Christian parents, and such like erroneous positions well known among the
Caluinists.

12. Floor.) This floor is his Church militant here in earth, wherein are
both good and bad (here signified by corn and chafe) til the separation be
made in the day of judgment: contrary to the doctrine of the Heretics, that
hold, the Church to consist only of the good.

16. Opened.) To signify that heaven was shut in the old law, til Christ by
his Passion opened it, and so by his Ascension was the first that entered into
it; contrary to the doctrine of the Heretics. See Hebr. 9, ^. and 11, 40.

CHAP. IIII.
Christ going into the desert ^o prepare him self before his Manifestation,
ouercometh the Devils tentations. 12 Beginning in Galilee, as the Prophet said
he should: 18 he calls four Disciples: and with his preaching and miracles
draws unto him innumerable folowers.

The Gospel upon the first Sunday in Lent.
to be tempted of the Devil. Mr. 1, 12
Lu. 4, 1.
afterward he was hungry. Deu. 8, 3
Nor in bread alone does man live, but in every word that proceeds from the
mouth of God.

That he will give his Angels charge of thee, Ps. 90, 12.
and in their hands shall they hold thee up, lest perhaps thou knock they foot
against a stone. Deu. 6, 16.
It is written, Thou shall not tempt the Lord thy God. Deu. 6, 13.
Auant Satan: for it is written, The Lord thy God shall thou adore, and him
only shall thou serve.

Mr. 1. 14
he retired into Galilee: THE THIRD part of the Gospel, of Christ's manifesting
him self by preaching, and that in Galil^e.
Luc. 4, 14.
came and dwelled in Capharnaum a sea town, in the borders of Zabulon and
Nephthali, Isa. 9, 1.
Land of Zabulon and land of Nephthali, the way of the sea beyond Jordan of
Galilee, of the Gentiles: preach, and to say, Mr. 1, 15.
* Do penance, for the Kingdom of heaven is at hand.

The Gospel upon S. Andrews day.
savv two brethren, Lu. 5, 1.
Simon who is called Peter, and his brother, casting a net into the sea (for
they were fishers) Mar. 1, 19.
Luc. 5, 10.
James of Zebedee and John his brother in a ship with Zebedee their father,
repayring their nets: and he called them.



ANNOTATIONS CHAP. IIII.
1. Desert.] As John the Baptist, so our Savior by going into the desert and
there living in contemplation even among brute beasts, Eremites.
and subject to the assaults of the Devil for our sins, gives a warrant and
example to such holy men as have lived in wilderness for penance and
contemplation, called Eremites.

2. Fasted fourtis days.] Elias and Moses (says S. Hierom) by the fast of 40
days were filled with the familiarity of God, The Lent-fast.
and our Lord him self in the wilderness fasted as many, to leave unto us the
solemn days of fast. (that is, Lent.) Hiero. in c. 58 Esa. S. Augustine also
has the very like words ep. 119. And generally all the ancient fathers that by
occasion or of purpose speak of the Lent-fast, make it not only an imitation
of our Saviors fast, but also an Apostolical tradition, and of necessity to
be kept. Ign^. ep. 5. Ambr. d^ Quadrag. ser. 36. 34. Hier. ep. 54. ad Mar^el.
adu. Montanum.
Contem^e not Lent (says S. Ignatius) for it contains the imitation of our
Lords conversation. And S. Ambrose says plainly, that it was not ordained by
men, but consecrated by God: nor invented by any earthly cogitation, but
commanded by the heavenly Majesty, And again, that it is sin not to fast
all the Lent. S. Hieroms words also be most plain: We (says he) fast forty
days, or, make one Lent in a year, according to the tradition of the Apostles,
in time convenient. This time most convenient is (as S. Augustine says ep.
119) immediately before Easter, thereby to communicate with our Saviors
Passion: and (as other writers do add) thereby to come the better prepared and
more worthily, to the great solemnity of Christ's Resurrection: beside many
other goodly reasons in the ancient fathers which for brevity we omit. See
(good Christian Reader) 12 notable sermons of S. Leo the Great de Quadragesi^^,
of Lent: namely Ser. 6 and 9. Where he calls it the Apostles ordinance by the
doctrine of the Holy Ghost. See S. Ambrose from the 23 sermon forward: in S.
Bernard 7 sermons, and in many other fathers the like. Aug. Ser. 69. de te^p.
Last of al, note well the saying of S. Augustine, who affirms that by due
observation thereof, the wicked be separated from the good, infidels from
Christians, Heretics from faithful Catholics.

6. It is written.] Heretics allege scriptures, as here the Devil does, in
the false sense: the Church uses them, as Christ does, in the true sense,
and to consute their falsehood. Aug. cont. lit. Petil. li. ^. c. (...). 10. 7.

11. Him only serve.] It was not said, says S. Augustine, The Lord thy God
only shall thou ^dore, ^atria. Dulia.
as it was said, Him only shall thou serve: in Greek, (...). Aug. sup. Genesis
9. 61. Whereupon the Catholic Church has always used this most true and
necessary distinction: that there is an honor dew to God only, which to give
unto any creature, were Idolatry: and there is an honor dew to creatures also
according to their dignity, as to Saints, holy things, and holy place. See
Eusebius. Hist. Ec. li. 4. c. 14. S. Hierom. cont. Vigil: ep. 53. Aug. li. 10.
Ci^it. c. 1. li. 1 Trin. c. 6. Con^. Nic. 2. Damase. li. 1. de Imag. Bed. in 4.
Luc.

17. Do penance.] That penance is necessary also before baptism, for such as
be of age: as John's, so our Saviors preaching declares, both beginning with
penance.

23. Healing every malady.] Christ (says S. Augustine) by miracles gat
authority, by authority found credit, by credit drew together a multitude, by
a multitude obtained antiquity, by antiquity fortified a Religion, which nor
only the most fond new rising of Heretics using deceitful wiles, but neither
the drowsy old error of the very Heathen with violence setting against it,
might in any part shake and cast down. Aug. de vtil. cred. c. 14.

CHAP. V.
First, THE SERmon of Christ upon the Mount: containing the pattern of a
Christian life, in these three chapters following. Whereof S. Augustine has two
goodly books to. 4.
3 he promises rewards, 13 and he lays before the Apostles their office. 17
Secondly, he protests unto us that we must keep the commandments, and that
more exactly then the Scribes and Pharisees, whose justice weas counted most
per^ite: but yet that it was insufficient. he shows in the precepts of 21
Murder, ^7 Aduoutrie, ^1 Divorce, (...) Swearing, 38 Revenge, 42 Usury, 43
Enemies.

Luc. 6, 20.
he * went up into a mountain: and when he was set, his Disciples came unto
him,

THE EIGHT Beatitudes: which are a patt of the Catechism.
for theirs is the Kingdom of heaven. The Gospel upon Alholowes day, and upon
the feasts of many Martyrs.
for they shall be comforted.

Mr. 9, 50.
The Gospel on the feasts of Doctors.
vvherevvith shall it be salted? It is good for nothing any more but to be cast
forth, Luc. 14, 34.
and to be trodden of men. * candel and put it under a bushel, Mr. 4, 21*
but upon a ca^dlesticke, that it may shine to all that are in the house. Lu. 8,
16* 11, 33.


Luc. 16, 17.
* til heaven and earth pass, one jot or one tittle shall not pass of the
Law: til al be fulfilled. Ia. 2, 10.
and shall so teach men: shall be called the least in the Kingdom of heaven. But
he that shall do and teach: he shall be called great in the Kingdom of heaven.
The Gospel upon the fifth Sunday after Pentecost.


Exo. 20, 13.
* Thou shall not kill* and who so kills, Deuteronomy. 5, 17.
shall be in danger of judgment. Luc. 12, 58.
This Prison is taken of very ancient fathers, for Purgatory: namely S. Cypr.
ep. 52. ad Anton. nu* 6.
and thou be cast into prison.

Exo. 20, 14.
* Thou shall not commit aduoutrie. Deu. 24, 1.
rather then that thy whole body go into ^el.

Mt. 19, 7.
* whosoever shall dimisse his wife, let him give her a bil of diuorcement.

Exo. 20, 7.
Leu. 19, 11.
because it is the throne of God: neither by the earth, because it is the
foote-stole of his feet: neither by Jerusalem, because it is the city of the
great King.

Exo. 21, ^4.
* An eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth. Deu. 15, 7.
The Gospel upon the friday after Ashwensday.
turn not away.

Leu. 19, 18.
* Thou shall love thy neighbor, and hate thine enemy. So taught the
Pharisees, not the Law.
do good to them that hate you: and pray for them that persecute and abuse
you: We see then that the temporal prosperity of persons and countries is no
sign of better men or truer religion.


ANNOTATIONS CHAP. V.
10. For Justice.) Heretics and other malefactors (...) suffer willingly and
stoutly: but they are not blessed, False Marteyrs.
because they suffer not for justice. For (says S. Aug.) they can not suffer
for justice, that have divided the Church, and, where sound faith or charity
is not, there cannot be justice. Cont. ep. Parm. li. 1. c. 9. Ep. 50. Psalm. 34.
Conc. 2. And so by this scripture are excluded al false Martyrs, as S.
Augustine often declares, and S. Cypr. de Unit. Eccl. nu. 8.

12. Reward.) Merces.
In Latin and Greek the word signifies very wages and hire dew for works,
(...).
and so presupposes a meritorious deed.

15. The light.) This light of the world, and city on a mountain, and candel
upon a candlestick, signify the Clergy, and the whole Church, so built upon
Christ the mountain, that it must needs be visible, The Church visible.
and can not be hid nor unknown. Aug. cont. Fulg. Donas. c. 18. Li. 16. cont.
^aust. c. 17. And therefore, the Church being a candle not under a bushel, but
shining to al in the house (that is) in the world, what shall I say more (says
S. Augustine) then that they are blind which shut their eyes against the candel
that is set on the candlestick? Tract. 2. in ep. 10.

17. Your light.) The good life of the Clergy edifieth much, and is Gods great
honor: whereas the contrary dishonors him.

20. One of these.) Behold how necessary it is, not only to believe, but to
keep all the commandments, even the very least.

21. Your justice.) It is our Justice, True inherent justice.
when it is given us of God. Aug. in Ps. ^0. Conc. 1. De Sp. and lit. c. 9. So
that Christians are true^^^ust, and have in them selves inhaerent justice, by
doing Gods commandment. without which justice of works no man of age can be
saved. Aug. de fid. and oper. c. 16. Whereby we see salvation, justice, and
justification, not to come of only faith, or imputation of Christ's justice.

23. Hell of fire.] Here is a plain difference of sins, Venial sins.
some mortal that bring to Hell, some less, and less punished, called venial.

24. Gift at the altar.] Beware of coming to the holy altar or any Sacrament
out of charity. But be first reconciled to thy brother, and much more to the
Catholic Church, which is the whole brotherhod of Christian men, Heb. 1^, ^.

(...). Excepting the cause of fornication.] This exception is only to show,
that for this one cause a man may put away his wife for ever: but not that he
may marry another: as it is most plain in S. Mark and S. Luke, Mr. 10, 11.
who leave out this exception, Marriage a Sacrament, and is not dissolved by
divorce.
saying: * Whosoever dimisseth his Wife and marieth an other, Lu. 16, 18.
commits aduou^rie. See the Annot. Luc. 19, 9. But if both parties be in one
and the same fault, then can neither of them not so much as divorce or put away
the other.

(...). Commits aduontrie.] The knot of Marriage is a thing of so great a
Sacrament, that not by separation it self of the parties it can be loosed,
being not lawful neither for the one part nor the other, to marie again upon
divorce. Aug. de bo. Coniug. c. 7.

15. Not to swear.] The Anabaptists here not following the Churches judgment,
but the bare letter (as other Heretics in other cases) hold that there is no
oath lawful, no not before a judge. whereas Christ speaks against rash and
usual swearing in common talk, when there is no cause.

19. Not to Resist evil.] Here also the Anabaptists gather of the letter, that
it is not lawful to go to law for our right. as Luther also upon this place
held, that Christians might not resist the Turk. whereas by this, as by that
which follows, patience only is signified and a will to suffer more, rather
then to revenge. For neither did Christ not S. Paul follow the letter by
turning the other cheek. Io. 1^. Act. 23.

CHAP. VI.
In this second chapter of his Sermon, he Controwleth the Pharisees justice
(that is, their alms, prayer, and fasting) for the scope and intention thereof,
which was vain glory. 1^ Their end also was to be rich, but ours must not be
so much as in necessaries.



THE a first work of justice.
do an almes-deede, sound not a trompet before thee, as the hypocrites do
in the Synagogues and in the streets, that they may be honored of men: Amen I
say to you, they have received their reward.

THE SEcond work of justice.
pray, you shall not be as the hypocrites, that love to stand and pray in the
Synagogs and corners of the streets, that they may be seen of men: Amen I say
to you, they have received their revvard. The PATER NOSTER.


Luc. 11, 2.
* OUR FATHER which art in heaven, sanctified be thy name. In S. Luke, the
Latin is, Panem quotidianum, daily bread, the Greek being indifferent to both,
(...).
supersubstential bread. Mr. 11, 25.


The third work of justice.
fast, be not as the hypocrites, sad. For they disfigure their faces, that they
may appear unto men to fast. Amen I say to you, that they have received their
revvard. The Gospel upon Ashwensday.
anoynte thy head, and vvash thy face:

Luc. 12, 33.
where the rust and mothe do corrupt, and where thieves dig through and
steal. Luc. 11, 34.
there is thy heart also.

The Gospel on the 14 Sunday after Pentecost.
For either he vvil hate the one, Luc. 16, 13.
and love the other: or he vvil sustain the one, and contemn the other. You
cannot serve God and Mammon.

Luc. 12, 22.
* be not careful for your life what you shall eat, neither for your body
what raiment you shall put on. Is not the life more then the meat: and the
body more then the raiment? They seek temporal things only, and that not of
the true God, but of their idols, or by their own industry.
Heathen do seek after. For your father knovveth that you need al these
things.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. VI.
1. Justice.] Hereby it is plain that good works be justice, and that man
doing them does justice, Good works justify.
and is thereby just and Justified, and not by faith only. Al which justice of
a Christian man our Savior here compriseth in these three works, in Alms,
fasting, and prayers. Aug. li. perf. just. ^. ^. So that to give alms, is to
do justice, and the works of mercy are justice. Aug. in Ps. 49. v. 5.

4. Repay.] This repaying and rewarding of good works in heaven, often
mentioned here by our Savior, Merits.
declares that the said works are meritorious, and that we may do them in
respect of that reward.

5. Hypocrites.] Hypocrisy is forbidden in all these three works of justice,
and not the doing of them openly to the glory of God and the profit of our
neighbor and our own salvation: Hypocrisy.
for Christ before (c. 5.) bids, saying: Let your light so shine before men
etc. And in all such works S. Gregotles rule is to be followed, The work so to
be in public, that the intention remain in secret. Ho. 11. in Euang. c. 10.

7. Much speaking.] Long prayer is not forbid, for Christ * him self spent
whole nights in prayer, Luc. 6, 12, 18, 1. 21, 36.
and he says, * we must pray always, and * the Apostle exhorts to pray
without intermission, and the holy Church * from the beginning has had her
Canonical hours of prayer: but idle and voluntary babbling, 1 These. 5, 17.
either of the heathens to their gods, or of Heretics, that by long
Rhetorical prayers think to persuade God: Cypr. de orat. Do. in fine.
whereas the Collects of the Church are most breese and most effectual. See S.
Augustine ep. 121, c. 8, 9. 10.

11. Superstantial bread.) By this bread so called here according to the Latin
word and the Greek, (...).
we ask not only al necessary sustenance for the body, but much more al
spiritual food, namely the blessed Sacrament it self, The B. Sacrament.
which is Christ the true bread that came from heaven, and the bread of life to
us that eat his body. Cypr. de orat. Do. Aug. ep. 121 c. 6. 11. And therefore
it is called here Supersubstantial, that is, the bread that passes and
excels al creatures, Hiero. in. 2. Tit. in 6. Mat. Amb. li. 5. de Sacr. 6.
4. Aug. ser. 22. de verb. Do. sec. Mat. S. Germanus in Theoria.

12. Dettes.) These dettes do signify not only mortal sins, Venial sins.
but also venial, as S. Augustine often teaches: and therefore every man, be he
never so just, yet because he can not live without venial sins, may very
truly and ought to say this prayer. Aug. cont. du^s. ep. Pelag. li. 1. ^. 14.
li. 21 de Ciuit. 6. 27.

13. Lead us not.] S. Cypr. reads, In Expos. orat. Do.
Ne patiaris nos induci. God is not author of evil.
Suffer us not to be led, as S. Augustine notes li. de ho. perseu. c. 6. and
so the holy Church understands it, because God (as S. James says) tempts
no man: Iac. 1.
though for our sins, or for our probation and crown, he permit us to be
tempted. Beware then of Bezaes exposition upon this place, who (according to
the Caluinists opinion) says, that God leads them into tentation, into whom
him self brings in Satan for to fill their hearts: so making God the author of
sin.

14. If you forgive.) This point, of forgeuing our brother, when we ask
forgiveness of God, our Savior repeateth again, as a thing much to be
considered: and therefore commended in the parable also of the servant that
would not forgive his fellow servant, Mat. 18.

16. Fast.] He forbids not open and public fasts, ^ud. 20, 26.
which in the * Scriptures were commanded and proclaimed to the people of God,
2. Esd. 9.
and the Niniuires by such fasting appeased Gods Wrath: Public fast.
but to fast for vain glory and praise of men, (...). 2, 15.
and to be desirous by the very face and look to be taken for a faster, Ion. 3.
that is forbidden, and that is hypocrisy.

20. Treasures in heaven.] Treasures laid up in heaven, must needs signify,
not faith only, but plentiful alms and deeds of mercy and other good works,
Meritorious Works.
which God keeping as in a book, will reward them accordingly: as of the
contrary the Apostle says, He that sows sparingly, shall reap sparingly. 2.
Cor. 9.

24. Two Masters.] Two religions, God and Baal, Christ and Calvin, Mass and
Communion, the Catholic Church and Heretical Conuenticles. Let them mark
this lesson of our Savior, that think they may serve masters, al times, al
religions. Again, these two masters do signify, God and the world, the sles
he and the spirit, justice and sin.

25. Careful.] Prudent provision is not prohibited, but to much doubtfulnes and
fear of Gods provision for us: to whom we ought with patience to commit the
rest, when we have done sufficiently for our part.

CHAP. VII.
In this third and last Chapter of his Sermon, because we know not men's ends,
he bids us beware of judging: 6 and nevertheless to take open dogs (so he
calls them) as they be. 7 If these works of justice seem to hard, we must
pray instantly to him that gives them. 12 In the conclusion, he gives one
short rule of al justice. 13 and then he exhorts with all vehemency to the
strait way both of the Catholic faith, 21 and also of good life: because only
faith will not suffice.

Luc. 6, 37.
you shall be judged: and in what measure you mete, Mr. 4, 24.
it shall be measured to you again.



Lu. 11, 9*
and it shall be given you: seek, and you shall find, knock, and it shall be
opened to you. that knocks, it shall be opened. These good things are grace
and al spiritual gifts, and whatsoever pertayneth to the health of the soul.
good things to them that ask him?

Luc. 6, 31.
Al things therefore whatsoever you vvil that men do to you do you also to
them. For this is the Law and the Prophets.

Luc. 13, 24.


The Gospel on the 7 Sunday after Penteco^t.
Luc. 6, 44.
fruits you shall know them. Do men gather grapes of thorns, or figs of
thistels?

Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of heaven: but he that does the vvil
of my father which is in heaven, he shall enter into the kingdom of heaven.
Lord, Lord, have not we prophesied in they name, and in thy name cast out
devils, and in thy name wrought many miracles? Luc. 6, 47.
Every one therefore that hears these my words, and does them: shall be
likened to a wise man that built his house upon a rock,

Mar. 1, 22. Luc. 4, 32.
admiration upon his doctrine.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. VII.
1. Judge not.] It is not Christian part to judge il of men's acts which be in
them selves good and may proceed of good meaning, or of man's inward meanings
and intentions which we can not see: of which fault they must beware that are
to suspicious and given to deem always the worst of other men. But to say,
that Judas, or an Heretic evidently known to die obstinatly in heresy, is
damned, and in all other plain and manifest cases to judge, is not forbidden.

6. Holy to dogs.] No holy Sacrament and specially that of our Saviors
blessed body, Worthy receiving.
must be given wittingly to the unworthy, that is, to them that have not by
confession of al mortal sins examined and proved them selves. See the Annot.
1. Cor. 11, 27. 28. 29.

^. Every one that asks.] Al things that we ask necessary to salvation with
humility, attention, continuance, and other dew circunstances, God will
undoubtedly grant when it is best for us.

15. Clothing of sheep.] Extraordinary appearance of zeal and holiness is the
sheep cote in some Heretics: Heretics Wolves in sheepe-skinnes.
but these of this time wear not that garment much, being men of insatiable
sin. This is rather their garment, common to them with all other Heretics, to
crake much of the word of the Lord, To. 16, 1^.
and by pretensed allegations and * sweet words of benediction, and specially
by promise of knowledge, light and liberty of the Gospel, to seduce the simple
and the sinful.

16. Fruits.] These are the fruits which Heretics are known by, division
from the whole Church, Heretics known by their fruits.
division among them selves, taking to them selves new names and new malsters,
inconstancy in doctrine, disobedience both to others and namely to spiritual
officers, love and liking of them selves, pride and intolerable vaunting of
their own knowledge above all the holy Doctors, corruption, falsification, and
quite denying of the parts of Scriptures that specially make against them, and
these be common to al Heretics lightly. Othersome are more peculiar to these
of our time, as Incestuous marriages of vowed persons, Spoil of Churches,
Sacrilege and profanation of al holy things, and many other special points of
doctrine, directly tending to the corruption of good life in all states.

21. Lord, Lord.] These men have faith, otherwise they could not invoke,
Lord, Lord: To. 10. But here we see that to believe is not enough, and that not
only infidelity is sin, as Luther teaches. Not only faith.
Yea Catholics also that work true miracles in the name of our Lord, and by
never so great faith, yet without the works of justice shall not be saved. 1.
Cor. 13. Again, consider here who they are that have so often in their mouth,
The Lord, the Lord, and how little it shall avail them, that set so little by
good works, and contemn Christian justice.

CHAP. VIII.
Immediately after his Sermon (to confirm his doctrine with a miracle) he
cures a Leper. 5 But above him and al other Jews, he commends the faith of
the Centurion, who was a Gentil: and foretells by that occasion, the vocation
of the Gentiles, and reprobation of the Jews. 14 la Peter's house he shows
great grace. 18 In the way to the sea he speaks with two, of following him: 23
and upon the sea commands the tempest: 28 and beyond the sea he manifests
the devils malice against man, in an heard of swine.

The Gospel on the 3. Sunday after the Epiphanie.
great multitudes followed him: Mr. 1, 40.
Lord, if thou vvilt, thou can make me clean. Lu. 5, 12.
him, Leu. 14, 2.
See thou tell no body: but go, * show thy self to the priest, and offer the
gift which Moses commanded for a testimony to them.

THE GOSPEL upon the thursday after Ashwensday. And also in Mass for the sick.
there came to him a Centurion, Lu. 7, 1.
beseeching him,

Mr. 1, 29*
he savv his vviues mother laid, Lu. 4, 38*
and in a fit of a fever: Esa. 53, 4.
and all that were il at ease he cured: He took our infirmities, and bare our
diseases. 1. Pet. 2, 24.


Lu. 9, 57*
Luc. 9, ^9.
THE GOSPEL on the 4 Sunday after the Epiphanie.


Mar. 4, 36.
his Disciples followed him: Lu. 8, 22.
that the boat was covered with waves, but he slept.

Mr. 5, 1.
there met him two that had devils, Luc. 8, 26.
coming forth out of the sepulcres, exceeding fierce, so that none could pass
by that way.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. VIII.
4 Priest.] The Priests of the old law (says S. Chrysostom) had authority
and privilege only to discern who where healed of leprosy, and to denounce
the same to the people: but the Priests of the new law have power to purge in
very deed the filth of the soul. Priests forgive sins.
Therefore whosoever despises them, is more vvorthie to be punished then the
rebel Datha^ and his accomplices. S. Chryso. li. 3. de Sacerd.

4. Gift.] Our Savior wills him to go and offer his gift or sacrifice
according as Moses prescribed in that case, because the other sacrifice being
the holiest of al holies, which is his body, was not yet begone. So says S.
Aug. li. 2. q. Euang. q. 3. and Cont. Aduers. leg. and Preph. li. ^. c. 19. 20.

^. Not worthy.] Orig. ho. 5. in diverse. When thou eatest (says he) and
drinkest the body and blood of our Lord, DOMINE, non sum dignus.
he enters under thy roof. Thou also therefore humbling thy self, say: Lord
I am not worthy. etc. So said Liturg. S. Chrysostom. Graec. sub finem.
S. Chrysostom in his Mass, and so does the Cath. Church use at this day in
every Mass, See S. Augustine ep. 118 ad Ianu.

14. His Wives mother. Priests marriage.
) Of Peter specially among the rest it is evident that he had a wife, but (as
S. Hi^rom says) after they were called to be Apostles, Lib. 1. adu.
they had no more carnal company with their wives, Iou. c. 14.
as he proves there by the very words of our Savior, * He that has left
wise etc. Mt. 19, 29.
And so in the Latin Church has been always used, that married men may be and
are daily made Priests, Epiph. hae. 59.
either after the death of the wife, or with her consent to live in perpetual
continency. And if the Greeks have Priests that do otherwise, S. Epiphanius
a Greek Doctor tells them that they do it against the ancient Canons, and
Sozom. li. 1. c. 22.
Paphnutius plainly signifies the same in the first Council of Nice. But this
is most plain, that there was never either in the Greek Church or the Latin,
Socrat. li. 1. c. ^.
authentical example of any that married after holy Orders.

22. Let the dead.) By this we see that not only no wordly or carnal respect,
but no other laudable duty toward our parents, ought to stay us from following
Christ, and choosing a life of greater perfection.

26. He commanded.) The Church (here signified by the boat or ship) and
Catholics, are often tossed with storms of persecution, but Christ who seemed
to sleep in the mean time, by the Churches prayers awaketh, and makes a
calm.

CHAP. IX.
The Masters of the Jews he confuteth both with reasons and miracles: a
defending his remitting of sins, 9 his eating with sinners, 14 and his
condescending to his weak Disciples until he have made them stronger. 18
showing also in two miracles, the order of his providence about the jews and
Gentiles, leaving the one when he called the other. 27 he cures two blind men,
and one possessed. 35 And having with so many miracles together confuted his
enemies, and yet they worse and worse, upon pity toward the people, he
thinks of sending true pastors unto them.

The Gospel upon the 18 Sunday after Pentecost.
he passed over the water, and came into his own city. Mr. 2, 3.
And JESUS We see that the faith of one helps to obtain for an other.
seeing their faith, Luc. 5, 18.
said to the sick of the palsy, Have a good heart son, thy sins are
forgiven thee.

The Gospel upon S. Matthewes day.
he savv a man sitting in the custom house, Mar. 2, 14.
named Matthew: Luc. 5, 27.
And he says to him, Follow me. And he arose up, and followed him. Ose. 6, 6.
I vvil mercy, and not sacrifice. For I am not come to call the just, but
sinners.

Mar. 2, 18.
saying, why do we and the Pharisees fast often, Lu. 5, 33.
but thy Disciples do not fast? Christ signifies that the Church shall use
fasting days after his Ascension. Epiph. in Comp. fid. Cath. Aug. ep. ^0.
then they shall fast.

Mar. 5, 22.
behold a certain Governor approached, The Gospel upon the 23 Sunday after
Pentecost.
and adored him, Luc. 8, 41.
saying, Lord, my daughter is even now dead: but come, lay thy hand upon her,
and she shall live. Lo, her devotion to the hemme of his garment, was not
superstition, but a token of greater faith: so is the devout touching of holy
relikes.
thy faith has made the safe. And the woman became whole from that hour.



Mat. 12, 22.
behold they brought him a dumme man, possessed with a devil. In like manner
say the Heretics, calling al miracles done in the Catholic Church, the lying
signs of Antichrist.
In the prince of devils he casts out devils. Mt. 12, 24.




ANNOTATIONS CHAP. IX.
3. He blasphemeth.] When the Jews heard Christ remitte sins, they charged
him with blasphemy, as Heretics now charge his priests of the new Testament,
for that they remitte sins: to whom he said, Whose sins you shall forgive,
they are forgeuen etc. Io. 20.

5. Whether is easier.] Men have power to forgive sins.
The faithless Jews thought (as Heretics now a days) that to forgive sins
was so proper to God, that it could not he communicated unto man: but Christ
shows that as to work miracles is otherwise proper to God only, and yet this
power is communicated to men, so also to forgive sins.

6. The son of man in earth.) Christ had power to remit sins, and often
executed the same, not only as he was God, but also as he was a man, because he
was head of the Church and our chief Bishop and Priest according to his
manhod, in respect whereof al power was given him in heaven and earth. Mat. 28,
v. 18.

8. Glorified.) The faithful people did glorify God that gave such power to
men for to remit sins and to do miracles, knowing that that which God
commits to men, is not to his derogation, but to his glory. him self only
being still the principal worker of that effect, men being only his ministers,
substitutes, and working under him and by his commission and authority.

^. To men.) Not only Christ as he was man, had this power to forgive sins,
but by him and from him the Apostles, and consequently Priests, Mat. 28. Al
power is given me. Mat. 18. Whatsoever you shall loose in earth, shall be loosed
in heaven. Joan. 20. Whose sins you shall forgive, they are forgeuen.

13. Not sacrifice.) External Sacrifice.
These are the words of the Prophet, who spoke them even then when sacrifices
where offered by Gods commandment: so that it makes not against sacrifice,
but he says that sacrifice only without mercy and charity, and generally
with mortal sin, is not acceptable. The Jews offered their sacrifices
dewely, but in the mean time they had no pity nor mercy on their brethren:
that is it which God misliketh.

14. Fast often.) Fasting.
By the often fasting of his disciples, we may easily gather that he appointed
them a prescript manner of fasting: as it is certain he taught them a form of
prayer. Lu. 5. and 11.

17. New wine.) By this new wine, he does plainly here signify fasting and the
straiter kind of life: by the old bottels, them that can not away therewith.

19. Twelve years.) This woman a Gentil had her disease twelve years, and the
Gouerners daughter a Jew (which is here raised to life) was twelve years old,
Luc. 8. Mark then the allegory hereof in the Jews and Gentiles. As that woman
fell sick when the wenche was borne, so the Gentiles went their own ways into
idolatry, when the Jews in Abraham believed. Again, as Christ here went to
raise the wenche, and by the way the woman was first healed, and then the
wenche revived: so Christ came to the Jews, but the Gentiles believed first and
were saved, and in the end the Jews shall believe also. Hiero. in Mat.

21. Touch only.) Not only Christ's words, but his garment and touch thereof
or any thing to him belonging, Relikes and Images.
might do and did miracles, Eusebius. li. ^ c. 14. hist.
force proceeding from his holy person to them. Yea this woman returning home *
set up an Image of Christ, for memory of this benefit, and the hemme of the
same Image did also miracles. This image Iul^an the Apostata threw down, and
set up his own in steed thereof, which was immediately destroyed by fire from
heaven. But the image of Christ broken in pieces by the heathen, the Christians
afterward gathering the pieces together, placed it in the Church: where it was
(as Sozomenus writes) unto his time. li. 5 c. 20.


2^. Do you believe that I can.] We see here that to the corporal healing of
these men he requires only this faith, that he is able. Which faith is not
sufficient to justify them. How then do the Heretics by this and the like
places plead for their only justifying faith? See the Annot. Mar. 5, 36.

3^. Pray therefore.) Therefore does the Church pray and fast in the Imber
days, when holy Orders are given, that is, when workmen are prepared to be
sent into the harvest. See Act. 1^. ^.

CHAP. X.
He gives to the Twelve the power of Miracles, and so sends them to the
lost sheep of the lovves, 5 with instructions accordingly: to and by occasion
of the sending, foretells of the persecutions after his Ascension, arming
them and al other against the same, 40 and also exhorting the people to harbor
his servants in such times of persecution.

Mr. 3, 13. 6, 7.
* he gave them power over unclean spirits, Lu. 6, 13 9, 1.
that they should cast them out, and should cure al manner of disease, and al
manner of infirmity.



They have here commission to preach only in Israel: the time being not yet
come to call the Gentiles.
Gentiles go ye not, and into the cities of the Samaritans enter ye not:

The Gospel upon the Commemoration of S. Paul, Iun. 30.
Be ye therefore Wisdom and simplicity both be necessary in preachers,
Bishops and Priests.
wise as serpents, and simple as dooues. Mar. 15, 11.
Luc. 12, 11.
Luc. 21, 16.


The Gospel upon S. Athanasius day. Maij 2.
flee into an other. Amen I say to you, you shall not finish all the cities of
Israel, til the son of man come.

Luc. 6, 40
nor the servant above his lord. A goodly comfort for Christians and Catholics
and al good men, in the persecutions of Turk, of Heretics, of al Wicked men.
fear ye not them that kill the body, and are not able to kill the soul: but
rather fear him that can destroy both soul and body into hell.

Mar. 8, 38.
better are you then many sparovves. Luc. 9. 26. 12, 8.
The Gospel upon a Martyrs day that is not a Bishop.
Luc. 12, 51.
I came not to send peace, but the svvord. Mich. 7, 6.
mother more then me, is not worthy of me: and he that loves son or
daughter above me, is not worthy of me.

Luc. 10, 16.
receives me: and he that receives me, receives him that sent me. The reward
for harboring and helping any blessed just person suffering for his justice
and conscience.
just man in the name of a just man, shall receive the revvard of a just man.
Mar. 9, 41.
only in the name of a disciple, amen I say to you, he shall not lose his
revvard.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. X.
1. Power.) Miracles were so necessary to the confirmation of their doctrine
beginning then to be preached, that not only Christ him self did miracles, but
also he gave to his Apostles power to do them.

2. First Simon.) Peter the first, not in calling, but in preeminence, Peter's
Primacie.
for (as S. Ambrose says in 2 Cor. 12.) Andrew first followed our Savior
before Peter: Beza in Annot. noui Test. 155^.
and yet the Primacie Andrew received not, but Peter. Which preeminence of S.
Peter above the other Apostles is so plainly signified in this word, First, by
the judgment even of Heretics, that Beza, notwithstanding he confesses the
consent of al copies both Latin and Greek, yet is not ashamed to say that he
suspecteth that this word was thrust into the text by some favorer of Peter's
Primacie. Whereby we have also that they care no more for the Greek then for
the Latin, when it makes against them: but at their pleasure say that al is
corrupted.

9. Do not possess.) Preachers may not carefully seek after the superfluities
of this life, or any thing which may be an impediment to their function. And as
for necessaries, they deserve their temporal living at their hands for whom
they labor spiritually.

12. Peace to this house.) As Christ him self used these words or this
blessing often, Bishops blessing.
Peace be to you, so here he bids his Apostles say the like to the house
where they come: And so has it been always a most godly use of Bishops Aug.
de ciuit. li. 22 c. 8. Leo Imp. i vit. S. Chrysostom. Socrat. li. ^ c. 14.
to give their blessing where they come. Which blessing must needs be of great
grace and profit, when none but worthy persons (as here we read) might take
good thereof: It remitteth venial sins.
and when it is never lost, but returns to the geuer, when the other party
is not worthy of it. Among other spiritual benefits it takes away venial
sins. Amb. in 9. Luc.

14. Shake of the dust.) To contemn the true preachers, or not to receive the
truth preached, is a very damnable sin.

15. More tolerable.) Hereby it is evident that there be degrees and
differences of damnation in Hell fire according to men's deserts. Aug. li. ^ de
Bapt. c. 19.

18. Kings.) In the beginning Kings and Emperors persecuted the Church, that
by the very death and blood of Martyrs it should grow more miraculously,
afterward when the Emperors and kings were them selves become Christians, they
used their power for the Church, against Infidels and Heretics. Aug. ep. 48.

19. It shall be given.) This is verified even at this present also, when many
good Catholics, that have no great learning, by their answers confound the
Adversaries.

25. How much more.) No marvel therefore if Heretics call Christ's Vicar
Antichrist, when their forefathers the faithles Jews called Christ him self
Beelzebub.

32. Confess me.) See how Christ esteems the open confessing of him,
Confessing of Christ and his truth.
that is, of his truth in the Catholic Church, Act. 9.
for as when Saul persecuted the Church, he said * him self was persecuted: so
to confess him, and his Church, is al one. Co^trariewise, see how he
abhors them that deny him before men. Which is not only to deny any one
little article of the Catholic faith commended to us by the Church: but also
to allow or consent to heresy by any means, as by subscribing, coming to
their service and sermons, furthering them any way against Catholics, and such
like.

34. Not peace but sword.) Christ came to break the peace of worldlings and
sinners: as when the son believes in him, and the father does not: the wife
is a Catholic, and the husband is not. For to agree together in infidelity,
heresy, or any other sin, is a naughty peace. This being the true meaning of
Christ's words, mark that the Heretic interpret this to maintain their
rebellions and troubles which their new gospel breeds. Beza in no. Test. an.
1565.

37. More then.] No earthly thing, nor duty to Parents, wife, children,
country, or to a man's own body and life, can be any just excuse why a man
should do, or feyne him self to do or believe any thing, against Christ or
the unity and faith of his Church.

41. In the name.] Reward for hospitality, and specially for receiving an holy
person, as Prophet, Apostle, Bishop, or Priest persecuted for Christ's sake.
For by receiving of him in that respect as he is such an one, he shall be
partaker of his merits, and he rewarded as for such an one. Whereas on the
contrary side, he that receives an Heretic into his house and a false
preacher does communicate with his wicked works. Ep. 2. Io.

CHAP. XI.
John the Baptist in prison also doing his diligence, sends some of his
disciples to Christ: that as they heard, so they might also see his miracles
with their eyes. 7 Afterward Christ declares how worthy of credit John's
testimony was: 16 and inueigheth against the jews, who with neither of
their manners of life could be vvonne: 20 no nor with Christ's infinite
miracles: 25 praising Gods wisdoms in this behalf, 27 and calling to him self
al such as feel the^e own burdens.



The Gospel on the 2. Sunday in Aduent.
sending two of his disciples, Luc. 7, 18.
he said to him, Esa. 35, 5. 61, 1.


Mal. 3, 1.
Behold I send mine angel before thy face, which shall prepare thy way before
thee.

lesser in the kingdom of heaven, is greater then he. Luc. 16, 16.
the kingdom of heaven suffers violence, and the violent bear it away. Mal.
4, 5.


Luc. 7, 31.
It is like to children sitting in the marketplace: which crying to their
companions, Mt. 3, 4.


Luc. 10, 13.
wherein were done the most of his miracles, for that they had not done
penance.

Luc. 10, 21.
* I confess to thee O Father lord of heaven and earth, The Gospel upon S.
Matthias day Feb. 24. and upon S. Francis day October. 4. and for many Martyrs.
because thou have hid these things from the wise and prudent, and have
revealed the^ to little ones.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XI.
3. Art thou he] John him self doubted not, for he baptized him and gave great
testimony of him before: Io. 1. But because his disciples knew him not, nor
esteemed of him so much as of John their own Master, therefore did he send
them unto Christ, that by occasion of Christ's answer he might the better
instruct them what he was, and so make them Christ's disciples, proferring them
to a better Master.

7. What went you out.] Eremitical life.
High commendation of John's holiness, as well for his fasting, rough attire,
solitary life, and constancy, as for the dignity of his function.

7. Into the desert.] The faithful people in all ages resorted of devotion into
wilderness to see men of special and rare holiness, Prophets, Eremites,
Anchorites etc. to have their prayers or ghostly counsel. See S. Hierom de
vitae Hilarionis.

14. Elias.) Elias.
As Elias shall be the messenger of Christ's later coming, so was John his
messenger and Praecursor at his former coming: and therefore is he called Elias,
because of his like office and like spirit. Luc. 1. Grego. ho. 7. in Euang.

18. Eating and drinking.] The wicked quarrellers of the world misconstre
easily all the acts and life of good men. If they be great fasters and austere
livers, they are blasphemed and counted hypocrites; if they converse with other
men in ordinary manner, then they be counted dissolute.

21. Penance in sackcloth.] Penance.
By this sackcloth and ashes added here and in other places, we see evidently
that Penance is not only leaving of former sins, and change or amendment of
life past, no nor bare sorowfulnes or recounting of our offenses already
committed, but requiteth punishment and chastiseme^t of our persons by these
and such other means as the Scriptures do else where set forth, and therefore
concerning the word also, it is rather to be called Penance, as in our
translation: then (as the Adversaries of purpose avoiding the word) Repentance
or Amendment of life: (...).
and that according to the very usual signification of the * Greek word in the
most ancient Ecclesiastical Greek writers: who for Poenitentes (which in the
Primitive Church did public penance) say, Dionys. Eccl. hier. c. 3. in initio.
(...), that is, Men that are doing penance. And concerning that part of
penance which is Confession, the Ecclesiastical history calls it by the same
Greek word, and the penitents coming to confession, (...). Sozom. li. 7 c.
16. Socrat. li. 5 c. 19.

25. Little ones.) These little ones do not signify here only the unlearned, as
though Cobblers and weauers and women and girls had this revelation, and
therefore do understand al Scriptures and are able to expound them: but here are
signified the humble, whether they be learned or unlearned: Mt. 18. ^.
as when he says, Unless you become as little ones, you shall not enter into the
Kingdom of heaven. And so also the greatest Doctors (who as they were most
learned, so most humbled them selves to the judgment of the Catholic Church)
are these little ones: and Heretics, who although unlearned, yet vaunt their
knowledge and their spirit of understanding above al ancient fathers and the
whole Church, can not be of these little and humble ones.

30. Yoke sweet.] The commandments possible.
What is this light burden and sweet yoke, but his commandments, of which S.
John says 1. Ep. 5. His commandments are not heavy? clean contrary to the
Adversaries that say, they are impossible to be kept.

CHAP. XII.
The blindness of the Pharisees about the Sabbath he reproves by Scriptures, by
reason, and by a miracle, 14 and his death being therefore sought by them, he
meekely goes out of the way, according as Esaias had prophesied of him, 2^ His
casting out of devils also he defends against them, 31 and sets forth the
danger they stand in for their horrible blasphemy. 38 And because they ask
yet for a sign, he shows how vvorthely they shall be damned, 43 foretelling
how the devil shall possess their Nation, 46 and testifying that although he
be of their blood* yet not they for this, but such as keep his commandments
are dear unto him.

Mr. 2, 23.
and his Disciples being hungry, Lu. 6, ^.
began to pluck the ears, and to eat. for them to do on the Sabboth-dayes.
1. Re. 21, 4.
Have you not read what * David did when he was an hungered, and they that
were with him: Leu. 24, 9.
* but for priests only? Nu. 28, 9
and are without blame? Ose. 6, 6.
I will mercy, and not See the annotatio^ chap. 9, 13.
sacrifice: you would never have condemned the innocents.

Mr. 3, 1, Lu. 6, 6.


Es. 42, 1
saying. Behold my servant whom I have chosen, my beloved in whom my soul
has well liked. I vvil put my spirit upon him, and judgment to the Gentiles
shall he show.

Luc. 11, 14.
blind and dumme: and he cured him, so that he spoke and saw. Mar. 3, 22
and said, whether this be the Son of David?

Every kingdom Therefore the Kingdom of heretics can not possibly stand,
because it is always full of division and dissension.
divided against it self shall be made desolate: and every city or house
divided against it self, shall not stand. It is a man's own free will and
election, to be a good tree or an il tree: to bring forth good fruits or bad.
S. Augustine upon this place. li. 2. c. 4 de actis cum F^lic. Manichae^.
make the tree good, and his fruit good: or make the tree evil, and his fruit
evil. for of the fruit the tree is known.

THE GOSPEL upon vvenesday the first week of Lent.
saying, Master, we would see a sign from thee.

The wicked and aduouterous generation seeks a sign: and a sign shall not
be given it, but the sign of Jonas the Prophet. Ion. 2, ^.
Ion. 3, 5.
because * they did penance at the preaching of Jonas. 3. Reg. 10, 1.
And behold more then Jonas here. the Solomon here. Luc. 11. 24.
2. Pet. 2, 20.
and they enter in and dwell there: and * the last of that man be made worse
then the first. So shall it be also to this wicked generation.

Mar. 3, 31.
* behold his mother and his brethren stood without, The Gospel upon the day
of the Seven Brethren etc. Iulij ^0.
seeking to speak to him. Luc. 8. 20.


ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XII.
24. In Beelzebub.] The like blasphemy against the Holy Ghost is, to attribute
the miracles done by Saints either dead or alive, to the Devil.

30. Not with me.] They that are indifferent to al religions, Neuters in
religion.
commonly and fitly called Neuters, ^oyning them selves to neither part, let
them mark these words well, and they shall see, that Christ accoumpted al them
to be against him and his Church, that are not plainly and flatly with him and
it.

30. Gathers not with me.] He speaks not only of his own person, but of al
to whom he has committed the government of his Church, and specially of the
chief Pastors succeeding Peter in the government of the whole. Ep. ^8.
As S. Hierom writing to Damasus Pope of Rome, applies these words unto him,
saying of al Heretics, He that gathers not with thee, scatters: that is to
say, He that is not with Christ, is with Antichrist.

31. The blasphemy of the Spirit.] He means not that there is any sin so
great, which God will not forgive, or whereof a man may not repent in this life,
as some Heretics at this day affirm: but that some heinous sins (as namely
this blasphemy of the Jews against the eu^dent works of the Holy Ghost, and
likewise Archeheretikes who wilfully resist the known truth and works of the
Holy Ghost in Gods Church) are hardly forgeuen, and seldom have such men grace
to repent. Otherwise among all the sins against the Holy Ghost (which are
commonly reckened six) one only shall never be forgiven, Final impenitence.
that is, dying without repentance wilfully, called Final impenitence. Which
sin he commits that dies with contempt of the Sacrament of Penance,
obstinatly refusing absolution, by the Churches ministry: as S. Augustine
plainly declares in these words. Remission of sins in the Church.
Whosoever he be that believes not man's sins to be remitted in Gods Church,
and therefore despises the bountifulnes of God in so mighty a work, if he in
that obstinat mind continue tll his lives end, he is guilty of sin against
the Holy Ghost, in which Holy Ghost Christ remitteth sins. Enchir. 83. Ep. 50
in fine.

32. Son of man.] The Jews in their words sinned against the son of man,
when they reprehended those things which he did as a man, to wit, calling him
therefore, a glutton, a great drinker of wine, a friend of the Publicans, and
taking offense because he kept company with sins, brake the Sabbath, and such
like: and this sin might more easily be forgiven them, because they judged of
him as they would have done of any other man: but they sinned and blasphemed
against the Holy Ghost (called here the finger of God whereby he wrought
miracles) when of malice they attributed the evident works of God in casting
our devils, to the devil him self: and this sin shall not be remitted, because
it shall hardly be remitted, as we see by the plague of their posterity until
this day.

3^. Nor in the world to come.] S. Augustine and other Holy Doctors gather
hereupon, that some sins may be remitted in the next life, Purgatory.
and consequently prove Purgatory thereby. De Ciuit. Dei li. 21 c. 18. D.
Gregor, Dial. li. 4 c. 39.

36. Idle word.] If of every idle word we must make accoumpt before God in
judgment, and yet shall not for every such word be damned everlastingly: then
there must needs be some temporal punishment in the next life.

4^. Who is my mother.] The dutiful affection toward our parents and kinsfolk
is not blamed, but the inordinate love of them to the hinderance of our service
and duty toward God. Al Heresies allege Scriptures.
Upon this place some old Heretics denied Christ to have any mother. Aug. li.
de Fid. and Symb. c. 4. Neither ever was there any heresy so absurd, but it
would seem to have Scripture for it.

CHAP. XIII.
Speaking in parables (as the Scripture foretold of him, and as meet was for
the reprobate Jews:) he shows by the parable of the Sour, that in the
labors of his Church, three parts of four do perish through the fault of
the hearers. 24 and yet, by the parable of good seed and cockle (as also of
the Nett^) that his seruant^ must not for all that, never while the world
lasts, make any Schism or Separation. 31 And by parables of the little
mustard seed and leaven, that notvvithstanding the three parts perishing, and
ouersovving of cockles, yet that fourth part of the good seed shall spread
over all the world. 44 And vvithal, what a treasure, and pearl it is. 53
After al which, yet his own country vvil not honor him.

Mr. 4, 1.
sat by the sea side. Lu. 8, 4.
in so much that he went up into a boat and sat: and all the multitude stood
in the shore,

Behold the sour went forth to sovv.

he that has, to him shall be given, and he shall abound: but he that has not,
from him shall be taken away that also which he has. When Gods word is
preached, they proprely have ears to hear, that have hearts to obey: and they
hearing do not hear, which hear by sense of their body, and obey not by
consent of their hearts. Aug. de dono perseu. c. 14.
hearing they hear not, neither do they understand: With hearing shall you
hear, and you shall not understand: and seeing shall you see, and you shall not
see. Luc. 10, 23.
and have not seen them: and to hear the things that you hear, and have not
heard them.



The Gospel upon the 5 Sunday after the Epiphanie.
saying, The kingdom of heaven is resembled to a man that sowed good seed in
his field. gathering up the cockle, you may root up the wheat also together
with it.

The Gospel upon the ^ Sunday after the Epiphanie.
saying, Mar. 4, 30.
* The kingdom of heaven is like to a mustard-seede, Luc. 13, 18.
which a man took and sowed in his field.

Psa. 77, 2.
I will open my mouth in parables, I will utter things hidden from the foundation
of the world.

Nor God then, but the Devil is the author of all evil.
the devil. But the harvest, is the end of the world. And the reapers, are
the Angels.

The Gospel for Virgins and other holy women.
which a man having found, did hide it, and for joy thereof goes, and sells
all that he has, and byeth that field. bought it.

Here also are signified good and bad in the Church.
good into vessels, but the bad they did cast out.

Mr. 6, 1.
when JESUS had ended these parables, Luc. 4, 16.
he passed from thence.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XIII.
8. One an hundred.] This difference of fruits is the difference of merits in
this life, Difference of merits and rewards.
and rewards for them in the next life, according to the diversities of
states, or other differences, of states, as that the hundred fold agrees to
virgins professed, threescore fold to religious widows, thirtiefold to the
married. Aug. li. de. S. Virginit. c. 44. and seq. Which truth the old Heretic
Iouinian denied (as ours do at this day) affirming that there is no difference
of merits or rewards. Hiero. li. 2 adu. Iouia. Ambros. ep. 82. Aug. her. 82.

11. To you is given.] To the Apostles and such as have the guilding and
teaching of others, deeper knowledge of Gods word and mysteries is given, then
to the common people. As also to Christians generally, that which was not given
to the obstinate Jews.

15. They have shut.) In saying that they shut their own eyes, which S. Paul
also repeateth Act. 28: God is not the author of evil.
he teaches us the true understanding of al other places, where it might seem
by the bare words that God is the very author and worker of this induration,
and blindness, and of other sins: Iren. apud Eusebius. li. 5. c. 19.
* which was an old condemned blasphemy, and is now the Heresy of * Calvin:
whereas our Savior here teaches us, that they shut their own eyes, and are
the cause of their own sin and damnation, God not doing, but permitting it,
and suffering them to fall further because of their former sins, Calu. li. 2*
Instit. c. 4.
as S. Paul declares of the reprobate Gentiles. To. 1.

25. Ouersowed.) First by Christ and his Apostles was planted the truth, and
falshod came afterward, and was ouersowen by the enemy the Devil, and not by
Christ, who is not the author of evil. Tertul, de praescript.

29. Left you plucks up also.] The good must tolerate the evil, when it is so
strong that it can not be redressed without danger and disturbance of the whole
Church, and commit the matter to Gods judgment in the later day. Otherwise
where il men (be they Heretics or other malefactors) may be punished or
suppressed without disturbance and hazard of the good, they may and ought by
public authority either Spiritual or temporal to be chastised or executed.

30 Suffer both to grow.] The good and bad (we see here) are mingled together
in the Church. Good and evil in the Church.
Which makes against certain Heretics and Schismatikes, which severed them
selves of old from the rest of the whole world, under pretense that them selves
only were pure, and al others both Priests and people sinners: and against some
Heretics of this time also, which say that evil men are not of, or in the
Church.

32. The least of al seeds.] The Church of Christ had a small beginning, but
afterward became the most glorious and known common-welth in earth: the
greatest powers and the most wise of the world putting them selves into the
same.

35. Carpenters son.] Hereupon Julian the Apostata and his flatterer Libanius
took their scoff against our Savior, saying (at his going against the
Persians) to the Christians, what does the Carpenters son now? and
threatening that after his return the Carpenters son should not be able to
save them from his fury. Whereunto a godly man answered by the Spirit of
Prophecy, He whom Julian calls the Carpenters son, is making a wooden
coffin for him against his death. And in deed not long after there came news
that in that bataile he dyed miserably. Sozo. li. 6 c. 2. Theodo. li. 36. 28.
The very like scoff use Heretics that call the body of Christ in the B.
Sacrament, bakers bread. It seems in deed to the senses to be so, as Christ
seemed to be Joseph's natural son, but faith tells us the contrary as well
in the one as in the other.

CHAP. XIIII.
Hearing the unworthy decollation of John Baptist by Herod, is he betaketh
him to his usual solitarines in the desert, and there feeds 5000 with five
loaves. 23. And then after the night spent in the mountain in prayer, he
walks upon the sea (signifying the vvide world) 28 yea and Peter also:
whereupon they adore him as the son of God. 35 And with the very touch of
his garments hemme he heals innumerable.

Mar. 6, 14.
Lu. 9, 7. 3, 19.
This is John the Baptist: he is risen from the dead, and therefore virtues
work in him. brother Philips
brothers' wife. A wicked and rash oath, and more wickedly fulfilled: because
an unlawful oath binds no man.
oath and for them that sat with him at table, he commanded it to be given.
and it was given to the damsel, and she brought it to her mother. S. John's
disciples at this time had well learned their duty toward Christ.
and came and told JESUS.

Mar. 6, 31
* he retired from thence by boat, Lu. 9, 10
into a desert place apart, and the multitudes having heard of it, Io. 6, 2.
followed him on foot out of the cities.

The Gospel upon the Octaue of S. Peter and S. Paul. Iulij 6.
and to go before him over the water, til he dimissed the multitudes. Mar. 6,
46.
he * ascended into a mountain alone to pray. And when it was evening, Io.
6, 16.
he was there alone. Notwithstanding the infirmities of them that govern the
Church, yet Christ sustaineth them, and holds them up, yea and by them,
whatsoever they are, he vpholdeth and preserves his Church.
JESUS stretching forth his hand took hold of him, and said unto him, O thou
of little faith, why did thou doubt? they were gone up into the boat, the
vvinde ceased.

See before, chap. 9, 20.
hemme of his garment, and whosoever did touch, were made hole.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XIIII.
3. Because of Herodias.) It is to ordinary in Princes to put them to death
that freely tell them such faults: women, whom they fancy, specially inciting
them to such mischief.

12. Buried it.) An example of duty toward the dead bodies of the faithful.
Wherein see the difference of Catholic Christian men and of al infidels,
Hiero. in Epitaph.
be they Pagans, Apostataes, or Heretics. For whereas the Christians had laid
the body of this blessed Prophet and Martyr ^ in Samaria with the Relikes of
Elias and Abdias, Paula. c. 6.
by virtue whereof wonderful miracle were wrought in that place: in Julian the
Apostataes time, when men might do al mischief freely against Christian
religion, the Pagans opened the tomb of S. John Baptist, Sacrilege against
holy Relikes.
burnt his bones, scattered the ashes about the fields: but certain religious
Monks coming thither a pilgrimage at the same time, adventured their life and
saved as much of the holy Relikes as they could, and brought them to their
Abbot Philip a man of God: who esteeming them to great a treasure for him and
his, to keep for their private devotion, sent them to Athanasius the B. of
Alexandria, and he with all reverence laid them in such a place (as it were by
the Spirit of Prophecy) where afterward by occasion of them was built a goodly
chapel. Theod. li. 3 c. 6. Ruff. li. 2 c. 28. 27. Mark here that the
Heretics of our time do as those Pagans, to the bodies and Relikes of al
blessed Saints that they can destroy: and Catholics contrariwise have the
religious devotion of those old Christians, as appears by the honor done now
to his head at Amiens in France.

13. Retired.) Christ much esteemed John, and withdrewe him self aside, to give
example of moderate mourning for the departed, and to show the horror of that
execrable murder. as in the Primitive Church many good men seeing the miserable
state of the world in the time of persecution, and the sins that abounded
withal: took an occasion to forsake those tumults, and to give them selves to
contemplation: and for that purpose retired into the deserts of Egypt and else
where, to do penance for their own sins and the sins of the world.
Whereupon partly rose that infinite number of Monks and Eremites, Eremites.
of whom the fathers and Ecclesiastical histories make mention. Hiero. to. 2 in
vit. Pauli Eremita. Sozo. li. 1 c. 12. 13.

19. The Disciples to the multitudes.) A figure of the ministry of the
Apostles, who as they here had the distribution and ordering of these
miraculous loaves, so had they also to bestow and dispense all the food of our
souls in ministering of the word and Sacraments, neither may lay men challenge
the same.

26. Walking.) When not only Christ, but by his power Peter also walks upon
the waters, it is evident that he can dispose of his own body above nature
and contrary to the natural conditions thereof, as to go through a door. Io.
20. to be in the compass of a little bread. Epiphan. in Anchorato.

29. Walked.] Peter (says S. Bernard) walking upon the waters, Peter's Primacie.
as Christ did, declared him self the only Vicar of Christ, which should be
ruler not over one people, but over al. For many waters, are many peoples.
Bernard. li. 2 de consid. c. 8. See the place, how he deduceth from Peter the
like authority and jurisdiction to his successor the Bishop of Rome.

CHAP. XV.
The Pharisees of Jerusalem coming so far to carpe him, he charge with a
tradition contrary to Gods commandment. 10 And to the people he yeldeth the
reason of that which they reproved: 15 and again to his Disciples, shevving
the ground of the Pharisaical washing (to vvitte, that meats otherwise
defile the soul) to be false. 21 then he goes aside to hide him self among
the Gentiles: where, in a woman he finds such faith, that he is feign, lest
the Gentiles should before the time extort the whole bread, as she had a
crumme, to return to the jews. 34 where (al contrary to those Pharisees)
the common people seek wonderfully unto him. and he after he has cured their
diseased feeds 4000 of them with seven loaves.

Mr. 7, 1.
saying, The Gospel upon wensday the 3. week in Lent.
Exo. 20, 12.
Honor father and mother. and, Heth it shall curse father or mother, Leu. 20, 9.
dying let him dye. Esa. 29, 13.
saying, This people honors me with their lips: but their heart is far
from me.

a man* but to eat with vnvvashen hands, does not defile a man.

The Gospel upon Thursday the fifth week in Lent.
Mr. 7. 25.
and crying out, said to him, Have mercy upon me, O lord the Son of David:
my daughter is sore vexed of a Devil. It were a strange case that Christ
should commend in this woman a sole faith without good works, that is to say,
a dead faith such as could not work by love, and which S. James doubted not to
call the faith not of Christians but of Devils. Aug. de Fid. and Op. c. 1^.
great is thy faith: be it done to thee as thou vvilt: and her daughter was
made hole from that hour.

Mr. 8, 1.
Here we see again that the people must not be their own caruers, nor receive
the Sacraments or other spiritual sustenance immediately of Christ, or at their
own hand, but of their spiritual gouerners.
the disciples gave to the people.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XV.
8. With their lips.] This is to be understood properly of such as have ever
God in their mouth, the word of our Lord, the Scriptures, the Gospel, but in
their heart and al their life be in deed Godles. It may be applied also to such
as say their prayers without attention or elevation of mind to God, whether he
understand the prayers or no, that says them. For many a poor Christian man
that understands not the words he speaks, has his heart nearer heaven,
more seruor and devotion, 1. Cor. 14.
more edification to him self, more profit in spirit (as the Apostle speaks)
and less distractions, then not only al Heretics Which have no true feeling
of such things, but then many learned Catholics. And therefore it is not to be
understood of praying in unknown tongues, as Heretics sometime expound it,
far wide from the circumstance of the place and Christ's intention, speaking
of the hypocritical Jews.

9. Commandments of men.] Such only are here called traditions, doctrines, or
commandments of men, which be either repugnant to Gods laws, as this of
defrauding their parents under pretense of religion: or which at the lest be
frivolous, unprofitable, and impertinent to pietle or true worshipe, The
difference between the Jewish traditions here reprehended, and the Churches
Apostolical traditions.
as that other sort of so often Washing hands and vessels without regard of
inward purity of heart and mind. Let no man therefore be abused with the
Protestants perverse application of this place against the holy laws, canons,
and precepts of the Church and our spiritual Governors, concerning fastes,
festiuities, and other rules of discipline and due order in life and in the
service of God. For such are not repugnant but consonant to Gods word and al
piety, and our Lord is truly honored, worshipped, and served both by the
making and also by the observing of them. ^. These. 2, 15.
* S. Paul gave commandments both by his epistles and by word of mouth, even
in such matters wherein Christ had prescribed nothing at al, 1. Cor. 11.
and he charge the faithful to observe the same. Act. 15.
The Apostles and Priests at Jerusalem made laws, and the Christians were
bound to obey them. Aug. Ser. de te^p. 251. See 1. Cor. 16, 2.
The keeping of Sunday in steed of the Sabbath is the tradition of the
Apostles, and dare the Heretics deny the due obsentation thereof to be an
acceptable worshipe of God? Epiph. har. 75
They prescribed the Festes of Easter, and whitsontide and other Solemnities of
Christ and his Saints, which the Protestants them selves observe. Hiero. ep.
54 ad Marcel. co^t. Mont.
They appointed the Lent and Imber fastes and other, as well to chastise the
concupiscence of man, as to serve and please God thereby, as is plain in the
fasting of * Anna, Tobie, Judith, Esther, who served and pleased God thereby.
Therefore neither these nor other such Apostolic Ordinances, nor any precepts
of the holy Church or of our lawful Pastors are implied in these Pharisaical
traditions here reprehended, nor to be compted or called the doctrines and
commandments of men, because they are not made by mere humane power, but by
Christ's warrant and authority, and by such as he has placed to rule his
Church, of whom he says, Luc. 2, 37 Tob. 12. Judith c. 8 Esth. 4. Luc. 10, 16
He that hears you, hears me: he that despises you, despises me. They are
made by the Holy Ghost, joining with our Pastors in the regiment of the
faithful, they are made by our Mother the Church, which whosoever obieth not,
Mat. 18, 17.
we are warned to take him as an Heathen. But on the other side, al laws,
doctrines, service and injunctions of Heretics, how soever pretended to be
consonant to the Scriptures, be commandments of men: because both the things
by them prescribed are impious, and the Authors have neither sending nor
commission from God.

11. Not that which enters.] The Catholics do not abstain from certain
meats, Difference of meats.
for that they esteem any meat unclean either by creation or by Iudaical
observation: but they abstain for chastisment of their concupiscences. Aug.
li. de. mor. Ec. Cath. c. 33.

18. Defile a man] It is sin only which properly defiles man, and meats of
them self or of their own nature do not defile: but so far as by accident
they make a man to sin, Catholic abstinence.
as the disobedience of Gods commandment or of our Superiors who forbid some
meats for certain times and causes, Genesis 3.
is a sin. As the apple which our first parents did eat of, though of it
self it did not defile them, yet being eaten against the precept, it did
defile. So neither flesh nor fish of it self does defile, but the breach of the
Churches precept defiles.

CHAP. XVI.
The obstinate Pharisees and Sadducees, as though his foresaid miracles were
not sufficient to prove him to be Christ, require to see some one from heaven,
5 Whereupon forsaking them, he warns his disciples to beware of the leaven of
their doctrine: (...) and Peter (the time now approaching for him to go into
lewrie to his Passion) for confessing him to be Christ, he makes the Rock of
his Church, giving fulness of Ecclesiastical power accordingly. 21 And after,
he so rebukes him fordissuading his Cross and Passion, that he also affirms
the like suffering in every one to be necessary to s^luation.

Mar. 8, 12.
and they demanded him to show them a sign from heaven. Luc. 12, 54.
Mat. 12, 39.
and there shall not a sign be given it, but the sign of Jonas the Prophet.
And he left them and went away.

Mar. 8, 14.
they forgot to take bread. Lu. 12, 1.
Look well and bevvare of the leaven of the Pharisees and Sadduces. Mat. 14,
17. 15, 34.
neither do you remember * the five loaves among five thousand men, and how
many baskets, you took up?

The Gospel upon SS. Peter and Paul's day Iun. 29. And in Cathedra Petri Roma,
Ian. 18. and Antiochia Febr. 22. And Petri ad vincula Aug. 1. And on the day of
the creation and coronation of the Pope, and on the Anniuersarie thereof.
and he asked his disciples, Mar. 8, 27.
saying, whom say men that the Son of man is? Luc. 9, 18.
Some John the Baptist, and othersome Elias, and others Hieremie, or one of the
Prophets. Thou art Christ the son of the living God. Io. 1, 42.
That thou art * That is, a Rock.
Peter: and upon this Rock vvil I build my Church, and the gates of hell shall
not prevail against it. Io. 21, 15.
And whatsoever thou shall bind upon earth, it shall be bound also in the
heavens: and whatsoever thou shall loose in earth it shall be loosed also in
the heavens.

no body that he was JESUS CHRIST.

This word in Hebrew signifies an adversary, as 3 Reg. 5, 4. and so it is
taken here.
Satan, thou art a scandal unto me: because thou sauourest not the things that
are of God, but the things that are of men. THE GOSPEL for a Martyr that is a
bishop.
If any man will come after me, let him deny him self, and take up his cross,
and follow me.

Mar. 9, 1
* there be some of them that stand here, Luc. 9, 27.
that shall not taste death, til they see the Son of man coming in his
kingdom.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XVI.
13. Whom say men.] Christ intending here to take order for the founding, OF
PETER'S PRIMACIE.
regiment, and stabilitie of his Church after his decea^e, and to name the
person to whom he meant to give the general charge thereof, would before by
interrogatories draw out (and namely out of that one whom he thought to make
the chief) the profession of that high and principal Article, That he was the
son of the living God. Which being the ground of the Churches faith, was a
necessary quality and condition in him that was to be made Head of the same
Church, and the perpetual keeper of the said faith and al other points thereon
depending.

14. But they said.] When Christ asked the peoples opinion of him, the Apostles
al indifferently made answer: but when he demanded what them selves thought of
him, then lo Peter the mouth and head of the whole fellowship answered for all.
Chrysostom. ho. 55. in Mat.

17. Blessed art thou.] Though some other (as Nathanael Io. 1, 49) seem to
have before believed and professed the same thing for which Peter is here
counted blessed, yet it may be plainly gathered by this place, Hilar. can. 6
in. Mat. and li. 6. de Trinit.
and so S. Hilarie and others think, that none before this did further utter
of him, then that he was the son of God by adoption as other Saints be,
though more excellent then other be. For it was of congruitie and Christ's
special appointment, that he upon whom he intended to found his new Church, and
whose faith he would make infallible, should have the preeminence of this first
profession of Christ's natural divinity, Chrysostom. ho. 55 in Mat.
or, that he was by nature the very son of God a thing so far above the
capacity of nature, reason, flesh and blood, and so repugnant to Peter's sense
and sight of Christ's humanity, flesh, and infirmities, that for the belief
and public profession there of he is counted blessed, as Abraham was for his
says: and has great promises for him self and his posterity, as the said
Patriarche had for him and his seed. According as S. Basil says, Basil. li. 1
adu. Eunom.
Because he excelled in faith, he received the building of the Church committed
to him.

1^. And I say to thee.] Our Lord recompenseth Peter for his confession, giving
him a great reward, in that upon him he builded his Church. Theophilactus upon
this place.

1^. Thou art Peter.] Christ (in the first of John v. 42) foretold and
appointed that this man then named Simon, PETER.
should afterward be called Cephas, or Petrus, that is to say, a Rock, not
then uttering the cause, Cyril. li. ^ c. 12 Com. in Io.
but now expressing the same, videlicet (as S. Cyril writes) For that upon him
is upon a firm rock his Church should be builded. Whereunto S. Hilarie
agreing says, O happy foundation of the Church in the imposing of thy new
name. etc. And yet Christ here does not so much call him by the name Peter or
Rock, Hilar. in hunc lo^u^.
as he does affirm him to be a rock: signifying by that Metaphore, both that
he was designed for the foundation and ground work of his house, which is the
Church: and also that he should be of invincible force, firmitie, durablenes,
and stabilitie, to sustain all the winds, wa^es, and storms that might fall
or beat against the same. And the Adversaries obiecting against this, that
Christ only is the Rock or foundation, wrangle against the very express
Scriptures and Christ's own words, giving both the name and the thing to this
Apostle. And the simple may learn by S. Basils words, Basil. li. de poenit.
how the case stands. Though (says he) Peter be a rock, yet he is not a
rock as Christ is. For Christ is the true immovable rock of him self. Peter
is immovable by Christ the rock. For Jesus does communicate and impart his
dignities, not voyding him self of them, but holding them to him self, 2 Mt. 5.
14.
bestows them also upon others. He is the light, and yet, 2 You are the
light: he is the Priest, and yet he 3 makes Priests: 3 Luc. 22. 19.
he is the rock, and he made a rock.

18. And upon this rock.] Upon that which he said Peter was, will he build his
Church: and therefore by most evident sequel he foundeth his Church upon Peter.
And the Adversaries wrangling against this, Thou art Cephah, and upon this
Cephah.
do against their own conscience and knowledge: specially seeing they know and
confess that in Christ's words speaking in the Syriake tongue, there was no
difference at al between Petrus and Petra: yea and that the Greek words also
though differing in termination, yet signify one thing, to wit, rock.
. a rock, or stone, as them selves also translate it. Io. 1, 42. So that they
which profess to follow the Hebrew or Syriake and the Greek, and to translate
immediately out of them into Latin or English, should if they had dealt
sincerely, have thus turned Christ's words, Thou art a rock, and upon this
rock: or, Thou art Peter, and upon this peter will I build my Church: For so
Christ spoke by their own confession without any difference. Which does
expressly stop them of al their vain euasions, that Petrus the former word is
referred to the Apostle: and petra the later word, either to Christ only, or to
Peter's faith only: neither the said original tongues bearing it, nor the sequel
of the words, upon this, suffering any relation in the world but to that which
was spoken of in the same sentence next before: neither the words following
which are directly addressed to Peter's person, nor Christ's intention by any
means admitting it, which was not to make him self or to promise him self to
be the head or foundation of the Church. For his father gave him that dignity,
and he took not that honor to him self, nor sent him self, nor took the
keys of heaven of him self, but al of his father. he had his commission the
very hour of his incarnation. Aug. li. 1 retr. c. 21. (...) in Ps. 69. de verb.
And though S. Augustine sometimes refer the word (Petra) to Christ in this
sentence (which no doubt he did because the terminations in Latin are diverse,
and because he examined not the nature of the original words which Christ
spoke, nor of the Greek, and therefore the Adversaries which otherwise flee to
the tongs, should not in this case allege him) yet he never denies but Peter
also is the Rock and head of the Church, saying that him self expounded it of
Peter * in many places, and alleges also S. Ambrose for the same in his hymn
which the Church sings. And so do we allege the holy Council of Chalcedon,
Do. sec. Io. ser. 49. ser. 15. 16. 26. 29 de Sanctis. Annot. in Job c. 30.
Act. 3 page 118. Tertullian, de praescript, Origin, Ho. 5 in Exo. S. Cyprian,
De unit. Ec. S. Hilarie, Can. 16 in mat. S. Ambrose, Ser. 47. 68. li. 6 in c.
9. Luca. S. Hierom, Li. 1 in Iouin, and in c. 2 Esa. and in c. 16 Hier. S.
Epiphanius, In Anchor. S. Chrysostom, Ho. 55 in Mat. S. Cyril, Li. 2 c. 12.
com. in Io. S. Leo, Ep. ^9. S. Gregory, Li. 4 ep. 32 ind. 13. Theodor. li. 5
haer. Fabul. c. de. poenit.
and others: every one of them saying expressly that the Church was founded and
builded upon Peter. For though sometimes they say the Church to be builded on
Peter's faith, yet they mean not (as our Adversaries do unlearnedly take them)
that it should be builded upon faith either separated from the man, or in any
other man: but upon faith as in him who here confessed that faith.

1^. Rock.] The Adversaries hearing also the Fathers sometimes say, that Peter
had these promises and prerogatives, as bearing the person of all the Apostles
or of the whole Church, deny absurdly that him self in person had these
prerogatives. As though Peter had been the proctor only of the Church or of the
Apostles, confessing the faith and receiving these things in other men's names.
Where the holy Doctors mean only, that these prerogatives were not given to
him for his own use, but for the good of the whole Church, and to be imparted
to every vocation according to the measure of their callings: Hiero. ep. 7, to.
2.
and that these great privileges given to Peter should not decay or die with
his person, but be perpetual in the Church in his successors. Therefore S.
Hierom to Damasus takes this Rock not to be Peter's person only, but his
successors and his Chair. I (says he) following no chief or principal but
Christ, Psalm. cont. part. Donat. to. 7. Leo ep. 89.
join my self to the communion of Peter's chair, upon that rock I know the
Church was built. And of that same Apostolic Chair S. August. says, That
same is the Rock which the proud gates of Hell do not overcome. And S. Leo, Our
Lord would the Sacrament or mystery of this gift so to pertain unto the
office of all the Apostles, that he placed it principally in blessed S. Peter
the chief of all the Apostles, that from him as from a certain head he might
pour out his gifts, as it were through the whole body: that he might
understand him self to be an aliene from the divine mystery that should
presume to revolt from the soliditie or stedfastnes of Peter.

1^. Build my Church.] The Church or house of Christ was only promised here to
be builded upon him (which was fulfilled, Io. 21, 1^.) the foundation stone and
other pillars or matter being yet in preparing, and Christ him self being not
only the supereminent foundation but also the founder of the same: which is an
other more excellent quality then was in Peter, for which he calls it my
Church: meaning specially the Church of the new Testament. Which was not
perfectly formed and finished, and distincted from the Synagogue til
whitsunday, though Christ gave Peter and the rest their commissions actually
before his Ascension.

18. Gates of hell.] Because the Church is resembled to a house or a city, the
adversary powers also be likened to a contrary house or town, the gates
whereof, that is to say, the fortitude or impugnations shall never prevail
against the city of Christ. And so by this promis we are assured that no
heresies nor other wicked attempts can prevail against the Church builded upon
Peter, Psalm. cont. part. Donati.
which the Fathers call Peter's see and the Roman Church. Count (says S.
Augustine) the Priests from the very See of Peter, and in that order of fathers
consider who to whom has succeeded. that same is the rock which the proud
gates of Hell do not overcome. De vtil. ^^ed. c. 17.
And in an other place, that is it which has obtained the top of authority,
Heretics in vain barking round about it.

19. To thee.] In saying, to thee vvil I give, it is plain that as he gave the
keys to him, so he builded the Church upon him. Cyp. epist. 73.
So says S. Cyprian, To Peter first of al, upon whom our Lord built the
Church, and from whom he instituted and shevved the beginning of unity, did
he give this power, that that should be loosed in the heavens, Greg. li. 4.
ep. ^2. ind. 11.
which he had loosed in earth. Whereby appears the vain cauil of our
Adversaries, which say the Church was built upon Peter's Confession only, common
to him and the rest, and not upon his person, more then upon the rest.

19. The keys.) That is, The authority or Chair of doctrine, knowledge,
judgment and discretion between true and false doctrine: the height of
government, The dignities of the keys.
the power of making laws, of calling Councels, of the principal voice in
them, of confirming them, of making Canons and holesom decrees, of abrogating
the contrary, of ordaining Bishopes and Pastors or deposing and suspending
them, finally the power to dispense the goods of the Church both spiritual and
temporal. Which signification of preeminent power and authority by the word
keys the Scripture expresses in many places: Apoc. 1.
namely speaking of Christ, I have the keys of death and Hell, that is, the
rule. And again, Esa. ^2, 22
I vvil give the key of the house of David upon his shoulder. Moreover it
signifies that men can not come into heaven but by him, the keys signifing
also authority to open and shut, as it is said Apoc. 3. of Christ, who has
the key of David, he shuts and no man opens. By which words we gather
that Peter's authority is marvelous, to whom the keys, that is, the power to
open and shut heaven, is given. And therefore by the name of keys is given that
supereminent power which is called in comparison of the power granted to other
Apostles, Bishops and Pastors, plenitude potestatis, fulness of power. Bernard,
lib. 2. de considerat. c. 8.

19. Whatsoever thou shall bind.) Al kind of discipline and punishment of
offenders, either spiritual (which directly is here meant) or corporal so far
as it tends to the execution of the spiritual charge, is comprised under the
word, bind. Of which sort be Excommunications, Anathematismes, Suspensions,
degradations, and other censures and penalties or penances enjoined either in
the Sacrament of Confession or in the exterior Courts of the Church, for
punishment both of other crimes, and specially of heresy and rebellion against
the Church and the chee^e pastors thereof.

19. Loose.) To loose, is as the cause and the offenders case requires, to
loose them of any the former bands, and to restore them to the Churches
Sacraments and Communion of the faithful and execution of their function, to
pardon also either al or part of the penances enjoined, or what debtes so ever
man owes to God or the Church for the satisfaction of his sins forgeuen.
Which kind of releasing or loosing is called Indulgence: finally this
whatsoever, excepteth nothing that is punishable or pardonable by Christ in
earth, for he has committed his power to Peter. And so the validity of Peter's
sentence in binding or loosing whatsoever, shall by Christ's promis be ratified
in heaven. Leo Ser. de Transfig. and Ser. 2. in anniuers-assumpt. ad Pontif.
Hilar. can. 16. in Matthew. Epiph. in Ancherato prepe initium. If now any
temporal power can show their warrant out of scripture for such sovereign
power, as is here given to Peter and consequently to his successors, by these
words, whatsoever thou shall bind, and by the very keys, whereby greatest
soueraintie is signified in Gods Church as in his family and household, Esa. 22.
and therefore principally attributed and given to Christ * who in the scripture
is said to have the key of David, but here communicated also unto Peter, Apoc.
^.
as the name of Rock: if I say any temporal potestate can show authority for
the like soueraintie, let them challenge hardly to be head not only of one
particular, but of the whole universal Church.

27. Works.) He says not, Good works.
to give every man according to his mercy (or their faith) but according to
their works. August. de verb. Apost. Ser. 35. And again, How should our
Savior reward every one according to their works, Freewill.
if there were no free will? August. lib. 2. cap. 4. 5. 8. de act. cum Foelic.
Manich.

CHAP. XVII.
As he promised, he gives them a sight of the glory, unto which Suffering
does bring: ^ and then again does in^ulcate his Passion. 14 A devil also he
casts out which his Disciples could not for their incredulity and lack of
praying and fasting. 22 being yet in Galilee, he reuealeth more about his
Passion, 24 and the tribute that the Collectors exacted for all, he pays for
himself and Peter: declaring yet withal his freedom both by word and miracle.

The TRANSFIGVRATION of our Lord, celebrated in the Church the 6. of Aug.
and brings them into a high mountain apart: Mr. 9, 2.
Luc. 9, 28.
And his face did shine as the sun: 2. Pet. 1, 17.
and his garments became white as snow. The Gospel of the said feast, and of
the 2. Sunday in Lent: and on the Saturday before.


Mal. 4, 5.
that * Elias must come first?

Mar. 9, 14.
there came to him a man falling down upon his knees before him, Luc. 9, 37.
you? How long shall I suffer you? bring him hither to me.

Mr. 9, 31
JESUS said to them, Luc. 9, 44.
The Son of man is to be betrayed into the hands of men:

These didrachmes were pieces of money which they paid for tribute.
didrachmes? This stater was a double didrachme, and therefore was paid for two.
stater: take that, and give it them for me and thee.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XVII.
2. Transfigured.] Mark in this Transfiguration many marvelous points, as,
Christ can exhibit his body under what form he list.
that he made not only his own body, which then was mortal, but also the
bodies of Moses and Elias, the one dead, the other to die, for the time as it
were immortal: thereby to represent the state and glory of his body and his
Saints in heaven. By which marvelous transfiguring of his body, you may the
less marvel that he can exhibit his body under the form of bread and wine
or otherwise as he list.

3. Appeared Moses.] By this that Moses personally appeared and was present
with Christ, Saints after their death deal with and for the living.
it is plain that the Saints departed may in person be present at the
affairs of the living. August. de cura pro mort. c. 15. 16. For even as Angels
else where, so here the Saints also served our Savior: and therefore as Angels
both in the old Testament and the new, were present often at the affairs of
men, so may Saints.

9. Mount.] Holy places.
This mount (commonly esteemed and named of the ancient fathers Thabor) S.
Peter calls the holy Mount because of this wonderful vision, 2. Pet. 1* 18.
like as in the old Testament where God appeared to Moses in the bush and else
where to others, he calls the place of such Apparitions, Exo. 3, ^.
holy ground. Devotion and Pilgrimage to the same.
Whereby it is evident that by such Apparitions, places are sanctified, and
thereupon grows a religion and devotion in the faithful toward such places,
and namely to this Mount Thabor (called in S. Hierom Itabirium Ep. 17.) there
was great Pilgrimage in the Primitive Church, as unto al those places which our
Savior had sanctified with his presence and miracles, and therefore to the
whole land of promis, The holy land.
for that cause called the holy land. Su S. Hiero. in Epitap. Paula. and ep.
17. and 18 ad Mercellam.

11. Elias shall come.] He distinguishes here plainly between Elias in person,
who is yet to come before the judgment: Elias.
and between Elias in name, Luc. c. 17.
to wit, John the Baptist, who is come already in the spirit and virtue of
Elias. Mal. 4, 5.
So that it is not John Baptist only nor principally of whom Malachie
prophecieth (as our Adversaries say) but Elias also him self in person.

19. Why could not we.] No marvel if the Exorcists of the Catholic Church
which have power to cast out devils, True miracles only in the Cath. Church.
yet do it not always when they will, and many times with much a do: Whereas
the Apostles having received this power * before over unclean spirits, yet
here cannot cast the^ out. Mt. 10.
But as for haeretikes, they can never do it, nor any other true miracle, to
confirm their false says.

20. Faith as mustard seed.) This is the Catholic faith, by which only al
miracles are wrought: yet not of every one that has the Catholic faith, but
of such as have a great and forcible faith and withal the gift of miracles.
These are able as here we see by Christ's warrant not only to do other
wonderful miracles here signified by this one, 1. Cor. 13. Hiero. in vita S. Hi
lari^nis. Niceph. li. 6, c. 17.
but also this very same, that is, to move mountains in deed, as S. Paul also
presupposes, and S. Hierom affirms, and Ecclesiastical histories namely
tells of Gregorius Neocaesariensnis, Gregorius Than maturgus.
that he moved a mountain to make room for the foundation of a Church, called
therefore and for other his wonderful miracles, Thaumaturgus. And yet faithless
Heretics laugh at al such things and believe them not.

21. Prayer and fasting.) Prayer and Fasting.
The force of fasting and praying: whereby also we may see that the holy
Church in Exorcismes does according to the Scriptures. Greg. Niss. de vit.
Gregorij.
When she uses beside the name of JESUS, many prayers and much fasting to
drive out Devils. because these also are here required beside faith.

26. The Children fres.) Though Christ to avoid scandal, paid tribute, yet in
deed he shows that both him self ought to be free from such payments (as
being the kings son, as well by his eternal birth of God the Father, as
temporal of David) and also his Apostles, as being of his family, and in them
their successors the whole Clergy, who are called in Scripture the lotte and
portion of our Lord. The privileges and exemptions of the Clergy.
which exemption and privilege being grounded upon the very law of nature it
self, and therefore practiced even among the Heathen (Genesis 42, 27.) good
Christian Princes have confirmed and ratified by their laws in the honor of
Christ, whose ministers they are, and as it were the kings sons. as S. Hierom
declares plainly in these words, We for his honor pay not tributes, and as
the Kings sons, are free from such payments. Hiero. upon this place.

27. Me and thee.] A great mystery in that he paid not only for him self,
Peter's praeminence.
but for Peter bearing the Person of the Church, and in whom as the chief,
the rest were contained. Aug. q. exno. Test. q. ^5. to. 4.

CHAP. XVIII.
To his Disciples he preaches against ambition the mother of Schism: 7
foretelling both the author whosoever he be, and also his folovvers, of their
vvo to come. (...) and shevving on the contrary side, how precious Christian
souls are to their Angels, to the Son of man, and to his Father. 15 charging
us therefore to forgive our brethren, when also we have just cause against
them, be it never so often, and to labor their salvation by all means possible.

Mr. 9, 34.
saying. The Gospel on Michelmas day September. 29. And upon his Apparition Maij
8.
Who, Luc. 9, 46.
think thou, is the greater in the kingdom of heaven? Humility, innocence,
simplicity, commended to us in the state and person of a child.
little child, he is the greater in the kingdom of heaven. Mr. 9, 42.
ones that believe in me, it is expedient for him that a millstone be hanged
about his neck, Lu. 17, 2
and that he be drowned in the depth of the sea.

Mt. 5, 30
or thy foot scandalize thee: cut it of, and cast it from thee. Mar. 9, 43.
It is good for thee to go in to life maimed or lame, rather then having two
hands or two feet to be cast into everlasting fire. Luc. 19, 10.
for I say to you that their Angels, in heaven alvvaies do see the face of my
father which is in heaven. Lu. 15, 4


Luc. 17, 3.
go, The Gospel upon Tuesday the 3 week in Lent.
and rebuke him between thee and him alone. If he shall hear thee, thou shall
gain thy brother. Deu. 19, 15.
That is (as S. Chrysosto^ here expounds it) tell the Prelates and chief
Pastors of the Church: for they have jurisdiction to bind and loose such
offenders, by the words following v. 18.
tell the Church. And if he vvil not hear the Church, let him be to thee as the
heathen and the Publican. Al joining together in the unity of Christ's Church
in Councels and Synods, or public prayers, is of more force then of any
particular man.
consent upon earth, concerning every thing whatsoever they shall ask, it shall
be done to them of my father which is in heaven.

Lu. 17, 4
* Lord, how often shall my brother offend against me, and I forgive him? until
seuentimes? Luc. 17, 4.
I say not to thee * until seven times: The Gospel upon the 21 Sunday after
Pentecost.
but until seventy times seven times.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XVIII.
1. Who is the greater.] The occasion of this question and of their contention
for Superiority among the rest of their infirmities which they had before the
coming of the Holy Ghost, was (as certain holy Doctors write) upon emulation
toward Peter, whom only they saw preferred before the rest in the payment of
the tribute, C. 17. v. 27
by these words of our Savior, Give it them for me and thee. Chrysostom. ho. 59.
Hiero. in Mat. Upon this place.

7. Scandals.] The simple be most annoyed by taking scandal of their preachers,
Priests, and elders il life: and great damnation is to the guides of the people
whether they be temporal or spiritual, but specially to the spiritual, if by
their il example and slanderous life the people be sca^dalized.

8. Hand, foot, eye.] By these parts of the body so necessary and profitable
for a man, is signified, that whatsoever is nearest and dearest to us, wife,
children, freeudes, riches, al are to be conte^^ned and forsaken for to save
our soul.

10. Their Angels.] A great dignity and a marvelous benefit that every one
has from his Nativity an Angel for his custody and Patronage against the
wicked before the face of God. Protection of Angels.
Hiero. upon this place. And the thing is so plain, that Calvin dare not deny
it, and yet he will needs doubt of it, lib. 1. Inst. c. 14. sect. 1.

17. Not hear the Church.] Disobedieuce to the Church.
Not only Heretics, but any other obstinate offender that will not be judged
nor ruled by the Church, may be excommunicated, and so made as an Heathen or
Publican was to the Jews, Excommunication.
by the discipline of the same, casting him our of the fellowship of Catholics.
Which Excommunication is a greater punishment then if he were executed by
sword, fire, and wild beasts. Aug. cont. Adu. leg. li^. c. 17. And again he
says, Man is more sharply and pitefully bound by the Churches Keys, then with
any iron or adamantine manicles or fetters in the world. August. ibidem.

17. Heathen.] Heretics therefore because they will not hear the Church, be no
better nor no otherwise to be esteemed of Catholics, then heathen men and
Publicans were esteemed of Catholics, then heathen men and Publicans were
esteemed among the Jews.

18. You shall bind.] Mat. ^. 18, 19.
As before he gave this power of binding and loosing over the whole, Power to
bind and loose.
first of al and principally to Peter, upon whom he builded his Church: so here
not only to Peter, and in him to his successors, but also to the other
Apostles, and in them to their successors, every one in their charge. Hieron.
lib. 1. c. 14. aduers. Iouin. and Epist. ad Heliod. Cyprian. de Unit. Eccl. nu.
3.

18. Shall loose.] Our Lord gives no less right and authority to the Church
to loose, then to bind, Li. 1. de (...). c. 2.
as S. Ambrose writes against the Nouatians, who confessed that the Priests
had power to bind, but not to loose.

20. In the mids of them.) Catholic Assemblies.
Not al assemblies may challenge the presence of Christ; but only such as be
gathered together in the unity of the Church, and therefore no conuenticles of
Heretics directly gathering against the Church, are warranted by this place.
Cypr. de unit. Eccles. nu. 7. 8.

22. Seventy times seven.) There must be no end of forgeuing them that be
penitent, either in the Sacrament by absolution, or one man an other their
offenses.

CHAP. XIX.
He answers the tempting Pharisees, THE fourth part of this Gospel, Christ's
coming into Jury toward his Passion.
that the case of a man with his wife shall be (as in the first institution it
was) utterly indissoluble, though for one cause he may be divorced. 10 And
thereupon to his Disciples he highly commends Single life for heaven. 13 He
vvil have children came unto him. 16 He shows what is to be done to enter
into life everlasting: 20 What also, for a rich man to be perfect: 27 As also
what passing revvard they shall have which follovv that his counsel of
perfection: 29 yea though it be but in some one piece.

Mr. 10, 1.
when JESUS had ended these words, he departed from Galilee, and came into
the coasts of Ievvrie beyond Iorda^,

The Gospel for Marriage. And for S. Agatha Febr. 5.
and saying, make man Genesis 1, 27.
Is it lavvful for a man to dimisse his wife, for every cause? made them male
and femal? And he said. Genesis 2, 24.
For this cause, man shall leave father and mother, and shall clean to his
wife: and they two shall be in one flesh. Deuteronomy. 24, 1.
let not man separate. but from the beginning it was not so. Mt. 5, 32
Mr. 10, 11.
but for fornication, and shall mary an other, does commit aduoutrie: and he
that shall mary her that is dimissed, Luc. 16, 18.
commits aduoutrie. 1. Cor. 7, 11.
it is not expedient to mary. (...). caplunt.
take this word, but they to whom it is given.

Mr. 10, 13.
that he should impose hands upon them and pray. Luc. 18, 15.
And the disciples rebuked them.

Mr. 10, 17.
Good Master, what good shall I do that I may have life everlasting? Luc. 18,
18.
what ask thou me of good? One is good, God. But I see not (says S.
Augustine) why Christ should say, If thou will have life everlasting, keep the
commandments: if without observing of the^, by only faith one might be saved.
Aug. de ^id, and op. c. 15.
if thou vvilt enter into life, keep the commandments. Exo. 20, 13.
which? And JESUS said, Thou shall not murder, Thou shall not commit
aduoutrie, Thou shall not steal, Thou shall not bear false witness, Leu. 19,
18.
Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self. S. Mark expounds it thus, rich
men trusting in their riches, ca. 10, 24.
then for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of heaven. The Gospel upon the
Conversion of S. Paul Ian.
Behold we have left al things, and have followed thee: what therefore shall
we have? Amen I say to you, 25. And in a v^tiue Mass of SS. Peter and Paul,
and for holy Abbotes.
that you which have followed me, in the regeneration, when the Son of man
shall sit in the seat of his majesty, you also shall sit upon twelve
seats, judging the twelve tribes of Israel. Hereof is gathered that the
Apostles among other things left their wives also to follow Christ. Hiero. li.
1. aduers. Iouin.
wife, or children, Mr. 10, 31.
or lands for my names sake: shall receive an hundred fold, and shall possess
life everlasting. Lu. 13, 30.
that are last: and last, that are first.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XIX.
6. Not man separate.] This inseparability betwixtman and wife rises of that,
that wedlock is a Sacrament. Aug. li. 2. de pec. origin c. 34. to. 7. De^upt.
and concupis. li. 1. c. 10.

9. But for fornication.) Marriage after divorce unlawful.
For aduoutrie one may dimisse an other, Mat. 5. But neither party can marry
again for any cause during life. Aug. li, 11. de adult. coniug. c. 21. 22. 24.
for the which unlawful act of marrying again, Fabiola that noble matrone of
Rome albeit she was the innocent part, In Epitaph. Fabiola.
did public penance, as S. Hierom writes in her high commendation therefore.
And in S. Paul To. 7. it is plain that she which is with an other man, her
husband yet living, shall be called an aduouteresse: contrary to the doctrine of
our Adversaries.

11. Not al take.) Whosoever have not this gift given them, it is either for
that they will not have it, or for that they fulfill not that which they will: and
they that have this gift or attain to this word, have it of God and their own
free will. Aug. li. de great. and lib. arbit. c. 4. So that it is evident no man
is excluded from this gift, Orig. tract. 7. in Mat.
but (as Origin here says) it is given to all that ask for it: contrary to
our Adversaries that say it is impossible, and that for excuse of breaking
their vows, wickedly say, they have not the gift.

12. Gelded them selves.) Vow of chastity.
They geld them selves for the kingdom of heaven which vow chastity. Aug. de
virginitate c. 24. which proves those kind of vows to be both lawful, and
also more meritorious, and more sure to obtain life everlasting, then the
state of wedlock, contrary to our Adu, in all respects.

14. He that can.) Counsels not Precepts.
It is not said of the Precepts, keep them who can, for they be necessary
under pain of damnation to be kept: Aug. ser. 6. de temp.
but of Counsels only (as of virginity, abstaining from flesh and wine, and of
giving al a man's goods away to the poor) it is said, He that can attain to
it, let him do it: which is counsel only, not a commandment. Contrary to our
Adu. that say, there are no Counsels, but only precepts.

13. Impose.) Bishops and Religious men's blessing.
They knew the valor of Christ's blessing, and therefore brought their children
to him: as good Christian people have at al times brought their children to
Bishops to have their blessing. See Annotation before Chap. 10, 12. And of
Religious men's blessing see Russin. li. 2. c. 1. hist. S. Hierom in Epitaph.
Paulae c. 7. and in vit. Hilarionis, Theodoret, in historia sanctoru^ Patrum
number. 8.

21. If thou will be perfect.] The Religious state of perfection.
Lo, he makes a plain difference between keeping the commandments, which
is necessary for every man: and being perfect, which he counseleth only to them
that will. And this is the state of great perfection which Religious men do
profess, according to Christ's counsel here, leaving al things and following
him.

21. Follow me.] Thus to follow Christ is to be without wife and care of
children, to lack propriety, and to live in common, and this has great reward
in heaven about other states of life: which, S. Augustine says, the Apostles
followed, and him self, and that he exhorted others to it as much as lay in him.
Aug. ep. 19. in fine, and in ps. 103 Conc 3. post med.

26. Al things possible.] This of the camel through a nedels eye, being
possible to God, although he neither has done it, nor by like will do it:
makes against the blasphemous infidelity of our Adversaries that say, God can
do no more then he has done or will do. We see also that God can bring a camel
through a nedels eye, and therefore his body through a door, and our of the
sepulcher shut, and out of his mother a virgin, and generally above nature and
contrary to nature do with his body as he list.

27. Left al.) Vow of poverty in respect of reward.
This perfection of leaving al things the Apostles vowed. Aug. li. 17. de Ciu.
Dei c. 4.

27. What shall we have.) They leave al things in respect of reward, and Christ
does well allow it in them by his answer.

28. You also shall sit.) Aug. in ps. 121.
Note that not only Christ, who is the principal and proper judge of the living
and the dead, but with him the Apostles and al perfect Saints shall judge: and
yet that does nothing derogate to his prerogative, by whom and under whom they
hold this and al other dignities in this life and the next.

CHAP. XX.
To show how through Gods grace the Jews shall be ouerrunne of the Gentiles,
although they begin after, he brings a parable of men working sooner and
later in the vineyard, but the later revvarded in the end even as the first. 17
He reuealeth more to his Disciples touching his passion: 20 Bidding the
ambitious two suitors to think rather of suffering with him: 24 And teaching
us (in the rest of his Disciples) not to be grieved at our Ecclesiastical
Superiors, considering they are (as he was him self) is toil for our
Salvation. 29 Then going out of Jericho, he gives sight unto two blind.

The Gospel upon the Sunday of Septuagesme.


The Jews are noted for envying the vocation of the Gentiles, and their reward
equal with the^ selves.
murmured against the good man of the house, Mr. 10, 32.
and the first, last. For many be called, but fevv elect.

The Gospel in a ^otiue Mass of the holy Cross.
took the twelve disciples secretly, Luc. 18, 31.
and said to them, Jerusalem, and the Son of man shall be delivered to the
chief priests and to the Scribes, and they shall condemn him to death,

Mr. 10, 35.
adoring and desiring some thing of him. The Gospel upon S. Iam^s day Iul. 25.
And S. John's ante portam Latinam Ma^^. 6.
Mr. 10, 41.
Superiority is not here forbidden among Christians, neither Ecclesiastical nor
temporal: but heathenish tyranny is forbidden, and humility commended.
ouerrule them: and they that are the greater, Lu. 22, 25.
exercise power against them.

Mr. 10, 46.
a great multitude followed him.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XX.
1. In the morning.] God called some in the morning, that is, in the beginning
of the world, as Abel, Enoch, Noe, and other the just and faithful of the first
age: at the third hour, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and the rest of their age:
at the 6 hour of the day, Moses, Aaron, and the rest: at the 9 hour, the
Prophets: at the eleventh, that is, at the later end of the world, the
Christian Nations, Aug. de verb. Doniniser. 59. briefly, this calling at
diverse hours signifies the calling of the Jews from time to time in the
first ages of the world, and of the Gentiles in the later age thereof. It
signifies also that God calls countries to the says, some souer, some
later: and particular men to be his servants, some younger, sme elder, of
diverse ages.

9. Penny.] The penny promised to al, Diversity of glory in heaven.
was life everlasting, which is common to all that shall be saved: 1. Cor. 15.
but in the ^^me life there be degrees of glory, as * betwixt star and
star in the element. Aug. li. de virgi^t. c. 26.

16. Fewa^ct.] Those are elect which despised not their caller, but followed and
believed him: for men (...) not but of their own free will. Aug. li. 1 ad
Simplic. q. 1.

23. To whom it is prepared.] Mt. 16, (...)
The kingdom of heaven is prepared for them that are worthy of it and deserve
it by their well doing, To. 2. 6.
as in holy Scripture it is very often, That God will repay every man according
to his works. Mt. 25, 34
and, Come ye blessed, possess the kingdom prepared for you. Why? because I
was hungry, Difference of merits and reward.
and you gave me meat: thirsty, and you gave me drink: etc. Therefore does
Christ say here, It is not mine to give. because he is lust and will not give it
to every man without respect of their deserts: yea nor alike to every one, but
diversely according to greater or lesser merits, as here S. Chryso, Chrysostom. ho.
66 in Mt.
makes it plain, when our Savior tells them, that although they suffer
martyrdom for his sake, yet he has not to give them the two chief places. See
S. Hiero. Upon this place, and li. 2 adu. Iouin. c. 15. This also is a lesson
for them that have to bestow Ecclesiastical benefices, that they have no carnal
respect to kindred etc. but to the worthiness of the persons.

(...). As the son of man.] Io. 13, 1^.
Christ him self as he was the Son of man, was their and our Superior, and *
Lord and Master, notwithstanding his humility: and therefore it is pride and
haultinesse which is forbidden, and not Superiority or Lordship, as some
Heretics would have it.

CHAP. XXI.
Being now come to the place of his Passion, THE FIFTH part, of the Holy week
of his Passion in Jerusalem.
he enters with humility and triumph together: 12 Shows his zeal for the
house of God joined with great maruels. 15 And to the Rulers he boldly
defends the acclamations of the children. (...) He ^urseth also that fruitles
lea^^e tree: 23 avouches his power by the witness of John: 28 and foretells
his in two parables their reprobation (with the Gentiles vocation) for their
wicked deserts, 42 and consequently their irreparable damnation that shall ensue
thereof.

The Gospel on Palm Sunday before the benedictio^ of the Palms.
and were come to Beth-phagee unto Mount-oliuet, Mr. 11, 1.
then JESUS sent two disciples, Lu. 19, 20.
Io. 12, 15
Go ye into the town that is against you, PALM SUNDAY.
and immediately you shall find an ass tied and a colt with her: loose them
and bring them to me: Esa. 62, 11.
Say ye to the daughter of Sion, Zach. 9, 9.
Behold thy king comes to thee, meek, and sitting upon an ass and a colt
the fool of her that is used to the yoke. that went before and that followed,
cried, saying, Hosanna to the son of David: Ps. 117, 26.
blessed is he that comes in the name of our Lord. Hosanna in the highest.

The Gospel upon Tuesday the first week in Lent.
the whole city was moved, saying, who is this? Mr. 11, 15.
of Nazareth in Galilee. How much the abuse of Churches by merchandising,
walking, or other profane occupying of them, displeases God, here we may see.
sold and bought in the temple, Lu. 19, 45.
and the tables of the bankers, and the chaires of them that sold pigeons he
ouerthrevve: Esa. 56, 7.
It is written, My house shall be called the house of prayer: but you have made
it a den of thieves. And there came to him the blind, Ier. 7, 11
and the lame in the temple: and he healed them. Hosanna to the son of David:
they had indignation, Ps. 8, 3.
have you never read, That out of the mouth of infants and sucklings thou have
perfited praise?

MONDAY.
he was an hungered. Mr. 11, 13.
The Jews having the words of the law, and not the deeds, were the figtree
full of leaves, and void of fruit. Aug. de verb. Do. Sermon. 44.
figtree by the way side, he came to it: and found nothing on it but leaves
only, and he says to it, Never grow there fruit of thee for ever. And
incontinent the figtree was withered. Mt. 17, 20.
* if you shall have faith, and stagger not, TVESDAY.
not only that of the figtree shall you do, but and if you shall say to this
mountain, Take up and throvv thy self into the sea, it shall be done.

Mr. 11, 28.
saying, * In what power do thou these things? and who has given thee
this power? Lu. 20, 2
I also vvil ask you one word: which if you shall tell me, I also vvil tell
you in what power I do these things. to JESUS they said, We know not. He
also said to them, Neither do I tell you in what power I do these things.



The Gospal upon friday the second week in Lent.
A man there was an householder who * planted a vineyard, Es. 5, 1.
and made a hedge round about it, Mr. 12, 1.
and dug in it a press, Lu. 20, 9.
and builded a tower, and let it out to husbandmen: and went forth into a
strange country.

The stone which the builders rejected, Ps. 117, 22.
the same is made into the head of the corner? By our lord was this done, and
it is marvelous in our eyes. Es. 8, 14
to lay hands upon him, they feared the multitudes: because they held him as a
Prophet. ^

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XXI.
2. You shall find.] Christ by divine power both knew where these beasts were
being absent, and commanded them for his use, being an other man's, and suddenly
made the colt fit to be ridden on, never broken before.

7. The ass and the col^.] This ass under yoke signifies the Jews under the
Law and under God their Lord, Hiero. in Mat.
as it were his old and ancient people: the young colt now first ridden on by
Christ, signifies the Gentiles, wild hitherto and not broken, now to be
called to the faith and to receive our Saviors yoke. Aug. li. 12 co^t. Faust.
c. 42.
And therefore the three last Evangelists writing specially to the Gentiles, make
mention of the colt only.

8. Garments in the way.] These offices of honor done to our Saulour
extraordinarily, Procession on Palme-sunday with the B. Sacrament.
were very acceptable: and for a memory hereof the holy Church makes a solemn
Procession every year upon this day, specially in our Country when it was
Catholic, with the B. Sacrament reverently carried, as it were Christ upon the
ass, and strawing of rushes and flowers, bearing of Palms, setting up
boughs, Al devout offices in that kind, exceeding grateful.
spredding and hanging up the richest clothes, the quire and queristers singing
as here the children and the people. al done in a very goodly ceremony to the
honor of Christ and the memory of his triumph upon this day. The like
service and the like duties done to him in all other solemn Processions of the
B. Sacrament, and otherwise, be undoubtedly no less grateful.

9. Hosanna.] These very words of joyful cry and triumphant voice of
gratulation to our Savior, HOSANN*
holy Church uses always in the Preface of the Mass, as it were the voice of
the Priest and all the people (who then specially are attent and devout)
immediately before the Consecration and Elevation, as it were expecting, and
rejoicing at his coming.

13. House of prayer.] Note here that he calls external sacrifice (out of the
Prophet Esaias) prayer. For he speaks of the Temple, which was builded
properly and principally for sacrifice.

16. Mouth of infants.] Young childrens prayers proceeding from the instinct of
Gods spirit, Prayers not understood of the party, are acceptable.
be acceptable: and so the voices of the like, or of other simple folk now in
the Church, though them selves understand not particularly what they say, be
marvelous grateful to Christ.

22. Believing.] In respect of our own unworthiness, and of the things not
always expedient for us, we may well doubt when we pray, whether we shall
obtain or no^ but on Gods part we must believe, that is, we must have no
diffidence or mistrust either of his power or of his will, if we be worthy,
Mar^. 11, 22.
and the thing expedient. And therefore S. Mark has thus, Have ye faith of God.

23. In what power?] The Heretics presumptuously think them selves in this
point like to Christ, Haeretike^ run, not sent.
because they are asked, in what power they come, and who sent them: but when
they have answered this question as fully as Christ did here by that which he
insinuates of John's testimony for his authority, they shall be heard, and til
then they shall be still taken for those of whom God speaks by the Prophet,
Ier. 33.
They ^anne, and I sent them not.

28. The first.) The first son here is the people of the Gentiles, because
Gentility was before there was a peculiar and chosen people of the Jews, and
therefore the Jews here as the later, are signified by the other son.

CHAP. XXII.
Yet by one other parable he fore shows the most deserved reprobation of the
earthly and persecuting Jews, and the gracious vocation of the Gentiles in
their place. 15 Then he defeateth the snare of the Pharisees and Herodians
about paying tribute to Caesar. 23 He answers also the invention of the
Sadducees against the Resurrection: 34 and a question that the Pharisees ask
to pose him: turning and posing them again, because they imagined that Christ
should be no more then a man: (...) and so he puts all the busy Secte^ to
silence.

The Gospel upon the 19 Sunday after Pentecost.
saying: Not only good men be within the church, but also evil me^. against the
Heretics of these days.
bad and good: and the marriage was filled with ghestes.

Mr. 12, 13.
consulted among them selves for to entrappe him in his talk. Lu. 20, 20.
saying, Master, we know that thou art a true speaker, and teach the way
of God in truth, neither carest thou for any man. for thou do not respect
the person of men: * Mr. 12, 19.
and the things that are Gods, to God. Lu. 20, 27.
and leaving him went their ways.

there is no resurrection: Act. 23, 6.
and asked him, If a man die not having a child, that his brother marie his
wife, and raise up seed to his brother. Deu. 25, 5.
Exo. 3, 6.
I am the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob? He is not
God ^ of the dead, but of the living.

Mar. 12, 28.
came together: The Gospel upon the 17 Sunday after Pentecost.
Deuteronomy. 6, 5.
Thou shall love the lord thy God from thy whole heart, and with thy whole soul,
and with thy whole mind. Leu. 19, 18.
Thou shall love thy neighbor as thyself.

Mr. 12, 35.
JESUS asked them Lu. 20, 41.
What is your opinion of Christ? Whose son is he? They say to him, David's.
sit on my right hand, Ps. 109. 1.
until I put thine enemies the foot stole of thy feet?

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XXII.
2. Marriage.) Then did God the Father make this marriage, when by the mystery
of the Incarnation he joined to his son our Lord, the holy Church for his
spouse. Greg. hom. ^8.

3. Servants.) The first servants here sent to inuit, were the Prophets: the
second, were the Apostles: and all that afterward converted countries, or that
have and do reconcile men to the Church. Wordly excuses against reconciliation.


5. One to his farm) Such as refuse to be reconciled to Christ's Church,
allege often vain impediments and worldly excuses, which at the day of
judgment will not serve them.

11. A man not attyred.] If profits not much to be within the Church and to
be a Catholic, except a man be of good life, for such an one shall be damned,
because with faith he has not good works: The Church consists of good and
bad.
as is evident by the example of this man, who was within, and at the feast as
the rest, but lacked the garment of charity and good works* And by this man
are represented all the bad that are called* and therefore they also are in the
Church, as this man was at the feast: but because he was called, and yet none
of the elect, it is evident that the Church does not consist of the elect only
contrary to our Adversaries.

2^. To Caesar.) Temporal duties and payments exacted by worldly Princes must
be paid, Neither must temporal Princes exact, nor their Subjects give unto
them, Ecclesiastical jurisdiction.
so that God be not defrauded of his more sovereign duty. And therefore Princes
have to take heed, how they exact: and others, how they give to Caesar, that
is, to their Prince, the things that are dew to God, that is, to his
Ecclesiastical ministers. Whereupon S. Athanasius recites these goodly words
out of an epistle of the ancient and famous Co^fessor Hosius Cordubensis to
Co^stantius the Arian Emperor: Cease I beseech thee, and remember that thou
art mortal, fear the day of judgment, intermedle not with Ecclesiastical
matters, neither do thou command us in this kind, but rather learn them of
us, to thee God has committed the Empire, to us he has committed the things
that belong to the Church: and as he that with malicious eyes carpeth thine
Empire, gainesayeth the ordinance of God: so do thou also beware, lest in
drawing unto thee Ecclesiastical matters, thou be made guilty of a great crime.
It is written, Give ye the things that are Caesar's, to Caesar: and the things
that are Gods, to God. Therefore neither is it lawful for us in earth to hold
the Empire, neither have thou (O Emperor) power over incense and sacred
things. Athan. Ep. ad Solit. vita^ agentes. And S. Ambrose to Valentinian the
Emperor (who by the il counsel of his mother Iustina an Arian, required of S.
Ambrose to have one Church in Millan deputed to the Arian Heretics) says: we
pay that which is Caesar's, to Caesar: and that which is Gods, to God. Tribute
is Caesar's, it is not denied: the Church is Gods, it may not verily be yielded
to Caesar: because the Temple of God can not be Caesar's right. Which no man can
deny but it is spoken with the honor of the Emperor. for what is more
honorable then that the Emperor be said to be the son of the Church? For a
good Emperor is within the Church, not above the Church, Ambr. lib. 5. Epist.
Orat. de Basil. trad.

30. As Angels.) As Christ proves here, The Saints hear our prayers.
that in heaven they neither marry nor are married, because there they shall be
as Angels: by the very same reason, is proved, that Saints may hear our
prayers and help us, be they near or far of, because the Angels do so, and
in every moment are present vvher they list, and need not to be near us, when
they hear or help us.

30. As Angels.) Not to marry nor be married, Religious single life, Angelical.
is to be like to Angels: therefore is the state of Religious men and women and
Priests, for not marrying, worthily called of the Fathers, an Angelical life.
Cyp. lib. 2. de discipl. and ha^. Virg. sub finem.

32. Of the dead.) S. Hierom by this place disproueth the Heretic Vigilantius,
and in him these of our time, which to diminish the honor of Saints, call
them of purpose, dead men.

40. On these two.) Hereby it is evident that al depends not upon faith only,
Not only faith.
but much more upon charity (though faith be the first) which is the love of
God and of our neighbor, which is the sum of all the law and the Prophets:
because he that has this double charity expressed here by these two principal
commaundeme^ts, fulfilleth and accomplisheth all that is commanded in the Law
and the Prophets.

CHAP. XXIII.
The Scribes and Pharisees after all this, continuing still incorrigible,
although he will have the doctrine of their Chair obeyed, yet against their
works (and namely their ambition) he openly inueigheth, crying to them eight
woes for their eightfold hypocrisy and blindness: 34 and so concluding with the
most worthy reprobation of that persecuting generation and their mother-citie
Jerusalem with her Temple.

The Gospel upon Tuesday the second week in Lent.
Luc. 11, 46.
but according to their works do ye not, Act. 15, 10.
for they say and do not. but with a finger of their own they vvil not move
them. These phylacteries were pieces of parchement, wherein they wrote the ten
commandments, and folded it, and carried it on their forehead before their
eyes, imagining grossly and superstitiously, that so they fulfilled that which
is said Deu. 6, They shall be immovable before thine eyes. Hiero. in 23* Mat.
phylacteries, Deu. 22, 12.
and enlarge their * fringes. Nu. 15, 38.
Mr. 12, 38.
Rabbi. Ia. 3, 1.




Lu. 20, 47.
^ praying long prayers* for this you shall receive the greater judgment.







^ they are full*
but within you are ful' of rapine and uncleanness.



The Gospel upon S. Steuens day December. 26.
vipers broodes, how vvil you flee from the judgment of hell? Genesis 4, 8*
from the blood of * Abel the just eue^ unto the blood of * Zacharias the son
of Barachias, 2. Par. 24, 22.
whom you murdered between the temple and the altar. Luc. 13, 34.
Free will.
would not?

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XXIII.
2. Chair of Moses.] The Sea of Rome preserved in truth.
God preserves the truth of Christian religion in the Apostolic See of Rome,
which is in the new law answerable to the chair of Moses, notwithstanding the
Bishops of the same were never so wicked of life: yea though some traitor as
il as Judas were Bishop thereof, it should not be prejudicial to the Church and
innocent Christians, for whom our Lord prou^ding said, Do that which they say,
but do not as they do. August. Epist. 165.

3. Whatsoever they shall say.] Co^tra lit. Petil. li. 2. c. 51.
Why (says S. Augustine) do^est thou call the Apostolic Chair the chair of
pestilence? The dignity of the Sea of Rome, notwithstanding some evil Bishops
thereof.
If for the men, why? Did our Lord Jesus Christ for the Pharisees, any vvrong
to thee Chair wherein they sat? Did he not commend that chair of Moses,
and preserving the honor of the chair, reprove them? For he says: They sit
upon the Chair of Moses, that which they say, do ye. These things if you
did well consider, you would not for the men whom you defame, blaspheme the Sea Apostolic, Co^tra lit. Petil. li. 2. c. 61.
vvhervvith you do not communicate. And again he says: Neither for the
Pharisees (to whom you compare us not of wisdom but of malice) did our Lord
command the Chair of Moses to be forsaken, in which chair verily he
figured his own* for he vvarneth the people to do that which they say, and
not to do that which they do, and that the holiness of the Chair be in no
case forsaken, nor the unity of the flock divided, for the naughty Pastors.

6. Love the first places.) He condemns not dew places of Superiority given
or taken of men according to their degrees, but ambitious seeking for the same,
and their proud heart and wicked intention, which he saw within them, and
therefore might boldly reprehend them.

8. One is your master.) Many masters are many Arch-heretikes.
In the Catholic Church there is one Master, Christ our Lord, and under him
one Vicar, with whom al Catholic Doctors and teachers are one, because they
teach al one thing, but in Arch-heretikes it is not so, where every one of them
is a diverse master, and teaches contrary to the other, and will be called
Rabbi and Master, every one of their own Disciples: Arius a Rabbi among the
Arians, Luther among the Lutherans, and among the Caluinists Calvin.

10. Masters.) Doctors, Masters, and spiritual fathers.
Wiclefe and the like Heretics of this time do hereupon condemn degrees of
Schole and titles of Doctors and Masters: where they might as well reprove S.
Paul for calling him self Doctor and Master of the Gentiles: 1. Tim. 2. 2.
Tim. 1.
and for saying Ephesians. 4.
that there should be always Doctors in the Church, and whereas they bring the
other words following, against Religious men who are called fathers: as well
might they by this place take away the name of carnal fathers, and blame S.
Paul for calling him self the only spiritual father of the Corinthians. 1.
Cor. 4, 15
but in deed nothing is here forbidden but the contentious division and
partiality of such as make them selves Ringleaders of Schisms and Sects, as
Donatus, Arius, Luther, Calvin.

11. Scribes and Pharisees.] The honor of Priesthod.
In all these reprehensions it is much to be noted, that our Savior for the
honor of Priesthod never reprehendeth Priests by that name. Cypr. ep. 65.
whereas our Heretics use this name of purpose in reproach and despite.

14. Praying long prayers.) The intention.
They are not reprehended here for the things them selves, which for the most
part are good, as, long prayer, making Proselytes, garnishing the Prophets
sepulchers, etc. but for their wicked purpose and intention, as before is said
of fasting, prayers, alms, Mat. 6.

15. Double more.) Not only faith.
They that teach that it is enough to have only faith, do make such
Christians, as the Jews did Proselytes, children of Hell far more then before.
August. lib. de fide and oper. cap. 26.

19. Sanctifies.) Note that donaries and gifts bestowed upon Churches and
altars, be sanctified by dedication to God, and by touching the altar and other
holy things: as now specially the vessels of the sacrifice and Sacrament of
Christ's body and blood, The altar is sanctified by our Lords body thereupon.
by touching the same, and the altar it self whereupon it is consecrated.
whereof Theophylacte writes thus upon this place: In the old law Christ
permits not the gift to be greater then the altar, Theophyl.
but with us, the altar is sanctified by the gift: Mat. 23.
for the hosts by the divine grace are turned into our Lords body, and
therefore is the altar also sanctified by them.

21. By him that dwells therein.) By this we see that swearing by creatures,
as by the Gospel, by Saints, is al referred to the honor of God, whose Gospel
it is, whose Saints they are.

28. Appear to men.) Christ might boldly reprehend them so often and so
vehemently for hypocrisy, because he knew their hearts and intentions: but we
that can not see within men, may not presume to call men's external good doings,
hypocrisy: but judge of men as we see and know.

29. Garnish*) Christ blames not the Jews for adorning the sepulchers of the
Prophets, but entwyteth them of their malice toward him, and of that which by
his divine knowledge he foresaw, that they would accomplish the wickedness of
their fathers in sheding his blood, as their fathers did the blood of the
Prophets. Hilar.

CHAP. XXIIII.
To his Disciples (by occasion of Jerusalem and the Temples destruction) he
foretells* * what things shall be before the consummation of the world, as
specially, 14 the Churches full preaching unto al nations: 15 then, what shall be
in the very consummation, to wit, Antichrist with his passing great
persecution and seduction, but for a short times* 29 then incontinent, the Day
of judgment to our great comfort in those miseries under Antichrist. 35 As for
the moment, to us it pertains not to know it, 37 but rather every man to
vvatch, that we be not unprovided when he comes to each one particularly by
death.

Mr. 13, 1*
And his disciples came to show him the buildings of the temple. Lu. 21, 5*


The Gospel for a votiue Mass in time of war* and for many Martyrs.
the disciples came to him secretly, saying: Tell us, when shall these things
be? and what shall be ^ the sign of thy coming, and of the consummation of
the world? TVESDAY night.
Bevvare that no man ^ seduce you: Mat. 10, 17*
^ There were in the people false Prophets, as among you also shall be lying
Masters, which shall bring in Sects of perdition. 2. Pet. 2.
falseprophets shall rise: and shall seduce many.

the abomination of desolation, which was spoken of by Daniel the Prophet,
The Gospel upon the last Sunday after Pentecost.
standing in the holy place (he that reads, Dan. 9, 27.
let him understand) to take any thing out of his house: Whosoever draws
Christ or his Church from the Communion and fellowship of al Nations Christened,
to one corner, town, or Country, believe him not. Aug. de unit. Ec. c. 1.
here is Christ, or there: do not believe him.

Ezech. 32, 7.
and the moon shall not give her light, Joel 3, 15*
and the stars shall fall from heaven, Dan. 7, 15.
and the powers of heaven shall be moved: This sign of the Son of man, is the
holy Cross, which the^ shall appear to the Jews to their confusion. Chrysostom. in
Mat. ho. 77. It shall be no less confusion to Heretics that can not abide the
sign thereof.
the sign of the Son of man in heaven: and then shall al tribes of the earth
bewail: and they shall see the Son of man coming in the clouds of heaven
with much power and majesty.

Genesis 7, 5.
the flood came, and took them al: so also shall the coming of the Son of
man be. The Gospel for a Co^fessor that is a Bishop. And for S. Clement martyr,
Nouemb. 23.
1. These. 5, 1.
that * if the good man of the house did know what hour the thief would
come, he would surely vvatch, and would not suffer his house to be broken up.



ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XXIIII.
2. Not left.] This was fulfilled 40 years after Christ's Ascension by
Vespasian the Emperor and his son Titus. Eusebius. li. ^. c. 6. and seq. ex
Iosepho. Upon which words, There shall not be left etc. The Church ca^ never
fail.
which threaten the destruction of the Jews Temple: Mt. 16. Li. adu. Gentes
(...) Christus sit Deus, prope fine^.
and those words, Upon this Rock I will build my Church, which promise the
building of the Catholic Church of al nations: S. Ch^ysostome making a long
comparison of these two prophecies of Christ, says thus: Thou see in both,
his great and unspeakable power, in that that he increased and built up them
that worshipped him, and those that stumbled at him, he abased, destroyed, and
plucked them up by the root. Do thou see how whatsoever he has built, no
man shall destroy: and whatsoever he has destroyed, no man shall build? He
builded the Church, and no man shall be able to destroy it: he destroyed the
Temple, and no man is able to build it, and that in so long time. For they have
endeavored both to destroy that, and could not: and they have attempted to
build up this, and they could not do that neither, etc.

3. The sign.] Our Master knowing that it was not profitable nor seemly for
them to know these secrets, gave them by way of Prophecy, warning of diverse
miseries, signs, and tokens, that should fall, some further of, and some
nearer the later day: by which the faithful might always prepare them selves,
but never be certain of the hour, day, month, nor year, when it should fall.
Aug. Ep. 10.

4. Seduce.] The first and principal warning, Heretics seduce under fair
titles.
needful for the faithful from Christ's Ascension to the very end of the world,
is, that they be not deceived by Heretics, which under the titles of true
teachers and the name of Christ and his Gospel, will seduce many.

5. I am Christ.] Not only such as have named them selves Christ, as Simon,
Menander, and such like: but al Arch-heretikes be Christ's to their folowers,
Luther to the Lutherans, Calvin to the Caluinists: because they believe them,
rather then Christ speaking in his Church.

12. Iniquity abound.] When Heresy and false teachers reign in the world,
namely toward the later day, wicked life aboudeth, and charity decays. The
Gospel now preached to Infidels.


14. Shall be preached.] The Gospel has been preached of late years, and now
is, by holy Religious men of diverse Orders, in sundery great Countries which
never heard the Gospel before, as it is thought.

15. Abomination of desolation.] The abomination of desolation.
This abomination of desolation foretold, was first partly fulfilled in diverse
prophanations of the Temple of Jerusalem, when the sacrifice and service of
God was taken away. but specially it shall be fulfilled by Antichrist and his
Precursors, when they shall abolishe the holy Mass, The abolishing of the holy
sacrifice of the Mass by Antichrist and his ministers.
which is the Sacrifice of Christ's body and blood, and the only sovereign
worship dew to God in his Church: as S. Hyppolytus writes in these words:
The Churches shall lament with great lamentation, because there shall neither
oblation be made, nor incense, nor worship grateful to God. But the sacred
houses of Churches shall be like to cottages, and the precious body and blood of
Christ shall not be extant (openly in Churches) in those days, the Liturgy (or
Mass) shall be extinguished, the Psalmodie shall cease, the reciting of the
Scriptures shall not be heard. Hippol. de Antichristo. By which it is plain
that the Heretics of these days be the special forerunners of Antichrist.

22. Shall be shortened.] Antichrist.
The reign of Antichrist shall be short, that is, three years and a half. Dan.
7. Apoc. 11. Therefore the Heretics are blasphemous and ridiculous, that say,
Christ's Vicar is Antichrist, who has sitten these 1500 years.

24. Great signs.] These signs and miracles shall be to the outward appearance
only, for S. Paul calls them * lying signs, 1. These. 2.
to seduce them only that shall perish. Whereby we see that if Heretics could
work feyned and forged miracles, yet we ought not to believe them, much less
when they can not so much as seem to do any.

26. In closets.] The secret co^uenticles of Heretics.
Christ having made the Churches authority bright and clear to the whole world,
warns the faithful to take heed of Heretics and Schisinatikes, which have
their conuenticles aside in certain odd places and obscure corners, alluring
curious persons unto them. Aug. li. 1. q. Euang. q. 38. Catholic Christians
secretly assembling in time of persecution.
For as for the coming together of Catholics to serve God in secret places,
that is a necessary thing in time of persecution, and was used of Christians
for three hundred years together after Christ, Act. 1, 12.
* and the Apostles also and disciples came so together in Jerusalem for fear
of the Jews. And Catholics do the same at this day in our country, not
drawing religion into corners from the society of the Catholic Church, but
practicing secretly the same faith, that in all Christendom shines and
appears most gloriously.

29. Immediately.] If the later day shall immdediatly follow the persecution of
Antichrist, which is to endure but three years and half, Antichrist.
as is aforesaid: then is it mere blasphemy to say, Gods Vicar is Antichrist,
and that (by their own limitation) these thousand years almost.

CHAP. XXV.
Continuing his Sermon, he brings two parables, of ten Virgins, and of
Talents, to show how it shall be in Domesday with the Faithful that prepare, and
that prepare not themselves. 31 Then also without parables he shows that such
Faithful as do works of mercy, shall have for them life everlasting: and such
as do not, everlasting damnation.

The Gospel for holy Virgins.
which taking their ^ lamps went forth to meet the bridegroom and the
bride. ye forth to meet him. If we be not in the favor of God, and have not
our own merits, we shall not be helped by other men's deserts at the day of
judgment.
your oil: because our lamps are going out.

The Gospel for a Co^fessor that is a Bishop.
called his servants, Luc. 19, 12.
and delivered them his goods. Free will with Gods grace does merit.
I have gained other five besides. A terrible example for all such as do not
employ the very least gift of God, to his glory.
Naughty and sloughtful servant, thou did know that I reap where I sovv
not, and gather where I stravved not: Mr. 13, 12.
Lu. 8, 18
shall be taken away from him.

The Gospel upon monday the first week of Lent.
and all the Angels with him, then shall he sit upon the seat of his
majesty: This kingdom then is prepared for those only that do good works: as
Christ also signifies else where, saying that it is not in his power to give it
otherwise. See the annot. ^. 20, 23.
prepared for you from the foundation of the world.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XXV.
1. Virgi^s.] These virgins five wise, and five foolish, signify that in the
Church militant there be good and bad: Good works necessary.
which bad shall be shut out at the later day, although they have lamps (that
is faith) as the other, because their lamps are out, that is, their faith is
dead without charity and good works to lighten them Greg. ho. 12.

1. Lamps.] These lamps lighted, be good works, namely of mercy, and the
laudable conversation which shines before men. Aug. ep. 120, c. 33.

3. Oil.) Right inte^tion.
This oil is the right inward intention directing our works to Gods glory,
and not to the praise of our selves in the sight of men. Aug. ep. 120, c. 33.

27. With usury.) Usury is here taken for the lawful gain that a man gets
by well employing his goods. When God gives us any talent or talents, he
looks for usury, that is, for spiritual increase of the same by our
diligence and industry.

29. That which he seems to have.] We must use Gods gifts.
He is said to have Gods gifts, that uses them, and to such an one God will
increase his gifts. He that uses them not, seems to have, rather then ^ath
them, and from him God will withdraw that which before he gave.

32. Separate.) Good and bad in the Church.
Lo here is the separation, for in the Church militant they lived both
together. As for Heretics, they went out of the Church before, and separated
them selves, and therefore are not to be separated here, as being judged already.

34. Come ye, 41 get ye away.) Heaven is the reward of good works, and Hell of
the contrary.
It is no incongruity that God should say, Go into everlasting fire, to them
that by their free will have repelled his mercy: and to the other, Come ye
blessed of my father, take the kingdom prepared for them, that by their free
will have received faith, and confessed their sins and done penance. Aug. li.
2 act. cum Fell. Manich. c. 8.

35. You gave me.) Hereby we see how much almes-deedes and al works of mercy
prevail toward life everlasting, and to blot out former sins. Aug. in Ps.
49.

42. Gave me not.) He charge them not here that they believed not, but that
they did not good works. For such did believe, but they cared not for good
works, as though by dead faith they might have come to heaven. Aug. defid. and
op. c. 15. and ad Dulcit. q. 2. to. 4.

CHAP. XXVI.
To the Council of the Jews, Judas by occasion of Marie Magdaelens ^intme^t,
does sell him for little. 17 After the Paschal lamb, 26 he gives them that
bread of life (promised Io. 6.) in a mystical Sacrifice or Separation of his
Body and Blood. 31 And that night he is after his prayer 47 taken of the Jews
men, Judas being their captain: and forsaken of the other eleven for fear: 57
is falsely accused, and impiously condemned of the Jews Council, 67 and
shamefully abused of them: 69 and thrice de^ied of Peter: Al, even as the
Scriptures and him self had often foretold

The Passion according to S. Matthew in these two Chapters, is the Gospel at
Mass upon Palm Sunday.
when JESUS had ended al these words, Mr. 14, 1
he said to his Disciples, Lu. 22, 1
TENEDRE Wenesday.
who was called Caiphas:

Mr. 14, 3.
Io. 12, 3.
and povvred it out upon his head as he sat at the table. Hereby (...) learn
that the good works of Saints are to be recorded and set forth to their
honor in the Church after their death. whereof rise their holy days and
Co^memorations.
shall be reported for a memory of her. Mr. 14, 10.
which was called Judas Iscarioth, to the chief Priests, Lu. 22, 3
what vvil you give me, and I vvil deliver him unto you? But they appointed
unto him thirty pieces of silver.

Mr. 14, 12.
saying, MAVNDY thursday.
where vvilt thou that we prepare for thee to eat the Pasche? Lu. 22, 7
Ps. 40, 10.
began every one to say, Is it I Lord?

1. Cor. 11, 24.
and brake: and he gave to his Disciples, and said, Take ye, and eat: ^ THIS
IS ^ MY BODY. See the margent note Mar. 14, 23.
ye al of this. THE NEW TESTAMENT, WHICH SHALL BE SHED FOR MANY UNTO REMISSION
OF SINS. THVRSDAY night.
until that day when I shall drink it with you new in the kingdom of my
father.

The NOCTVRNE of Mattins in the Churches Service, answers to this night part
of our Saviors Passion, and so consequently the other Canonical hours to the
rest.
Al you shall be scandalized in me, in this night. For it is written, Zach. 13,
7.
I vvil strike the Pastor, and the sheep of the flock shall be dispersed. Io.
13, 38.




10. 18, 3.
behold Judas one of the Twelve came, and with him a great multitude with
swords and clubbes, sent from the chief Priests and the ancients of the
people.

Io. 2, 19.
and after three days to reedifie it. Dan. 7, 13.
nevertheless I say to you, hereafter you shall see * the Son of man sitting on
the right hand of the power of God, and coming in the clouds of heaven. face
with the palms of their hands,

To this time the LAVDES do answer in the Churches Service.
And incontinent the cock crevve.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XXVI.
1. This wast.] Cost upon Churches, altars, etc.
Cost bestowed upon Christ's body then alive, being to the same not necessary,
seemed to the disciples lost and fruitles: so the like bestowed upon the same
body if the Sacrament, upon altars, or Churches, seems to the simple lost, or
less meritorious, then if the same were bestowed upon the poor.

10. Good work.] Cost bestowed for religion, devotion, and signification, is a
meritorious work, Relief of the poor.
and often more meritorious then to give to the poor, Ambros li. 2 Off. c. 2^.
though both be very good, and in some case the poor are to be preferred: yea
* in certain cases of necessity, the Church will break the very consecrated
vessels and jewels of silver and gold, and bestow them in works of mercy. But
we may remember very well, and our fathers knew it much better, that the poor
were then best relieved, when most was bestowed upon the Church.

11. Have not.) We have him not in visible manner as he conuersed on the earth
with his disciples, needing relief like other poor men: Christ always with
us in the B. Sacrament.
but we have him after an other sort in the B. Sacrament, and yet have him
truly and really the self same body. Therefore he says, they should not have
him, because they should not so have him, but after an other manner, as when he
said Luc. 24 as though he were not then with them, when I was with you.

20. Twelve.) It must needs be a great mystery that he was to work in the
institution of the new Sacrifice by the marvelous transmutatio^ of bread and
wine into his body and blood. A wonderful mystery in the Institution of the B.
Sacrament.
Whereas he admitted none (although many present in the city) but the twelve
Apostles, which were already taught to believe it without contradiction Io. 6,
and were to have the administration and consecration thereof by the Order of
Priesthod, which also was there given the^ to that purpose. Whereas at the
eating of the Paschal lamb all the family was wont to be present.

^6. He took bread.) Here at once is instituted, for the continuance of the
external office of Christ's eternal Priesthod according to the order of
Melchisedec, both a Sacrifice and a Sacrament, though the Scriptures give
neither of these names to this action: The holy Eucharist is both a Sacrifice
and a Sacrament.
and our Adversaries without al reason or religion accept in a sort the one,
and utterly deny the other. A Sacrifice, in that it is ordained to continue the
memory of Christ's death and oblation upon the Cross, and the application of
the general virtue thereof to our particular necessities, by co^secrating the
several ^leme^ts not into Christ's whole person as it was borne of the virgin
or now is in heaven, but the bread into his body apart, as betrayed, broken,
and given for us: the wine into his blood apart, as shed out of his body for
remission of sins and dedication of the new Testament, which be conditions of
his person as he was in sacrifice and oblation. In which mystical and
unspeakable manner, he would have the Church to offer and sacrifice him daily,
and he in mystery and Sacrament dies, though now not only in heaven, but also
in the Sacrament, he be in deed per Concomitantia^ (as the Church calls it,
that is, by sequel of al his parts to each other) whole, alive, and immortal.
Which point because ou^ Adversaries understand not, Mat. 2^* 2^.
not knowing the Scriptures nor the power of God, they blaspheme, and abuse the
people to their damnation. It is also a Sacrament, in that it is ordained to be
received into our bodies and to feed the same to resurrection and immortality,
and to give grace and salvation to our souls, if we worthily receive it.

26. Blessed.) The blessing of Christ referred to the creatures and working an
effect in the^.
Our Adversaries for the two words that are in Greek and Latin, benedixit,
and, gratias egit, he blessed, he gave thanks, use only the later, of purpose
to signify that Christ blessed not nor consecrated the bread and the wine, and
so by that blessing wrought any effect upon them, but gave thanks only to his
father, as we do in saying grace. But the truth is that the word (...),
signifies properly to bless, and is referred to the thing that is blessed, as
Luc. 9 of the fishes, (...), benedixit eis, he blessed them, and thereby
wrought in them that wonderful multiplication. So the blessing of God is
always effectual: and therefore here also he blessed the bread, Consecration.
and by that blessing, with the words following, made it his body. Ambros. li.
de his qui initi. mist. c. 9. Aug. ep. 59 ad Paulinum. Now whereas taking the
cup it is said, he gave thanks. We say that it is al one with blessing, and
that he blessed the cup, as before the bread: ^ Cor. 10.
as it is evident by these words of S. Paul, Calix cui benedicimus, the cup
which we bless: and therefore he calls it, Calicem benedictionis, the cup
of blessing; using the same Greek word that is spoken of the bread. But why is
it then said here, he gave thanks? because we translate the words faithfully
as in the Greek and the Latin, and because the sense is al one, as we are
taught by S. Paul before alleged, and by the fathers, which call this giving of
thanks over the cup or over the bread, (...).
the blessing thereof. S. Justin. in fin. 2. Apol. Panem Eucharistisatum: S.
Iren^e li. 4. c. 34. Panem in quo grati^ act^ sunt. S. Cyprian de coen. do.
Calix solenni benedictione sacratus. that is, The bread blessed by giving
thanks upon it. The cup consecrated by solemn blessing.

26. This is.) Transsubstantiation.
The bread and the wine be turned into the body and blood of Christ by the same
omnipotent power by which the world was made, and the word was incarnate in the
womb of the virgin. Damasc. li. 4 c. 14. Cypr. de Coen. Domini. Amb. li. de
mist. init. c. 9.

26. My body.) No figurative but a real presence.
He said not, This bread is a figure of my body: or, This wine is a figure of
my blood: but, This is my body, and, This is my blood. Damasc. li. 4 c. 14.
Theophyl. in hunc locum. Cone. 2. N^c. act. 6, to. 4 eiusdem actionis in fine.
When some fathers call it a figure or sign, they mean the outward forms of
bread and wine.

28. Blood of the new Testament.) As the old Testament was dedicated with blood
in these words, This is the blood of the Testament etc. Heb. 9. so here is the
institution of the new Testament in Christ's blood, (...).
by these words, This is the blood of the new Testament etc. Which is here
mystically shed, (...).
and not only afterward upon the Cross: for the Greek is the present tense in all the Evangelists, (...).
and S. Paul: and likewise speaking of the body 1 Cor. 11. it is in the Greek
the present tense, and Luc. 22. and in the Latin here. And the Heretics them
selves so put it in their translations.

29. Fruit of the vine.) The elements after consecration called bread and wine.
S. Luke puts these words before he come to the consecration, whereby it
seems that he speaks of the wine of the Paschal lamb, and therefore names
it, the fruit of the vine. but if he speak of the wine which was now his
blood, he names it notwithstanding wine, as S. Paul names the other bread,
for three causes: first because it was so before: as Eve is called Adams bone,
Genesis 2.
and, Aarons rod devoured their rods: Whereas they were not now rods, but
serpents. Exo. 7.
And, He tasted the water turned into wine: whereas it was now wine and not
water: and such like, Io. ^.
secondly, because it keeps the forms of bread and wine, and things are
called as they appear: as when Raphael is called a young man Tob. 5. and, Three
men appeared to Abraham Genesis 18. whereas they were three Angels, thirdly,
because Christ in this Sacrament is very true and principal bread and wine,
feeding and refreshing us in body and soul to everlasting life.

^9. Not as I will.) A perfect example of obedience and submitting our self and
our wills to Gods will and ordinance in all adversity: and that we should
desire nothing temporal, but under the condition of his holy pleasure and
appointment.

41. Watch and pray.) De ^rat.
Hereof came Vigils and Nocturnes, Vigils and Nocturnes.
that is, watching and praying in the night, Do. nu. ^5.
commonly used in the Primitive Church of al Christians, as is plain by S.
Cyprian and Adu. Vigilant. ep. ^3.
S. Hierom: but afterward and until this day, specially of Religious persons.

69. Wench.) The virtue of the holy Ghost.
S. Gregory declaring the difference of the Apostles before the receiving of
the Holy Ghost and after, says thus: Even this very Pastor of the Church him
self, at whose most sacred body we sit, how weak he was, the wenche can tell
you: but how strong he was after, his answer to the high Priest declares, Act.
5. 29: We must obey God rather then men. Greg. ho. 20 ^o Euang.

74. To curse.) Man's infirmity
A goodly example and warning to man's infirmity, and to take heed of
presumption, and to hang only upon God in tentations.

75. Wept bitterly.) Peter's tears and repentance.
S. Ambrose in his Hymn that the Church uses at Lauds, speaking of this,
says, Hoc ipsa Petra ecclesia canente, culpam diluit. When the Cock crewe,
the Rock of the Church him self washed away his fault. S. August. 1 Retract.
c. ^1.

CHAP. XXVII.
The chief of the Jews accuse him to Pilate the Gentil (his betrayer, and
the Judge, and the Judges wife, testifying in the mean time manifoldly his
innocence:) 20 and persuade the common people also not only to prefer the
murderer Barabbas, but also to cry, CRVCIFIGE: (Al, to the reprobation of
their whole nation, and nothing but fulfilling the Scriptures.) 27 After many
illusions, 31 he is crucified by the Gentiles. 38 Which the Jews seeing, do
triumph as if they had now the victory. 45 But even then by many wonderful
works he declares his might, to their confusion 57 Finally being buried,
they to make al sure, set souldiars to keep his sepulcher.

PRIME or Hora prima in the Churches Service.
all the chief Priests and ancients of the people consulted together against
JESUS, Mr. 15, 1*
that they might put him to death. Lu. 23, 1. Io. 18, 28.
GOOD FRIday.


This Corbana was a place about the Temple, which received the peoples gifts or
offerings. See Mar. 12, v. 42.
Corbana: because it is the price of blood. Haceldama, that is, the field of
blood, even to this present day. Zach. 11, 12.
saying, And they took the thirty pieces of silver, the price of the priced,
whom they did price of the children of Israel:



HORA TERTIA in the Churches Service.
would.

Io. 19, 2.
gathered together unto him the whole band: HORA SEXTA in the Churches Service.
him they forced to take up his cross.

Ps. 21, 19
saying: They divided my garments among them: and upon my vesture they did cast
lottes. Ps. 21, 9.
let him now deliver him if he will: Sap. 2, 18.
for he said, That I am the son of God.

Eli, Eli, lamma-sabacthani? that is, My God, my God, ^ why have thou forsaken
me? HORA NONA in the Churches Service.
yielded up the ghost.

HORA VESPERARVM, or, Euensong.
and the mother of the sons of Zebede^. rich man of Arimathaea, named Joseph,
who also him self was disciple to JESUS. HORA COMPLETORII, or Complin.
Then Pilate commanded that the body should be delivered.

SATVRDAY called Sabbatum sa^^ctum.
which is after the Parasceue, the chief Priests and the Pharisees came
together to Pilate,

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XXVII.
3. Repenting him.] Horror of conscience.
Note how spedily the plague of God falls after sin, and specially men must
note what torment of conscience, and desperation often follows the sheading of
innocent blood.

5. Hung himself.] Desperation.
If he had rightly repented, notwithstanding his horrible treason, he might
have obtained mercy: but by hanging him self he took away al means of mercy
and salvation, because he died finally impenitent.

24. Innocent of his blood.] They that execute laws against their conscience,
are like to Pilate.
Though Pilate was much more innocent then the Jews, and would have been free
from the murder of our Savior, seeking all the means that he could (without
offending the people and the Emperors laws) to dimisse him: Yet he is damned
for being the minister of the peoples wicked will against his own conscience,
even as al Officers be, and specially the Judges and Iuries which execute laws
of temporal Princes against Catholic men: for all such be guilty of innocent
blood, and be nothing excused by that they execute other men's will according to
the laws, which be unjust. For they should rather suffer death them selves,
then put an innocent man to death.

40. If thou be the Son.] Christ derided in the B. Sacrament, even as upon
the Cross.
Marvel not, when thou hear our Savior in the B. Sacrament mocked at, or
see him abused of wicked men, that he straight reuengeth not such
blasphemies: or that he shows not him self there visibly and to the senses,
when faithles Heretics will say, Let me see him, taste him, etc. for he suffered
here the like on the Cross, when he might at his will have come down with as
much ease as he rose when he was dead.

46. Why have thou forsaken me?] Beware here of the detestable blasphemy of
Calvin and the Caluinists, Catechis. Calu. and Instit. li. 2. 16.
who thinking not the bodily death of Christ sufficient, say, that he was also
here so forsaken and abandoned of his Father, that he sustained in soul and
conscience the very fears and torments of the damned, And to take away the
Article of his descending into Hell after his death, (which was with triumph and
not in pain,) Caluins blasphemy.
they say that his descending was nothing else, but that his soul suffered the
very pains of Hell upon the Cross. Whereas in deed by these words out of the
Psalm, our Savior will signify no more but that his pains (being now so long
on the Cross and ready to die) were very great, and therefore according to the
infirmity of his humane nature, for very anguish (as before in the garden when
he was but toward his Passion) he says he was forsaken, for two causes, first
because it was the will of God not to deliver him, but that he should die:
secondly, because his divine nature did so repress it self for the time, that
he felt no comfort thereof at al, but was left to die in extreme pains as a
mere man.

19. Wrapped.] Reverent using of our L. Body.
This honor and duty done to Christ's body being dead, S. Hiero. in hunc locum.
was marvelous grateful and meritorious And this wrapping of it in clean find
on may signify by S. Hierom, that the Body of our Lord is to be wrapped not in
gold, precious stones, and silk, but in pure linen. And so in the whole
Church it is observed by to. 1, Council.
S. Siluesters constitution, Corporals.
that the Corporal whereupon our Lords body lies on the altar, must be pute
and plain linen.

CHAP. XXVIII.
He rises again the third day, and (the blind most obstinate Jews by bribery
working to their own reprobation) he appears to his Disciples in Galilee (as
both before his Passion he foretold them Mat. 26, and now after his
Resurrection, first the Angel, then also him self appointed by the women) (...)
and sends them to al Nations, to build his Church among the Gentiles.

The Gospel for the night Mass of Christ's Resurrection, which is now used to
be said on Easter eve in the morning.
came Marie Magdalene, Mr. 16, 1.
and the other Marie to see the sepulcher. Luc. 24, 1.
Io. 20, 1.
For an Angel of our Lord descended from heaven: EASTER day.
and coming, rolled back the stone, and sat upon it: Mt. 29, 32.
* as he said. come, and see the place where our Lord was laid.



vvil persuade him, and make you secure.

The Gospel upon Friday in Easter week.
unto the mount where JESUS had appointed them. The Gospel in the feast of the
B. Trinity.
but some doubted.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XXVIII.
1. To see the Sepulcher.] In Ep. 17 Paulae and Eustoch. ad Marcel. to. 1.
The devout women came to visit our Saviors sepulcher, The holy Sepulcher,
and Pilgrimage thereunto.
and for their devotion first deserved to know the Resurrection, and to see him
risen. The honor of the which Sepulcher and the Pilgrimage thereunto in the
Primitive Church, S. Hierom declares in these words, The Jews sometime
honored Sancta Sanctorum, because there were the Cherubs, and the
Propitiatory, and the Arc of the Testament, Manna, Aarons rod, and the
golden altar. Does not the Sepulcher of our Lord seem unto thee more
honorable? Which as often as we enter into, so often do we see our Savior lie
in the sindon: and staying there a while* we see the Angel again sit at his
feet, and at his head the napkin wrapped together. Esa. 11.
The glory of whose Sepulcher, we know was long prophetied before Joseph hewed
it out, by Esaias saying* And his rest shall be honor: to wit, because the
place of our Lords burial should be honored of al men. And at this present,
notwithstanding the Turks dominion, yet do the Religious Christian Catholic
men by Gods mighty providence keep the holy Sepulcher, The Catholic Church to
be gathered of al Nations, And Christ's continual protection of the same Church.
which is within a goodly Church, and Christians come out of all the world in
Pilgrimage to it.

19. Going then.] Commission to baptize and preach to al Nations given to the
Apostles, and grounded upon Christ's sovereign authority, to whom was given al
power in heaven and in earth.

20. With you al days.] Here Christ does promise his concurrence with his
Apostles and their successors; as well in preaching as ministering the
Sacraments, and his protection of the Church never to cease til the worlds end:
contrary to our Adversaries, saying that the Church has failed many hundred
years til Luther and Calvin.

THE ARGUMENT OF S. MARKS GOSPEL.
S. Marks Gospel may be well divided into four parts.

The first part, of the preparation that was made to the manifestation of
Christ: chap. 1. in the beginning.

The Second, of his manifesting himself by Preaching and Miracles, and that in
Galilee: the residue of the 1. chap. unto the 10. chap.

The third, of his coming into Jury, toward his Passion: chap. 10.

The fourth, of the Holy week of his Passion in Jerusalem: chap. 11. to the
end of the book.

Of S. Mark and his conversation with the two Apostles S. Paul and S.
Barnabee, we have at large Act. 12 and 15. somevvhat also Col. 4. and 2. Tim.
4. and to Philemon. Moreover of his familiarity with the Prince of the
Apostles S. Peter, we have 1 Pet. 5. For so it pleased our Lord, that only
two of the Evangelists should be of his twelve Apostles, to wit, S. Matthew
and S. John. The other two, S. Mark and S. Luke, he gave unto us of the
Disciples of his two most principal and most glorious Apostles S. Peter and S.
Paul. Whose Gospels therefore were of Antiquity counted as the Gospels of S.
Peter and S. Paul them selves. In Catal. Script. Ecclesiast.
Mark the disciple and interpreter of Peter (says S. Hierom) according to
that which he heard of Peter's mouth, wrote at Rome a brief Gospel at the
request of the Brethren (about 10 or 12 years after our Lords Ascension.)
Which when Peter had heard, he approved it, and with his authority did publish
it to the Church to be read, as Clemens Alexandrinus writes li. 6. hypotypos.

In the same place S. Hierom adds, how he went into Egypt to preach, and
was the first Bishop of the chief City there, named Alexandria: and how
Philo Iudaeus at the same time seeing and admiring the life and conversation of
the Christians there under S. Mark, Philo de Supplicibus.
who were Monks, vvrote a book thereof, which is extant to this day. In
Catalogo.
And not only S. Hierom (in Marco, and in Philone) but also Eusebius Hist. li.
2. ca. 15. 16. 17. Epiphanius Secta 29 Nazaraeorum, li. 1. to. 2. Cassianus de
Instit. Caenobiorum li. 2. c. 5. Sozomenus li. 1. c. 12. Nicephorus li. 2 c.
15. and diverse others, do make mention of the said Monks out of the same
Author. Finally, He died (says S. Hierom) the 8 year of Nero, and was buried
at Alexandria, Anianus succeding in his place. But from Alexandria he was
Naucler. generat. 28.
translated to Venice, Anno Dom. 830.

It is also to be noted, that in respect of S. Peter, who sent S. Mark his
scholar to Alexandria, and made him the first Bishop there, this See was
esteemed next in dignity to the Sea of Rome, and the Bishop thereof was
accounted the chief Metropolitan or Patriarch of the East, and that by the
first Council of Nice. Whereof see S. Leo ep. 53. S. Gregory li. 5. ep. 60.
and li. 6. ep. 37.

THE HOLY GOSPEL OF JESUS CHRIST ACCORDING TO MARK.
CHAP. I.
John (the Eremite of whom the Prophets) preaching penance, THE FIRST part of
this Gospel: of the preparation to Christ's manifestation.
and living him self accordingly. baptizeth the people to prepare them to
Christ, 7 telling them, that it is not his, but Christ's Baptism, in which
they shall receive the Holy Ghost. 9 JESUS there is manifested from heaven: 12
and by and by he also goes into the wilderness. 14 Beginning in Galilee, 16
after that he has called four Disciples, 21 he preaches first in Capharnaum,
confirming his doctrine with beneficial Miracles, to the great admiration of
al: 35 then also (but first retiring into the wilderness) in all the rest of
Galilee, with like miracles.

Mal. 3, 1.
(Behold I send mine Angel before thy face, Esa. 40, 3. the prophets
who shall prepare thy way before thee,) Mt. 3, 1.
and preaching the baptism of penance John's baptism put them in hope only of
remission of sins as a preparatiue to Christ's Sacrament by which sins were
indeed to be remitted. Aug. li. 5 de bapt. c. 10.
unto remission of sins. Lu. 3, 4.
Io. 1, 15.
and al they of Jerusalem: and were baptized of him in the river of Jordan, ^
confessing ^ their sins.



Mt. 4, 1.
Lu. 4, 1.
THE SECOND part of this Gospel: of Christ's manifestation.
and the Angels ministered to him.

Mat. 4, 12.
JESUS came into Galilee, Luc. 4, 14.
preaching the Gospel of the kingdom of God, He does not preach belief or
faith only, but penance also.
be penitent, and believe the Gospel.

Mat. 4, 18.
he savv Simon and Andrew his brother, Lu. 5, 2.
casting nets into the sea (for they were fishers)

Mat. 4, 13.
and he forthwith upon the Sabboths going into the Synagogue, Lu. 4, 31
taught them. Luc. 4, 32.
and he cried out,

Mat. 8, 14.
they came into the house of Simon and Andrew, Luc. 4. 42.
with James and John. gathered together at the door.



Mt. 8, 2.
and in all Galilee: and casting out devils. Lu. 5, 12.
Our Savior even when he healed the leper by extraordinary miraculous power,
would not yet break order, but sent the party to the Priest.
to the high priest, and offer for thy cleansing the things that * Moses
commanded, Leu. 14, 3.
for a testimony to them.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. I.
5. Confessing their sins.] Confession.
A certain confession of sins there was even in that penance which John
preached, and which was made before men were baptized. Whereby it is clear
that John made a preparation to the Sacrament of Penance which afterward was
instituted by Christ, as well as he did by baptizing prepare the way to Christ's
baptism. Particular confession.


5. Their sins.] He does not say that they confessed them selves to be
sinners, which may be done by a general confession: John's example of penance.
but that they confessed their sins, which is a particular confession.

6. Clothed.] The Holy Ghost thought it worthy of special reporting how
straightly this Prophet li^ed, and how he abstained from delicate meats and
apparel. See M^t. c. 3.

8. With water.] Baptism in water.
John with water only, Calu. 4. inst. c. 16.
Christ with the Holy Ghost, not only, as the Heretics hold, that say water is
not necessary, but with water and the Holy Ghost, as it is plain Io. 3. unless
a man be borne again of water and the Holy Ghost, he shall not enter into the
kingdom of heaven.

9. Baptized of John.] The humility of Christ not disdaining his servants
baptism. Which is an example for all faithful not to disdain Christ's
Sacraments of any Priest be he never so simple, being by the Catholic Church
lawfully called. Aug. li. 5 de bapt. c. 9.

10. The Spirit.] The B. Trinity.
Express mention of the B. Trinity* the Father speaks from heaven, the Holy
Ghost appears in the likeness of a dove, the Son also is recommended unto
us. Ambros. li. 1 de Sacram. c. 5.

12. Desert.] Christ's example of penance.
Christ doing penance by long fasting, solitariness, and conuersing with wild
beasts, gave example and instruction to the Church for Lent fast, and to holy
Eremites of retiring them selves to the wilderness and prayer.

35. Desert place.] Christ used very often to retire into solitary places, no
doubt for our example, to teach us that such places are best for prayer and
contemplation, Solitary contemplation.
and that we should often retire our selves from worldly matters to solitary
meditation of heavenly things.

CHAP. II.
Against the Scribes and Pharisees he defends first his power to remitte
sins in earth, (...) and his eating with sinners (as being the Physici^n of
souls, signified in those his miraculous cures upon bodies): (...) then also
he defends his Disciples, not having as yet any fastes by him prescribed unto
them, and plucking ^ares of corn upon the Sabbath: signifying vvithal that he
vvil change their ceremonies.

Mt. 9, 1.
and it was heard that he was in the house, Lu. 5, 18
Our Lord is moved to be merciful to sinners by other men's faith and desires,
and not only by the parties own means alvvay.
their faith, he says to the ^ sick of the palsy, Son, ^ thy sins are
forgiven thee. Job. 14, 4.
he blasphemeth. * Who can forgive sins but only God? Esa. 43, 25.


passed by, Mt. 9, 9.
* he savv Leui of Alphaeus sitting at the custom place: Lu. 5, 27
and he says to him, Follow me. And rising up he followed him.

Mt. 9, 13
and they come, Lu. 5, 32
and say to him, Why do the disciples of John and of the Pharisees fast: but
thy disciples do not fast? He foretells that fasting shall be used in his
Church, no less then in the old law or in the time of John the Baptist. See
Mat. c. 9, 15.
fast in those days.

Mt. 12, 1
and his Disciples began to go forvvard and to pluck the ears. Lu. 6, 1.
1. Re. 21, 6.
how * he entered into the house of God under Abiathar the high Priest, and did
ear the loaves of Proposition, which it was not lavvful to eat * but for
the Priests, and did give unto them which were with him? Leu. 24, 9.
The maker of the law may abrogate or dispense when and where for just cause it
seems good to him.
Lord of the Sabbath also.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. II.
4. Uncovered.) Such diligence ought to be used to bring sinners to Christ in
his Sacraments, as was used to procure this man and others, by Christ, the
health of their bodies.

5. Sick of the palsy.) Such as this man was in body by dissolution of his
limbs, such also was he in soul by the noisome desires of the world occupying
his heart, and withdrawing him from al good works. Aug. de Pastor. c. 6 to. 9.

5. Thy sins.) Hereby it appears that Christ healed this sick man first in
his soul, before he took away his bodily infirmity: The Sacraments to be
called for in sickness.
which may be an instruction for all men in bodily disease, first to call for
the Sacraments, which be medicines of the soul. As hereby also may be gathered
that many diseases come for sin, and therefore can not be healed til the
sins be remitted.

10. The Son of man.) As Christ proves unto them, that him self as man, and
not as God only, has power to remitte sins, Man has power to remit sins.
by that in all their sightes he was able to do miracles and make the sickman
suddenly arise: so the Apostles having power granted them to do miracles,
though they be not God, may in like manner have authority from God to remitte
sins, not as God, but as Gods ministers.

10. In earth.) Christ remitteth sins by the Priests ministry.
This power that the Son of man has to remitte sins in earth, was never
taken from him, but dureth still in his Sacraments, and ministers, by whom he
remitteth sins in the Church, and not in heaven only. For concerning sin,
there is one court of conscience in earth, and an other in heaven: and the
judgment in heaven follows and approves this on earth: as is plain by the
words of our Savior to Peter first, Mt. 18, 19.
and then to all the Apostles, Whatsoever you shall bind upon earth, Mt. 18, 18.
ad Heliod. ep. 1.
shall be bound in heaven: Whatsoever you shall loose upon earth, shall be loosed
in heaven: whereupon S. Hierom says, That Priests having the keys of the
kingdom of heaven, judge after a sort before the day of judgment. And S.
Chrysostom. li. 3 de Sacerd. paul. post princip. more at large.

25. In necessity.) Amb. li. ^ off. c. 28.
In necessity many things be done without sin, which else might not be done:
and so * the very chalices and consecrated jewels and vessels of the Church in
cases of necessity are by lawful authority turned to profane uses: which
otherwise to alienate to a man's private commodity is sacrilege.

CHAP. III.
The blind Pharisees seeking his death for doing good upon the Sabboths, he
meekely goes out of the way: where the people that flock unto him, and his
Miracles, are innumerable. 13 Yea to his Twelve also (having need of more
workmen) he gives power to work Miracles. ^0 He so occupies him self for
souls, that his kin think him mad. 22 The Scribes of Jerusalem come so
far, and yet have nothing but absurdly to blaspeme his casting out of Devils,
to their own damnation. ^1 That the Jews should not (after their manner)
think it enough, that he is of their blood, he tells that such rather are
dear to him, as keep Gods commandments.

Mt. 12, 9
and there was a man there that had a withered hand. Lu. 6, 6.


The only touching of Christ's holy person, or any part of his clothes, or
whatsoever belonged to him, did heal al diseases.
to touch him, as many as had hurtes.

Mt. 5, 1. 10, 1.
he called unto him whom he would him self: Lu. 6, 12 9, 1.
and they came to him. Boanerges, which is, the sons of thunder.

See here the conceit of worldly fre^des, who think the Zeal of Religion,
madness: and therefore count them mad, that are Zealous in Gods cause and for
the Catholic faith: and the more Zealous, the more mad.
mad. Mat. 12, 24.
said, * That he has Beelzebub: and that in the prince of devils he casts
out devils. Luc. 11, 15.
he said to them in parables, How can Satan cast out Satan? they shall
blaspheme.

Mt. 12, 46.
and standing without they sent unto him calling him, Lu. 8, 19*


ANNOTATIONS CHAP. III.
13. Thou art the Son.) The confession of the truth is not grateful to God,
proceeding from ouery person. The devil acknowledging our Savior to be the
son of God, was bidden hold his peace: Peter's confession of the same was
highly allowed and rewarded. Aug. tract. 10 in ep. Joan. Ser. 30. 31. de verb.
Apostoli. Sermons, Service, and prayer of Heretics.
Therefore neither Heretics sermons must be heard, no not though they preach
the truth. So is it of their prayer and service, which being never so good in
it self, is not acceptable to God out of their mouths, yea it is no better
then the howling of wolves. Hiero. in 7 Os^^.

14. Twelve.) The number of Twelve, mystical.
This number of twelve Apostles is mystical and of great importance (as
appears * by the choosing of Mathias into Judas place to make up again this
number) prefigured in the 12 Patriarchs, Act. 1^.
Genesis 49. the 12 Princes of the children of Israel, Number. 1. the 12 fountains
found in Elim, Exodus 15. the 12 precious stones in the Rational of Aaron, Exodus
39. the 12 Spies sent by Moses, Number. 13. the 12 stones taken out of Jordan
whereof the Altar was made, Iosu. 4. the 12 loves of Proposition, Leuit. 24.
etc. Anselm. in Mt. c. 10. And these are the 12 foundations of heavenly
Jerusalem. Apoc. 21.

16. Peter.) Peter in numbering the Twelve is always the first, and his name
is so given him for signification of his calling to be the * Rock or
Foundation of the Church under Christ: Peter's preeminence,
as here also the name BOANERGES is given to other two Apostles for
signification, Mt. 1^.
and so names else where in the old Testament and in the new.

24. Kingdom against kingdom.) Dissension of Heretics.
As this is true in all Kingdoms and Commonweals where Civil dissension
reigns, Greg. li. ^ ep. 3.
so is it specially verified in heresies and Heretics, which have always
divisions among them selves as the plague of God, for dividing them selves and
others from the Church.

29. Eternal sin.) Venial sins forgiven after death.
That which is here called eternal, Mt. 12, 32.
is (as S. Matthew expresses it) that which shall neither be remitted in this
life, nor in the life to come. Where we learn by S. Mark, that there are also
sins not eternal: and by S. Matthew, that they are such, as shall be forgiven
either here, or in the life to come.

33. Who is my mother?) Spiritual kindred and business preferred before carnal
and worldly.
Neither is it here said, that he had no mother, as some upon these words
falsely gather: nor ingratitude to our parents is taught us by this answer: but
we be hereby admonished to prefer the spiritual mother of the Faithful, which
is the Church Catholic, and our brethren in her, and their spiritual good,
above our carnal parents or kin. For so our Master being occupied here about
heavenly things, accounted al them his mother and brethren, which did the will
of his Father. The B. Virgin without sin.
in which number our Lady his mother was also included, for she did his fathers
will. Aug. ep. 38. Yea and above al others, because she had so much grace given
her that she never sinned not so much as venially in all her life. Aug. de not.
and great c. 36.

CHA. IIII.
The parables (in which he speaks to the Jews, because they were
reprobate) he expounds to his Disciples, shevving that in his sovving, three
parts of four shall perish, through the fault of the hearers. 21 and that his
servants, must confess their faith, 24 and use their gifts (contrary to those
stony and thorny hearers.) 26 and that his Church (notvvithstanding the loosing
of those three parts of the seed) shall be brought by his providence to the
harvest, that is, to the end of the world: 30 growing over al in time, though
in the beginning it ^e as the little mustard scede* 35 and though such tempests
of persecution in the sea of this world do rise against it.

Mt. 13, 1.
and a great multitude was gathered together unto him, Lu. 8, 4.
so that he went up into a boat, and sat in the sea, and all the multitude
about the sea was upon the land:

Behold, the sour went forth to sovv.

Such as be out of the Church, though they hear and read never so much, they
cannot understand.
them that are without, al things are done in parables: Esa. 6, 9
and not see: and hearing they may hear, and not understand: lest at any time
they should be converted and their sins be forgiven them. Bed. in 4 Marc.
in them selves, but are temporal: afterward when tribulation is risen and
persecution for the word, forthwith they are scandalized.

Lu. 8, 16
* Comes a candel to be put Christ came not to teach his doctrine in corners
and hucker mucker, as Heretics do, but to lighten the whole world therewith.
under a bushel, or under a bed? and not to be put upon the candlestick?

Lu. 8, 18
See what you hear. * In what measure you mete, it shall be measured to you
again, and more shall be given to you that hear.
to you.'



Mat. 13, 31.
To what shall we liken the kingdom of God? or to what parable shall we
compare it? Luc. 13* 19.
which when it is sown in the earth, is less then all the seeds that are
in the earth:



Mt. 8, 23
when evening was come, Lu. 8, 22
* Let us pass over to the other side. were other boats with him.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. IIII.
12. Lest they should be converted.] These speeches here and else where, God is
not author of sin, but man's own will.
we must not so understand as though he spoke in parables of purpose and to
this end, that the hearers might not understand, lest they should be converted:
which were as much to say as that he would not have them understand, nor be
converted: but we must learn the true sense of this very place in S. Matthew
and in the Acts, Mt. 13.
where our Savior and S. Paul speak thus, They have heard heavily, and have
shut their eyes, Act. (...).
left perhaps they may see, and understand, and be converted, and I heal them.
Whereby it is evident, that the speaking in parables was not the cause (for
many beside the Apostles heard and understood) but them selves would not hear,
and understand, and be converted: and so were the cause of their own wilful
and obstinate infidelity. And therefore also he spoke in parables, because they
were not worthy to understand, as the other to whom he expounded them.

27. And sleep.] The Church, and Christ's doctrine, (sleep we, wake we)
increases by the great providence of God. 1. Cor. 3.
only the preachers must sow, and plant, and water, and * God will give the
increase, nourishing the seed in men's hearts. And therefore we may not give
over, or be impatient and solicitous, if we have not always good success: but
doing our duty, commit the rest to God.

31. Mustard seed.] The Church visibly increasing.
If the Church and Truth had more and more decayed and been obscured after the
Apostles time unto ours, as the Heretics hold: then had it been great in the
beginning, and small afterward: where this Parable says contrary, that it was a
mustard seed first, and afterward a great tree* vide Chrysostom. to. 5 contra
Gentiles in vita S. Babylae Mart.

32. The birds.] Christian religion wonderfully spreading.
Of al sects or doctrine, Christ's religion at the beginning was the smallest,
and most contemptible: but the success thereof far passed al man's doctrine:
in so much that afterward all the wisest and greatest of the world made their
residence and rest therein.

CHAP. V.
To the Gerasens (and in them to al men) Christ manifests how the Devil of
his malice would use them, if he would permit: 17 and yet they like not their
Saviors presence. 21 A woman Gentil, that began her sickness when the Jews
daughter began her life (signifying Abraham's time) he cures by the way as he
was coming to heal the Jews: And even then the Jews do die, but yet them
also he will revive, as here the Jews daughter.

Mat. 8, 28.
Luc. 8 26.
immediately there met him out of the sepulchers a man in an unclean spirit,
It is not with out mystery that the devils desired, and Christ suffered them
to enter into the swine,signifying that filthy livers be meet dwelling places
for devils. Aug. tract. 6 in ep. Io.
into the swine, that we may enter into them.

Mat. 9, 18.
a great multitude assembled together unto him, and he was about the sea.
Archsynagogue, chief gouerner of a Synagogue.
Luc. 8, 42.
named Iairus: and seeing him, he falls down at his feet,



from
to' the Archsynagogue, saying, That thy daughter is dead: why do thou
trouble the Master any further? To Christ, that can more easily raise a dead
man then we can do one that is but a sleep, death is but sleep. Aug. de
verb. Do. S^r. 44.
sleeps. Talithacumi, which is being interpreted, wenche (I say to thee)
arise. the we^che rose up, and walked. and she was twelve years old: and they
were astonished with great astonishment.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. V.
3. Could bind him.] We see here that mad men which have extraordinary
strength, are many times possessed of the devil: Profane and natural men.
as there is also a deaf and a dumme devil, and unclean spirits, which work
these effects in men, possessing their bodies. Al which things infidels and
carnal men following only nature and reason, attribute to natural causes: and
the less faith a man has, the less he believes that the devil works such
things.

2^. If I shall touch.] The touch of Relikes.
So the good Catholic says, If I might but touch one of his Apostles, yea
one of his Apostles napkins, yea but the shade of one of his Saints, I should
be better for it. Act. 5. and 19. See S. Chrysostom. to. 5 cont. Gent. in principio.
in vit. Babyla. Yea S. Basil says, Basil. in Ps. 115.
He that touches the bone of a martyr, receives in some degree holiness of
the grace or virtue that is therein.

30. Virtue.] Virtue to heal this woman's malady, proceeded from Christ,
though she touched but his coat: so when the Saints by their Relikes or
garments do miracles, the grace and force thereof comes from our Savior,
they being but the means or instruments of the same.

36. Only believe.] Scripture fondly applied to prove only faith.
It is our common speech, when we require one thing specially, though other
things also be as necessary, and more necessary. As the Physicion to his
patient, Only have a good heart: when he must also keep a diet, and take
potions, things more requisite. So Christ in this great infidelity of the
Jews, required only that they would believe he was able to do such a cure, V.
5.
such a miracle, and then he did it: otherwise it follows in the next Chapter,
He could not do miracles there because of their incredulity. Again, for this
faith he gave them here and in all like places health of body, which they
desired, and therefore he says not, Thy faith has justified thee: but, has
made the safe or whole. Again this was the fathers faith, which could not
justify the daughter. Whereby it is most evident, that this Scripture, and the
like, are folishely abused of the Heretics to prove that only faith justifies.

41. Wenche arise.] Christ's miracles, besides that they be wonders and ways to
show his power, be also significatiue: By three dead, are signified three kind
of sinners.
as these which he corporally raised from death, Aug. de verb. Do. ser. 44.
put us in mind of his raising our souls from sin. The Scripture makes
special mention only of three raised by our Savior, of which three, this wench
is one within the house: an other, the widows son in Naim, now carried out
toward the grave: the third, Lazarus having been in the grave four days, and
therefore stinking. Which diversity of dead bodies, signify diversity of dead
souls, some more desperate then other, some past al man's hope, and yet by the
grace of Christ to be revived and reclaimed.

CHAP. VI.
In his own country (signifying the reprobate Jews) he is contemned, and
therefore works little in respect. 6 His Apostles preach every where and work
miracles, so that King Herod (who shamefully killed John Baptist) and others
are stricken with great admiration. 30 After John's death he goes into the
Desert, where great concurse being unto him, he feeds 5000 with five loaves.
46 And after he has prayed long in the mountain, he walks upon the sea. 53
And with the very touch of his garments hemme he heals innumerable.

Mt. 13, 54.
he went into his country: and his Disciples followed him. Lu. 4, 16
and what wisdoms is this that is given to him, and such virtues as are
wrought by his hands?

Mt. 10, 1
and began to send them two and two, Lu. 9, 1.
and gave them power over unclean spirits. Ia. 5, 14.
and * anointed with A preparatiue to the Sacrament of extreme unction. Iac. 5.
oil many sick, and healed them.

Mt. 14, 1
That John the Baptist is risen again from the dead, Lu. 9, 7.
and therefore virtues work in him.

The Gospel upon the decollation of S. John Baptist Aug. 29.
and bound him in prison for Herodias the wife of He might and should by
Moses law have married his brothers wife, if he had been dead without issue:
but this Philip was yet alive, and had also this daughter that daunced.
Philippe his brother, because he had married her. Leu. 18, 16. 20, 21.
* It is not lavvful for thee to have thy brothers wife. came in, and had
daunced, and pleased Herod, and them that sat with him at the table: the King
said to the damsel, Ask of me what thou vvilt, and I vvil give it thee,

Lu. 9, 10
made relation to him of al things that they had done and taught. Mt. 14, 13.
they went into a desert place apart.

Mt. 14, 15.
Lu. 9, 12
Io. 6, 5.
that going out into the next villages and towns, they may bie them selves
meats to eat. he blessed, and brake the loaves, and gave to his Disciples to
set before them: and the two fishes he divided to al.

Mt. 14, 23.
he went into the mountain to pray. The Gospel on Saturday after Ashwenesday.
Io. 6, 16.
the boat was in the mids of the sea, and him self alone on the land.

Mt. 14, 34.
they came into the land of Genezareth, and set to the shore.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. VI.
^. The carpenter.) As his countrie-folkes seeing him not only to be a poor
man, but also knowing (as they thought) his whole parentage to be but vulgar,
not reaching to his Godhead and divine generation, did take offense or scandal
of him: so do the Heretics take like offense at his parson in the B.
Sacrament, saying, why, this is not God: for it is bread made of corn by suck
a baker, of the same moulde that such a lofe is: not marking that it was not
made Christ by baking, but by Consecration, and the virtue of Christ's words.

3. They were scandalized.] Chrysostom. ho. 49, in Mt.
This scandal rose partly of envy of his equals by birth, who reputing them
selves as good as he, took skorne to be taught of him. Whereupon Christ says,
A Prophet is not without honor but in his own country: Lu. 4, 25.
signifying (as it is plain in Luke) the malice and envy of the Jews his
country men in refusing him (Io. 1.) and that the Gentiles would more esteem
of him.

5. He could not.] It is said that he could not work miracles there, not
meaning that he was not able, but that on their part there wanted apt
disposition to receive them. And therefore he would not of co^gruity work
there, where their incredulity was so great, that it would not have profited
them. Marc. 5, 36.
And for this cause he says * else where to them that will see and enjoy his
miracles, Only believe.

8. Not two coats.] He forbids superfluites, and to careful provision of
bodily things, when they are about Gods service in gaining souls. Mt. 10.
And for the contrariety that seems here and in S. Matthew, understand that
there he forbids them to carry rod or staff to defend them selves, here he
permits a vvalking rod or staff to lean and stay upon: there he forbids
shoes to cover all the foot, such as we wear: here he permits sandals,
that is such as had soles only, which the poor commonly vvare in ^evvry, and
now some religious men. See S. Augustins opinion li. ^ c. 30 de consensu
Euang. to. 4.

13. With oile] In the words of the commission oil is not mentioned, and yet
it is certain by this their using of oil, that either Christ did then appoint
them to use it, or they might take it up of them selves, by virtue of the
general commission.

13. With Oil). By this it is clear that not only the Apostles or other may
have power to work miracles, by their only word and invocation of Christ's
name, but also by application of creatures: which creatures also have a
miraculous medicinal virtue to heal diseases.

CHAP. VII.
The masters of Jerusalem coming so far to carpe him 6 he charge with
traditions, partly frivolous, 9 partly also contrary to Gods commandments.
14 And to the people he yeldeth the reason of that which they carped, 17 and
again to his disciples, showing the ground of the Jewish washing (to wit,
that meats otherwise de^i^e the soul) to be false. 24 But by and by among the
Gentiles, in a woman he finds wonderful faith, upon her therefore he
bestows the crumme that she asked, 32 returning (because the time of the
Gentiles was not yet come) to the Jews with the loaf. 32 Where he shows
his compassion toward mankind so deaf and du^me, 36 and of the people is
highly magnified.

Mt. 15, 1
coming from Jerusalem. Esa. 29, 13.
as it is written, This people honors me They that say well or teach and
preach well, or have Christ and his word in their mouth, and live naughtily,
be touched in this place.
with their lips, but their heart is far from me. Exo. 20, 12.
Honor thy father and thy mother. and, He that shall curse father or mother,
dying let him dye. Leu. 20, 9.
Corban (which is a gift) whatsoever proceeds from me, shall profit thee:

See the first annotation upon this chapter.
common.

Mt. 15, 21.
and entering into a house, he would that no man should know, and he could not
be hid. of the children.

of Tire and Sidon, he came
of Tire, The Gospel upon the 11 Sunday after Pentecost.
he came by Sidon' to the sea of Galilee through the mids of the coasts of
Decapolis. Ephphetha, which is, Be thou opened.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. VII.
2. Common.] Common and unclean is al one. For the Jews were commanded by
the Law to eat certain kinds of meats only, and not al indifferently: and
because these were separated from other meats, and as it were sanctified to
their use, they called the other common and profane: and because the Law
calls those clean and these unclean, thereof it is, that unclean and
common is al one, as in this Chapter often, and Act. 10.

7. Precepts of men.] Men's ordinances which be repugnant to Gods
commandments, be here condemned: Commandments of men.
as al observations not edifying nor profitable to the fulfilling of Gods
commandments, be vain and superfluous: as many observations of the Pharisees
were then, and the like traditions of Heretics be now. for howsoever they
brag of Scriptures, al their manner of administration and ministry is their
own tradition and invention without al Scripture and warrant of Gods word. But
the traditions of the Apostles and Ancients, and all the precepts of holy Church
we are commanded to keep, Traditions.
as things not prescribed by man, but by the Holy Ghost. Act. 15, ^^. 41. 2
Thessal. ^, 61.

11. Gift*] To give to the Church or Altar is not forbidden, but the forsaking
of a man's parents in their necessity, Duty to parents.
pretending or excusing the matter upon his giving that which should relieve
them, to God or to the Altar, that is impious and unnatural. And these
Pharisees teaching children so to neglect their duties to their parents, did
wickedly.

15. Nothing entering into a man.] As these words of our Savior do not
import, that the Jews then might have eaten of those meats which God forbade
them: no more do they now, that we Christians may eat of meats which the
Church forbids us. Abstine^ce from certain meats.
And yet both then and now al meats are clean, and nothing entering into a
man, defiles a man. For neither they then, nor we now abstain, for that any
meats are of their nature abominable, or defile the eaters, but they for
signification, we for obedience and chastisement of our bodies.

33. Spitting.) Christ's spittle works miracles.
Not only by Christ's word and vvil, but also by ceremony and by application
of external creatures which be holy, miracles are wrought. as by Christ's
spittle, which was not part of his person, being a superfluity of his body,
but yet most holy. Theophyl. in 7 Marci.

34 Ephphetha.) Exorcismes and other ceremonies in Baptism.
The Church does most godly imitate and use these very words and ceremonies
of our Savior in the Exorcismes before Baptism, to the healing of their
souls that are to be baptized, as Christ here healed the bodily infirmity and
the disease of the soul together. Ambros. li. 1 de Sacram. c 1.

CHAP. VIII.
Of compassion he feeds the people, 4000 with seven loaves. 10 After al
which miracles as though they were yet insufficient to prove him to be
Christ, the obstinate Pharisees do require some miracle from heaven. 13
Whereupon forsaking them, he vvarneth his Disciples to bevvare of the leaven of
their doctrine, neither to fear want of necessaries. 22 He heals a blind
man by degrees and with ceremonies. 27 Peter confesses him (though men all this while had not learned so far) to be Christ. 31 and by and by he
reuealeth to them his passion, 32 rebuking also Peter for dissuading it, 34 and
showing that it is a thing wherein all that vvil be saved (namely in time of
persecution) must follow him.

Mt. 15, 32.
and had not what to eat: The Gospel upon the 6 Sunday after Pentecost.
calling his Disciples together, he says to them, Great fervor and devotion
in the good people, and exceeding force in our Masters preaching, that made
the^ abide fasting so long to hear his divine sermons.
three days they now endure with me, neither have what to eat.

Mt. 15, 39. 16, 1.
he came into the quarters of Dalmanutha.

Mar. 6, 38.
and having ears hear you not? Neither do you remember? Mr. 8, 5.
Twelve.

Our Savior used to work much by touching: that we may learn not to contemn
the corporal and external application of holy things, nor to challenge by the
spirit and faith only, as Heretics do.
touch him.

Mt. 16, 13.
and in the way he asked his Disciples, Lu. 9, 18
saying to them, Whom do men say that I am?

together with his Disciples, he said to them, If any man vvil follow me, let
him deny him self, and take up his cross, and follow me.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. VIII.
6. Gave to his disciples.] He serves the people not immediately him self, but
by the Apostles ministry: to teach us that we must receive Christ's
Sacraments and doctrine, not at our own hand, but of his Priests and our
Pastors.

7. Blessed them.] (...).
So is it in some ancient Greek copies, agreeable to our Latin, and in S. Luke
expressly in the common Greek text, Luc. 9, 16.
that he blessed the five loaves and the two fishes: which must be always
marked against the Heretics, Blessing of creatures works an effect in the^.
which deny this blessing to pertain to the creatures, but ^eine it always
to be referred to God for thanks giving. For if it were so, he would have said
grace but once for that whole refection: but he did severally bless both the
bread first, and afterward the fishes also, Genesis 1, 22* 28.
multiplying them by his said blessing (as * he did mankind and other creatures
in the beginning by blessing them) and so working effectually some change or
alteration in the very creatures them selves.

35. For me and the Gospel.] What is to suffer for the Gospel.
By the Gospel is signified, not only the four Evangelists, but al
Scriptures, and whatsoever Christ said that is not in Scripture: for he says
in this very place, He that shall be ashamed of my words, the Son of man will
be ashamed of him etc. Neither his own words only, Luc. 9.
but whatsoever the Apostles taught in word or writing: for our Savior says,
He that despises you, despises me. For defense of any of al these and of
every Article of the Catholic faith, we ought to die, and this is to lose our
life for Christ and his Gospel.

36. Gain the whole world.] Doing against our own conscience.
Let such note this, that for fear or flattery of the world co^descend to obey
the unjust laws of men touching religion, against their own consciences: and
be content for the rest of a few days of this life, and for saving their
temporal goods, to lose their soul and the joys of heaven.

CHAP. IX.
The more to confirm them, he gives them in his Transfiguration a sight of
his glory, whereunto Suffering does bring, 9 and then again does inculcate
his Passion. 14 A Devil also he casts out, which his Disciples (upon whom
therefore the perverse Scribes triumphed in his absence) could not, for lack of
fasting and praying. 30 Being yet in Galilee, he reuealeth more about his
Passion. 33 And (because in the way to Capharnaum they contended for the
Primacie (he teaches them that humility is the way to Primacie before God: 38
bidding them also, not to prohibit such as be not against them: nor to give
scandal to any one of the faithful. and on the other side, the faithful to
avoid them by whom they may be scandalized and fall, be they never so near
unto them.

Mt. 16, 27. 17, 1
Amen I say to you, that there be some of them that stand here, Lu. 9, 27
which shall not taste of death, until they see the kingdom of God coming in
power. See the Annotations upon the 17 of S. Matthew.
And after six days JESUS ^aketh Peter and James and John: and brings them
alone into a high mountain apart, and was transfigured before them. The law
and the Prophets join with Christ and his Gospel: the one signified by Moses,
the other by Elias. By whose apparitions here we also learn that sometime
there may be personal intercourse betwixt the living and the dead, though not
ordinarily.
Elias with Moses: and they were talking with JESUS. when he shall be risen
from the dead.

Mal. 4, 5
that * Elias must come first? as
hovv' it is written of the Son of man, that he shall suffer many things and
be contemned.

Mt. 17, 14.
he savv a great multitude about them, and the Scribes questioning with them.
Lu. 9, 37
was astonished, and much afraid: and running to him, saluted him. The Gospel
upon wenesday in the Imber week of September.
What do you question of among you? said, O incredulous generation, how long
shall I be with you? how long shall I suffer you? bring him unto me. Note the
great force of prayer, and fasting.
by prayer and fasting.

Mt. 17, 22.
neither would he that any man should know. Lu. 9, 21
and said to them, That the Son of man shall be betrayed into the hands of
men, and they shall kill him, and being killed the third day he shall rise again.

Mt. 18, 1
Who, when he was in the house, Lu. 9, 46.
asked them, What did you treat of in the way?

Lu. 9* 49.
saying, Master we savv one casting out devils in thy name, who follows
not us, and we prohibited him. Reward for alms deeds, whereby it is evident
they be meritorious.
revvard. To give scandal by our life to the weak in faith, is a great sin,
specially in Priests, Preachers, and Princes.
scandalize one of these little ones believing in me: it is good for him rather
if a millstone were put about his neck, and he were cast into the sea. Leu.
2, 13


ANNOTATIONS CHAP. IX.
4. Elias with Moses.) Elias. Moses.
Moses represents the persons of all the Saints that shall be departed this
life when Christ comes in his Majesty to judgment: And Elias (who was then
living) figureth the holy men that shall then be found alive when he comes in
glory. Who both shall then begin to reign with Christ in glory. Beda in 9.
Marc.

13. Elias also is come.) Elias and John Baptist Eremites.
Elias was Zealous for Gods Law, a great reprehender of sin, and an Eremite,
and shall be the Precursor of Christ in his second Aduent: So was John before
his first Aduent, a Zelatour, a Corrector, an Eremite, and his Precursor.
Theod. in ^aten. Thoma super hunc locum. See S. Hierom in the life of Paul the
eremite, that both Elias and John Baptist were counted principal professors
of that life.

38. In thy name.) The name of JESUS works miracles.
Miracles are wrought sometime by the name of JESUS, whatsoever the men be,
when it is for the proof of a truth or for the glory of God. In so much that
Julian the Apostata him self did drive away devils with the sign of the
Cross: as S. Gregory Nazianzene writes orat. 1 in Julian. Theodoret. li. ^
c. 3 hist. And so also Heretics may do miracles among the Heathen, to prove
any article of the Christian faith: but they never did nor ever shall work any
miracle to prove any of their erroneous opinions. as, to prove that Christ is
not really in the B. Sacrament.

CHAP. X.
He answers the tempting Pharisees (and again his disciples afterward) that
the case of a man with his wife shall be (as in the first institution) utterly
indissoluble. THE THIRD part of this Gospel, Christ's coming into Iewrie
toward his Passion.
13 He blesses children. 17 He shows what is to be done to get life
everlasting. 21 What also for a rich man, to be perfect: 2^ as also what
passing reward they shall have that do so in time of persecution. 32 He
reuealeth more to his Disciples touching his Passion: 35 bidding the two
ambitious suitors to think rather of suffering with him: 41 and teaching us in
the rest of his Disciples, not to be grieved at our Ecclesiastical Superiors,
considering they are (as he was him self) to toil for our salvation. 46 Then
going out of Jericho, he gives sight to a blind man.

Mt. 19, 1
he comes into the coasts of Ievvrie beyond Jordan: and the multitudes
assemble again unto him. and as he was accustomed, again he taught them.
Deuteronomy. 24, 1.
What did Moses command you? Genesis 1, 27.
Genesis 2, 24.
The obligation betwixt man and wife is so great, that during life it can not
be broken.
let not man separate.

Mt. 19, 9
Mt. 5, 32
Whosoever dimisseth his wife and marries an other: Lu. 16, 18.
commits aduoutrie upon her. 1. Cor. 7, 11.
she commits aduoutrie.

Mt. 19, 13.
that he might touch them. And the Disciples threatened those that offered
them. Lu. 18, 15.
Our Savior gave the children his blessing.
blessed them.

* Good Master, Mt. 19, 16.
what shall I do that I may receive life everlasting? Lu. 18, 18.
God. Note that the keeping of Gods commandments procures life everlasting.
commandments, Exo. 20, 13.
* Commit not aduoutrie, Kill not, Steal not, Bear not false witness, do no
fraud, Honor thy father and mother. This is counsel of prefectio^ (not a
precept) which the Religious professing and keeping voluntary poverty, do
follow.
go, sell whatsoever thou have, and give to the poor, and thou shall have
treasure in heaven: and come, follow me. Exceeding happy be they that can
forsake their temporal things for religion.
Amen I say to you, there is no man which has left house, or brethren, or
sisters, or father, or mother, or children, or lands for me and for the
Gospel: Mt. 19. 30.


Lu. 13, 30.
and JESUS went before them, and they were astonished: and following were
afraid. Mt. 20, 17.
And * taking again the Twelve, he began to tell them the things that should
befall him. Lu. 18, 31.
and the Son of man shall be betrayed to the chief Priests, and to the
Scribes and Ancients, and they shall condemn him to death, and shall deliver
him to the Gentiles,

Mt. 20, ^0.
saying, Master, we vvil that what thing soever we shall ask, thou do it
to us. Mt. 20, 25.
says to them, * You know that they which seem to rule over the gentiles,
ouerrule them: and their Princes have power over them. Lu. 22, 25.


Mt. 20, 29.
and when he departed from Jericho, and his Disciples, and a very great
multitude, the son of Timaeus, Lu. 18, 35.
Bar-timaeus the blind man, sat by the way side begging.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. X.
4. Permitted.) Toleration and permission of evil.
Some things are permitted, though not approved or allowed, to avoid greater
inconveniences. No man may do evil for any cause, but he may permit other men's
evils for diverse causes: Aug. ep. 119 c. 19.
as God him self does, who can do no evil. So does the Prince and
Commonwealth permit lesser evils to eschew greater, and so may the Holy Church
much more (as S. Augustine says she does) being placed among much chafe and
much cockle, tolerate many things: and yet whatsoever is against faith and good
life, she neither approves, nor dissembleth with silence, nor commits.

11. And marries an other.) That which S. Matthew uttered more obscurely, and
is mistaken of some, Marriage after divorce unlawful.
as though he meant that for fornication a man might put away his wife and
marry an other, Lu. 16, 18.
is here by this Evangelist (as also by S. Luke) put out of doubt, generally
auouching, that whosoever puts away his wife and marries an other,
commits aduoutrie. Aug. li. 1 de adult. coniug. c, 11 and sequentibus.

18. None is good.) None is entirely, substantially, and of him self good, but
God: though by participation of Gods goodness, men are truly also called good.

25. A rich man.) He is here called a rich man that has his confidence (as
here is expressed) in his treasure, and had rather forsake his faith and duty
to God, then lose them* as al they which live in Schism or Heresy to save
their goods.

30. An hundred times so much.) Then reward in this life that forsake ought for
Gods sake.
Sometime God does so bless men also in wordly benefits that have forsaken al
for him, Hiero. in 19 Mat.
as S. Gregory, S. Augustine, and S. Paulinus: but the principal meaning is, *
that he will give to such men in this life abundance of grace and spiritual
comfort and contentatio^ and joy of conscience (as they feel which have
experience) the which spiritual gifts excede the temporal commodities more
then an hundred sold* in so much that he that has fully forsaken but small
things for religion, would not forsake religion to have all the world.

CHAP. XI.
Being now come to the place of his Passion, THE fourth part of this Gospel,
the Holy week of his Passion in Jerusalem.
he enters with triumph as their Christ. 12 He curses that fruitless leafie
tree. 15 He shows his Zeal for the house of God: for which the Rulers seek
his destruction. 24 He exhorts his Disciples to stedfastnes of faith, and to
forgive their enemies. 27 He avouches his power by the witness of John who was
a man sent of God.

Mt. 21, 1.
he sends two of his Disciples, PALME-Sunday.
Lu. 19, 20.
Go into the town that is against you, Io. 12, 15
and immediately entering in thither, you shall find a colt tied, upon which no
man yet has sitten: loose him, and bring him. Al these voluntary duties were
grateful to our Savior, and so be the like done to him in the B. Sacrament.
many spread their garments in the way: and others did cut boughs from the
trees, and stravved them in the way. Ps. 117, 26.
cried saying, Hosanna, blessed is be that comes in the name of our Lord.

MONDAY.
he was an hungered. Mt. 21, 19.


And * when he was entered into the temple, Mt. 21, 12.
he began to cast out them that sold and bought in the temple, and the tables
of the bankers, Lu. 19, 45.
and the chaires of them that sold pigeons he ouerthrevv. Esa. 56, 7.
Is it not written, That my house shall be called the house of prayer to al
nations? But you have made it adenne of thieves. Ier. 7, 11
they sought how they might destroy him. for they were afraid of him, because
the whole multitude was in admiration upon his doctrine.

Mt. 21, 20.
they savv the figtree withered from the roots. TVESDAY.
The Gospel for S. Gregorius Thaumaturgus Nouemb. 17. And in a Votiue Mass for
any necessity.
And JESUS answering says to them, Have Faith of God is to believe that he is
able, and that he will do it if it be expedient, and no impediment on our part.
faith of God. God never forgiueth sins to him that pardons not his enemies
from his heart. Whereby it is evident that more is required then only faith.
If so be that you vvil not forgive, neither vvil your father that is in
heaven, forgive you your sins.

And * when he vvalked in the temple, Mt. 21, 23.
there come to him the chief Priests and the Scribes and the Ancients, Lu.
20, 2.
In what power do thou these things? and who has given thee this power,
that thou should do these things?

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XI.
16. Vessel through the temple.] Profaning of Gods Church.
He could not abide to see the Temple of God profaned, no nor suffered those
things to be done in it, which otherwise were not unlawful but honest, if they
had been done in dew place. How much less can he abide the profaning of
Churches now with Heretical service and preaching of heresy and blasphemy?

17. D^nne of thieves.] If the Temple was then a den of thieves, because of
profane and secular merchandise: how much more now, when the house appointed
for the Holy Sacrifice and Sacrament of the Body of Christ, is made a den
for the Ministers of Caluins bread?

CHAP. XII.
He foretells to the Jews in a parable their reprobation most worthy, and
the vocation of the Church of the Gentiles in their place, 10 him self being the
headstone thereof. 13 He defeateth the snare of the Pharisees and Herodians,
about paying tribute to Casar: 18 answers also the invention of the Sadducces
against the Resurrection: 28 also the opposition of a Scribe. 35 And so having
put all the busy sects to silence, he turns and poseth them on the other
side, because they imagined Christ should be no more but a man. 38 Bidding the
people to beware of the Scribes, being ambitious and hypocrites. 41 He
commends the poor widovv for her two mites, above al.

Es. 5, 1.
This man, is God the Father. This vineyard, is (as Esaias says 5. 1.) the house
of Israel. The servants sent, are Moses and the Prophet^, who^ the Jews did
diuersely afflict and persecute.
A man planted a vineyard and made a hedge about it, Mt. 21. 33.
and dug a trough, Lu. 20, 9.
and built a tower, and let it out to husbandmen: and went forth into a
strange country. of the husbandmen, of the fruit of the vineyard. His Son
is CHRIST our Savior, who^ the Jews crucified out of the city of Jerusalem,
as it were casting him out of the vineyard.
son most dear: him also he sent unto them last saying, That they will
reverence my son. The Jews and their guides to whom the vineyard was set,
destroyed: and Gods vineyard given to the Apostles and their Successors in the
Gentiles.
He vvil come and destroy the husbandmen: and vvil give the vineyard to others.
The CHRIST is become the corner stone of the Synagogue and the Church in which
the faithful both of the Jews and Gentiles are contained.
stone which the builders rejected, Ps. 117, 22.
the same is made the head of the corner:

Mt. 22, 15.
that they should entrappe him in his word. Lu. 26, 20.
say to him, Master, we know that thou art a true speaker, and carest not
for any man: for thou do not look upon the person of men, but teach the
way of God in truth, is it lavvful to give tribute to Caesar: or shall we not
give it?

Mt. 22, 23.
and they asked him saying, Master, Lu. 20, 27.
that if any man's brother die, and leave his wife, Act. 23, 6.
and leave no children, his brother shall take his wife and raise up seed to
his brother. Deu. 25, 5.
and the first took a wife, and died leaving no issue. died. Exo. 3, 6
saying, I am the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob?

Mt. 22, 34.
and seeing that he had well answered them, asked him which was the first
commandment of al. Deu. 6, 5
That the first commandment of al is, Hear Israel: the Lord thy God, is one
God. This is the first commandment. Leu. 19, 18.
Thou shall love they neighbor as thy self. An other commandment greater
then these there is not. This excellency of Charity teaches us that faith
only is not sufficient.
to love his neighbor as him self is a greater thing then al holocaustes and
sacrifices.

Mt. 22, 41.
said, teaching in the temple, How do the Scribes say, that Christ is the
son of David? Lu. 20, 41.
Our Lord said to my Lord, Ps. 109, 1.
sit on my right hand, until I put thine enemies the foote-stoole of thy feet.

shall receive larger judgment.

Lu. 21, 2.
beheld how the multitude did cast money into the treasury, and many rich men
did cast in much. God does accept alms that are correspondent to every man's
ability* and the more able, the more must a man give.
more then all that have cast into the treasury.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XII.
17. To God.] God first to be served, and (...) the Prince.
These men were very circumspect and wary to do al duties to Caesar, but of
their duty to God they had no regard. So Heretics, to flatter temporal
Princes, and by them to uphold their Heresies, do not only inculcate men's
duty to the Prince, dissembling that which is dew to God: but also give to
the Prince more then dew, and take from God his right and duty. But Christ
allowing Caesar his right, warns them also of their duty toward God. And
that is it which Catholics inculcate, Obey God, do as he commands, Serve
him first, and that the Prince.

19. His brother shall take.) Leu. 18, 16
Mark well here, Marying the brothers wife.
that the Law which says, Thou shall (...) marry thy brothers wife, Deu. 25, 5.
is not such as admits no dispensation, as though this marriage we^^ against
nature. For here the same Law says, that in some case, the brother not only
might, but then was bound to marry his brothers wife.

24. Not knovving the Scriptures.) Many truths deduced out of scripture, which
Heretics see not.
who would have thought that by this place of Scripture alleged by Christ, the
Resurrection were proved? and yet we see that Christ does hereby deduce it, and
charge these great Doctors and Masters (which arrogated to them selves the
knowledge of Scriptures) that it is their ignorance, that they knew not so to
deduce it. No marvel then if the Holy Doctors and Catholic Church make the
like deductions sometime and proofs, where the Heretic does not or will not
see so much, therefore no doubt, because he knows no^ the Scriptures, whereof
he boasts so much, nor the sense of the Holy Ghost in them. For example, when
of that place, It shall not be forgiven in this world nor in the world to
come, ancient fathers deduce, that there are sins remitted after this life in
Purgatory. See Mat. 1^. 32.

24. The power of God.) Heretics ignorant and without faith.
Even so do Heretics err two ways: because they know not the Scriptures,
which they interpret contrary to the sense of the whole Church and of all the
ancient fathers: and because they know not the power of God, that as he is able
to raise the self same bodies again, so he can make his body present in many
places: but being altogether faithless and not believing his power, they
dispute of al such matters only by reason and their own imaginations.

CHAP. XIII.
To his Disciples (by occasion of Jerusalem and the Temples destruction) he
foretells, 5 what things shall be before the consummation of the world, as
specially the Churches full preaching unto al nations. 14 Then, what shall be in
the very consvmmation, to wit, Antichrist with his passing great persecution
and seduction, but for a short time. 24 then incontinent the day of Judgment,
28 to our great comfort in those miseries under Antichrist. 32 As for the
moment, to us it pertains not to know it. 33 but rather every man to vvatch*
that we be not unprovided when he comes ^o (...) one particularly by death.

Mt. 24, 1*
Master, See the Annotations upon S. Matthew c. 24.
behold what manner of stones, Lu. 21, 5.
and what kind of buildings.

TVESDAY night.
^ when shall these things be? and what shall be the sign when al these
things shall begin to be consummate? Great vvarres toward the later end.
but the end is not yet. Much persecution of the faithful and Catholic men in
the later end.
Great treachery and many false brethren at the same time.
that speak ye. For it is not you that speak, but the holy Ghost. Constancy
and perseuera^ce necessary in time of persecution.
But he that shall endure unto the end, he shall be saved.

the abomination of desolation, Dan. 9, 27.
standing where it ought not (he that reads, let him understand) then they
that are in Ievvrie, 2 Thessalonians. 2, 4.
let them flee unto the mountains: be. Antichrists reign shall be three years
and a half. Dan. 7. Apoc. 13.
shortened the days.

Ez. 31, 7*
and the moon shall not give her light, Joel. 3, 15*
Dan. 7, 13.
with much power and glory.

Not as though him self knew not, as the Heretics Agnoit^ held: but because he
knew it not for to teach it others, as being not expedient. Ambr. de fide li.
(...).
Son, The Gospel for a Co^fessor that is a Bishop, And on the Anniuersarie of
the creation of a Bishop.
but the Father.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XIII.
4. When shall these things be?] The miseries which did fall before the
destruction of the Temple and city of Jerusalem, Arch heretics be
False-Christs and False-Prophets.
were a resemblance of the extreme calamity that shall befall before the later
day at the time of Antichrist: whereupon Christ's speaks indifferently of both.

6. I am he.] As before destruction of Jerusalem, diverse Seducers arose, and
called them selves Christ's, promising the people deliverance from the fears
and dangers they were in of foreign souldiars: so shall there come many toward
the end of the world, and make them selves Christ's and Authors of Sects, and
shall gaiue many Disciples: as in plain words follows in this chapter v. 22.
There shall rise up False-Christs and False-Prophets etc.

14. The abomination of desolation.] Hyppolyt. li. de Antichristo.
No heresy does so properly and purposely tend to this abomination of
desolation * which by Antichrist shall be achieved, Caluinisme tends to the
abomination of desolation.
as this Caluinisme: which takes away with other Sacraments and external
worship of God, Cypr. de Can. Do. nu. 1.
the very sacrifice of Christ's Body and blood. Which being taken away (as S.
Cyprian says) no religion can remain.

22. Signs and Wonders.] Fasle-Christes and False-Prophets be seducers, who in
the later day by the power of the devil shall seem to work wonders, and yet
men must not believe them. Much less these, which for their false faith can
not show so much as one false miracle.

CHAP. XIIII.
Judas by occasion of Marie Magdalens ointment, THE PASSION according to S.
Mark in these two chapters, is the Gospel at Mass upon Tuesday in the Holy
week.
does sell him to the Council of the Jews 12 After the Paschal lamb he gives
them the bread of life (Io. 6.) in a mystical sacrifice or separation of his
body and blood. 27 and that night, is after his prayer, 43 taken of thee
jews men. Judas being their Captain: is forsaken of the other eleven for
fear: 53 is falsely accused, and impiously condemned of the Jews Council, 65
and shamefully abused of them: 66 and thrice denied of Peter. Al even as the
Scriptures and him self had often foretold.

Mt. 26, 1*
and the chief Priests and the Scribes sought how they might by some vvile
lay hands on him, Lu. 22, 1*
and kill him. TENEBRE Wenesday.


Mat. 26, 6.
and sat at meat, there came a woman having an alabaster box of ointment,
Joan. 12, 3.
of precious spike-narde: and breaking the alabaster-boxe, she povvred it out
upon his head. we have not Christ here needing our alms, as when he co^uersed
upon the earth. See Mat. 26, 11.
me you have not alvvaies.

Mat. 26* 17.
for to betray him to them. Lu. 22, 7*
it, were glad: and they promised him that they would give him money. And he
sought how he might betray him conveniently.

Mt. 26, 17.
the Disciples say to him, MAVNDY Thursday.
Wither vvilt thou that we go, Lu. 22, 7*
and prepare for thee to eat the Pasche? Io. 13, 21*
Ps. 40, ^0.
* as it is written of him, but vvo to that man by whom the Son of man shall
be betrayed. it were good for him, Mt. 26, 26.
if that man had not been borne. Luc. 21, 19.
and said, Take, THIS IS MY BODY. Al drank, to wit, all the twelve, for more
were not present. Whereby is evident that the words in S. Mat. (26, 27)
Drink ye al of this, were spoken to all the Apostles only, which here are said
that they al did drink. And so it is no general commandment to al men.
al drank of it. 1. Cor. 11, 24.
See Annot. in Mat. c. 26, 29.
of the vine until that day when I shall drink it new in the kingdom of God.
THVRSDAY night.


Z^ch. 13, 7.
for it is written, I vvil strike the Pastor, and the sheep shall be
dispersed.



Mt. 26, 47.
comes Judas Iscariote one of the Twelve, Luc. 22, 47.
and with him a great multitude with swords and clubbes, from the chief
Priests and the Scribes and the Ancients. Io. 18, 3.


Io. 2, 19.
* I vvil dissolve this temple made with hand, and in three days vvil I build
an other not made with hand. Dan. 7, 13.
Art thou Christ the son of the blessed God? Here we may see that they were
worthily reprobated and forsaken, according to our Saviors predictio^ by the
parable (Mar. 12) The kingdom of God shall be taken from you etc.
condemned him to be guilty of death.

He fears not afterward Rome the Lady of the world, that in the house of
Caipha^ was afraid of the high Priests wench. Leo in Natiu. Pet. and Pau. ser.
1.
vvoman-seruants of the high Priest.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XIIII.
4. This wast.] Cost religiously bestowed upon Christ and his Church.
Religious offices done to Christ for signification, devotion, or honor sake,
both then in his life, and now in the Holy Sacrament, be of some (under
pretense of better bestowing such things upon the poor) condemned unjustly.

6. Let her alone.] Christ answers for the devout woman, and for defense of
her fact, as we must answer against the ignorant and il men, when they blame
good men for giving their goods to the Church.

22. Bread.] The real presence by Consecration.
This is bread before the Sacramental words, but the Consecration once done,
of bread is made the flesh of Christ. Ambros. li. 4 c. 4 de Sacramentis.

23. Chalice.] Wine and Water is put into the Chalice, but is made blood by
Consecration of the heavenly word: Very blood under the form of wine.
though to avoid the lothsomnesse which would be in the sight of blood, thou
receiuest that which has the likeness and resemblance thereof. Ambr. ibidem.

^^. 24. My body, My blood.] Whosoever believes it not to be true that is
said, he falls from grace and salvation. Faith necessary in the B. Sacrament.
Epiph. in Ancorato. Let us ever give credit to God, and never resist him,
though the thing that he says, seem never so absurd in our imagination, or
far pass al our sense and understanding. For his words can not beguile us,
but our sense may easily be deceived. Seeing therefore that he said, This is my
body, let us never doubt of the matter. Chrysostom ho. 83. in Mat. sub finem.

71. He began to curse.] In this one Apostle, Peter, the first and chief in
the order of Apostles, in whom the Church was figured, both sorts were to be
signified, to wit, the strong and the weak, Peter.
because, without both the Church is not. Aug. ser. 13. de verb. Do. Again,
Our Savior would show by the example of the chief Apostle, that no man ought
to presume of him self, when neither S. Peter could avoid the danger of
mutability. Aug. tract. 66. in Euang. Io. Leo Ser. 9. de Pass. Do.

CHAP. XV.
The chief of the Jews accuse him to Pilate the Gentil. ^ And (he seeking to
deliver him) they persuade the common people (who hitherto were alvvaies
ready to defend him) not only to prefere the murderer Barabbas, but also to
cry Crucifige (to the reprobation of the whole nation.) 16 After many
illusions, 20 he is crucified by the Gentiles. ^9 Which the Jews seeing, do
triumph as if they had now the victory. 33 But even then by many wonderful
works he declares his might, 42 and finally is buried honorably.

GOOD FRIDAY.
consulting together, Mt. 27, 1*
binding JESUS led and delivered him to Pilate. Lu. 23, 1.
Io. 18, 28*
Art thou the King of the Jews? but he answering, said to him, Thou say.

began to require according as alvvaies he did unto them.

Io. 19, 2.
and they call together the whole band: The place of Caluarie.

Esa. 53, 1^.
And with the wicked he was reputed. thou that destroi^st*
'he that destroieth' the temple, and in three days buildest*
builds it: So Heretics say of the B. Sacrament, If it be Christ, let him
save him self from al injuries.
save thy self, coming down from the cross.

Ps. 21, 1.
Eloi, Eloi, lamma-sabacthani? Which is being interpreted, My God, my God, why
have thou See (Mat. c. 27, 46) the blasphemous exposition of Calvin and his
folovvers, and take heed thereof.
forsaken me?



ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XV.
11. Chief Priests.] The Priests of the old Testament.
Heretics abuse the ignorant people with these naughty Priests of the old
Testament, to make that name odious, and to discredit the Priests of Christ in
the new Testament. Eusebius. Ec.
But for these Priests, thou may not marvel that they are so busy against
Christ, * partly because they were such as were intruded by the secular power
of the Roman Emperor, Hist. li. ^ c. 6. ex Iosepho.
and from year to year by bribery and friendship, not by succession according to
the Law of Moses: partly because the time was now come when the old Priesthod
of Aaron should cease, and the new begin according to the order of Melchife
dec: and for these causes cod suffered their former priueleges of wisdom and
judgment and discretion to decay in these later usurpers, and that according
to the Prophet saying, Ezech. 7, 26.
The Law shall perish from the Priest and counsel from the Ancients. But the
Priesthod of the new Testament is to continue unto the end of the world, The
Priesthod of the new Testament.
and has (as being the principal part of the Church) the assistance of the
Holy Ghost for ever promised, Io. 16, 1^.
to teach it al truth: and for Peter the chief Priest thereof under Christ,
Luc. 22. and 10.
our Savior prayed, That his faith should not fail: Executi^g laws against
innocents.
and to the rest he said, He that hears you, hears me.

^^. To satisfy the people.] Pilate should have suffered death, rather then by
other men's provocation or commandment have executed an innocent: as a
Christian judge should rather suffer al extremity, Religious duty tovvard the
bodies of Christ and his Saints.
then give sentence of death against a Catholic man for his faith.

^6. Bying sindon.] This duty done to Christ's body after his departure, was
exceeding meritorious, and is therefore by holy write so often commended for an
example to faithful men, to use al honor and devotion toward the bodies of
Saints and holy persons.

CHAP. XVI.
The third day, to three women at his Sepulcher, an Angel tells that he is
risen, and vvil (as he promised Mar. 14, 28.) show him self in Galile^. 9 The
same day he appears to Marie Magdalene, afterward to two Disciples: yet the
Eleven vvil not believe it, until to them also he appears. 15* To whom
having given commission into al nations, with power also of Miracles, he
ascends, and they plant his Church every where.

Mt. 28, 1*
Marie Magdalene and Marie of James, The Gospel upon Easter day.
and Salome bought spices, Iu. 24, 1*
that coming they might anoint JESUS. Io. 20, 1.
EASTER DAY.
they come to the monument: the sun being now risen. Peter is named in
special (as often else where) for prerogative.
Peter that he goes before you into Galilee: Mr. 14, 28.
there you shall see him, * as he told you.

Io. 20, 16.
* appeared first to Marie Magdalene, Luc. 8, 2.
* out of whom he had cast seven devils. Lu. 24, 13.
did not believe.

of them vvalking, as they were going into the country. Lu. 24, 36.
neither them did they believe.

The Gospel upon the Ascension day.
and he exprobrated their incredulity and hardness of heart, Io. 20, 19.
because they did not believe them that had seen him risen again. Mt. 28, 19.


The Ascension.
* was assumpted into heaven, Lu. 25, 51.
and sat on the right hand of God.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XVI.
1. Bought spices.] The vvomens devotion tovvard Christ's body now dead.
As she did bestow and consume a costly ointment upon his body being yet alive
(c. 14, 3,) Christ him self defending and highly commending the fact against
Judas and other who accounted it to be superfluous and better to be bestowed
otherwise: So not without great devotion and merit, she and these other women
seek to anoint his body dead (though Heretics or other simple persons may
pretend such things to be better bestowed upon the poor) and therefore, Mr. 16,
9.
* she first before al other, Mt. 28, 9.
* and they next, saw him after his Resurrection.

12. In an other shape.] Christ's body under diverse forms.
Christ though he have but one corporal shape, natural to his person, yet by
his omnipotency he may be in whatsoever form, and appears in the likeness of
any other man or creature, as he list, Therefore let no man think it strange,
that he may be under the form of bread in the B. Sacrament.

16. He that believes.] Note well, that whereas this Evangelist mentions only
faith and baptism, Not only faith.
as though to believe and to be baptized were enough, S. Matthew adds these
words also of our Savior, Mt. 28. 20.
teaching them to observe al things whatsoever I have commanded you, which
contains al good works and the whole justice of a Christian man.

17. These signs shall follow.] The gift of miracles.
It is not meant, that al Christians or true believers should do miracles: but
that some for the proof of the faith of al, should have that gift. The which
is the grace or gift of the whole Church, executed by certain for the
edification and profit of the whole.

THE ARGUMENT OF S. LVKES GOSPEL.
S. Lukes Gospel may be divided into five parts.

The first part is, of the Infancy both of the precursor, and of Christ
himself: chap. 1 and 2.

The second, of the Preparation that was made to the manifestation of Christ:
chap. 3 and a piece of the 4.

The third, of Christ's manifesting him self, by preaching and miracles,
specially in Galilee: the other piece of the 4 chap. unto the mids of the 17.

The fourth of his coming into Jury toward his Passion: the other piece of
the 17 chap. unto the mids of the 19.

The fifth, of the Holy week of his Passion in Jerusalem: the other part of
the 19 chap. unto the end of the book.

S. Luke was sectator (says S. Hierome) that is, a disciple of the Apostle
Paul, Hier. in Catalago.
and a companion of (...) his peregrination. And the same we see in the Acts
of the Apostles: Where, from the 16 chap. S. Luke puts him self in the
train of S. Paul, vvriting thus in the story. Forthwith we sought to go into
Macedonia. and in like manner, in the first person, commonly through the rest of
that book. Of him and his Gospel, S. Hierom understands this saying of S.
Paul: We have sent with him the brother, whose praise is in the Gospel
through al Churches. 2. Cor. 8, 8.
where also he adds: Some suppose, so often as Paul in his Epistles says,
According to my Gospel, that he means of Lukes book. And again: Luke
learned the Gospel not only of the Apostle Paul, who had not been with our
Lord in flesh, but of the other Apostles: which him self also in the beginning
of his book declares, Luke 1, 2.
saying, As they delivered to us who them selves from the beginning saw, and
were ministers of the word. It follows in S. Hierome: Therefore he wrote the
Gospel, as he had heard, but the Acts of the Apostles he compiled as he had
seen. Col. 4, 14.
S. Paul vvriteth of him by name to the Colossians: 2. Tim. 4, 21.
Luke the Physicion saluteth you. and to Timothee: Luke alone is with me.
Hiero. in Catalogo.
Finally of his end thus does S. Hierome write: He lived fourscore and four
years, having no wife. He is buried at Constantinople: to which city his
bones with the Relikes of Andrew the Apostle were translated out of Achaia the
twentieth year of Constantius.
Constantinus. Hier. con. Vigil, 2.
And of the same Translation also in another place against Vigilantius the
Heretic: It grieueth him that the Relikes of the Martyrs are covered with
precious couerings, and that they are not either tied in cloutes or thrown to
the dunghill. The Heretic so counted the Catholics for their honoring of
Saints and Relikes.
why, are we then * sacrilegious, when we enter the Churches of the Apostles?
Was Constantius
Constantinus' the Emperor sacrilegious, who translated to Constantinople the
holy Relikes of Andrew, Luke, and Timothee: at which the Devils rore, and the
inhabiters of Vigilantius confess that they feel their presence?

His sacred body is now as Padua in Italy, Wither it was again translated
from Constantinople.

THE HOLY GOSPEL OF JESUS CHRIST ACCORDING TO LVKE.
CHAP. I.
The Annunciation and Conception, first of the Precursor: THE FIRST part: of
the Infa^cie both of the Precursor, and of CHRIST him self.
26 and six months after, of Christ also him self. 39 The Visitation of our
Lady, where both the mothers do Prophecy. 5^ The Nativity and Circumcision
of the Precursor, where his father does prophecy, 80 The Precursor is from a
child an Eremite.

Act. 1, 1.
good * Theophilus,

The Gospel upon the eve of S. John Baptist.
a certain Priest named Zachary, 1 Par. 24, 10.
of the * course of Abia: and his wife of the daughters of Aaron, and her name
Elizabeth. Exo. 3, 17.
he went forth by lot * to offer incense, entering into the temple of our Lord:
We see here that the Priest did his duty within, the people in the mean time
praying without: and that the Priests functions did profit the^, though they
neither heard nor saw his doings.
praying without at the hour of the incense. Leu. 16, 16.
Lord, standing on the right hand of the altar of incense. This abstinence
foretold and prescribed by the Angel, shows that it is a worthy thing, and
an act of religion in S. John, as it was in the Nazarites.
and wine and sicer he shall not drink: and he shall be replenished with the
Holy Ghost even from his mothers womb. Mal. 4, 6.
Mt. 11, 14.
that he may convert the hearts of the fathers unto the children, and the
incredulous to the wisdoms of the just, to prepare unto the Lord a perfect
people. Zachary punished for doubting of the Angels word.
thou shall be dumme, and shall not be able to speak until the day wherein
these things shall be done: for-because thou have not believed my words,
which shall be fulfilled in their time.

The Gospel upon the Annunciation of our Lady, March 25. And on the wenesday of
Imber week in Adue^t, And for a Votiue Mass of our Lady in Aduent.
And in the sixth month, the Angel Gabriel was sent of God into a city of
Galilee, Mt. 1, 18
called Nazareth, The beginning of the AVE MARIE. See the rest v. 42.
said unto her, HAIL full of grace, our Lord is with thee: blessed art thou
among women. Esa. 7, 14.
thou shall conceive in thy womb, and shall bear a son: and thou shall
call his name JESUS. Dan. 7, 14, 27,
reign in the house of Jacob for ever, and of his kingdom there shall be no
end. She doubted not of the thing as Zachary, but enquired of the means.
How shall this be done? because I know not man? At this very moment when the
B. Virgin gave consent, she conceived him perfect God and perfect man.
BEHOLD the handmaid of our Lord, be it done to me according to thy word. And
the Angel departed from her.

The Gospel upon the Visitatio^ of our Lady, Iul, 2. And upon the Imber friday
in Aduent.
went unto the hill country with speed, into a city of Judah. John the
Baptist being yet in his mother: womb, rejoiced and acknowledged the presence
of Christ and his mother.
infant did leap in her womb. and Elisabeth was replenished with the Holy
Ghost: art thou among women, and blessed is the fruit of thy womb.

MY SOVLE does magnify our Lord. MAGNIFICAT at Euensong.




Have the Protestants had always generations to fulfill this prophecy? ordo
they call her blessed, that derogate what they can from her graces, blessings,
and al her honor?
al generations shall call me blessed.















The Gospel upon the Nativity of S. John Baptist Iun. 24. called Midso^mer day.
and she bare a son. Lu. 1, 13.
saying, * John is his name. And they al marueled.

BLESSED BE OUR LORD God of Israel: BENEDICTVS at Lauds.
because he has visited and wrought the redemption of his people:









Genesis 22, 6.




Mal. 3, 1.
shall be called the Prophet of the Highest: for * thou shall go before the
face of our Lord to prepare his ways.



Zac. 3. 9. 6, 12.
has visited us,

Mal. 4, 2.


Mark that he was a voluntary Eremite, and chose to be solitary from a
child, til he was to preach to the people, in so much that antiquity counted
him the first Eremite. Hiere. in vit. Pauli.
in the deserts until the day of his manifestatio^ to Israel.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. I.
3. Having diligently atteined.] Sacred writers and holy Councils.
Hereby we see that, though the Holy Ghost ruled the pen of holy vvriters
that they might not err, yet did they use humane means to search out and find
the truth of the things they wrote of. Even so do Councels, and the President
of them, Gods vicar, discuss and examine al causes by humane means, the
assistance of the Holy Ghost concurring and directing them into al truth,
according to Christ's promise Io. 16, 13: as in the very first Council of the
Apostles them selves at Jerusalem is manifest Act. 15, 7 and 28. Again here
we have a familiar preface of the Author as to his friend, or to every godly
Reader (signified by Theophilus) concerning the cause and purpose and manner of
his vvriting, and yet the very same is confessed Scripture, with the whole
book following. The second book of the Machabees.
Marvel not then if the Author of the second book of the Machabees * use the
like humane speeches both at the beginning and in the later end, 2 Match. 2, and
15.
neither do thou therefore reject the book for no Scripture, as our Heretics
do: or not think him a sacred writer.

6. Just before God.] Against the Heretics of this time, here it is evident
that holy men be just, not only by the estimation of men, True justification by
observing the commandments.
but in deed and before God.

6. In all the commandments.] Three things to be noted directly against the
Heretics of our time. first, that good men do keep al Gods commandments:
which (they say) are impossible to be kept. Again, that men be justified not
by only imputation of Christ's justice, nor by says alone, but by walking in
the commandments. Again, that the keeping and doing of the commandments is
properly our justification.

6. Iustifications.] Corrupt translation of Heretics.
This word is so usual in the Scriptures (namely in the Psalm. 118) to signify
the commandments of God, because the keeping of them is justification, and
the Greek is always so fully correspo^dent to the same, that the Heretics in
this place (otherwise pretending to esteem much of the Greek) blush not to
say, (...).
that they avoid this word of purpose against the justification of the Papists.
And therefore one uses Tullies word forsooth, Beza in Annot. no. Test. 1556.
in Latin constituta: and his scholars in their English Bibles say, Ordinances.

14. Joy and exultation.) This was fulfilled, not only when he was borne, but
now also through the whole Church for ever, in joyful celebrating of his
Nativity.

2^. He departed.) In the old Law (says S. Hierom) they that offered hosts
for the people, were not only not in their houses, but were purified for the
time, being separated from their wives, The contine^cie of priests.
and they drank neither wine nor any strong drink, which are wont to provoke
concupiscence. Much more the Priests of the new Law that must always offer
sacrifices, must always be free from matrimony. Li. 1 c. 19. adu. louin. and
ep. 50 c. 3. See S. Ambrose in 1 Timothy 3. And therefore if there were any
religion in Caluins Communion, they would at the least give as much reverence
in this point, as they in the old Law did to their sacrifices, and to the
loaves of proposition. 1 Reg. 21.

28. Haileful of grace.) Holy Church and al true Christian men do much and
often use these words brought from heaven by the Archangel, Often saying of
the AVE MARIE.
as well to the honor of Christ and our B. Lady, as also for that they were
the words of the first glad tidings of Christ's Incarnation and our Salvation
by the same, Liturg. S. Jacobs and Chrysostom.
and be the very abridgement and sum of the whole Gospel. In so much that the
Greek Church used it daily in the Mass.

28. Full of grace.) Corrupt translation of Heretics.
Note the excellent prerogatives of our B. Lady, and abhor those Heretics
which make her no better then other vulgar women, S. Athan. de S. Deip.
and therefore to take from her fulness of grace, they say here, Hail freely
beloved, contrary to al significations of the Greek word, which is at the
lest, (...).
endued with grace, as S. Paul uses it Ephesians. 1. by S. Chrysostoms
interpretation: S. Ephrem in orat. de laud. B. virg. Ambro. in 1
or rather, full of grace, as both * Greek and Latin fathers have always here
understood it, and the Latins also read it, namely S. Ambrose thus, well (...)
she only called full of grace. who only obtained the grace, which no other
woman deserved, to be replenished with the author of grace. And if they did as
well know the nature of these kind of Greek words, as they would seem very
skilful, they might easily observe that they signify fulness, (...).
as when them selves translate the like word (Luc. 1^, 20) full of sores. Luc.
li. 2.
Beza. vlcerosus.

14. I know not man.) Hier, ep. 140 in exp. ps. 44.
These words declare (says S. Augustine) that she had now vowed virginity to
God. Our B. Lady vowed virginity.
For otherwise neither would she say, How shall this be done? nor have added,
because I know not man. Yea if she had said only the first words, How shall
this be done? It is evident that she would not have asked such a question, how
a woman should bear a son promised her, if she had married meaning to have
carnal copulation. c. 4 de virgin. As if he should say. If she might have
known a man and so have had a child, she would never have asked, How shall
this be done? but because that ordinary way was excluded by her vow of
virginity, therefore she asks. How? And in asking, How? The plainly declares
that she might not have a child by knowing man, because of her vow. See S.
Grego. Nyssene de sancta Christi Natiuitate.

36. Elisabeth thy Cousin.) Christ came of both tribes, Judah and Leui.
By this that Elisabeth and our Lady were cosins, the one of the tribe of Leui,
the other of Judah, is gathered that Christ came of both tribes, Judah and Leui,
of the kings and the priests: him self both a king and a priest, and the
Anointed (to wit) by grace spiritually, as they were with oil materially
and corporally. August. 2 de Consens. Euang. c. 1.

42. Blessed art thou.) The blessed virgin MARIE.
At the very hearing of our Ladies voice, the infant and she were replenished
with the Holy Ghost, and she sang praises not only to Christ, but for his sake
to our B. Lady, calling her blessed and her fruit blessed, as the Church does
also by her words and example in the AVE MARIE.

43. Mother of my Lord.) Her excellency.
Elizabeth being an exceeding just and blessed woman, yet the worthiness of
Gods mother does so far excel her and al other women, as the great light the
little stars. Hiero. Praef. in Sophon.

48. Shall call me blessed) This Prophecy is fulfilled, Her honor in all the
world.
when the Church keeps her Festiual days, and when the faithful in all
generations say the AVE MARIE, and other holy Antems of our Lady. And therefore
the Caluinistes are not among those generations which call our Lady blessed.

63. John is his name.) Mystery and signification in names.
we see that names are of signification and importance, God him self changing
or giving names in both Testaments: as, Abraham, Israel, Peter, and the
principal of al others, JESUS: and here JOHN, which signifies, Gods grace or
mercy, or, God vvil have mercy. For he was the Precursor and Prophet of the
mercy and grace that ensued by CHRIST JESUS. Note also that as then in
Circuncision, What names to be given in Baptism.
so now in Baptism (which answers thereunto) names are given. And as we
see here and in all the old Testament, great respect was had of names: so we
must beware of strange, profane, and secular names (now a days to common) and
rather according to the * Catechism of the holy Council of Trent, c. de bapt.
in fine.
take names of Saints and holy men, that may put us in mind of their virtues.

75. Justice before him.) True justice, not imputative.
Here also we see that we may have true justice, not only in the sight of men,
or by the imputation of God, but in deed before him and in his sight: and that
the coming of Christ was to give men such justice. The Heretics control
both Greek and Latin text.


78. The orient.) Marvel not if Heretics control the old authentical
translation, as though it differed from the greek: whereas here they make
much a do to co^troule not only all the greek interpreters of the old
testament, Beza.
but also S. Luke him self, for the word (...), as differing from the Hebrew.

CHAP. II.
The Nativity of Christ, 8 and manifestation thereof to the Shepherds by an
Angel, and by them to others. 21 His Circuncision. 22 His Presentation,
together with Simeons (as also Annes) attestation and prophesying of his
Passion, of the Jews reprobation, and of the Gentiles illumination. 41 His
annual ascending to Jerusalem with his parents, to whom he was subject, and
his fulness of wisdom showed among the Doctors at twelve years of his age.

The Gospel at the first Mass upon christmas day.
in those days there came forth an edict from Caesar Augustus, that the whole
world should be enrolled. In the year, from the creation of the world 5199:
from Noes flood, 2957: from the Nativity of Abraham, 2015: from Moses and the
coming forth of the people of Israel out of Egypt, 1510: from David anointed
king, 1032: from the first Olympias, 800: from the building of Rome, 752:
hebdomada 63, according to the prophecy of Daniel (c. 9), that is, in the year
440 or there about: in the sixth age of the world, when there was universal
peace in all the world: the eternal God and son of the eternal Father,
meaning to consecrate and sa^ctifie the world with his most blessed coming,
being conceived of the Holy Ghost, nine months after his conception, JESUS
CHRIST the son of God is borne in Bethlehem of Judah, in the year of Caesar
Augustus 42. Vsuard. in martyrol. Dece^b. 25. according to the common ancient
supputation.
every one into his own city. and svvadled him in clothes, and laid him
down in a manger: because there was not place for them in the inn.

Glory in the highest to God: GLORIA IN EXCELSIS at Mass.
and in earth peace to ^men of good vvil. The Gospel at the second mass upon
Christmas day. And for a Votiue of our Lady from christmas to Candlemas.
And it came to pass: after the Angels departed from them into heaven, the
shepherds spoke one to an other: Let us go over to Bethlehem, and let us see
this word that is done, which our Lord has shevved to us.

The Gospel upon the Circuncisio^ of our Lord Ian. 1.
And * after eight days were expired, Genesis 17, 12.
that the child should be circuncised: his name was called JESUS, which was
* called by the Angel, Lu. 1 31.
before that he was conceived in the womb.

The Gospel upon the Purification of our Lady or Candlemas day.
And after the days were fully ended of her purification * according to the
law of Moses, Leu. 12, 6.
they carried him into Jerusalem, to present him to our Lord ( Exo. 13, 2
That every male opening the matrice, shall be called holy to the Lord.) Nu. 8,
16
Leu. 12, 8.
a pair of turtles, or two young pigeons. should not see death unless he savv
first the Sea Ioh. 1, 20 and 41.
CHRIST of our Lord.

NOW THOU do dimisse thy servant O Lord, NVNC DIMITTI^ at Complin.
according to thy word in peace.

SALVATION,





Simeon prophesied not only of Christ but of our B. Lady, of al her sorrows:
wherein she was always partaker with our Savior, from his flight into Egypt
even to her death.
thine own soul shall a svvord pearce, that out of many hearts cogitations
may be revealed. (...)
serving night and day.

strong in spirit:
strong': full of wisdoms, and the grace of God was in him. Exo. 23, 15. 34,
17.
* at the solemn day of Pasche. The Gospel upon the first Sunday after the
Epiphan^e.
they going up into Jerusalem according to the custom of the festiual day,
Deu. 16, 1.


ANNOTATIONS CHAP. II.
14. Men of good will.] Free vvil.
The birth of Christ gives not peace of mind or salvation but to such as be
of good will, because he works not our good against our wills, but our
wills concurring. Aug. quaest. ad Simpli^. li. 1. q. 2. to. 4.

19. Kept al.] Our B. Lady full of deep contemplations.
Our Lady though little he spoken of her concerning such matters in the
Scriptures, because she was a woman, and not admitted to teach or dispute in
public of high mysteries: yet she knew al these mysteries, and wisely noted
and contemplated of al those things that were done and said about Christ, from
the first hour of his Conception til the end of his life and his Ascension.

34. To the ruin.) Therefore to the ruin of some, because they would not
believe in him, and so were the cause of their own ruin, 1 Pet. 2, 1.
as he is else where called, A stumbling stone, because many would stumble at
him and so fall by their own fault, Men's ruin and damnation is of themselves.
other some he raised by his grace from sin to justice, and so he was the
resurrection of many. The Apostle uses the like speech, saying: We are to
some the odor of life, 2 Cor. 2, 16
unto life: to others, the odor of death, unto death. Not that their preaching
was to cause death, but because they that would not believe their preaching,
wilfully incurred deadly sin and damnation.

38. A vvidow.) Mark that widowhod is here mentioned to the commendation
thereof even in the old Testament also, Holy vvidowhod.
and the fruit and as it were the profession thereof is here commended, 1 Cor.
7.
to vvitte, fasting, praying, being continually in the Temple, even as S. Paul
more at large for the state of the new Testament speaks of widowhod and
virginity, as being professions more apt and commodious for the service of God.

37. By fastings and prayers serving.) Fasting an act of religion.
Serving, in the Greek is (...), that is, doing divine worship unto God, as by
prayer, so also by fasting, so that fasting is (...), that is, an act of
religion whereby we do worship God, as we do by prayer, and not used only to
subdew our flesh, much less (as Heretics would have it) as a matter of
poliIcie.

61. Subject to them.) Dutiful obedience to parents.
Al children may learn hereby, that great ought to be their subjection and
obedience to their Parents, when Christ him self, being God, would be subject
to his parents being but his creatures.

CHAP. III. THE SECOND part: The preparation that was made to the
manifestation of CHRIST.

John, to prepare al to Christ (as Esaias had prophesied of him) baptizeth them
to penance, 7 insinuating their reprobation, and the Gentiles vocation, 10
teaching also and exhorting each sort to do their duty. 15 That him self is
not Christ vvil also judge his baptized. 19 John's imprisonment. 21 Christ being
him self also baptized of John, has testimony from heaven, 23 as he whose
generation reduces us again to God.

The Gospel upon Imber Saturday in Aduent. And on the 4 Sunday in Aduent.
Pontius Pilate being Governor of Ievvrie, and Herod being Tetrarch of
Galilee, and Philip his brother Tetrarch of Iturea and the country
Trachonitis, and Lysanias Tetrarch of Abilina, Mt. 3, 1.
in the desert. Mr. 1, 1.
preaching the baptism of Penance prepares the way to Christ.
penance unto remission of sins: as it is written in the book of the
sayings of Esaias the Prophet: Esa. 40, 3.
A voice of one crying in the desert: prepare the way of our Lord, make
straight his paths. SALVATION of God.

Mt. 3, 7.
* Ye viper broodes, who has shevved you to flee from the wrath to come?
Fruits of penance be works satisfactorie.
fruits vvorthie of penance. and do ye not begin to say, We have Abraham to
our father. For I tell you, that God is able of these stones to raise up
children to Abraham. A man without good works is unfruitful, and shall be cast
into everlasting fire.
Every tree therefore that yeldeth not good fruit, is
shall be' cut down, and cast into fire. Alms counseled or enjoined for
sins and to avoid damnation.
He that has two coats, let him give to him that has not: and he that has
meat, let him do likewise.

John was so holy that many might by error easily think he was Christ.
the people imagining, and al men thinking in their hearts of John, Mt. 3, 11.
lest perhaps he were Christ: Mr. 1, 8,
saying unto al, * I in deed baptize you with water: How say then the
Heretics that the Baptism of Christ is of no greater virtue then John's?
but there comes Io. 1, 26.
shall come' a mightier then I, whose latchet of his shoes I am not vvorthie to
unloose, he shall baptize you in the Holy Ghost and fire. Act. 1, 5. 11, 16. 19
4.
people.

Mat. 14, 3
when he was rebuked of him for Herodias his brother Philips
brothers' wife, Mar. 6, 17.
and for all the evils which Herod did:

Mt. 3, 13.
JESUS also being baptized and praying, Mr. 1, 9.
heaven was opened: Io. 1, 32.
Beza boldly wipeth out of this Gospel, these words, who was of Cainan:
though all the Greek copies both of the old Testament and of the new, have the
words with full consent. whereby we learn the intolerable saucines of the
Caluinists, and their contempt of holy Scripture, that dare so deal with the
very Gospel it self.
who was of Cainan, who was of Arphaxad, who was of Sem, who was of
Noe, who was of Lamech,

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. III.
20. He added this above al.] The fault of Princes and other great men, that
can not only not abide to hear their faults, but also punish by death or
emprisonment such as reprehend them for the same (specially if they warn them,
as Prophets and Priests do, from God) is exceeding great.

23. Of Heli.] Whereas in S. Matthew, The reconciliation of Matthew and Luke
in our Saviors petigree.
Jacob is father to Joseph, and here Heli, the case was thus, Mathan (named in
S. Matthew) of his wife called Escha begat Jacob: and after his death, Melchi
(named here in S. Luke) of the same woman begat Heli: so that Jacob and Heli
were brethren of one mother. This Heli therefore marrying and dying without
issue: Jacob his brother, according to the Law married his wife, and begat
Joseph, and so raised up seed to his brother Heli. whereby it came to pass,
that Jacob was the natural father of Joseph, which as (S. Matthew says) begat
him: and Heli was his legal father according to the Law, as S. Luke signifies.
Eusebius. li. 1 Ec. Hist. c. 7* Hiero. in 6. 1 Mat. Aug. li. 2* c. 2. 3 de cons.
Euang.

CHAP. IIII.
Christ going into the Desert to prepare him self before his manifestation,
overcomes the tentations of the Devil. 14 then beginning gloriously in
Galilee, 16 he shows to them of Nazareth his commission out of Esaias the
Prophet, 23 insinuating by occasion the Jews his countriemens reprobation. 31
In Capharnaum his doctrine is admired, 33 specially for his miracle in the
Synagogue. 38. from which, going to Peter's house, he shows there much more
power. 42 Then retiring into the wilderness, he preaches afterward to the
other cities of Galilee.

Mt. 4, 1.
returned from Jordan, Mr. 1, 12*
and was driven in the spirit into the desert, The Churches fast of 40 days
(called Le^t) comes of this, and is an Apostolical Tradition. Clem. Constit.
Apost. li. 5 c. 13. Hier. ep. ad Marcal. ^du erro. Mo^tani. Leo ser. 6 et 9 de
Quadrages.
forty days, and was tempted of the devil. And he did eat nothing in those
days: and when they were ended, he was an hungered. Deuter. 8, 3.
It is written, That not in bread alone shall man live, but in every word of
God. Deu. 6, 13 10, 20.
It is written, See the Annot. in S. Matthew c. 4, 11.
Thou shall adore the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou (...).
serve. Psalm. 90, 11.
If thou be the son of God, cast thy self from hence dovvnevvard. If the
Devil him self allege Scripture against Christ, no marvel that Heretics do so
against Christ's Church.
it is written, that He has given his Angels charge of thee, that they
preserve thee: in their hands they shall bear thee up, lest perhaps thou knock
thy foot against a stone. Deuteronomy. 6, 16.
It is said, Thou shall not tempt the Lord thy God. THE third part: of Christ's
manifesting him self by preachi^g and miracles, specially in Galilee*


Mt. 4, 12.
and the fame went forth through the whole country of him. Mr. 1, 14


Mt. 13, 54.
and he entered Our Savior used to preach in their Synagogues.
according to his custom on the Sabbath day into the synagogue: Mr. 6, 1.
and he rose up to read. Io. 4, 43
And as he unfolded the book, he found the place where it was written, Esa.
61, 1
The Spirit of the Lord upon me, for which he anointed me, to euangelize unto
the poor he sent me, to heal the contrite of heart, He had a marvelous grace,
and an extraordinary force in moving the hearts of his hearers.
marueled in the words of grace that proceeded from his mouth, and they said,
Is not this Joseph's son? The Gospel upon Monday in the 3 week of Lent.
Physicion, cure they self: as great things as we have heard done in
Capharnaum, do also here in thy country. 3 reg. 17, 9.
4 reg. 5, 14.


Mat. 4, 13. 7, 28.
and there he taught them on the Sabboths. Mr. 1, 21
because his talk was in power. the SAINT of God.

Mat. 8, 14.
entered into Simons house. The Gospel upon Thursday in the 3 week of Lent.
And upon Saturday in Vvhitsonvveeke.
* And Simons vviues mother was holden with a great fever: Mr. 1, 30
and they besought him for her.



ANNOTATIONS CHAP. IIII.
13. Departed until a time.) The devils tentations.
No marvel if the devil be often or alvvaies busy with Christian men, seeing
after he was plainly overcome by Christ, yet did he not give him over
altogether, but for a time.

23. Done in Capharnaum) God makes choice of persons and places where he
works miracles or does benefits, Miracles at one place and not at an other.
though he might do the same else where if it liked his wisdom. So does he in
doing miracles by Saints, not in all places, nor toward al persons, but as it
pleases him, Aug. ep. (...).

30. Passing through the mids of them.) Christ's body contained in place above
nature.
Either by making him self invisible, or also more wonderfully, penetrating the
multitude and passing through them, as he did through the door, his body
either being without space of place, or with other bodies in one place. By all
which and the like his doings mentioned in the Gospel, it is evident that he
can alter and order his body as he list, above the natural conditions of a body.

38. Simons wives mother.) The Apostles left their vviues.
It is evident that Peter had a wife, but after his calling to be an Apostle, he
leaft her, as S. Hierom writes in many places ep. 14 c. 2 ad Iulianum. Li. 1
adu. Ionin. See the Annot. Matthew. 9, 29.

CHAP. V.
Having taught the people out of Peter's ship, 4 he shows in a miraculous
taking of fishes, how he vvil make him the fisher of men. 12 He cures a leper
by touching him, and sends him to the Priest in witness that he is not
against Moses. 15 The people flocking unto him, he retireth into the
wilderness. 17 To the Pharisees in a solemn assembly he proves by a miracle
his power to remit sins in earth. 27 He defends his eating with sinners,
as being the Physicion of souls, (...) and his not prescribing as yet of any
fastes to his Disciples.

The Gospel upon the 4 Sunday after Pentecost.
when the multitudes pressed upon him to hear the word of God, and him self
stood beside the lake of Genesareth. Mt. 4, 18.
and the fishers were gone down, and vvashed their nets. Mar. 1, 16.


Mt. 8, 2.
Mar. 1, 40.


and behold a man full of leprosy, and seeing JESUS, and falling on his face,
besought him saying, Lord, if thou vvilt, thou can make me clean. See S.
Mat. Annot. c. 8, 4.
show thy self to the Priest, Leu. 14, 2.
and offer for thy cleansing * as Moses commanded, for a testimony to them.



Mt. 9, 2.
and he sat teaching. The Gospel upon Friday in whitsonvveeke.
And there were Pharisees sitting and Doctors of Law that were come out of
every town of Galilee and Ievvrie and Jerusalem: Mr. 2, 3.
and the virtue of our Lord was to heal them.

Mt. 9, 9.
and savv a Publican called Leui, Mr. 2, 14
sitting at the Custom House, The Gospel upon S. Matthevves eve Septe^b. 2^.
and he said to him, Follow me. murmured, saying to his disciples, why do you
eat and drink with Publicans and sinners? Mat. 9, 14.
but they that are il at ease. Christ came not to call those, who presume of
their own justice, and that cou^pt them selves to have no need of Christ.
I came not to call the just, but sinners to penance.

Mar. 2, 18.
* Why do the disciples of John See S. Mat. Annot. c. 9, 14.
fast often, Lu. 5, 33.
and make obsecrations, and of the Pharisees in like manner: but thine do eat
and drink?

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. V.
3. One ship Simons.) Peter's ship.
It is purposely expressed that there were two ships, and that one of them
was Peter's, and that Christ went into that one, and sat down in it, and that
sitting he taught out of that ship: no doubt to signify the Church resembled
by Peter's ship, and that in it is the chair of Christ, and only true preaching.

6. A great multitude of fishes.) Peter fishing.
Likewise by this significatiue miracle wrought about Peter's fishing, is
evidently forshewed what wonderful success Peter should have in converting
men to Christ, Act. 2, 41. 4, 4.
both Jews and Gentiles, as when at one draught, that is to say, * at one
Sermon he drew into his ship, which is Christ's Church, a great number of men,
as he did now fishes: and so continually by him self and his Successors unto
the worlds end.

7. Beckened to their fellows.) Peter's coadiutors.
Peter had so much work that he called for help and joined unto him the other
ship, representing to us his Copartiners in the preaching of the Gospel, and
the conjunction of the Synagogue and the people of Gentilitie unto Peter's ship,
that is, to the Church of Chriss. Ambro. li. 4. in Luc. c. vlt.

10. Thou shall be taking men.) Peter's preeminence in fishing for (...) souls.
That all this aforesaid did properly mean Peter's travails to come, in the
conversion of the world to Christ, and his prerogative before al men therein,
it is evident by Christ special promis made to him severally and apart in this
place, that he should be made the taker of men, though to other he gives also,
as to Peter's cooperators and coadiutors, the like office. Mat. 4. 19.

19. Went up upon the roof.) Zeal of souls.
A strange diligence in procuring corporal health of and by Christ: and an
example for us of the like or greater, to obtain salvation of him either for
our selves or our friends, and to seek to his Church and Sacraments with what
extraordinary pain soever.

20. Whose faith.) The intercession of others,
Great is God (says S. Ambrose) and pardons one sort through the merits of
others, therefore if thou doubt to obtain forgiveness of thy great offenses,
join unto thy self intercessors, use the Churches help, which may pray for
thee and obtain for thee that which our Lord might deny to thy self. Amb. li.
5 in Luc.

24. The son of man in earth.) In catena S. Thomae.
By which act (* says S. Cyril) it is clear that the Son of man has power
in earth to remit sins: Priests do remit sins.
which he said both for him self and us. For he, as God being made man and Lord
of the Law, forgiueth sins. And we also have obtained by him that wonderful
grace. Io. 20, 23.
for it is said to his Disciples, Whose sins you shall remit, they are
remitted to them. And how should not he be able to remit sins, who gave
others power to do the same?

28, Leaving al followed him.) Hiero. in Mat. 9.
The * profane Julian charged Matthew of to much lightness, Forsaking al, and
following Christ.
to leave al and follow a stranger, at one word. but in deed hereby is seen
the marvelous efficacy of Christ's word and internal vvorking, Athan. in vit.
S. Antonij. August. co^fes. li. 8 c. 12. Bonau. in vit. S. Fra^cisci.
that in a moment can alter the heart of a man, and cause him nothing to esteem
the things most dear unto him. Which he did not only then in presence, but
also daily does in the Church. For so S. Antonie, S. Francis, and others, by
hearing only the word of our Savior read in the Church, forsook al and
followed him.

CHAP. VI.
For reproving by Scripture and miracle (as also by reason) the Pharisees
blindness about the observation of the Sabbath, 11 they seek his death, 12
Having in the mountain prayed al night, he chooses twelve Apostles. 17 and
after many miracles upon the diseased, 20 he makes a sermon to his Disciples
before the people: proposing heaven to such as vvil suffer for him, 24 and vvo
to such as vvil not. 27 Yet vvithal exhorting to do good even to our enemies
also. 19 and that the Masters must first mend them selves. 46 finally, to do
good works, because only faith vvil not suffice.

S. Hierom (ep. 1 ad Nepotia.) vvriteth of him self, that being at
Constantinople, he asked his master Gregory Nazianzene, the famous Doctor,
then Bishop there what Sabbath this was, who by his answer declared that it
was very hard to tell, neither is it yet known to the best learned. Yet the
Protestants are wont to say, Al is very easy.
Sabbath second-first, Mt. 12, 1
when he passed through the corn, Mr. 2, 23
his Disciples did pluck the ears, and did eat rubbing them with their
hands. 1. Re. 21, 4.
Leu. 24, 9.


Mt. 12. 10.
and taught. * And there was a man, Mr. 3, 1.
and his right hand was withered. man, Stretch forth thy hand. And he
stretched it forth: and his hand was restored.

The Gospel upon S. Bartlemewes day.
he went forth into the mountain to pray, and he passed the whole night in
the prayer of God. Mt. 10, 1
Mr. 3, 13 6, 7.
he called his Disciples: and he chose twelve of them ( whom also he named
Apostles) Lu. 9, 1.
and Andrew his brother, James and John, Philippe and Bartholomew, The Gospel
upon Alholowes eve.
And for many Martyrs.
and a very great company of people from al Ievvrie and Jerusalem: and the
sea coast both of Tire and Sidon,

* Blessed are ye poor: Mt. 5, 2. 6, 7.
for yours is the kingdom of God.

That is, to every one justly asking For that which is unjustly asked, may be
justly denied. Aug. li. 1. c. 40. de Sermon. Do. in monte.
to every one that asks thee, give: and of him that takes away the things
that are thine, ask not again. The Gospel upon the first Sunday after
Pentecost.






He builds right and surely, that has both faith and good works: he
builds on sand, that trusts to his faith or reading or knowledge of the
scripture, and does not work or live accordingly.
building a house, that dug deep, and laid the foundation upon a rock. And
when an inundation rose, the river bette against that house, and it could not
move it: for it was founded upon a rock.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. VI.
1. Neither this have you read?] Heretics understand not the Scriptures.
The Scribes and pharisees boasted most of their knowledge of the Scriptures:
but our Savior often shows their great ignorance. Even so the Heretics
that now a days vaunt most of the Scriptures and of their understanding of
them, may soon be proved to understand little or nothing.

9. Save a soul.] Hereby it seems that Christ (as at other times lightly
alvvaies) did not only heal this man in body, but of some correspondent
disease in his soul.

12. The vvholenight.) The Churches prayers at the times of giving holy Orders.
Our Savior instantly prayed, alone in the mount without door, al night
long, as a preparation to the designement of his Apostles the day after: to
give example to the Church of praying instantly when priests are to be
ordered, and a lesson to us al what we should do for our own necessities,
when Christ did so for other men's.

13. Whom he named Apostles..] Here it is to be noted against our Adversaries
that deceitfully measure to the simple the whole nature and quality of
certain sacred functions, by the primitive signification and compass of the
names or words whereby they be called. with whom as a Priest is but an
elder, Calu. Inst. li. 4 c. ^.
and a Bishop, a watchman or Superintendent, so an Apostle is nothing but a
Legate or Messenger, and therefore (as they argue) * can make no Laws nor
prescribe or teach any thing not expressed in his mandatum. The name and
dignity of Apostles.
Know therefore against such deceivers, that such things are not to be ruled by
the vulgar signification of the word or calling, but by use and application of
the holy writers, and in this point by Christ's own express imposition. And
so this word. Apostle, is a calling of Office, government, authority, and
most high dignity given by our Master, specially to the College of the
Twelve: whom he endued above that which the vulgar etymology of their name
requires, with power to bind and loose, to punish and pardon, to teach and
rule his Church. Ps. 108, 8.
Out of which room and dignity, which is called in the Psalm and in the
acts, Act. 2, 20.
a Bishoprike, when Judas sell, Mathias was chosen to supply it, and was
numbered among the rest, Ephesians. 1, 20.
who were as founders or foundations of our religion, as the Apostle terms
them. Therefore to that college this name agrees by special imposition and
prerogative, though afterward it was by use of the Scriptures extended to S.
Paul and S. Barnabas, Act. (...).
and sometimes to the Apostles successors: 1 Cor. 12.
as also (by the like use of Scriptures) to the first conuerters of countries
to the says, Ephesians. 4, 11.
or their coadiutors in that function. In which sense S. Paul chalengeth to be
the Corinthians Apostle, 1 Cor. 9, 2.
and names Epaphroditus the Philippians Apostle: as we call S. Gregory and
his Disciple S. Augustine, Phil. 2, 25.
our Apostles of England. In all which taking, it ever signifies dignity,
regiment, Paternitie, Principality, and Primacie in the Church of God:
according to S. Paul 1. Cor. 12, He has placed in his Church, first in deed
Apostles etc. whereby we may see that S. Peter's dignity was a wonderful
eminent Prerogative and Soueraintie, when he was the head not only of other
Christian men, but the head of al Apostles, yea even of the College of the
Twelve. And if our Aduersaties list to have learned any profitable lesson by
the word Apostle, more profitably and truly they might have gathered, Luc. 4,
18.
that Christ called these his principal officers, Apostles, or Sent (him self
also specially and above al other being Missus, Hebr. 3, 1.
that is, Sent, and called also Apostle in the Scriptures) to vvarne us by the
nature of the word, that none are true Apostles, Pastors, or Preachers, that
are not specially sent and called, or that can not show by whom they be sent.
and that al Heretics therefore be rather Apostates then Apostles, for that they
be not sent, nor duly called, nor chosen to preach.

14. Simon.) Peter in the numbering of the Apostles, Peter's preeminence.
alvvaies first named and preferred before Andrew his elder brother and senior
by calling, See Annotat. Mt. 10, 2.

23. Be glad.) Al persecution for Christ, is a blessing.
The common miseries that fall to the true preachers and other Catholic men
for Christ's sake, as poverty, famine, mourning, and persecutions, be in deed
the greatest blessings that can be, and are meritorious of the revvard of
heaven. Contrarievvise, all the felicities of this world without Christ, are
in deed nothing but vvo, and the entrance to everlasting misery.

26. Shall bless you.) The vanity of Heretical preachers.
This vvo pertains to the Heretics of our days, that delight to have the
peoples praises and blessings and shoutes, preaching pleasant things of purpose
to their itching ears: as did the False-Prophets, when they were magnified
and commended therefore of the carnal Jews.

35 Land, hoping nothing.) In that we may here seem to be moved to lend to
those whom we think not able nor like ever to repay again, Against usury.
it must be holder for a counsel rather then a commandment, except the case
of necessity. but it may be taken rather for a precept, wherein usury, that
is to say, the expectation not of the money lent, but of vantage for lone, is
forbidden: as by other places of Scripture it is condemned, and is a thing
against the Law of nature and nations. And great shame and pity it is, that
it should be so much used or suffered among Christians, or so covered and
cloked under the habit of other contractes, as it is.

CHAP. VII.
He testifies, the faith of the Centurion who was a Gentil, to be greater them
he found among all the Jews, and cures his servant absent. 11 the widow
son he reuiueth and restores to her, and is renowned thereupon. 18 To John's
messengers he answers with miracles, leaving to John to preach thereby unto
them that he is Christ. 24 And afterward he declares how worthy credit was
John's testimony, 29 inueighing against the Pharisees, 31 Who with neither of
their manners of living could be won. 36 showing also unto them by occasion of
Marie Magdalen, how he is a friend to sinners, not to maintain them in sin,
but to forgive them their sins upon their faith and penance.

Mt. 8, 5.
See the Annotations upon S. Matthew. c. 8, 8.
I am not vvorthie that thou should enter under my roof.

The Gospel upon the 15 Sunday after Pentecost. And upon Thursday in the 4
week of Lent. And for S. Monica S. Augustin^ mother Maij. 4.
afterward he went into a city that is called Naim: and there went with
him his Disciples and a very great multitude.

Mt. 11, 2*
(...)
gave sight.) Esa. 35, 5. 61, 1.
the Iame walk, the lepers are made clean, the deaf hear, the dead rise
again, Pauperes euangelizantur, that is, to the poor the Gospel is preached,
and they receive it.
the poor are euangelized: and blessed is he whosoever shall not be
scandalized in me.

Mt. 11, 7*
he began to say of John to the multitudes, What went you out into the desert
to see? a reed moved with the vvinde? Mark this well concerning John's
apparel and diet. See the Annotations upon S. Matthew. c. 3, 4.
soft garments? behold they that are in costly apparel and delicacies, are in
the house of kings. Mal. 3, 1
Behold I send mine Angel before thy face, which shall prepare thy way before
thee. John's baptism. As they that conte^ned John's baptism, despised Gods
counsel and wisedo^; so much more they that make no accoumpt of the Sacraments
of the Church, despise Gods counsel and ordinance touching their salvation, to
their own damnation.
despised the counsel of God against them selves, being not baptized of him. Mt.
3, 4.


The Gospel upon S. Marie Magdalens day Iul, 22. And upon Thursday in Passion
week. And upon Imber Friday in Sept.
And being entered into the house of the Pharisee, he sat down to meat. A
perfect pattern of true penance in this woman, who sought of Christ with
open tears and other strange works of satisfaction and devotion, remission
of her sins.
water his feet with tears, and wiped them with the hears of her head,
and kissed his feet, and anointed them with the ointme^t. Not only faith (as
you may perceive) but love or charity obtains remission of sins.
loved much. But to whom less is forgiven, he loves less. thee. As the
Pharisees did always carpe Christ for remission of sins in earth, so the
Heretics reprehend his Church that remitteth sins by his authority.
Who is this that also forgiueth sins?

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. VII.
5. Built a Synagogue.) As at that time to found a Synagogue, was acceptable
to God, and procured the prayers of the faithful people for whose use it was
made: Building of Churches, Monasteries, etc.
so now much more in the new Testament, to build a Church Monastery,
College, or any like work for the honor and service of God, is grateful to
him and procures the prayers of the good people for whose use such things be
founded.

44 Into thy house.] An exceeding approbation of the extraordinary works and
signs of external devotion, Exterior signs of more then common devotion.
which seem to carnal men (though otherwise faithful) to be often
superfluous or not acceptable. This Simon was perhaps of a good vvil, and
therefore (as diverse others did else where) invited Christ to his house, not of
curiosity or captiousnes, as some other did: but of affection, as it may seem
by Christ's familiar talk with him. Notvvithstanding his duties toward him
were but ordinary, but the anointing, washing, kissing, vviping of his feet
in such sort as the woman did, were further signs of more then vulgar love:
such as is in devout men or women that go on pilgrimage and kiss devoutly
the holy memories of Christ and his Saints. Which is no more but an exterior
expressing of their affection, and that they love much, as every vulgar
christian man does not.

50 Thy faith.] The remission of her sins being attributed before to
charity, is now also said to come of her faith. Justification attributed not
to faith only.
Whereby you may know that it commonly proceeds of both, and of hope also,
though but one named. Because when there be diverse causes concurring to one
effect, the scriptures commonly name but one, and that especially which is
most proper to the purpose and time* not excluding the other. And therefore his
vvorking miracles upon any person, is attributed to the faith of them on whom
or at whose desire they be done. Because he wrought his miracles to induce al
men to believe in him, and therefore specially required faith at their hands,
and namely before other things, whether they did believe that he was able to
do that which they asked at his hands: without which it had been rather a
mockrie and tentation of him, then a true desire of benefit at his hands.

CHAP. VIII.
Going over al Galilee with his train, 4 he preaches to the Jews in parables
because of their reprobation: 9 but to his Disciples manifestly: because he will
not for the Jews incredulity have his coming fe^strate: 19 signifying also
that we art his kin (though we be Gentiles) and not his carnal brethren the
Jews. 22 To whom also (signified by the Gerasens) after the tempest in his
sleep (that is, in his death) and caulme in his resurrection, he comes: but
they preferring their temporals before his presence, he leaves them again. 41
Likewise coming to cure the Jews (who were borne when the Gentiles sickened,
about Abraham's time) he is prevented with the faith of the Gentiles, and then
the Jews die, but them also in the end he will restore.

Mr. 16, 9.
* Marie which is called Magdalene, out of whom seven devils were gone
forth, aliae multae
many others that did minister unto him of their substance.

Mt. 13, 1.
and hastened out of the cities unto him, The Gospel upon the Sunday of
Sexagesine.
he said by a similitude. Mr. 4, 1.


Es. 6, 9.
but to the rest in parables, See the Annotations upon S. Matthew. c. 13, 14.
that * seeing they may not see, and hearing may not understand. Against the
Heretics that say, faith once hat can not be lost, and that he which now
has not faith, never had.
for a time they believe, and in time of tentation they revolt.



He did not here disdainfully speak of his mother, but teaches that our
spiritual kindred is to be preferred before carnal cognation. Hilar. in (...).
Mat.
mother and my brethren, are they that hear the word of God and do it.

Mt. 8, 23.
and he went up into a boat, Mar. 4, 36.
and his disciples, and he said to them, Let us strike over the lake. And they
launched forth. complebantur.
were filled, and were in danger. See the Annotations upon S. Matthew c. 8,
24.
they came and raised him, saying, Master, we perish. But he rising, rebuked
the vvinde and the tempest of water: and it ceased, and there was made a
calm. Mt. 8, 28
and they obey him? Mr. 5, 1.


them: for they were taken with great fear. And he going up into the boat,
returned.

Mt. 9, 18*
and al were expecting him. Mr. 5, 22.
and he was Prince of the Synagogue: and he fell at the feet of JESUS,
desiring him that he would enter into his house,

See the Annotations upon S. Matthew c. 9. 19.
a certain woman in a flux of blood from twelve years past, which had
bestovved al her substance upon Physicions, neither could she be cured of any:
It is an evident sign of prerogative, that Peter only is named so often as
chief of the company. Mar. 1, 36. Act. 5, 29. Luc. 9, 12. Mar. 16, 7. 1 Cor.
15, 5.
Peter said, and they that were with him, Master, the multitudes throng and
press thee, and do thou say, Who touched me?

See the Annotations upon S. Mark c. 5, 36.
believe only, and she shall be safe. incontinent. And he bade them give her to
eat.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. VIII.
^. That did minister.] Holy women that followed Christ.
It was the custom of the Jews that women of their substance did minister
meat and drink and cloth to their teachers, going about with them. which
because it might have been scandalous among the gentiles, 1 Cor. 9, 5. 1^.
S. Paul makes mention that he used it not. And they ministered to our Lord of
their substance for this cause, that he whose spiritual benefits they reaped,
might reap their carnal things.

20. Thy brethern.] The brethren of Christ.
These brethern of our Lord, were not the sons of the B. Virgin MARIE the
mother of God, Hiero. co^t.
as Heluidius wickedly taught: neither are they to be thought (as some others
say) the sons of Joseph by an other wise: Heluid. C. 9.
for (as S. Hierom vvriteth) not only our Lady was a virgin, but by reason of
her, Joseph also: that our Savior might be borne of a virginal matrimony. But
they are called his brethren (according to the visual speech of the Scriptures)
because they were his cosins, Ibide^ ^. 8.
either the sons of Joseph's brother, or (as the more received opinion is) the
sons of our Ladies sister called Marie of James, which James therefore is also
called the brother of our Lord.

55. Her spirit returned.) This returning of the souls again into the bodies
of them whom CHRIST and his Apostles raised from death (specially Lazarus who
had been dead four days) does evidently prove a third place against our
adversaries, A third place after this life.
that say, every one goes straight to Heaven or to Hell. ^or it can not be
thought that they were called from the one or the other, and therefore from
some third place.

CHAP. IX.
His Twelve also now preaching every where and working miracles, 6 Herod and al
do wonder much. 10 After which, he takes them and goes into the
wilderness: Where he cures and teaches, feeding 5000 with five leaves. 18
Peter confessing him to be Christ, 21 he on the other side foretells his
Passion, and that al must in time of persecution follow him therein. ^7
Whereunto to encourage us the more, 27 he gives in his Transfiguration a
sight of the glory, which is the revvard of suffering. ^7 The next day he
casts out a devil which his Disciples could not. 43 Whom amiddes these
wonders he fore vvarneth again of his scandalous Passion, 49 And to cure
their ambition, he tells them, that the most humble he esteems most: 49
bidding them also, not to prohibit any that is not against them. 51 Yea and
tovvard such as be against them Schismatically, to show mildnes for all that,
57 Of following him, three examples.

The Gospel upon Thursday in whitso^ week.
he gave them To command Devils and diseases either of body or soul, is by
nature proper to God only: but by Gods gift, men also may have the same even
so to forgive sins.
virtue and power over al devils, Mt. 10, 1
and to cure maladies. Mr. 3, 13 6, 8.
shake of the dust also of your feet A great fault to reject the true
preachers, or not to admit them into house for needful harbor and sustenance.
for a testimony upon them.

Mt. 14, 1
and he staggered because it was said of some, Mar. 6, 14.
That John was risen from the dead.

Mt. 14, 13.
reported to him whatsoever they did: and taking them he retired apart into a
desert place, Mar. 6, 31.
which belongs to Beth-saida. Io. 6, 5.
followed him: and he received them, and spoke to them of the kingdom of God,
and them that had need of cure he healed. (...):
Here you see that he blessed the things, and not only gave thanks to God. See
Annot. Marci. c. 8, 7.
blessed them: and he brake, and distributed to his disciples, for to set
before the multitudes. The miraculous providence. of God toward such as follow
Christ into deserts, prisons, banishment, or whithersoeuer.
they did al eat, and had their fill. And there was taken up that which
remained to them, twelve baskets of fragments.

Mt. 16, 13.
when he was alone praying, his disciples also were with him: and he asked
them saying, Whom do the multitudes say that I am? Mar. 8, 27.
third day rise again.



The TRANSFIGVRATION.
and he took Peter and James and John, Mt. 17, 1
and went into a mountain to pray. Mr. 9, 1.
2. Pet. 1, 17.
when they entered into the cloud.

Mt. 17, 14.
when they came down from the mountain, there met him a great multitude.
Mar. 9, 17.
Incredultie hinders the effect of Exorcismes, and other miraculous power
given to the Church.
O faithles and perverse generation, how long shall I be with you and suffer
you? bring hither thy son.

Desire of preeminence is an humane infirmity often even among the good.
Against which, Christ teaches humility, but forbids not Superiority.
a cogitation into them, Mt. 18, 1
which of them should be greater. Mar. 9, 34.


Mar. 9, 38.
Master, we savv a certain man casting out devils in thy name, and we
prohibited him, because he follows not with us. There be some that follow not
Christ precisely in life and doctrine, of whom we may make our advantage to the
propagation of Christ's honor and religion, when they do any thing for the
adua^ceme^t thereof, of what intention soever they do it. Philip. 1, 15.
Prohibit not. for he that is not against you, is for you.

them as Elias also did?
them'?

Mt. 8, 19.
* I vvil follow thee vvhithersoeuer thou go. This man would have followed
him for temporal commodities, and therefore was not suffered.
The foxes have holes, and the fowls of the air nestes: but the son of man
has not where to repose his head. first to take my leave of them that are at
home.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. IX.
27. Til they see.) The Transfiguration.
To the Apostles, that had to preach the kingdom of God and to suffer so much
misery for the same in this world, he vvil show his glory, and give them a
taste of his own joyful state and of his Saints in heaven, calling thither
Moses and Elias, that the Law and Prophets might be vvitnesses of the same.
See the annotation upon S. Matthew c. 17, 2.

53. Face to go to Jerusalem.) The Samaritans were Schismatikes from the
Jews, Io. 4. 9.
and had a Schismatical temple in mount Garizim, Schismatikes.
of purpose to dravv men thither from Gods temple in Jerusalem, ^ Re (...). ^7.
where only was the true and as it were the Catholic service and Sacrifice
unto God. Tob. ^.
Therefore they did not gladly receive our Savior, because they perceived he
was going to Jerusalem.

53. He rebuked them.) Not justice nor al rigorous punishment of sinners is
here forbidden, Desire of revenge.
not Elias fact reprehe^ded, nor the Church or Christian Princes blamed for
putting Heretics to death: but that none of these should be done for desire of
our particular revenge, Act. 5.
or without discretion, and regard of their amendment, The Churches severity.
and example to others. Therefore S. Peter used his power upon Ananias and
Sapphira, when he struck them both down to death for defrauding the Church.

62. No man looking back.) It is a dangerous temptation for a man that has
lost or left his goods for Christ, Looking back.
to look much back at them, and to remember with delight the pleasures and
eases of this world, for it breeds in him coffeehouse of the troubles and
crosses that are incident to the state of such as fully follow Christ. In
which case a man should ever look forvvard toward heaven, and never
backevvard to the world.

CHAP. X.
He sends yet 72 more to preach to the Jews, with power also of miracles, 13
crying w^ to the cities impenitent. 17 At their return he agniseth the great
power he gave them, but yet teaches them not to be proud thereof, 21 and
praises God for his grace, 23 his Church also for her happy state. 2^. To one
of the Scribes he shows, that the love of God and of his neighbor will bring
him to life everlasting, 29 teaching him by the parable of the Samaritane, to
take every one for his neighbor that needs his charity. 38 To Martha he
shows that Mary's Contemplatius life is the better.

As the twelve Apostles did represent the higher degree of the clergy, called
Bishops: so these Seventy two bear the figure of the inferior clergy,
called Priests. Beda.
seventy two: The Gospel upon S. Marks day and S. Lukes.
and he sent them two and two before his face into every city and place
vvhither him self would come. there, your peace shall rest upon him: but if
not, it shall return to you. 1. Tim. 5, 18.
* For the vvorkeman is vvorthie of his hire. Remove not from house to house.

Differences of pains and damnation in Hell according to the differences of
demerites. Aug. li. ^. c. 5. cont. Julian.
more tolerable for Sodom in that day, then for that city. True penance not
only to lead a new life, but to punish the body by such things as here be
recorded, for the il life past.
in sack cloth and ashes long ago. It is al one to despise Christ, and to
despise his Priests and Ministers in the the Catholic Church: to refuse his
doctrine, and theirs.
He that hears you, hears me: and he that despises you, despises me. And
he that despises me, despises him that sent me.



The Gospel upon 12 Sunday after Pe^tecost.
things that you hear, and heard them not.

Deu. 6, 5
how read thou? Thou shall love the Lord thy God with thy whole heart,
Leu. 19, 18.
and with thy whole foul, and with al thy strength, and with al thy mind:
and thy neighbor as thy self. S. Augustine says that the Apostle (1. Cor. 9.)
according to this place did supererogate, that is, did more then he needed or
was bound to do, when he might have required al duties for preaching the
Gospel, but would nor. li. de ep. Monach. c. 5. whereof it comes, that the
works which we do more then precept, be called works of Supererogation: and
whereby it is also evident against the Protestants, that there be such works.
See Optatus li. 6. cont. Par^^n. how aptly he applies this parable to S.
Paul's counsel of virginity (1 Cor. 7) as to a work of supererogation.
said, A certain man went down from Jerusalem into Jericho, and fell among
thieves, who also spoiled him, and giving him wounds went away leaving him
halfe-dead. Superogaueris, (...).
supererogate, I at my return vvil repay thee.

The Gospel upon the Assumptio^ of our Lady Aug. 15.
And it came to pass as they went, and he entered into a certain town: and
a certain woman named Martha, received him into her house,

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. X.
21. To little ones) By this place every vulgar artificer may not presume that
God has revealed al truth to him, and therefore refuse to be taught of the
learned. for Christ did not afterward endevv fishers and vulgar men nor any
other with the gifts of wisdom and tongues, without their industry, study,
and teaching, though at the beginning, of great providence he did it, that it
might be clear to the world, The humble unlearned Catholic knovveth Christ
better then the proud learned Heretic.
that al Nations were converted to him not by persuasion of cunning Orators or
subtle Disputers, but by the plain force of his grace and truth, which S.
Augustine counts greater then al other miracles. Further we are taught by
this place, that the poor humble obedient children of the Church know by
their faith the high mysteries of Christ's Divinity, and his presence in the B.
Sacrament, and such like: rather then Arius, Calvin, and other like proud
Scribes and Pharisees.

28. This do.) Not by faith only, but by keeping Gods commandments we
obtain life everlasting: not only by believing, but by doing. The heretics
say that it is impossible to keep this commandment of loving God with all our
heart. The commandments possible to be kept.
But the Scriptures give us examples of diverse that have kept and fulfilled it,
as far as is requisite in this life. 3. reg. 14, 8. ^. Par. 15, 15. Ps. 118,
10. Ecclci. 47, 9, 10. 4 Reg. 20, 3. 5. Luc. 1, 5. And if it were impossible
to keep it, and yet by Christ proposed for the mean to obtain life
everlasting, he had mocked this Lawyer and others, and not taught them.

30. Half dead.) Here is signified man vvounded very sore in his understanding
and free will, Conc. Araus. ^ cap. 25. to. 1.
and al other powers of soul and body, by the sin of Adam: but yet that
neither understanding, nor free-vvil, The parable of the vvounded man,
explicated.
nor the rest were extinguished in man or taken away. The Priest and Leuite,
signify the Law of Moses: Conc.
this Samaritane, is Christ the Priest of the nevve Testament: the oil and
wine, Co^c, Trid.
his Sacraments: the host, the priests his ministers. Whereby is signified,
that the Law could not recover the spiritual life of mankind from the death of
sin, Sest. 6. c. 1.
that is, justify man: but Christ only, who by his passion and the grace and
virtue thereof ministered in and by his Sacraments, justifies, and increases
the justice of man, healing and abling free-vvil to do al good works.

42. Marie the best part.) Two notable examples, one of the life Active, in
Martha: the other of the life Conte^platiue, The Contemplative or Religious
life, better then the Active and secular.
in Marie^ representing unto us, that in holy Church there should be alvvaies
some to serve God in both these several sorts. The life conte^platiue is here
preferred before the active, the Religious of both sexes are of that more
excellent state, and therefore our Protestants have wholly abandoned them out of
their common wealth, which the true Church never wanted. But to say truth, they
have neither Martha nor Marie. our Lord give them grace to see their misery,
If ours were not answerable to their profession, or were degenerated, why have
they no new ones? if our Churches Votaries vowed unlawful things, Chastity,
Poverty, Obedience, Pilgrimage: what other Votaries or lawful vows have they?
For, to offer voluntarily by vow (besides the keeping of Gods commandments,
Vows and votaries.
whereunto we are bound by precept and promise in our Baptism) our souls,
bodies, goods, or any other acceptable thing to God, is an act of sovereign
worship belonging to God only: and there was never true religion without such
vows and Votaries. If there be none in their whole Church that profess
contemplation, or that vow any thing at al to God voluntarily, neither in their
bodies nor in their goods: God and the world know they have no Church nor
religion at al.

CHAP. XI.
He teaches a form of prayer, ^ and exhorts to pray instantly, 11 assuring
that so God will give us good things. 14 The Jews blaspheming his casting out
of Devils, and asking for a miracle from heaven, 17 he defends his doing:
(...) foretelling also the Devils expulsion by him out of the world (that is,
the vocation of the Gentiles) 24 and his reentrie into their nation, 27 with
their reprobation though he be of their flesh, 29 and also their final most
worthy damnation. 37 Again, to the Pharisees and Scribes he cries woe, as
authors of the said ^^probation now at hand.

Mt. 6, 9.
* When you pray, say, FATHER, sanctified be thy name. Thy kingdom come, The
Gospel in Maioribus ^itanijs on S. Marks day, and in the Rogation days. And
in a votiue Mass against the Pagans.
and shall go to him at midnight, and shall say to him, Friend, lend me three
loaves, The Gospel in a votiue Mass for sins.
and give him as many as he needs. Mt. 7. 7.


Mt. 12, 22.
and that was dumme. And when he had cast out the devil, the dumme spoke: and
the multitudes marueiled. The Gospel upon the 3 Sunday in Lent.
Mr. 3, 22.
In Beel-zebub the prince of Devils he casts out Devils. (...)
house upon house, shall fall. This finger, is the spirit of God, Mt. 12, 28.
finger of God do cast out Devils: surely the kingdom of God is come upon you.
nouissima siunt
last of that man be made worse then the first.

The Gospel upon Assumption eve, and in a Votiue of our Lady between Candlemas
and Easter, and between Pe^tecost and Aduent.
And came to pass: when he said these things, a certain woman lifting up
her voice out of the multitude said to him, Blessed is the womb that bare
thee, and the pappes that thou did suck. The said mother of God, in that
also was blessed that she was the temporal means and minister of the
Incarnation, but much more blessed, in that she continued the perpetual keeper
of his word. Beda. Aug. tract. 19. in Joan.
Yea rather, blessed are they that hear the word of God, and keep it.

Mt. 12, 29.
is a wicked generation: it asks a sign, and a sign shall not be given it
but the sign of Jonas the Prophet. Ion. 2, 2.
3 Reg. 10, 1.
Ion. 3, 5.
and shall condemn it, * because they (...). Mark that the great penance of
the Ninevites (Ionae 3) is here expressed by this Greek word. See Annot. Mat.
3, 2. The Gospel for a Confessor that is Bishop.
did penance at the preaching of Jonas. and behold, more then Jonas here.

Mt. 5, 15.
and puts it in secret, neither under a bushel: Mar. 4, 21.
but upon a candlestick, that they that go in may see the light. Mt. 6, 22.
If thine eye be simple, thy whole body shall be lightsome: but if it be
naught, thy body also shall be darkesome. bright candel it shall lighten thee.

Mt. 23, 25.
* Now you Pharisees do make clean that on the out side of the cup and of
the platter: but that of yours which is within, is full of rapine and
iniquity. Quod superest, (...),
that that remains, give alms, and behold al things are clean unto you.

The Gospel for many Martyrs.
and your selves touch not the packes with one of your fingers. Not the
building of the Prophets monuments is condemned, but their imitation of their
fathers that slew the Prophets. Ambros.
build the momuments of the Prophets: and your fathers did kill them. Genesis 4, 8
2. Par. 24, 22.
Yea I say to you, it shall be required of this generation.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XI.
27. Blessed is the womb.) Beda upon this place.
Let us also (says Venerable Bede) lift up our voice with the Catholic
Church, Our B. Lady.
of which this woman was a figure: let us lift up our hearts among the
people, and say to our Savior, Blessed be the womb that bare thee, and the
pappes which thou did suck, for blessed in deed is the mother which bare
the King that rules heaven and earth for ever.

29. The sign of Jonas.) The sign of Jonas.
Of al miracles, his Resurrection, after he had been according to his body, in
the grave, according to his soul, in Hell three days, was the greatest, and
most conuinceth the incredulous Jews: and therefore a greater or more evident
then that, he says he vvil not give them.

41. Give alms.) Ecclci. 3, 33.
The great force of alms is here and in diverse places of holy write
signified. The force of alms.
In one place, they extinguish sin: in an other, they redeem sins: in an
other, they deliver from death: Dan. 4, 24
in an other, to them given or omitted, our judgment to heaven or hell is
attributed: and here they make clean and satisfy for the Jews former
offenses. Tob. 4, 12, 11. 9.
for (as S. Augustine says c. 70 Enchiridij) alms deeds profit not a man
that has a will to continue in his sins, but they are to be done for a
propitiation to God of former offenses. Mat. 25. 35, 42.
Now how well the Protestants like this doctrine so evidently set forth in
Scripture, let the indifferent judge, and how well it agrees with their
only faith.

46. Woe to you Lawyers.) The Lawyers and Priests of the old Testament.
These were Doctors of Moses Law, otherwise called Scribes. Shall we
therefore cry out against al Lawyers now, or ought the name of Lawyer be
odious with us, because of these naughty Lawyers among the Jews? much less
ought the name of Priests to be odious (as Heretics would have it) because of
the Jews Priests that were so busy against our Savior.

CHAP. XII.
He prepares his Disciples against persecutions to come upon them at their
publishing of his doctrine. 13 With dividing the brethrens inheritance he will
not meddle, but exhorts them against avarice, 22 and his Disciples (by this
occasion) against solicitude so much as of necessaries. 32 yea counseling them
to give al in alms, 35 and to be ready at a knock: 41 namely admonishing
Peter and other Prelates to see to their charge: 49 and al, not to look but for
persecution. 54 The Jews he reprehendeth for that they will not see this time
of grace, 58 whereas it is so horrible to die without reconciliation.

Mr. 10, 26.
that shall not be revealed: nor secret, that shall not be known. Mar. 4, 22.
shall be said in the light: and that which you have spoken into the ear in
the chambers, shall be preached in the house-toppes. The fear of Hell also is
profitable: contrary to the protestants, teaching security of salvation, and
that fear of Hell makes men hypocrites.
fear him who after he has killed, has power to cast into hell. yea I say
to you, fear him. al numbered. Mt. 10, 32.
Fear not therefore: you are more vvorth then many sparovves. Mar. 8, 38.
the Son of man also vvil confess him before the Angels of God. Mt. 12, 33.
shall be denied before the Angels of God. See Annot. Mt. 12, 32.
every one that speaks a word against the son of man, it shall be forgiven
him: Mr. 3, 28
but he that shall blaspheme against the holy Ghost, Mt. 10, 19.
to him it shall not be forgiven. Mar. 13, 11.
be not careful in what manner, and what you shall answer, or what you shall
say.

Give it to the poor, that should thou do, says S. Basil.
What shall I do, because I have not vvhither to gather my fruits? A goodly
warning for all rich men.
Thou fool, this night they require thy soul of thee: and the things that
thou have provided, whose shall they be?

Mt. 6, 25
* Therefore I say to you, He forbids not co^petent providence, but to much
carefulnes. See Annot. upon S. Matthew. c. 6, 25.
Be not careful for your life, what you shall eat: nor for your body, what
you shall do on. they grow: they labor not, neither do they spinne. But I
say to you, Neither Solomon in all his glory was araied as one of these. (...).
be not lifted up on high. The Gospel for S. Paulinus Iun. 22. And for a
Co^fessor that is not a Bishop.
Fear not It was little at the beginning, and is still in comparison of all the
reprobate: but in itself very great, as in the parable of the great tree that
grew of the little mustard seed. Mt. 13.
little flock, for it has pleased your father to give you a kingdom. Mt. 6, 20.
treasure that vvasteth not, in heaven: vvhither the thief approaches not,
neither does the mothe corrupt. The Gospel for a Co^fessor that is not a Bishop.
Let your To girde our loins, is to keep chastity and co^tinencie. Gregor.
ho. (...).
loins be girded, and candles burning in your hands, Mt. 24, 43.
blessed are those servants.

shall appoint his portion with the infidels. Mt. 10, 34.
He means the naughty peace that is between worldlings and sinners, the
agreement that is in in^idelity, in Heresy, or in any other wickedness, he
came to break this peace. See Annot. Matthew. c. 10, 34.
peace on the earth? No, I tell you, but separation.

Mt. 16, 2
When you see a cloud rising from the west, by and by you say, A shoure
comes, and so it comes to pass: See Annot. Mt. 5, 25.
when thou go with thy adversary to the Prince, Mt. 5, 25
in the way endeavor to be delivered from him: lest perhaps he dravv thee to
the judge, and the judge deliver thee to the exactour, and the exactour cast
thee into prison.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XII.
^. Every one that confesses.] Open confession of our faith.
A Catholic man is bound to confess his faith, being called to accoumpt or
examined by Jew, Heathen, or Heretic, concerning the same. Neither is it
enough to keep Christ in his heart, but he must also acknowledge him in his
words and deeds. And to deny Christ, or any article of the Catholic faith,
for shame or fear of any worldly creature, has no less punishment, then to
be denied, refused, and forsaken by Christ at the hour of his death before al
his Angels: Which is an other manner of presence and Consistory, then any Court
or Session that men can be called to for their faith, in this world.

11. Be not careful.] The holy Ghost teaches every unlearned Catholic to give
sufficient reason of his faith.
That the poor vnclearned Catholic should not be discouraged, or make his
excuse that he is a simple man, not able to answer cunning Heretics, nor to
give a reason of his belief, and therefore must suffer or say any thing rather
then come before them: our Master gives them* comfort, promising that the
Holy Ghost shall ever put into their hearts at time of their appearance, that
which shall be sufficient for the purpose, not that every one which is
conuented before the Adversaries of faith, should alvvaies be endeed with
extraordinary knowledge to dispute and confute, as the Apostles and others in
the primitive Church were: but that God vvil ever give to the simple that
trusts in him, sufficient courage and words to confess his belief. For
such an one called before the Commissioners, says enough and defends him
self sufficiently, when he answers that he is a Catholic man, and that he
will live and die in that faith which the Catholic Church throughout al
Christian countries has and does teach, and that this Church can give them a
reason of all the things which they demand of him. etc.

14. Who has appointed?] Christ refused to meddle in this temporal matter,
partly because the demand proceeded of covetousness and il intention, The
dealing of Clergy men in vvorldly affairs.
partly to give an example to Clergy men, that they should not be vvithdravven
by secular affairs and controversies from their principal function of praying,
preaching, and spiritual regiment: but not wholy to forbid them al actions
pertaining to vvorldly business, specially where and when the honor of God,
the increase of religion, In vita c. 19.
the peace of the people, and the spiritual benefit of the parties do
require. In which cases S. Augustine (as Possidonius vvriteth) was occupied
often whole days in ending vvorldly controversies, Li. de op. Monach. c. 29.
and so he vvriteth of him self also, not doubting but to have revvard therefore
in heaven.

21. Rich to God ward.] Meritorious works.
He is rich toward God, that by his goods bestovved upon the poor, has
store of merits, and many almesmens prayers procuring mercy for him at the day
of his death and judgment, which is here therefore called treasure laid up in
heaven, where the barnes be large enough. The necessity of which alms is by
Christ him self here shevved to be so great, and so acceptable to God, that
rather then they should lack the fruit thereof, they should sell al they have
and give to the poor.

34. Where your treasure is.] Alms.
If the rich man vvithdravven by his vvorldly treasure, can not set his heart
upon heaven, let him send his money thither before him, by giving it in alms
upon such as vvil pray for him, and his heart vvil solovv his purse thither.

CHAP. XIII.
He threateneth the Jews to be forsaken unless they do penance, 10 and
confounds them for maligning him for his miraculous good doing on the
Sabboths. 18 but his kingdom (the Church) as contemptible as it seems to them
now in the beginning, shall spread over all the world, 20 and convert al, 23 and
what an hartsore it shall be to them at the last day, to see them selves
excluded from the glory of this kingdom, and the Gentiles admitted in their
place. 31 foretelling that it is not Galilee that he fears, but that
obstinate and reprobate Jerusalem vvil needs murder him, as also his
messengers before and after him

Or as it is uttered in other places, do penance, (...), the which in the new
Testament signifies perfect repentance. See Annotatio^s Mat. 3, 2. 11, 21.
Nisi poenitentiam habueritis,
have penance, you shall al likewise perish.

The Gospel on the Imber Saturday in Sept.
A certain man had The figtree with only leaves and no fruit, is the Jews
synagogue, and every other people or person which has faith and fair words,
and no good works.
a figtree planted in his vineyard, and he came seeking for fruit on it, and
found not.



Mt. 13, 31.
* Whereunto is the kingdom of God like, Mr. 4, 30.
and whereunto shall I esteem it like? See Annota. Matthew. 13, 31.
mustard seed, which a man took and cast into his garden, and it grevv: and
became a great tree, and the fowls of the air rested in the boughs thereof.
Mt. 13, 33.


Mt. 7, 13
* But he said to them, Christians in their lives must seek the strait way,
but in religion the ancient common way.
Strive to enter by the narrovv gate: because many, I say to you, shall seek to
enter, and shall not be able. The Gentiles coming into Gods favor later, are
preferred before the Jews which were first,
last that shall be first, and they be first that shall be last.

Non capit (...)
cannot be that a Prophet perish out of Jerusalem. Mt. 23, 37.
how often would I gather thy children as the bird does her brood under her
vvings, and The Jews lost their preeminence, by their own free will, and not
by Gods causing: who ceased not to call and cry upon them, and they would not
hear. Whereby free will is plainly proved.
thou would not?

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XIII
2. These Galilaans) It is Gods mercy that he straight punishes not al
offenders, Some punished for example.
but some fevv for a warning to all: Nu. 16.
as that for Schism he strikes nor al such as have forsaken the Church and
the lavvful Priests, 2 Match. 3
as he did Core and his accomplices: that for spoil of Churches he reuengeth not
al, Act. 5.
as he did Heliodorus: and all that vow and revoke their gifts to God, as
Ananias and Sapphira. Some few therefore for their just deserts, be so handled
for example, to provoke al others guilty of the same crimes to do penance.
Which if they do not in this life, they shall all assuredly perish in the next
world. Optatus li. 1 cont. Parmen, sub finem.

16. This daughter.) Diseases not natural.
we may see that many diseases which seem natural, do proceed of the Devil by
Gods permission, either for sin, or for probation: and both those kinds
Christ specially cured, for that no natural medicines could cure them, and
specially because he came to dissolve the works of Satan both in body and soul.

24. By the narrovv.) Our Lord is not contrary to him self in that he
answers, the gate to be strait, and fevv to be saved, whereas else where he
said, that many should come from the East and West etc. and joy with Abraham
in the kingdom of heaven. Mat. 8. 11. For though they be few in respect of the
wicked of al sorts, yet they be many in them selves and in the society of
Angels, the wheat corns are scarce seen at the threshing, when they are
meddled with the chafe: but when the il are removed, the whole barn of
heaven shall be filled. So says S. Aug. Ser. 32 de verb. Do.

24. Shall seek.) Many would be saved and look to be saved, but can not,
because they vvil not take pains to enter in at so strait a passage, Penance.
that is to say, to fast much, pray often, do great penance for their sins,
live in holy Churches discipline, abstain from the pleasures of this world,
and suffer persecution and loss of their goods and lives for Christ's sake.

26. Eat before thee.) It is not enough to feed with Christ in his
Sacraments, or to hear his word the Church, Schism.
to challenge heaven thereby, unless we live in unity of the Catholic
Church. So S. Augustine applies this against the Donatistes, Cont. lit. Petil.
li. 2 c. 55.
that had the very same service and Sacraments which the Catholic Church had,
but yet severed them selves from other Christian countries by Schism.

CHAP. XIIII.
By occasion of dining with a Pharisee, 2 after that he has again confounded
them for maligning him for his miraculous good doing on the Sabbath. 7 he
teaches them humility, seeing their ambition, 1^ and in their works to seek
retribution not of men in this world, but of God in the world to come: 16
foretelling also that the Jews for their worldly excuses shall not taste of the
Supper, but the Gentiles in their place, (...) Yea that so far must men be from
al worldlines, that they must earnestly bethink them before they enter into
his Church, and be ready to forgot all: 34 specially considering they must be
the salt of others also.

The Gospel upon the 16 Su^day after Pentecost.
and they vvatched him.



Reward for charitable deeds, and that they may be done for reward, against
our Adversaries.
recompense shall be made thee in the resurrection of the just.

The Gospel upon the 2 Sunday after Pentecost.
A certain man made a great supper, and called many. Worldlines, wealth, and
voluptuousnes, are the things that specially hinder men from God.
I have bought a farm, and I must needs go forth and see it, I pray thee
hold me excused.

The Gospel for a Martyr that is a Bishop. And for S. Basil Iun. 14.
and turning, he said to them, Mt. 10, 37.
No creature so dear unto us, which we must not hate or forsake, if it
hinder us, and in that respect that it hinders us from Christ, or his Church,
and our Salvation.
father and mother, and wife and children, and brethren and sisters, yea and
his own life besides: he can not be my disciple. what king about to go to
make vvare against an other king, does not first sit down and think whether
he be able with ten thousands to meet him that with twenty thousands
comes against him? He that is a right Christian man, must make his account
that if he be put to it (as he often may be in times of persecution) he must
renounce all that ever he has, rather then forsake the Catholic faith.
renounce all that he possesses, cannot be my disciple.

Mt. 5, 13.
But if the salt leese his virtue, vvherevvith shall it be seasoned? Mar. 9, 50.


ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XIIII.
2^. Compel them.) The vehement persuasion that God uses both externally by
force of his word and miracles, Free-vvil.
and internally by his grace, to bring us unto him, is called compelling: not
that he forces any to come to him against their own wills, but that he can
alter and mollify an hard heart, ep. 50 pa^lo post princip. and ep. 204. and
li. 1 cont. ep. Gaudent. 6. 25.
and make him vvilling that before would not. S. Augustine also refers this
compelling to the penal laws which Catholic Princes do justly use against
Heretics and Schismatikes, proving that they who are by their former
profession in Baptism subject to the Catholic Church, Heretics may by penal
laws be compelled to the Catholic faith.
and are departed from the same after Sects, may and ought to be compelled
into the unity and society of the universal Church again. and therefore in
this sense, by the two former parts of the parable, the Jews first, and
secondly the Gentiles, that never believed before in Christ, were invited by
fair svveete means only: but by the third, such are invited as the Church of
God has power over, because they promised in baptism, and therefore are to be
revoked not only by gentle means, but by just punishment also.

CHAP. XV.
By occasion of the Pharisees murmuring at him for receiving penitent sinners,
he shows what joy shall be in heaven for the conversion of one sinner, 11 and
for the younger son, which is the Gentiles: 25 the elder (to wit the Jews) in
the mean time disdaining thereat, and refusing to come into his Church.

The Gospel upon the 3 Sunday after Pentecost.
This man, is our Savior Christ: whose care and travail in serching and
reducing sinners to repentance, al spiritual men specially should follow.
man of you having an hundred sheep: Mat. 18, 12.
and if he has lost one of them, does he not leave the ninety nine in the
desert, and goes after that which was lost until he find it? it, lays it
upon his shoulders rejoicing? This woman is the catholic Church, who also
continually seeks her lost children.
woman having ten grotes: if she leese one grote, does she not light a candle,
and svveepe the house, and seek diligently, until she find?

The Gospel upon Saturday in the 2 week of Lent.
A certain man had two sons: The prodigal son, is a pa^ble, both of the
Gentiles conversion, and also of every dissolute sinner penite^tly returning to
God.
Gods wonderful and tender mercy toward penitent sinners.
when he was yet far of, his father savv him, and was moved with mercy,
and running to him fell upon his neck, and kissed him. and when he came and
drevv nigh to the house, he heard music and dancing:

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XV.
7. Then upon ninety nine just.) Joy in heaven for every penitent.
Neither God, nor the Saints in heaven, nor men in earth do for all that
esteem more of penitent sinners, then they do of them that continue just and
godly: though by the soden motion and present affection of joy that man takes
and expresses in such alteration and new fallen good, it be here signified
that the conversion of every sinner is exceeding acceptable to God, and gives
his Saints new cause of joy and thanks giving to God in an other kind then
for the continuance of the just.

10. Before the Angels.) The Angels and other celestial spirits in heaven, do
rejoice at every sinners conversion: The Angels and Saints know our hearts.
they know then and have care of us, yea our hearts and inward repentance be
open to them: how then can they not hear our prayers? And betwixt Angels and
the blessed souls of Saints there is no difference in this case, Mt. 22, 14.
the one being as highly exalted as the other and as near God, in whom and by
whom only they see and know our affairs, as the other.

23. The fatted calfe.) This feasting and festiuitie (says S. Augustine li. 2,
qu. Euang. c. 33. to. 4.) are now celebrated throughout the whole world the
Church being dilated and spread: The B. Sacrament and Sacrifice of the Altar.
for, that calfe in the body, and blood of our Lord is both offered to the
Father, and also feeds the whole house. And as the calfe signifies the B.
Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ, so the first stole may signify our
innocence restored in baptism, and the rest, other graces and gifts given us
in the other Sacraments.

CHAP. XVI.
He teaches the rich to procure heaven with their riches. 14 And being
therefore derided of the covetous Pharisees (who savv temporal riches promised
in the letter of the Law) he shows that now is come the preaching of the
kingdom of God, howbeit the Law for all that in no jot shall be frustrat. 19
foretelling them also, that the covetous Ievvis shall be denied of their father,
Abraham, when poor Laxarus the penitent Gentily shall rest in his bosom.

The Gospel upon the 8 Su^day after Pentecost.
There was a cartaine rich man that had a (...)
bailife: and he was il reported of unto him, as he that had waste his
goods. (...)
bailiship: for now thou can no more be bailife. Ma^mon (says S. Hierom q.
6. ad Algas.) in the Syriake tongue signifies riches.
mammon of iniquity: that when you fail, they may receive you into the
eternal tabernacles. Mammon of iniquity, because they are often il gotten, or
il bestowed, or occasion of evil, or at the least worldly and false and not the
true heavenly riches.
with that which is the true who may credit you? Mat. 6, 24.
that which is yours, who vvil give you?

Mat. 11, 12.
because that which is high to men, is abomination before God. Mat. 5, 18.
and every one does force tovvard it. Mat. 5, 31. 19, 9.
Mar. 10, 11. 1. Cor. 7, 11.
and marieth an other, commits aduoutrie: and he that marieth her that is
dimissed from her husband, commits aduourrie.

The Gospel upon Thursday in the 2 week of Le^t.
and he was clothed with purple and silk: and he fared every day
magnifically. Lazarus in Abraham's bosom, and rest: but both in hell, and not in
the kingdom of heaven before Christ. Hiero. ep. 3. Epitaph. Nepot.
and Lazarus in his bosom: To be in continual pleasures, ease, wealth, peace,
and prosperlty in this world, is perilous, and a sign of pains in the next.
S. Hiero.
good things in thy life time, and Lazarus likewise evil: but now he is
comforted, and thou art tormented. (...) a horrible distance.
chaos: that they which vvil pass from hence to you, may not, neither go
from thence hither. Abraham had knowledge of things in earth which were not in
his time as that they had Moses and the Prophets books which he never saw.
August. de cura pro mor. c. 14.
They have Moses and the Prophets: let them hear them.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XVI.
2. The lord praised.) This man's deceiving his master is not praised, nor we
vvarra^ted by his fact to gain unjustly for to have vvherevvith to give alms:
Good works.
but his prudence, in that he provided so substancially for him self vvhilest
his masters goods were in his hands, is commended, not for a virtue, but for
avvorldly policy: and proposed as an example of the careful provision that
rich men (who are Gods stewards in earth) should make for their souls, against
they be put out of their bailiship and be called to account, which is the day
of their death: and for a condemnation of faithful men's folly and negligence,
that being assured they shall out of their offices, and well knovving they
might gain salutation by their money, have so little regard thereof.

9. They (...) receive.) Tob. 12, 9.
A great comfort to al great almes-men, and a wonderful force and virtue in
alms, Mat. 25.
with beside the merit of the work of mercy, Alms meritorious.
which (as in other places of Scripture is said) purges sin and gains
heaven, pocureth also not only the prayers of their beadsmen in earth, The
Saints do pray for us.
but their patronage in heaven also. whereby also the prayers of Saints for
the living, and namely for them to whom they were beholding in their life, are
proved. Yea and that they be in such favor with God, that they may and do
receive their friends which were once their benefactors, into their mansions
in heaven, no less then the farmers whom the il steward pleasured, might
receive their friend into their earthly houses. Which also insinuates to us,
that alms bestovved specially upon holy men, who by their merits and prayers
are great in Gods grace, may much more help us then our charitable deeds done
upon vulgar men in necessity, though that be of exceeding great merit also.
See all this in these Doctors following. Hiero. qu. 6. ad Algas. to. 3. Ambros.
in Luc. August. ser. 35 de verb. Do. c. 1. Gregor. moral. li. (...) c. 14.
Augu. li. 2 q. Euang. qu. 34. Chrysostom. ho. 3^ ad po. Antioch. to. 5.

18. And marries.) Marriage after divorce unlawful.
The good of Marriage through out al nations and men, is in issue and fidelity
of chastity, but among the people of God it consists also in holiness of
Sacrament: Whereby it comes to pass that is a heinous crime to marry again,
though there be a divorce made, so long as the parties live. Aug. de bono
coniug. c. 24 to. 6. See the Annotations upon Mark 10, 11.

22. Of the Angels.) Unmerciful rich men.
Angels carry good men's souls to heaven now, as they did then his to Abraham's
bosom. See the revvard of poverty, affliction, and patience: and on the
contrary, the end and revvard of wealth joined with unmercifulness. Note also
here, that at the day of every man's death there is a particular judgment, and
therefore the soul sleeps not nor hangs in suspense til the general
judgment.

22. Abraham's Bosom.) Abraham's bosom.
The Bosom of Abraham is the resting place of al them that died in perfect
state of grace before Christ's time, heaven before being shut from men. It is
called in Zachary, Limbus patru^.
a lake without water, Zach. 9, 11.
and sometimes a prison, but most commonly of the Divines Limbus patrum, for
that it is thought to have been the higher part or brimme of Hell, Esa. 42, 7.
the places of punishment being far Iovver then the same, which therefore be
called Infernum inferius. Aug. in Ps. 85. Ep. 99.
the lovver hell. where this mansion of the fathers stood, or whether it be any
part of Hell, S. Augustine doubts: but that there was such a place, he nor no
Catholic man ever doubted: as all the fathers make it most certain, Christ
descended into Hell, and delivered the fathers.
that our Savior descending to Hell, went thither specially, and delivered the
said fathers out of that mansion. Iren. li. 4 c. ^9. Eusebius. Demonst. Euang. li.
10. c. 8 sub fine^. Nazian. orat. 2 de Pasch. Chrysostom. to. 5 in demonst. Quod
Christus sit Deus paulo post initium. Epipha. in here is. 46 Tatiani. Ambro. de
mist. Pasch. c. 4. Hiero. in 9 Zacharia. August. ep. 99 and li. 20 de Ciuit. c.
15. Paulinus in Panegyrico Celst. Cyrillus in lo. li. 12 c. 36 ad illud,
Inclinato capite. Gregor. li. 6 ep. 179. which truth and place though of all the ancient vvriters confessed and proved by this and other Scriptures: yet the
Adversaries deny it (as they do Purgatory) most impudently.

26, A great chaos.) Purgatory,
A great distance betwixt Abraham's bosom and the inferior hell. Some judge
Purgatory to be placed there, from whence (no doubt) Christ also delivered
some at his descending to hell. Aug. ep. 99.
for, these in Abraham's bosom were not in pains: and S. Augustine says the
Scriptures be plain that he took some out of the places of punishment, and
yet none out of the hell of the damned. What other place then can that be but
Purgatory?

28. Lest they also.) If the damned had care of their friends alive how and for
what cause soever, much more have the Saints and saved persons. And if those
in hell have means to express their cogitations and desires, Saints do hear
our prayers and have care of us.
and to be understood of Abraham so far distant both by place and condition,
much rather may the living pray to the Saints and be heard of them: betwixt
earth (that is to say) the Church militant and heaven, Genesis 32.
being continual passage of souls, and * Angels ascending and descending by
Jacobs ladder. M^n must not for all that be curious to search how the souls of
the deceased express their minds, and be heard one of an other, and so fall
to blasphemy, as Calvin does, Calu. li. 3
asking whether their ears be so long to hear so far of, Caluins blasphemy.
and wickedly measuring al things by mortal men's corporal gross manner of
uttering conceits one to an other. Iustit. c. 22 sect. 24.
Which was not here done by this damned nor by Abraham, with corporal
instruments of tongue, teeth, and ears: though for the better expressing of
the damneds case, Christ vouchsaued to utter it in terms agreeing to our
capacity.

CHAP. XVII.
So damnable it is to be author of a Schism, 3 that we must rather forgive be
it never so often. 5 We must he fervent in faith, 7 and humble withal, knowing
that we are bound to God, and not he to us. The nine Jews are ungrateful after
that he has cured their leprosy: but the one Samaritane (the one Catholic
Church of the Gentiles) far otherwise. 20 The Pharisees asking, when comes
this kingdom of God (of whose approaching they had now heard so much) he
teaches that God must reign within us: 22 and warns us after his Passion
never to go out of his Catholic Church for any new secret coming of Christ
that Heretics shall pretend, but only to expect his second coming in glory,
26 preparing our selves unto it, because it shall come upon many unprovided, 31
specially through the persecution of Antichrist a little before it.

Mt. 18, 7
It is Not of mere necessity, for then it were no fault: but praesupposing the
great wickedness of men, it is impossible but there shall be scandals and
therefore it follows, Vvo^ to him by whom they come.
impossible that scandale should not come: Mar. 9, 42.
but vvo to him by whom they come. Mt. 18, 21.
rebuke him: and if he do penance, forgive him.

Mat. 17, 20.
* If you had faith like to a mustard seed, you might say to this mulberie
tree, be thou rooted up, and be transplanted into the sea: and it would obey
you. THE fourth part of this Gospel, The coming of Christ into Iewrie,
toward his Passion.
and serve me vvhiles I eat and drink, and afterward thou shall eat and
drink?

The Gospel upon the 13 Su^day after Pentecost.
Leu. 14, 2.
he said, Go, * show your selves to the Priests. And it came to pass, as
they went, they were made clean. And yet we see here it was not only faith,
but also his thankfulness and returni^g to give glory to God.
thy faith hathmade thee safe.

of God comes not with observation: While they ask and look for a
temporal kingdom in pomp and glory, lo their king and Messiah was now among
the^* whose spiritual kingdom is within all the faithful that have dominion
over sin.
the kingdom of God is within you.

Mt. 24, 23. Mar. 13, 21.
No man must ru^ne out of the Church after Schismatikes to hear them preach
Christ in corners, Christ's doctrine being open in all the world. See annot. Mt.
14, 23.
Go not, neither do ye follow after. Genesis 7, 5
days of Noe, so shall it be also in the days of the Son of man. Genesis 19, 24.
They did eat and drink, bought and sold, planted, and builded: Genesis 19, 26.


ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XVII.
10. Unprofitable servants.) How we are unprofitable and profitable servants.
If our Savior had said that the keeping of Gods commandments had been
unprofitable and not auailable to our selves, them might the Protestants have
truly argued thereby that our works deserve not heaven or any revvard at
Gods hand: but so he said not, but that our service is to God unprofitable, who
calls for it as duty, and not as a thing needeful or profitable to himself.
And though here our Master teach us so humbly to conceive of our own doings
tovvard him, Mt. 25, (...).
yet him self else vvher calls not his servants unprofitable when they have
done their labor, but speaks thus, Good and faithful servant, because thou
vvast faithful in a little, I vvil place thee over much: enter into the joy of
thy Lord. Io. 15, 14.
Yea of such as serve him in the grace of the new Testament, he affirms that
he will not now name them servants but friends, yea and take them for his own
children, and as his friends and sons he counts of us and our works
toward heaven, though we in humility and truth must confess alvvaies that
we be to him unprofitable servants. Yea and S. Paul says plainly, that by
cleansing our selves from sinful works, we shall be profitable vessels to our
lord 2 Timot. 2, 21.

14. To the priests.) Confession to the Priest.
This leprosy signifies sin, which though God may and can heal without
any man's means, yet he does it not ordinarily but by the Priests ministry:
therefore let no man despise Gods ordinance nor say that it is enough to
confess to God though he never come at the priest. li. de visit. infirm. apud
August.

14. As they went.) A man may sometimes be so contrite and penitent, that his
sin is forgiven before he come to the Priest, but then also he must
notwithstanding go to the Priest, as these lepers did: specially whereas we
are never sure how contrite we are, and because thereis no true contrition, but
with desire also of the Sacrament in time and place.

CHAP. XVIII.
The Church is taught to commit the revenge of her persecutions to God, and to
pray incessantly, for he no doubt (though in the persecution of Antichrist fevv
vvil so think) vvil at length come. 9 We must also pray with humility,
because we know not with the Pharisee if we be just, but we know with the
Publicane that we be sinners. 15 He vvil have children to be brought to him,
and al to be as children. 18 What is to be done to get life everlasting. 22
What also, to get perfection, 28 and what revvard they shall have that leave
al, year or any part, for his sake. 31 he foretells of his Passion most
particularly, 33 and entering into Jericho, cures one blind man.

We should pray always by faith, hope, and charity, and by working the
things that be acceptable to God: though special times of vocal prayers in the
Canonical hours be assigned for the sturring of us up to God through external
signs of devotion.
always to pray, and not to be weary,

The Gospel upon the 10 Sunday after Pentecost.
and despised others, this parable: him self: God, I give thee thanks that I
am not as the rest of men, extorcioners, unjust, aduouterers, as also this
Publicane. To take pride of fasting, tithing, or any good work, is naught:
though the works the^ selves be very good.
I fast twice in a week: I give tithes of all that I possess. So do the
priests and people at the holy Altar knock their breasts, and say with the
humble Publicane, Deus propitius. August. ps. 31 conc, 3.
knocked his breast, saying, God be merciful to me a sinner.

Mt. 19, 13. Mr. 10, 13.
that he might touch them. Which thing when the Disciples savv, they rebuked
them. In matters of faith and religion we must be as humble and obedient to the
Catholic Church as young children to their parents.
as a child, shall not enter into it.

Mt. 19, 16. Mr. 10, 17.
saying, Good master, by doing what, shall I possess everlasting life? Exo.
20, 13.
Not faith only but also keeping the commandments purchase life everlasting.
See annot. Mat. 19, 16.
the commandments: Thou shall not kill, Thou shall not commit aduoutrie, Thou
shall not bear false witness, Thou shall not steal, Honor thy father and
mother. This is not a commaundme^t or precept, but counsel: which the
religious do follow. See Annot. Mat. 19.
Sell all that ever thou have, and give to the poor, and thou shall have
treasure in heaven: and come, follow me. The Apostles among other things left
their wives also, as S. Hierom notes out of this place. li. 1 adu. Iouin.
wife, or children for the kingdom of God, Life everlasting the reward for
leaving or losing willingly our goods for Christ's sake.
life everlasting.

Mt. 20, 17. Mr. 10, 32.
and said to them, Behold we go up to Jerusalem, The Gospel upon the Sunday
of Quiquagesme.
and al things shall be consummate which were written by the Prophets of the
son of man.



ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XVIII.
8. Shall he find faith?) The Church erreth not in faith.
The Luciferians and Donatists used this place to excuse their fall from the
Church, as our Adversaries now do, saying that it was decayed in faith,
when they forsook it. To whom we answer as S. Hierom and S. Augustine
answered them, Hier, con^. Lucif. c. 6. Aug. de unit. Ec. c. 15, and de verb.
Do. Ser. (...).
that Christ says not that there should be no faith leaft in earth: but by
this manner of speech the insinuates, that at the later day in the great
persecution of Antichrist faith should be more rare, and the faithful among so
many wicked not so notorious: specially that perfect faith containing devotion,
trust, and affection toward God, which our Master so praised in certain upon
whom he wrought miracles, and by force whereof mountains might be moved,
which is rare even when the Church florisheth most.

CHAP. XIX.
In Ieriche he lodges in the house of Zachaus a Publicane, and against the
murmuring Jews opens the reasons of his so doing, 11 He shows, that the
last day should not be yet, 15 and whas then in the judgment he vvil do both
to us of his Church as well good as bad, 47 and also to the reprobate Jews.
29 Being new come to the place of his Passion, he enters (weeping and
foretelling the destruction of blind Jerusalem) which triumph as their
Christ. 4^ He shows his zeal for the house of God, and teaches therein
every day. 47 The rulers would destroy him, but for fear of the people.

The Gospel upon the Dedication of a Church.
he vvalked through Jericho. Zachaeus.
savv him, and said to him, Zachaeus, come down in have: because this day I
must abide in thy house. Mt, 18, 12.
because that he also is the son of Abraham.

The Gospel for a confessor that is not a Bishop, and namely for S. Lewis the
king of France, August. 25.
* A certain noble man went into a far country to take to him self a
kingdom, Mt. 25, 14.
and to return. Mark here against the adversaries, that the rewards of these
two good servants be diverse and vnaequal, according to the diversity or
inequality of their gains, that is, their merits. and yet one receives the
penny (Mt. 20, 9.) as well as the other, that is, heaven or life everlasting.
ten cities. that which thou did not sovv. See annotatio^s Matthew. 27, 29,
etc.
and I coming might certes with usury have exacted it? THE fifth part of the
Gospel, Of the Holy week of his Passion in Jerusalem.
bring them hither: and kill them before me.

Mt. 21, 1
he went before ascending to Jerusalem. Mr. 11, 1
Io. 12, 15
he sent two of his Disciples, PALM SUNDAY.
into the which as you enter, you shall find the colt of an ass tied, on
which no man ever has sitten: loose him, and bring him. his disciples,
them that descended', began with joy to praise God with a loud voice, for all the miracles that they had seen, eyes. This was fulfilled 40 years after the
death of Christ by Titus and Vespasianus, when besides incredible miseries of
famine and other distresses, there perished eleue^ hundred thousand, and were
taken captives 97000, the siege begi^ning in the very same feast and greatest
sole^nitie of Easter when they put Christ to death. Eusebius. li. 1 hist. c. 6. 1.
8. Joseph. li. 7 c. 17.
the days shall come upon thee: and thy enemies shall compass thee with a
trenche, and enclose thee about, and straiten thee on every side,

Mt. 21, 12. Mr. 11, 15.
And entering into the temple, he began to cast out the sellers therein and the
biers, That my house is the house of prayer. MONDAY
But you have made it a den of thieves. Es. 56, 7
And the chief Priests and the Scribes and the Princes of the people sought to
destroy him: Ier. 7, 11


ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XIX
4. Went up.) Not only inward devotion of faith and charity toward Christ,
but external offices of seeing, External devotion.
following, touching, receiving, harboring him, are recommended to us in this
example: even so our manifold exterior devotion toward his Sacraments,
Saints, and servants, be grateful: specially the endeavor of good people not
only to be present at Mass or in the Church, but to be near the B.
Sacrament, and to see it with al reverence and devotion according to the order
of the Church, much more to receive it into the house of their body.

2. I restore fourefold.) Restitution.
That which we give of our own, is alms and satisfaction for our sins:
but that which we restore of il gotten goods by Extortion, Usury, Simonie,
Bribrie, Theft, or otherwise, that is called here Restoring. And it is of duty
and not of free alms, and must be rendered not to whom we lift, but to the
parties annoyed if it be possible, otherwise it must be bestovved upon the
poor, or other good uses, according to the advice of our superior and such as
have charge of our souls. But that he yielded fourefold, that was more then he
was bound, Satisfaction.
but very satisfactorie for his former sins also. And herevvith we may note,
that it is not the giving of a penny, grote, or crown, of a rich man's
superfluity, that is so much reco^mended to sins for redeeming their
faults: but this large bestovving upon Christ, to sell al and give it in
alms, to give the moytie of our goods, to render four times so much, for
that which is wrongfully gotten, Lu. 21, 3.
that extinguisheth sins. The poor widow brass penny was very grateful,
because it was al or much of that she had: but the rich man's pound of his
superfluity, though it be good, yet is nothing so grateful.

CHAP. XX.
To the Jews he avouches his power by the witness of John who was a man
sent of God. 9 and foretells in a parable their reprobation most worthy
(with the vocation of the Gentiles in their place) 17 and consequently their
irreparable damnation that shall ensue thereof. 20 He defeateth their snare
about paying tribute to Caesar: 27 he answers also the invention of the
Sadduces against the Resurrection, 40 And so having put them al to silence, 41
he turns and poseth them, because they imagined that Christ should be no more
but a man: 45 bidding al to bevvare of the Scribes (authors of the Jews
schism from him) being ambitious and hypocrites.

Mr. 21, 23. Mr. 11, 27,
the chief Priests and the Scribes with the ancients assembled, TVESDAY.
See Annot. Mat. c 21, 23.
Tell us, in what power do thou these things? or, who is he that has
given the this power?

Esa. 5, 1.
* A certain See the marginal annotations Marc. (...).
man planted a vineyard, Mt. 21, 33. Mr. 12, 1.
and let it out to husbandmen: and he was from home a long time. Ps. 117, 22.
said to him, God forbid. The stone which the builders rejected, the same is
become into the head of the corner?

Mt. 22, 15. Mr. 12, 13.
they sent spies which should feine them selves just: that they might take him
in his talk, and deliver him to the principaltie and power of the Praesident.
So duties must be done to Princes, that our duty to God be not neglected. See
Annot. Mat. c. 22, 15.
to to Caesar: and the things that are Gods, to God.

Mt. 22, 23. Mr. 12, 18.
which deny that there is a resurrection, and they asked him, Deu, 25, 5.
and he have no children, that his brother take her to wife, and raise up
seed to his brother. The greek (...) impotteth also this much, they that are
made vvorthie, to wit, by the grace of God, and so they are in deed worthy,
as also in the next chapter verse 36. and 2 Thessalonians. 1. 5.
counted vvorthie of that world and the resurrection from the dead, neither
marry, nor take vviues, The God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, Exo. 3, 6.
and the God of Jacob.

Mt. 22, 44. Mr. 12, 36.
* How say they that Christ is the son of David? The Lord said to my Lord,
Sit on my right hand, Ps. 109, 1.
the foot stool of thy feet?

Mt. 23, 6. Mr. 12, 38.
that vvil walk in robes, and love salutations in the marketplace, and the
first chaires in the synagogs, and the chief rooms in feasts.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XX.
^^. Shall be counted vvorthie.) This truth and speech that good men be worthy
of heaven, is according to the Scriptures, To be worthy of heaven, or to
deserve and merit it.
and signifies that man's works done by Christ's grace do condignely or
vvorthely deserve eternal joy, as Sap. 3. God proved them, and found them
worthy of him self. and Mat. 10. He that loves his father more then me, is
not worthy of me. and Colos. 1, That you may walk worthy of God. and most
plainly Apoc. 3. They shall walk with me in white, because they are worthy.
as of Christ (c. 1) Thou art worthy o Lord to receive glory etc. And that, to
be counted vvorthie, and to be vvorthie, (...).
is here al one, The new Testament an. 1580.
it is plain, by the Greek word, which S. Paul uses so, as the adversaries
own English Testaments do testify, reading thus Hebre. 10. Of how much
sorer punishment shall he be vvorthie, which etc. And it must needs signify,
because men for sins are not only counted, but are in deed vvorthie of
punishment, as them selves do grant. They do greatly therefore forget them
selves, and are ignorant in the Scriptures, and know not the force nor the
valor of the grace of God, which does not only make our labors grateful to
God, but worthy of the reward which he has provided for such as love him. See
the Annot. 2 Thessalonians. 1, 5.

^6. Equal to Angels.) Saints of our kind, The dignity of Saints.
now in their souls, and after their resurrection in body and soul together,
shall be in all things equal to Angels: and for degree of bliss, many Saints of
greater merit shall be above diverse Angels: as S. John Baptist, the Apostles,
and others, and our B. Lady above all the orders of holy spirits in dignity and
bliss, and no marvel, our nature by Christ being so highly exalted above al
Angels.

CHAP. XXI.
He commends the poor widow for her two mites, above al. 5 Having said
that the Temple shall be quite destroyed, 7 he foretelletb first many things
that shall go before, 20 then a sign also when it is near, after which shall
come the destruction it self in most horrible manner, without hope of
restitution, until al Nations of the Gentiles be gathered into his Church in the
very end of the world. 25 And then what signs shall come of the last day,
terrible to the world, 28 but comfortable to us of his Church, 34 so that we
be alvvaies vvatchful.

Mr. 12, 14.
he savv them that did cast their gifts into the treasury, rich persons.

with goodly stones and donaries, he said, Mt. 24, 1. Mar. 13, 1.
* the days vvil come wherein This was fulfilled 40 years after the death of
Christ, the 19 of August, being the very month and day where in the
Babylonians burnt it: from the first building thereof by Salomo^ 1^30 years,
from the reedifying thereof under Cyrus, 639 years. Iosep. de bell. Iud. li. 9
cap. 10.
there shall not be left a stone upon a stone that shall not be destroyed,
TVESDAY night.
saying, Master, when shall these things be: and what shall be the sign when
they shall begin to come to pass? Many falseprophets and Heretics. See An. Mt.
24. Mr. 13.
many vvil come in my name, saying that I am he: and the time is at hand, go
not therefore after them. The Gospel for many Martyrs.
And when you shall hear of vvarres and seditions, be not terrified: these
things must first come to pass, but the end is not yet by and by. Great
persecution of Catholic men.
lay their hands upon you: and persecute you delivering you into synagogs and
prisons, dravving you to kings and presidents for my name.



Eze. 32, 7. Joel. 3, 15.
and upon earth distress of nations, The Gospel upon the 1 Sunday in Aduent.
for the confusion of the sound of sea and waves, for fear and expectation,
what shall come upon the whole world. for the powers of heaven shall be
moved:

(...). See Annot. c. 20, 15.
accounted vvorthie to escape al these things that are to come, and to stand
before the Son of man.

Solitariness or eremitage (as S. Gregory Nazian. says) is a goodly thing,
this does the mount Carmel of Elias teach, John's desert, and that mount unto
which JESUS often retired, and was quietly alone with him self. Ser. 26 de
amore pauperum.
mount that is called Oliuet.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XXI.
4. Of her penury.) To offer or give alms of our superfluites, is not so
acceptable nor meritorious, as to bestow some of that which is of our
necessary provision, and which we may hardly spare from our selves: for, that
proceeds of greater zeal, vvil, and intention, which be more respected of God
then the substance of the gift.

CHAP. XXII.
Judas does sell him to the Jews. 7 After the old Paschal, 19 he gives to
his disciples the bread of life in a mystical sacrifice of his body and blood,
for an everlasting comemoration of his Passion. 21 He covertly admonishes the
traitor. 24 Against their ambitious contention he shows them that the
maioritie of any among them in this world is for their service, as his own
also was: 28 and how he vvil exalt them al in the world to come: 31
foretelling Peter the singular privilege of his faith never failing, 33 and his
three negations: 35 and how they shall al now be put to their shifts. 39 And
that night, after his prayer with svveating of blood, 43 he is taken of the
Jews men, Judas being their captain: yet shevving them both by miracle and
word, that they could do nothing unto him but by his own permission. 54
Then in the chief Priests house he is thrice denied of Peter, 63 shamefully
abused of his keepers, 66 and in the morning impiously condemned of their
Council, for confessing him self to be the Son of God.

Mt. 26, 1
which is called Pasche: The PASSION according to S. Luke in these two
chapters, is the Gospel at Mass upon Tenebre wenesday.
Mr. 14, 1
but they feared the people. TENEBRE Wenesday.


Mt. 26, 17. Mr. 14, 12.
wherein it was necessary that the Pasche should be killed. MAVNDY Thursday.
saying, Go and prepare us the Pasche, that we may eat.



Mt. 26, 26. Mr. 14, 22.
he gave thanks, and brake: and gave to them, saying, THIS IS MY BODY WHICH
IS GIVEN FOR YOU. 1. Cor. 11, 24.
Do this for a commemoration of me. The Greek is here so plain, that there
was very blood in the chalice, shed for us, that Beza says it is a corruption
in the greek. See the Annota. upon this place.
THIS IS THE CHALICE THE NEW TESTAMENT IN MY BLOOD, WHICH SHALL BE SHED FOR
YOU.

Mt. 26, 21. Mr. 14, 20.
the hand of him that betraieth me, is with me on the table. Io. 13, 18
goes according to that which is determined: but yet vvo to that man by whom
he shall be betrayed.

Mt. 20, 25.
which of them seemed to be greater. Mr. 10, 42.
Straight after the former loving check and admonition, he promises to them
all that have been partakers with him of his miseries in this life, greater
prcemi^^ence in heaven, then any Potentate can have in this world, and therefore
that they need not be careful of dignity or Supremacy.
upon thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel.

Mt. 26, 34. Mr. 14, 30.
Mt. 10, 9. Lu. 10, 4.
did you lack any thing? But they said, Nothing. Es. 53, 12
And with the wicked was he reputed. For those things that are concerning
me, have an end. Mt. 16, 36. Mr. 14, 32.
THVRSDAY night.
Io. 18, 1,
he said to them, Pray, lest ye enter into tentation. as drops of blood
trikling down upon the earth.









ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XXII.
15. With desire I have desired.] The old Paschal cease and a new is
instituted.
This great desire he had to eat this Paschal lamb, was not for it self,
which he had celebrated many years before: but because he meant immediately
after the Paschal of the Law was sacrificed and eaten, to institute the other
new Paschal in the oblation and eating of his own body, by which the old
Paschal should end and be fulfilled, and in which the old Testament and Law
ceasing, the Kingdom of God (which is the state of the new Testament and of his
Church) should begin. For, the very passage from the old Law to the new was in
this one supper.

17. Taking the chalice.] This chalice according to the very evidence of the
text it self also, is not the second part of the Holy Sacrament, but that
solemn cup of wine which belonged as a libament to the offering and eating
of the Paschal lamb. Which being a figure specially of the holy Chalice, Two
cups or chalices at Christ's last supper.
was there drunken by our Savior, and given to the Apostles also, with
declaration that it should be the last cup of the Law, not to be drunken any
more, til it should be drunken new in the kingdom of God, that is to say, in
the celebration of the B. Sacrament of his blood of the new Testament. Mt. 26,
29
And by this place it seems very like that the words in S. Matthew, I will
not drink of the fruit of the vine etc. were pertaining to this cup of the
old Law, and not to the Holy Sacrament, though they be there by repetition or
recapitulation spoken after the holy Chalice.

19. This is my body.] Although sense tell thee it is bread, yet it is the body,
according to his words. let faith confirm thee, The real presence.
judge not by sense, after the words of our Lord let no doubt rise in thy
mind. Cyril. mystag. 4. Of the verity of flesh and blood there is left no
place to doubt: by the profession of our Lord him self and by our faith it is
flesh and blood in deed. Is not this truth? To them be it untrue, which deny
JESUS CHRIST to be true God. Hilar li. 8 de Trinit.

19. Which is given.] Christ sacrificed his body and blood in Sacrament at his
supper.
As the former words make and prove his body present, so these words plainly
signify, that it is present, as given, offered or sacrificed for us: and being
uttered in the quod datur (...)
present tence, it signifies not only that it should afterward be given or
offered on the Cross, but that it was then also in the Sacrament given and
offered for us. Whereby it is inuincebly proved that his Body is present as an
host or Sacrifice: and that the making or consecrating thereof must needs be
Sacrificing. And therefore the holy Fathers in this sense call it a Sacrificing.
Nissen. orat. 1 de resur. The Sacrifice of the Altar.
Leo ser. Cyril. Alex. anathem. (...).
^ et ^ de Pass. Hesychius li. 2. in Leuit. c. 8. Grego. ho. 37 in Euang. et
Dial. li, 4, c. 59. Cyrillus Hieros. mystag. 5. Dionys. Eccl. hier. c. 3.
Ignat. ep. 5. ad Smyrn. Justinius dial. cum Tryph. circ. med. Iren. li. 4, c. 32
et 14. Tertu!. de cult, fam. et ad vxor. li. 2. Cypr. ep. ad Cacil. et de Can.
Do. Eusebius. Demonst. euang. li. 1 c. 10 Nazian. orat, ^ cont. Iulianu^. Christ.
ho. 83 in 26 Mat. et li. 6 de Sacerd. Ambros. li. 4 de Sacram. c. 6. et li. 1
Offic. c. 48. Hiero. in ep. ad Hedib. q 2. et ad Euagr. ep. 126 to. 3. August.
in psalm. 33 conc. 1. et alibi sape. Graci omnes in 9 Hebr. et Primasius. Conc.
Nic. 1. can. 14. Ephesians. ad Nestor, Constantinop. 6. can. 32. Nicen. ^ act. 6
to. 3. La^cran. Constant. Flor. Trid.

19. Do this) The Apostles are made Priests, and the Sacrament of holy Orders
instituted.
In these words the holy Sacrament of Order is instituted, because power and
commission to do the principal act and work of Priesthod, is given to the
Apostles: that is, to do that which Christ then did concerning his body:
which was, to make and offer his body as a sacrifice for us and for all that
have need of Sacrifice, and to give it to be eaten as Christ's body
sacrificed, to al faithful. For as the Paschal lamb was first sacrificed, and
then eaten: so was his body: and thus to do he here gives commission and
authority to the Apostles, and to al Priests which be their successors in this
matter. Dionys. call. Hierar. c. 3. Iren. li. 4, c. 32. Cypr. ep. ad Cacil.
Chrysostom. ho. 17 in ep. ad Hebr. Ambros. in Ps. 38. and in c. 10 ad Hebr.

19. For a commemoration.] This Sacrifice and Sacrament is to be done
perpetually in the Church for the commemoration of Christ, specially of his
Passion: that is to say, that it may be a lively representation, A
co^memoratiue sacrifice is a true sacrifice, no less then the prefiguratiue
sacrifices were true sacrifices.
exemplar, and form of his Sacrifice upon the cross. Of which one oblatio^
on the cross, not only al other sacrifices of the Law were figures, but
this also: though this in a more nigh, high, mystical, and marvelous sort then
any other. for in them Christ death was signified as by resemblance and
similitudes of external creatures and bodies of brute beasts, but in this of
the new Testament, his body visibly sacrificed on the cross, in and by the
self same body sacrificed and immolated in Sacrament and under the shapes of
bread and wine, is most nearly and perfectly resembled: and therefore this is
most properly co^memoratiue, as most nearly expressing the very condition,
Ambr. in 10. Hebr. Chrysostom. ho. 17 in ep. ad Hebr.
nature, efficacy, sort, and substance of that on the cross. For which the
holy fathers call it the very self same sacrifice (though in other manner) which
was done on the cross, as it is the self same thing, that is offered in the
Sacrament, and on the cross. whereby you may see the peruersitie of the
Protestants or their ignorance, that think it therefore not to be Christ's body,
because it is a memory of his body or a figure of his body upon the cross:
nor to be a true sacrifice, because it is a commemoratiue sacrifice. for as the
thing that more lively, nearly, and truly resembles or represents, is a
better figure then that which shadoweth it a far of: so this his body in the
Sacrament, To be a figure of a thing, and yet the thing it self, repugneth not.
is more perfectly a figure of Christ's body and sacrifice, then any other.
Christ him self the Son of God is a figure and character of his fathers
person, being yet of the self same substance, and Christ's body transfigured on
the holy Mount, was a figure and resemblance of his person glorified in heaven,
even so is his body in the Sacrament to a faithful man that knovveth by his
belief grounded on Christ's own word, that in the one form is his body, in
the other his blood, the most perfect representatio^ of his death that can be.
As for the sacrifice, it is no less a true Sacrifice, because it is
commemoratiue of Christ's Passion: then those of the old Testament were the
less true, because they were prefiguratiue, for that is the condition annexed
to al Sacrifice of every Law, to represent Christ's Passion.

20. The new Testament in my blood.] Moses took the blood of the first
sacrifice that was made after the giving of the Law Exodus 24. and with blood
confirmed the covenant and compact betwixt God and his people, and so
dedicated the old Testament, which without blood (says S, Paul) was not
dedicated. Hebr. 9.
Moses put that blood also into a standing piece, and sprinkled all the people
etc. Both testame^ts dedicated in blood.
with the same, and said these formal words, This is the blood of the
covenant etc. or (as it is read in S. Paul) of the Testament which God has
delivered unto you. verse. 20.
Unto al which, Christ in this action about the second part of this his
sacrifice, in every of the Evangelists most clearly alludeth, expressing that
the new Testament is begone and dedicated in his blood in the Chalice, no
less then the old was dedicated, begone, and ratified in that blood of
calves contained in the goblet of Moses, with which his own blood he
sprinkled inwardly his Apostles as the first fruits of the new Testament,
imitating the words of Moses, and saying, This is the Chalice the new
Testament etc.: which the other Evangelists spoke more plainly, This is my
blood of the new Testament. The external religion of the new Testament
principally in the sacrifice of the altar.
By all which it is most certain, that Christ's blood in the Chalice, is the
blood of Sacrifice, and that in this sacrifice of the altar consists the
external religion and proper service of the new Testament, no less then the
sovereign worship of God in the old Law did consist in the sacrifices of the
same. For though Christ's sacrifice on the Cross and his blood shed for us
there, bed the general price, redemption, and satisfaction for us all, and is
the last and perfectest sealing or confirmation of the new law and Testament:
yet the service and Sacrifice which the people of the new Testament might
resort unto, could not be that violent action of the Cross, but this on the
Altar, which by Christ's own appointment is and shall be the eternal office of
the new Testament, and the continual application of all the benefits of his
Passion unto us.

20. Which shall be shed.) calix qui the chalice which (...)
It is much to be observed that the relative, The chalice shed for us, must
needs signify, the blood therein, not wine, and the same sacrificed.
Which, in these words is not governed or ruled (as some would perhaps
think) of the novvne blood, but of the word chalice. which is most plain by
the Greek. Which takes away al cauillations and shifts from the Protestants,
both against the real presence and the true Sacrificing. For it shows
evidently, that the blood as the contents of the chalice, or as in the chalice,
is shed for us (for so the Greek reads in the present tense) and not only
as upon the cross. And therefore as it follows thereof inuincibly, that it is
no bare figure, but his blood in deed, so it ensues necessarily^ that it is a
Sacrifice, and propitiatory, because the chalice (that is the Blood contained
in the same) is shed for our sins. For all that know the manner of the
Scriptures speeches, know also that this, Blood to be shed for sin, Beza
condemns the Gospel it self of falshod and impossibility.
to be sacrificed for propitiation or for pardon of sins. And this text
proves all this so plainly, that Annot. (...). Test. 1556.
Beza turns him self roundly upon the Holy Evangelist, charging him with
Soloecisme or false Greek, or else that the words (which yet he confesses to
be in all copies Greek and Latin) are thrust into the text out of some other
place: which he rather stands upon then that S. Luke should speak
incongruously in so plain a matter. And therefore he says plainly that it can
not be truly said neither of the chalice it self nor of the contents thereof:
which is in deed to give the lie to the blessed Evangelist, or to deny this
to be Scripture. So clear is the Scripture for us, so miserable flights and
shifts is falshod put unto, God be thanked.

24. Contention.] Ambition.
The Apostles perceiving Christ's departure from them and his kingdom to be
near, as infirm men and not yet endewed with the spirit of God, began to have
emulation and cogitations of Superiority one over an other: which our Master
represseth in them by exhortation to humility and by his own example, that
being their Lord, yet so lately served them: not forbidding Maioritie or
Superiority in them, but pride, tyranny, and contempt of their inferiors.

31. Simon Simon.] Lastly to put them out of doubt, he calls Peter twice by
name, and telling him the Devils desire to sifte and try them al to the
uttermost (as he did that night) says that he has specially prayed for him,
Peter's faith shall never fail.
to this end that his faith should never fail, and that he being once
converted, should after that for ever confirm, establish or uphold the rest in
their faith. which is to say, that Peter is that man whom he would make
Superior over them and the whole Church. Whereby we may learn that it was
thought fit in the providence of God, that he who should be the head of the
Church, should have a special privilege by Christ's prayer and promise, never to
fail in faith, and that none other either Apostle, Bishop, or priest may
challenge any such singular or special prerogative either of his Office or
person, otherwise then joining in faith with Peter and by holding of him. Sermon.
2.
The danger (says S. Leo) was common to all the Apostles, but our Lord took
special care of Peter, Assump. ad Pontif. Li. q. Noui. Test. q. 75. to. 4.
that the state of all the rest might be more sure, if the head were invincible:
God so dispensing the aid of his grace, that the assurance and strength which
Christ gave to Peter, might redound by Peter to the rest of the Apostles. S.
Augustine also: Christ praying for Peter, prayed for the rest, because in the
Pastor and Prelate the people is corrected or commended. And S. Ambrose
writes, that Peter after his tentation was made Pastor of the Church, because
it was said to him, Thou being converted, confirm thy brethren. Neither was
this the privilege of S. Peter's person, but of his Office, that he should not
fail in faith but ever confirm al other in their faith. The Roman faith of
Peter's successors can not fall.
For the Church, for whose sake that privilege was thought necessary in Peter
the Head thereof, was to be preserved no less afterward, then in the Apostles
time. whereupon all the Fathers apply this privilege of not failing and of
confirming other in faith, Cypr. ep. 55. nu. 6. Bernard. ep. 190.
to the Roman Church and Peter's successors in the same. To which (says S.
Cyprian) infidelity or false faith can not come. And S. Bernard says writing
to Innocentius Pope, against Abailardus the Heretic, we must refer to your
Apostleship all the scandals and perils which may fall, in matter of faith
specially. For there the defects of faith must be helped, where faith can not
fail. For to what other See was it ever said, Popes may err personally, not
iudicially or definitiuely.
I have prayed for thee Peter, that thy faith do not fail? So say the Fathers.
not meaning that none of Peter's seat can err in person, understanding,
private doctrine or writings, but that they can not nor shall not ever
iudicially conclude or give definitive sentence for falshod or heresy against
the Catholic faith, in their Consistories, Courts, Councels, decrees,
deliberations or consultations kept for decision and determination of such
controversies, doubts, or questions of faith as shall be proposed unto them:
because Christ's prayer and promise protecteth them therein for confirmation of
their brethren. Deuteronomy. 17.
And no marvel that our Master would have his vicars Consistory and Seat
infallible, seeing even in the old Law the high Priestod and Chair of Moses
wanted not great privilege in this case, though nothing like the Churches and
Peter's prerogative. But in both, any man of sense may see the difference
between the person, and the Office, as well in doctrine as life. Liberius in
persecution might yield, Marcellinus for fear might commit Idolatry, Honorius
might fall to Heresy, Aug. ep. 166. in fine.
and more then all this, some Judas might creep into the Office: and yet all this without prejudice of the Office and Seat, in which (says S. Augustine)
our Lord has set the doctrine of truth. Caiphas by privilege of his Office
prophesied right of Christ, but according to his own knowledge and faith, knew
not Christ. The Evangelists and other penners of holy write, for the execution
of that function had the assistance of God, and so far could not possibly err:
but that Luke, Mark, Solomon or the rest might not err in other their private
vvritings, The learned fathers sought to the B. of Rome for resolution of
doubts.
that we say not. Bernardus ep. 190. Chrysostom. ep. 1 and 2.
It was not the personal wisdom, virtue, learning, or faith of Christ's Vicars,
that made S. Bernard seek to Innocentius the third: S. Augustine and the
Bishops of Afrike to Innocentius the first, and to Celestinus, ep. 90. 92. 95:
S. Chrysostom to the said Innocentius: S. Basil to the Pope in his time ep.
52: S. Hierom to Damasus ep 57. 58. to. 2. but it was the prerogative of their
Office and higher degree of Unction, and Christ's ordinance, that would have al
Apostles and Pastors in the world, for their confirmation in faith and
Ecclesiastical regiment, depend on Peter. The lack of knowledge and humble
acceptance of which Gods providence, that is, that one is not honored and
obeyed of all the brotherhod, is the cause of al Schisms and Heresies, Cypr.
ep. 55. nu. 2
says S. Cyprian. A point of such importance, that all the Twelve being in
Apostleship like, Christ would yet for the better keeping of unity and truth,
have one to be head of them al, that a head being once appointed, occasion of
Schism might be taken away, says S. Hierom. li. 1. adu. Iouinian. c. 14.

CHAP. XXIII.
The Jews accuse him to Pilate the Gentil: 4 Who seeking earnestly to deliver
him, specially after that Herod sent him back, 17 they not only prefer the
murderer Barabbas, but also cry, CRVCIFIGE. 26 in the way to Caluarie he
foretells the women that lamented upon him, the horrible destruction of
their Jerusalem. ^2 upon the cross he is between two thieves, ^5 scorned of
the Jews, 36 of the souldiars, 39 and of one of the thieves, 40 but even
there confessed of the other thief, 44 and after his death (because of the
great miracles concurring) also of the Centurion. 4^ yea and of the whole
multitude. 50 and finally he is buried honorably.

GOOD FRIDAY.
led him to Pilate. Mt. 27, 1, 11.
Mr. 15, 1 Io. 18, 27.
We have found this man subuerting our nation, and prohibiting to give
tributes to Caesar, and saying that he is Christ the king.







Os. 10, 8.
Then shall they begin to say to the mountains, Fall upon us: and to the hills,
Cover us.



beholding,
expecting', and the princes with them derided him, saying, Others he has
saved, let him save him self, if this be Christ, the elect of God. IS THE KING
OF THE JEWS.

This eclipse was seen and wondered at as a thing above nature, of Dionisius
Areopagita at Thebes, when he was yet a Pagan. Dionys. ep. ad Polycarp, et ep.
ad Apollophane^.
sun was darkened: and the veil of the temple was rent in the mids. Ps.
30, 6.
said, Father, into thy hands I commend my spirit. And saying this, he gave up
the ghost.



Mt. 27, 57. Mr. 5, 43,
which was a senator, a good man and a just, ^o. 19, 38
of Arimathaea a city of Ievvrie, who also him self expected the kingdom of
God.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XXIII
34. Forgive them.) A perfect example of charity in our Savior praying for
his crucifiers, which the first martyr S. Steven did follow, Act. 7: and the
prayers of ^oth were heard: Christ's prayer taking effect in the Centurion and
others, Steuens in Paul.

43. In Paradise.) Thou may not hereupon differ thy conversion or
amendment, The good thief.
presuming of grace at the last hour of thy life, not look to have salvation
by says and confession of Christ without good works, no^ to go straight to
heaven without satisfaction, penance, or punishment for thy former sins and
life il spent, nor challenge security and certain knowledge of thy salvation.
for this good thieves case is not common, but a rare example of mercy and
prerogative. but for the first point, learn only not to despair, though thou
have been il to the last moment of thy life. for the second, that faith, hope,
and charity, repentance, and good vvil be sufficient, and good works not
required, Pardon of due penance and satisfaction.
where for want of time and opportunity they cannot be had. for the third,
that Christ gave to this happy man for his ^elous confession of him and
reprehending his fellovv, not only remission of his sins, but also by
extraordinary grace, a pardon of al penance and satisfaction due either in
this life or the next for the same. even as the holy Church by his examle and
commission gives pardons also to some of her zealous children, of al punishment
due for their offenses, and such go straight to heaven. lastly, that every one
has not a revelation of his salvation as this man had, and therefore can not be
so sure as he was.

^3. Wherein never.) As in the womb of MARIE none was conceived before nor
after him, so in this monument none was laid before nor after him: which
prerogative (no doubt) was of Gods providence, this Joseph no less abstaining
afterward to be buried in it, then the other Joseph from copulation with the
mother of our Lord. S. Augustine.

^^. Saw the monument.) These good women of great devotion observed the
Sepulcher for the honor of the holy body. Visiting the Sepulcher, or
Sepulchers.
Whereupon the devotion of faithful folk watching and visiting on
Good Friday and Easter eve the sepulcher made in every Church for memory of
our Lords burial, is exceeding good and godly, specially the B. Sacrament for
more signification sake being present in the same Sepulcher.

CHAP. XXIIII.
Devout women not finding his body in the Sepulcher. 4 Angels tell them that he
is risen according to his own prediction: 9 yet the Apostles vvil not believe
it. 12 but neither Peter finds his body there. 13 He walks with two
Disciples, declaring all this unto them out of the Scriptures, and is known of
them by breaking of bread. 36 The same day he appears to the Eleven and
others being together, ^ felt of them, and eats with them. finally teaching
them out of the Scriptures not only of his Passion and Resurrection, 47 but
also of his Catholic Church, 49 he promises the Holy Ghost to confirm them,
50 and so ascends into heaven.

That is, first after the Sabbath, which is (says S. Hiero. q. 4 ad Hedib.)
dies Dominica, our Lords day, wherein he arose. for the week is divided into
the Sabbath, and the 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6 of the Sabbath. and the Apostle (1 Cor.
16, 2) commanded a collection of money to be made on the first of the Sabbath.
whereby we learn, both the keeping of Sunday, and the Churches count of days
by the 2. 3. 4 of the Sabbath, to be Apostolical. which S. Syluester after ward
named, 2. 3. 4 feriam etc. Breuiar. Roman. December. 31
first of the Sabbath very early they came to the monument, EASTER DAY.
carrying the spices which they had prepared. Mt. 28, 1
Mr. 16, 1
Io. 20, 1.
they found not the body of our Lord JESUS. Lu. 9, 22
back from the monument, they told al these things to those eleven, and to all the rest.

Io. 20, 3.
and stouping down he savv the linen clothes lying alone, and went away
marueiling with him self at that which was done.

Mr. 16, 12.
two of them went the same day into a town which was the space of sixty
furlonges from Jerusalem, The Gospel upon Monday in Easter week.
named Emmaus. him, saying, Tarry with us, because it is tovvard night, and
the day is now far spent. And he went in with them.

The Gospel upon Tuesday in Easter week.
JESUS stood in the mids of them, Mr. 16, 14. Io. 20, 19.
and he says to them, Peace be to you: it is I. fear not.

As he shall be Anathema (says S. Aug.) which preaches that Christ neither
suffered nor rose again, because we learn by the Gospel, That it behooved
Christ to suffer and to rise again the third day: so he shall also be Anathema,
whosoever preaches the Church to be else where the^ in the communion of al
nations: because by the self same Gospel we learn in the words next following,
and penance to be preached in his name and remission of sins through out al
nations, August. ep. 48.
and penance to be preached in his name and remission of sins unto al
nations, beginning from Jerusalem. Act. 1, 8. 2, 1.


Mr. 16, 19. Act. 1, 9.
and lifting up his hands he blessed them. ASCENSION DAY.
vvhiles he blessed them, he departed from them, and was carried into heaven.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XXIIII.
30. Took bread.) The Fathers in diverse places take this to be meant of the B.
Sacrament. Author operis imperf. ho. 17. S. Augustine li. 39 de consensu Euang.
c. 25 and ser. 140 de temp. and ep. 59 ad Paulinum q. 1^ Paulinus him self in
the next epistle before that, among S. Augustines. Venerable Bede also upon
this place. Theophylacte upon this place. And that it should be meant of the
holy Sacrament, The B. Sacr^ment in on kind.
the form of solemn taking the bread into his hands, blessing it, breaking
it, and reaching it to his disciples (exceeding proper to the consecration, and
common to none other vulgar benediction, nor any where used but in Christ's
miraculous multiplying the loaves) and the singular effect in notifying Christ
unto them, do prove. And if it be the Sacrament (as it is most probable) then
is it an evident example and vvarrant of ministration in one kind.

46. Penance to be preached.) The Cathol^^e or universal Church.
He shevved unto them out of the Scriptures, not only the things that were now
accomplished in himself, but also that were yet to come about his Church: as,
where it should begin, De unit.
to wit, at Jerusalem: and how far it should go, to wit, to al nations:
that he might not suffer us (says S. Augustine) to err neither in the
bridegroom nor in the bride. Ec. c. 10.
For this makes manifestly against al Heretics and Schismatikes, that set up
new churches in particular countries, dravving the people from the foresaid
only true Church, which from Jerusalem so grows Mt. 24, 14.
over al nations, til the end of the world come.

50. Blessed them.) Christ our high priest, Heb. 7, 6.
prefigured specially therein by Melchisedec, Christ blessed diverse ways.
often gave his blessing to his: Io. 20, 21. 26. Marc. 10, 16.
sometimes by words, as, Peace be to you: sometimes by imposing his hands: and
now here by lifting up his hands over his Disciples as it were for his
farewell. In what form, the Scripture does not express, but very like it is
that in form of the cross, as Jacob the Patriarch blessed his nephews for
signification of Christ's benediction. Blessing with the sign of the cross.
for now the cross began to be glorious among the faithful, Genesis 48, 14.
and the Apostles (as it is most certain Teriul. de coron. milit. nu. 3 Basil.
de Sp. sanct. c. 27.
by the fathers which call it an ancient tradition) used that sign for an
external note of benediction. Yea S. Augustine says (in Ps. 30. Conc. 3) that
Christ him self not without cause would have his sign to be fixed in our
foreheads as in the feate of shame fastnes, that a Christian man should not be
ashamed of the reproach of Christ. and what form can a Christian man use
rather to bless him self or others, then that which was dedicated in Christ's
death, and is a convenient memorial of the same? Howsoever it be, that the
Bishops and Priests of Gods Church bless with an external sign, no man can
reprehend, being warranted by Christ's own example and action.

THE ARGUMENT OF S. JOHN'S GOSPEL.
S. John's Gospel may be divided into four parts.

The first part is, of the acts of Christ before his solemn manifestation of
himself, while John Baptist was yet baptizing: Chap. 1. 2. 3. 4.

The second, of his Acts in Jury (having now begone his solemn
manifestation in Galilee, Mat. 4, 12) the second Easter or Pasche of his
preaching: Chap. 5. For of the first pasche, we had in the first part, chap. 2,
13: And the pasche of This speech very common in this Gospel, as appears by
the places here marked, declares that he writes to the Gentiles.
the Jews was at hand. And that feast whereof we have in this second part,
chap. 5, 1: Iren. li. 2. c. 39.
After this there was a festiual day of * the Jews, is thought of good
Authors, to be the feast of Pasche.

The third part is, of his Acts in Galilee, and in Iuri^e, about the third
Pasche, and after it: cap. 6, to the 12. For so we have chap. 6, 4: And Pasche
the festiual day of * the Jews was at hand.

The fourth part is of the fourth pasche (which we have in the end of the
chap. 11, 55: And the pasche of * the Jews was at hand) that is to say, of the
Holy week of his Passion in Jerusalem: chap. 12. unto the end of the book.

By which division it is manifest, that the intent of this Evangelist vvriting
after the other three, was, to omit the Acts of Christ in Galilee, because
the other three had written them at large: and to report his Acts done in
Jury, which they had omitted.

And this he does, because Jury with Jerusalem and the Temple, being the
principal part of the Country, there abode the principal of the Jews, both
for authority, and also for learning in the law or knowledge of the
Scriptures. and therefore that was the place, where our Lord JESUS finding in
the Head it self and in the leaders of the rest, such willful obstinacy and
desperate resistance, as the Prophets had foretold, did by this occasion, much
more plainly then in Galilee, both say and prove, at sundry times, even every
year of his preaching, himself to be the CHRIST that had been so long promised
unto them, and expected of them: and the same CHRIST to be not only a man, as
they imagined, but also the natural, consubstantial, and coeternal Son of God
the Father, who now had sent him. Therefore these were the words and deeds
that served best the purpose of this Evangelist, being, to show the glory and
excellency of this person JESUS: that thereby the Ge^tils might see, how
vvorthily Jerusalem and the Jews were reprobated, who had refused yea and
crucified such an one: and how well and to their own salvation themselves
might do, to receive him and to believe in him. For this to have been his
purpose, Io. 20, 31.
him self declares in the end, saying: These are written, that you may
believe that JESUS is CHRIST the Son of God: and that believing, you may have
life in his name.

And hereupon it is, Hier. in Catal.
that S. Hierome vvriteth thus in his life: John the Apostle, Io. 21, 20.
whom JESUS loved very much, the Mat. 4. 21.
son of Zebedee, Mat. 4. 21.
the brother of James the Apostle Act. 12, 2.
whom Herod after our Lords Passion beheaded, last of al wrote the Gospel, at
the request of the Bishops of Asia, against Cerinthus, and other Heretics, and
specially against the assertion of the Ebionites then rising, who say that
Christ was not before MARIE. Whereupon also he was compelled to utter his
Divine Nativity. Of his three Epistles, and of his Apocalypse, shall be said in
their own places.

It follows in S. Hierome, that In the Second persecution under Domitian,
fourtene years after the persecution of Nero he was exiled into the i will Patmos.
But after that Domitian was slain, and his acts for his passing cruelty
repealed by the Senate: under Nerua the Emperor he returned to Ephesus, and
there continuing unto the time of Traiane the Emperor, he founded and governed
all the Churches of Asia, and worn with old age, he died the threescore and
eighteth year after the Passion of our Lord, and was buried besides the same
city.

Whose excellency the same holy Doctor thus briefly describes. li. 1. Aduers.
Iouinianum.
JOHN the Apostle, one of our Lords Disciples, who was the youngest among the
Apostles, and whom the faith of Christ found a virgin, remained a virgin, and
therefore is Io. 13, 23. 24. etc. 21, 20.
move loved of our Lord, and Io. 13, 23. 24. etc. 21, 20.
lies upon the breast of JESUS: and that which Peter durst not ask, Io. 13,
23. 24. etc. 21, 20.
he desires him to ask: and after the resurrection, when Marie Magdalen had
reported that our Lord was risen again, both of them ran to the Sepulcher,
Io. 20, 4.
but he came thither first: and when they were in the ship and, fished in the
lake of Genezareth, JESUS stood on the shore, neither did the Apostles know
whom they savv: Io. 21, 7.
only the virgin knovveth the virgin, and says to Peter. It is our Lord. This
John was both an Apostle, and Evangelist, and Prophet: an Apostle, because he
vvrote to the Churches as a Master: an Evangelist, because he compiled a book
of the Gospel, which (except Matthew) none other of the twelve Apostles did:
a Prophet, for he savv in the i will Patmos, where he was banished by Domitian the
Emperor for the testimony of our Lord, the Apocalypse, containing infinite
mysteries of things to come. Tertullian also reports, that at Rome being cast
into a barrel of hot boiling oil, he came forth more pure and fresher or
liuelier, then he went in. Yea and his Gospel it self much differs from the
rest. Matthew begins to write as of a man: Mark of the prophecy of
Malachie and Esaias. Luke of the Priesthod of Zachary: the first has the face
of a man, because of the genealogy: the second the face of a lion, for the
voice of one crying in the desert: the third the face of a calfe, because of
the Priesthod. But John as an Eagle flies to the things on high, and mounteth
to the Father him self, saying: In the beginning was the WORD, and the WORD
was with God, and God was the WORD. Thus far S. Herome.

Upon this Gospel there are the famous commentaries of S. Augustine called
Tractatus in Euang. Joan. to. 9. and twelve books of S. Cyrils commentaries.

THE HOLY GOSPEL OF JESUS CHRIST ACCORDING TO JOHN.
CHAP. I.
The preface of the Evangelist, The 1. part:
commending Christ (as being God the Son incarnate) to the Gentiles, THE ACTS
of Christ before his manifestation, whiles John Baptist was yet baptizing.
and setting out the blindness of the Jews in not receiving him. 19 Then, the
testimonies of John Baptist, first to the solemn legacy of the Jews: 29
secondly, when he savv JESUS come to him: 35 thirdly, to his own Disciples
also, putting them over from him self to JESUS. Who made it plainer to them
that he is Christ, 40 and so began he also to have Disciples.

The Gospel at the third Mass upon Christmas day. And every day at the end of
Mass.
nothing that was made.
nothing. That which was made', ET VERBVM CARO FACTVM EST.
and dwelled in us (and we savv the glory of him, glory as it were of the
only-begotten of the Father) full of grace and verity. He is preferred and made
of more dignity and excellency then I, because he was before me and al
things, eternal God.
is made before me: because he was before me.

The Gospel upon the 3 Sunday in Aduent.
when the Jews sent from Jerusalem Priests and Levites to him, that they
should ask him, Who art thou? Mal. 4, 5
What then? Art thou * Elias? And he said, I am not. Deu. 18, 15.
Art thou By like the Jews ignora^tly understood not the place in
Deuteronomie, of Christ, and therefore they ask also whether he be the Prophet
there spoken of. See also c. 7, 40.
* the Prophet? And he ansvvered, No. Esa. 40, 3.
I am the voice of one crying in the desert, make straight the way of our
Lord, as Esaie the Prophet said. Mt. 3, 11.
Elias, nor the Prophet? He does often here signify the great difference of
his baptism and of Christ's, as of his person and Christ's. See Annot. Mat. 3.
I baptize in water: Mr. 1, 8.
but there has stood in the mids of you whom you know not. Lu. 3, 16.


The Gospel on the octaue of the Epiphanie.
and he says, Behold the lamb of God, behold him that takes away the sins
sinne' of the world. AGNVS DEI at Mass.


The Gospel upon S. Andrews eve.
and two of his disciples. the lamb of God. Messiah in Hebrew, in Greek
Christ, i^ English Anointed, to wit, with the spiritual oil of grace above
his brethren. Ps. 44.
MESSIAH, which is being interpreted, CHRIST. Cephas in Syriake, and Peter in
Greek, in English, Rock, See Mat. 16, 18.
Cephas, which is interpreted, Peter. The Gospel in a votiue Mass of the holy
Angels.
Come and see. Genesis 28, 12.


ANNOTATIONS CHAP. I.
1. Was the word,] The second Person in Trinity which is the natural, only,
and eternal Son of God the Father, How God the Son is called the WORD.
is called the WORD: not as the holy Scriptures or speeches of the Prophets and
Apostles (written and spoken by Gods commandment for the uttering of his
divine will toward man) be called his word, but in a more divine, eminent, and
ineffable sort, to express unto us in a sort, by a term agreeable to our
capacity, that the Son of God so is, and so from everlasting is borne of God
the Father, as our prime concept (which is our internal and mental word) is and
issues out of our intelligence and mind. This WORD then, Son, or second
Person in the holy Trinity, was and had his being then already, when other
creatures (of what sort so ever) had but their beginning, The Platonikes.
and therefore can not be a creature, as many Heretics before the writing of
this Gospel thought, August. de Ciu. Dei li. 10, c. 29.
and as the Arrians after taught. And this first sentence of the Gospel not
only the faithful, but the Platonikes did so admire (as S. Augustine writes)
that they wished it to be written in gold.

1. With God.) The WORD coeternal with the Father, distinct in person, and of
the Father.
Because a man might say, If the WORD were before any thing was created,
where or how could he be? the Evangelist preventing that carnal concept,
says first, that he was with God, whose being depends not upon time,
place, space, or any other creatures, al which were made by him. secondly, he
gives us to understand, that the WORD has his proper subsistence or
personalitle distinct from God the Father, vvherby Sabellius the old Heretic
is refuted, thirdly, here is insinuated the order of these two persons, one
toward the other, to wit, that the Son is with and of the Father, and not
the Father of the Son. Fourthly, you may consute here the blasphemy of
Calvin, Calu. inst. li. 1 c. 13. sect. 23 and 25.
holding the second Person to be God, not as of God the Father, but as of him
self. And yet such are the books that our youth now read commonly in England,
and that by commandment.

1. God was the Word.] Lest any man upon the premises, which set forth the
relation and distinction of the second Person from the first, The WORD true
God by nature.
might think that the Father only were God, the Evangelist expressly teaches,
the WORD to be God. for though the words seem to lie otherwise (because we
have of purpose so owed the elegancie which the Evangelist him self observed in
placing them so, and therefore they stand so both in Greek and Latin) yet in
deed the construction is thus, 1 Io. c. 5, 20.
The WORD was God, and (as in his first Epistle the same Apostle writes)
true God: lest any might say (as the Arians did) that he was God in deed, but
not truly and naturally, but by common adoption or calling, The Protestants
are like the vvra^gling Aria^s.
as good men in the Church be called the sons of God. What wonderful
wrangling and tergiuersation the Arians used to avoid the evidence of this
place, we see in S. Augustine li. 3 de Doct. Christ. c. 2. even such as the
Protestauts do, to avoid the like words, This is my body, concerning the B.
Sacrament.

3. By him.] The WORD not a creature but the creator.
Again, by this he signifies the eternity, divinity, omaipotencie, and
equality of the WORD or Son, with God the Father, because by him al things
were created. al things he says, both visible of this world: and invisible,
as Angels and al spiritual creatures. Whereupon it is evident also, that him
self is no creature, being the creator of al: neither is sin of his creation,
being a defecte of a thing, rather then a thing it self, and therefore neither
of nor by him.

1^. He gave them power.] Free-vvil.
Free will to receive or acknowledge Christ, and power given to men, if they
will, to be made by Christ the sons of God: but not forced or drawn thereunto
by any necessity.

14. The Word made flesh.] Humble kneeling at the solemn words of Christ's
incarnation.
This is the high and divine testimony of Christ's incarnation and that he
vouchsaued to become man, for the acknowledging of which inexplicable benefit
and giving humble thanks for the same, al Christian people in the world by
tradition of the Fathers prostrate them selves or kneel down, when they hear
it sung or said at the holy Mass, either in this Gospel: or in the Creed by
these words, ET HOMO FACTVS EST.

1^. No man has seen.] Never man in this mortality saw God in the very shape
and natural form of the divine essence, How mortal men see God.
but men see him only in the shape of visible creatures, in or by which it
pleases him to show him self unto many diversely in this world: but never in
such sort as when he shevved him self in the person of the Son, of God,
being made truly man and conuersing with men.

^2. The Spirit.] The B. Trinity.
Here is an evident testimony of the third Person in Trinity, which is the
Holy Ghost: so that in this one Chapter we find expressly against al Heretics,
Jews, and Pagans, set forth the truth of the Churches doctrine concerning the
whole Trinity.

42. Looking upon him.] Peter by his new name designed to be the Rock of the
Church.
This beholding of Simon, insmuateth Christ's designement and preferring of him
to be the chief Apostle, the Rock of the Church, and his Vicar. and therefore
upon that Divine providence and intention he accordingly changes his name,
Cephas. Petrus.
calling him for Simon, Cephas, which is a Syriake word, as much to say as,
Rock or Stone. And S. Paul commonly calls him by this name Cephas, Li. 2 c.
12 in Joan.
whereas other both Greeks and Latins call him altogether by the Greek word,
Peter, which signifies the self same thing. whereof S. Cyril says, that our
Savior by foretelling that his name should no more now be Simon, but Peter,
did by the word it self aptly signify, that on him, as on a rock and stone
most firm, he would build his Church.

CHAP. II.
At the request of his mother he works his first miracle, turning water
into wine at a marriage in Galilee, although the time of his manifestation be
not yet come. 1^ Then in Jerusalem at Pasche, being but one, and yet obseure,
he throws out of the Temple most miraculously all the marchant^s. 28 And being
yet of the blind Jews asked a sign, he signifies so long before, that they
should kill him, but he vvil rise again the third day. 2^ Which also
presently they would do, but that he knovving their falses hearts (though
many believe in him) vvil not t^ri^ among them.

The Gospel upon the 2 Sunday after the Epiphanie.
and the mother of JESUS was there. He that sees water turned in to wine,
needs not dispute or doubt how Christ changed bread into his body.
water made wine, and knevv not whence it was, but the ministers knew that
had drawn the water: the chief steward calls the bridegroom,

The Gospel upon Monday in the fourth week of Lent.
these things hence, and make not the house of my father, a house of
merchandise. The zeal of thy house has eaten me. Ps. 68, 10.
What sign do thou show us, that thou do these things? Mt. 26. 61. 27,
40.
* Dissolve this temple, and in three days I vvil raise it.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. II.
2. JESUS also was called.) Christ with his presence honors and approves
Marriage.
By his vouchsauing to come with his to the Marriage, he approves the custom
of the Faithful in meeting at honest fostes and recreations for maintenance of
love, Cyril. in 2
peace, and amity among them selves: he reproves the heresy of Tatian,
Marcion, and such like condemning wedlock: Io. c. 22.
lastly (as S. Cyril says) he sanctifies and blesses the Marriage of the
Faithful in the new Testament, making it a new creature in him, and discharging
it of the manifold maledictions and disorders wherein it was before. By which
benediction the often divorces, remariages, and pluralities of wives, and the
women's servile subjection and imparitie in that case, be redressed and reduced
to the primitive institution, and so Christian marriage made a Sacrament. See S.
Aug. de nupt. and concup. li. 1 6. 10 and 21. li. 1 de adult. coniug. c. 8.

3. They have no wine.) Our Lady many ways understood that now the time
approached of manifesting him self to the world by miracles and preaching, Our
Ladies intercession.
and nothing doubted but that he would now being at her request. Whereby we
learn that Christ ordinarily gives not his graces, but humbly asked and
requested there unto, and that his mothers intercession is more then vulgarly
effectual, and that he denies her nothing.

4. What is to me and thee?) Translatours of holy Scriptures.
Because this speech is subject to diverse senses, we keep the words of our
text, left by turning it into any English phrase, we might straiten the holy
Ghosts intention to some certain sense either not intended, or not only
intended, and so take away the choice and indifferency from the reader,
whereof (in holy Scripture specially) al Translatours must bevvare. Christ
then may mean here, what is that, woman, to me and thee being but strangers,
that they want wine? as some interpret it. or (which is the more proper use of
that kind of speech in holy write) what have I to do with thee? that is, why
should I have respect to thy desire in this case? In matters touching my charge
and the commission of my father for preaching, working miracles, and other
graces, I must not be tied to flesh and blood, which was not a reprehe^sion of
our Lady, or signification that he would not hear her in this or other things
pertaining to Gods glory or the good of men, for the event shovveth the
contrary. but it was a lesson to the company that heard it, and namely to
his Disciples, that respect of kindred should not dravv them to do any thing
against reason, or be the principal motion why they do their duties, but
Gods glory.

5. Whatsoever he shall say.) By this you see, Our lady doubts not but Christ
vvil grant her petition.
our Lady by her divine prudence and entiere familiarity and acquaintance with all his manner of speeches, knew it was no check to her, but a doctrine to
others: and that she had no repulse, though he seemed to say his time was not
yet come to work miracles: not doubting but he would begin a little before his
ordinary time for her sake, as S. Cyril thinks he did: li. 2 in Io. c. 23.
and therefore she admonishes the waiters to mark well, and to execute
whatsoever Christ should bid them do.

1^. Cast them out.) By this chastising corporally the defilers and abusers of
the Temple he does not only show his power, Profaners of Gods Church are to be
punished in soul and body by the Spiritual power.
that being but one poor man he could by force execute his pleasure upon so
many sturdy fellows: but also his soneralne authority over al offenders, and
that not upon their souls only, as by excommunication and spiritual
penalties, but so far as is requisite for the execution of spiritual
jurisdiction, upon their bodies and goods also. That the Spirituality may
learn, how far and in what cases, for just zeal of Christ's Church, they may
use and exercise both spiritually and temporally their forces and faculties
against offenders, specially against the prophaners of Gods Church, according
to the Apostles allusion 1 Cor. 3. If any defile the Temple of God, him vvil
God destroy.

^4. JESUS committed not him self,) S. Augustine applies this their first
faith and belief in Christ, The B. Sacrament is not to be given to nouices or
yonglings in faith.
suddenly raised upon the admiration of his wonders, Tract. in Io. 11.
but yet not fully formed or established in them, unto the faith of Nouices or
Catechumen: in the Church: and Christ's not committing his Person to them as
yet, to the Churches like wariness and wisdom, in not opening not giving to
them our Lord in the B. Sacrament, because al were not to be trusted with that
high point without full trial of their faith.

CHAP. III.
He teaches Nicodemus, that to come to the kingdom of God, Baptism is
necessary, as being our Regeneration. 10 Which point Nicodemus as then not
understanding, 11 he shows that they must believe him, and what good cause
there is for them so to do. ^3. After this he also baptizeth, and John
likewise at the same time. 25 Whereupon a question being moved. Whether
Baptism is better, 25 John answers it by saying, that he is so far
inferior to Christ, as a mere man to God most high.

The Gospel upon Holy Roode day, Maij ^.
named Nicodemus, a prince of the Jews. We follow rather S. August. and those
ancient fathers, which most commonly understand this place of the holy Ghost,
and not of the winde^ although both senses be good.
he vvil: and thou hear his voice, but thou know not whence he comes
and vvhither he goes: so is every one that is borne of the Spirit. master in
Israel, and art thou ignorant of these things? Nu. 21, 9
The Gospel upon Monday in the whitsonweeke.
but may have life everlasting.

Io. 1, 19.
to whom * thou did give testimony, behold he baptizeth, and al come to
him. Io. 1, 20.


ANNOTATIONS CHAP. III.
5. Born^ again of water.] As no man can enter into this world not have his
life an I being in the same, Baptism in water necessary to salvation.
except he be borne of his carnal parents: no more can a man enter into the
life and state of grace which is in Christ, or attain to life everlasting,
unless he be borne and baptized of water and the Holy Ghost, whereby we see
first, this Sacrament to be called our regeneration or second birth, in respect
of our natural and carnal which was before. Secondly, that this Sacrament
consists of an external element of water, and internal virtue of the Holy
Spirit: wherein it excels John's Baptism, which had the external element,
but nor the spiritual grace, thirdly, that no man can enter into the kingdom of
God, not into the fellowship of Holy Church, without it. Whereby the *
Pelagians, and Caluinists be condemned, that promise life everlasting to young
children that die without Baptism, August. haeres. 18.
and al other that think only faith to serve, or the external element of
water superfluous or not necessary: our Saviors words being plain and
general. Though in this cafe, Baptism in two cases not necessary, but
otherwise supplied.
God which has not bound his grace, in respect of his own freedom, to any
Sacrament, may and does accept them as baptized, which either are martyred
before they could be baptized, or else depart this life with vow and desire to
have that Sacrament, but by some remediless necessirie could not obtain it.
Lastly, it is proved that this Sacrament gives grace ex opere operato, that
is, of the work itself (which al Protestants deny) because it so breeds our
spiritual life in God, as our carnal birth gives the life of the world.

18. It judged already.] Every infidel, and namely heretics, are judged
already.
He that believes in Christ with faith which works by charity (as the
Apostle speaks) shall not be condemned at the later day nor at the hour of
his death: Gal. 5, 6.
but the infidel, be he Jew, Pagan, or Heretic, is already (if he die in his
incredulity) by his own profession and sentence condemned, and shall not come
to judgment either particular or general, to be discussed according to his
works of mercy done or omitted. Tit. 3, 11^.
In which sense S. Paul faith that the obstinate Heretic is condemned by his
own judgment, preventing in him self, of his own free will, the sentence both
of Christ and of the Church.

31. He that comes from above.] The excellency of Christ's power and graces.
As though he should say, No marvel that men resort to Christ so fast and make
less account of me, for, his baptism and his preaching and his person are al
from heaven immediately. He brings al from the very bosom, mouth, and
substance of God his Father. Whatsoever is in me, is but a little drop of his
grace. His spirit and graces are above al measures or men's gifts, even
according to his Manhod: and al power temporal and spiritual, the kingdom and
the Priesthod, and al soueraintie in heaven and earth are bestowed upon him as
he is man also.

CHAP. IIII.
Leaving Ievvrie because of the Pharisees, in the way to Galilee he talks
with a Samaritane woman, telling her that he vvil give water of everlasting
life, 16 shevving him self to know men's secrets, 19 preferring the Jews
religion before the Samaritanes, but ours (the Christian Catholic religion)
before them both, 25 and uttering unto her that he is Christ. 28 which by her
testimony and his preaching very many Samaritanes do believe: he in the mean
time fore telling his Disciples, of the harvest he vvil send them in to. 45 The
Galilaans also receive him, where again he works his second miracle.

He did not baptize ordinarily yet that he baptized his Apostles, S. Aug.
thinks it very probable, ep. 108.
JESUS did not baptize, but his Disciples) Genesis 48, 22.
The Gospel upon Friday in the ^ week in Lent.
* beside the manner that Jacob gave to Joseph his son.

This woman is a figure of the Church, not yet justified, but now to be
justified. Aug. tract. 15 in loan.
a woman of Samaria to dravv water, JESUS says to her, Give me to drink.
There were many other causes why the faithful Jews could not abide the
Samaritans, but their precise abstaining from their company and conversation,
was their Schismatical Temple and service in mount Garizim.
do not communicate with the Samaritanes. He speaks of his baptizing in the
Holy Ghost. See Io. c. 7, 39.
living water.

JESUS says to her, Thou have said well, that I have no husband.

Deu. 12, 6. Ps. 121 13.
4 Reg. 17, 28, 36.






have entered into their labors.

This woman mystically being the Church, it is here signified, that they which
at the first believe because the Church teaches so, afterward be much
confirmed, sinding it in the Scripture also, and by other instructions.
woman giving testimony, that he told me al things whatsoever I have done.

Mt. 4, 12
Mr. 1, 14
the Galilaeans received him, Luc. 4, 14.
whereas they had seen al things that he had done at Jerusalem in the
festiual day: for them selves also came to the festiual day.

Io. 2, 9.
* Where he made water wine. The Gospel upon the 20 Sunday after Pentecost.
And there was a certain lord whose son was sick at Capharnaum. Io. 2,
11.
when he was come from Ievvrie into Galilee.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. IIII.
^0. Our Fathers adored.] The Schismatical temple contendeth against the true
Temple.
By adoration is meant doing of sacrifice. for other offices of Religion might
be done in any place. The Samaritanes to defend their adoring in Garizim,
pretended their worshipping there to be more ancient then the Jews in
Jerusalem, referring it to Jacob: Whereas in deed that Patriarch adoring
there before the Temple was appointed, or the Law given, Joseph. li. antiq.
11. c. 8.
made nothing for their Schism: Which was begone by Manasses a fugitive
Priest, only to hold his unlawful wife thereby, and to obtain Superiority,
in Schism: which he could not do in the unity of his brethren: long after
the Temple of Jerusalem, from which the revolt was made. Therefore Christ
gives sentence for the Jews and the Temple of Jerusalem, affirming that
they had a good ground thereof, but the Samaritanes none at al.

Josephus also records how the Samaritanes demanded of Alexander the Great,
the like privileges and immunities as he had granted to the high Priest and
Temple of Jerusalem, pretending their Temple to be as great and as worthy,
The true Temple prevails.
and them selves to be Jews as the other, and to worship the same God.
Joseph. li. 13. antiq. c. 6.
but their Schismatical hypocrisy was easily spied and dimissed with
nothing. An other time the Jews and Samaritanes (as the same writer
testifies) made a great stir in Alexandria about the truth and antiquity of
the Schismatical temple and service in Garizim and the other true Temple of
Solomon: in so much that the matter was put to arbitrament by Ptolomaeus the
kings commandment, only to trie^ whether of the two was first. And the
Schismatikes (as their custom is) per saltum can make their Church or service
as old as they list, referring it to the Patriarchs, as our Schismatikes do
now to Christ and the Apostles. But when the trial was made, only they of
Jerusalem did inuincibly prove by continual succession of their Priests, The
true Temple is proved by continual succession.
and by the just note of the time when the Schismatikes went out from them,
that theirs was the lavvful, and the other the false temple and false
adoration, and so it was judged, and the Samaritanes put to silence. Afterward
the said Schismatikes (which is lightly the end of al Schisms) revolted quite
from the Jews religion, and dedicated their temple in Garizim to Jupiter
Olympius, as Caluins supper and his bread and wine is like at length to come to
the sacrifice of Ceres and Bacchus.

23. In Spirit and verity.) Our Savior foretells her that the end and
ceasing of their sacrifice and adoration in both the Temples should shortly be,
Christian adoration throughout al nations in every place, in spirit and
verity: that is, in the Sacraments and service of the new law, full of spirit
and grace: in the verity of things before prefigured, specially the true
sacrifice of Christ's body and blood.
and even then was begone to be fulfilled: instructing her in three things
concerning that point. first, that the true Sacrifice should be tied no more to
that one place or nation, Mal. 1, 11.
but that true adoration should be through out al Nations according to the
Prophecy of Malachie. Secondly, that the gross and carnal adoration by the
flesh and blood of beasts and other external terrene creatures, nor having in
them grace, spirit, and life, should be taken away, and an other sacrifice
succeed, which should be in it self invisible, celestial, divine, full of life,
Spirit, and grace, and thirdly, that this adoration and sacrifice should be the
verity it self, whereof all the former sacrifices and hosts were but
shadows and figures, and he calls that here spirit and truth, Io. 1, 17.
which in the first Chapter is called grace and truth. Al which is no more
but a prophecy and description of the Sacrifice of the faithful Gentiles in the
body and blood of Christ: not that it is not by external means given to us
(for otherwise we being men consisting of flesh and blood could not be
capable thereof) but that it is spirit and life in it self, being the flesh of
the WORD of God. And if a man enlarge the word of Adoration, (which here as
is said, signifies properly the worship of God by sacrifice) to all the
Sacraments of the new Law, they al likewise be spirit and grace, the Holy Ghost
working inuisibly and internally upon our souls by every one of them.
Wherevpo^ our Baptism, is water and the Holy Ghost: our Penance, the word of
absolution and the Holy Ghost: our Confirmation, oil and the Holy Ghost by
imposition of hands: finally, all the adoration of the Catholic Church, is
properly spiritual, though certain external creatures for our natures, state
and necessity, be joined thereunto. Take heed therefore thou gather not of
Christ's words, that Christian men should have no use of external office
toward God: for that would take away al sacrifice, Sacraments, prayers,
Churches, and society of men in his Service.

CHAP. V.
Curing a bed^ed man at the pond of miracle, The 2 part:
because he does it on the Sabbath, THE ACTS of Christ in Iewrie (having
already begone his solemn Manifestation in Galilee Mt. 4, 12) the second
Pasche of his preaching.
the blind Jews do persecute him, 7 and again because he says that God is
his natural father. 19 He thereupon continues saying, the Fathers operation
and his to be in every thing alone, and that he shall do greater things then
these miraculous cures, to wit, 21 quicken the dead in soul by sin, as
being appointed Judge of al, 21 yea and quicken the dead in bodies also,
incontinent judging al uprightly. 31 And that these are not bragges of his
own, but his vvitnesses to be, 33 John Baptist, 36 his own miraculous
works, 37 his fathers voice at his baptism, 39 the Scriptures also, namely
of Moses.

The Gospel upon friday in the first week of Lent.
and JESUS went up to Jerusalem. By our latin text and the Greek, this
miraculous pond was in or upon Probatica, that is, a place where the sheep
to be sacrificed, were kept. But by other latin copies, S. Hierom, and some
Greek fathers, Probatica is the very po^d it self: so called, because the
sheep of sacrifice were there vvashed.
Probatica a pond which in hebrew is surnamed Bethesda,
Bethsaida', having five porches. multu^ tempus haberet,
he had now a long time, he says to him, Vvilt thou be made whole?

For what things soever he does, these the Son also does in like manner. is
passed
shall passe' from death into life. The Gospel upon Alsoules day.
amen I say to you, that the hour comes, and now it is, when the dead shall
hear the voice of the Son of God, and they that have heard, shall live. Not
faith only, but good and il deeds shall be counted, and accordingly rewarded at
the day of judgment.
done good things, shall come forth into the resurrection of life: but they that
have done evil, into the resurrection of judgment.

Io. 1, 19.
and he gave testimony to the truth. Mt. 3, 17
neither have you heard his voice at any time, nor seen his shape, Catholics
search the scriptures, and find there, Peter's and his successors Primacie,
the real presence, the Priests power to forgive sins, justification by faith
and good works, Virginity preferred before matrimony, breach of the vow of
co^tinencie damnable, voluntary poverty, Penance, alms, and good deeds
meritorious, diverse rewards I heaven according to diverse merits, and such
like.
scriptures, for you think in them to have life everlasting: and the same are
they that give testimony of me: He means specially Antichrist How the^ can
the Pope be he, seeing the Jews receive him not?
an other shall come in his own name, him you vvil receive.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. V.
2. A pond.) 1 Virtue of miracles given to creatures.
This is as great a wonder and work as was in the old Law, yet never recorded
in the Scripture before: the conditions and circunstances of the same much to
be distinctly weighed against the Miscreants of this time for many causes.
First, that God without derogation to his honor, yea to the great commendation
of it, does give virtue of miracles and cure to water or other creatures.
Secondly, 2 The same given specially to sanctified creatures.
that he gives such virtues to these creatures specially which be by use and
occupying in sacred functions or otherwise, as it were sanctified: for this
pond was it wherein the carcasses of sheep (therefore called Probatica) and
other beasts to be sacrificed, Hiero. de locis Hebr. post med.
were first washed, to which being always red (as S. Hierom says) with the
blood of hosts, this force was given, for the commendation of the sacrifices
of the Law there offered. How much more may we acknowledge such works of God
miraculously done in or about the Sacrifice or Sacrament of the new Testament,
which faithless men wholly reject and condemn for fables, because they know
not the Scriptures nor the power of God Thirdly, 3 Miracles done at on time
more the^ at an other, specially i^ greater solemnities.
that this operation was given at one time more then an other, and rather on
great festiual days then other vulgar times (for this was the feast of Pasche
or of Pentecost) as days more sanctified, and when the people made greater
concourse: which shows that we should not vvonder to see great miracles
done at the Memories and feasts of Martyrs or other great Festiuities, more
then at other places and times. Fourthly, 4 Angels and Saints patrones and
Workers in places of miracles.
that the Angels or some special Saints are Presidents or Patrones of such
places of miracle, and workers also under God of the effects that there
extraordinarily be done. Which ought to make Christians less doubt, that the
force of diverse waters in the world is justly attributed by our forefathers and
good stories to the prayers and presence of Saints, which profane incredulous
men refer only to nature, untruly pretending that God is more glorified by
the works of nature, which be of his ordinary providence, then by the graces
of Miracle given to his Saints or Angels by his extraordinary providence.
Fifthly, 5 Miracles in certain places, and wrought upon the^ that corporally
visit the same See S. Augustine ep. 137.
that miracles be not wrought on men by their faith only and as well by their
presence, in spirit as in body, or upon the parties desire or devotion only,
according to the Heretics pretext that God is a like present by his power and
grace to every man and place: and therefore that men need not to go from their
own houses or countries to seek holiness or health at the places of Christ's or
his Saints birth, death, memories: for none could have benefit of this water
but he that could touch it, and be in it corporally, and at that just time when
the water was in motion by the Angel. 6 Al reasoni^g in these matters must yield
to Gods pleasure.
Yea sixthly, we may consider that in such cases to make the matter more
marvelous, rare, and more earnestly to be sought for, and to signify to us
that God has al such extraordinary operations in his own will and
commandment, without al rules of our reasons and questioning thereon, Hiero.
con. Lucifer. c. ^ 10. 2.
none could be healed but that person who first could get into the pond after
the Angel came and stirred the same. 7 This water is a figure of Baptism.
Seventhly, that these graces of corporal cures given to this water, *
prefigure the like force of the Sacrament of Baptism for the cure of souls,
though we need not seek correspondence thereof to the figure in every point.

Lastly, Christ by his power of excellency and prerogative could and did heal
this poor man that could get no body to help him into the water, 8 Christ
extraordinarily heals and saves without creatures.
because he earnestly and long desired the remedy by God appointed, but was
excluded by necessity: as our Lord saves al such as die without Baptism, if
they in their own persons earnestly intended, desired, and sought for the same.

14. Sin no more.) We may gather hereby that this man's long infirmity was
for punishment of his sins, and that men often attribute their sickness to
other natural defects, and seek for remedies of the world in vain, Sin the
cause of sickness and infirmities.
when the sin for which it was sent, remains, or is not repented of^ and
therefore that in all infirmities men should first turn to God and go to their
Ghostly father, and then call for the wordly Phisicions afterward.

34. I receive not.) Our Master means that man's testimony is not necessary
to him, nor that the truth of his Divinity depends on worldly witnesses or
men's commendations: though to us such testimonies be agreeable and necessary.
and so for our instruction he vouchsaued to take the testimonies of John the
Baptist and Moses and the Prophets: and departing out of this world, to send
forth al his Apostles, and in them al Bishops and Lawful Pastors, to be his
witnesses from Jerusalem to the ends of the world.

39. Search the Scriptures.) Neither Jews nor Heretics find the truth,
because they search not the Scriptures deeply, but read superficially.
He reprehendeth the Jews, that reading daily the Scriptures and acknowledging
that in them they should find life and salvation, they yet looked over them so
superficially that they could not find therein him to be CHRIST their King,
Lord, life, and Savior. For the special masters and Scribes of the Jews
then, were like unto our Heretics now, who be ever talking and turning and
shuffling the Scriptures, but are of al men most ignorant in the deep
knowledge thereof. And therefore our Master refers them not to the reading
only or learning them without book, or having the sentences thereof
gloriously painted or written in their Temple, houses, or coats: but to the
deep search of the meaning and mysteries of the Scriptures, which are not so
easily to be seen in the letter.

CHAP. VI.
Having with five loaves fed five thousand 16 (vvalking also the night after
upon the sea) 22 on the morovv the people there upon resorting unto him, The 3.
part.
27 he preaches unto them of the Bread which he vvil give: telling them that
he is come from heaven, His ACTS in Galilaee, and in Iewrie, about the third
Pasche and after.
and therefore able to give such bread as ca^ quicken the word, even his own
flesh: and that al his Elect shall believe as much. 60 Many not with standing
do murmur at this doctrine, yea and become apostataes, thoug he tell them that
they shall see by his Ascension into heaven, that he is descended from heaven,
but the Twelve stick unto him, believing that he is God omnipotent, as he
said. Among whom also (that no man be scandalized) he signifies that he
foreknovveth which vvil become a traiter: as among the foresaid, which would
become apostataes.

The Gospel upon Midlen^ Su^day.
which is of Tiberias: Mt. 14, 13. Mar. 6, 32.
Lu. 9, 10
to him, Mt. 14, 23. Mr. 6, 46.
* he fled again into the mountain him self alone.



These words do plainly import, that the giving thanks was an effectual
blessing of the bread and working the multiplication thereof.
giving thanks. perishes, but that endures unto life everlasting, which the
Son of man vvil give you. For him the Father, God, has signed.

Exo. 16, 4. 14.
as it is written, Bread from heaven he gave them to eat. why we keep the
hebrew word, Amen, and translate it not, See the Annot. c. 8. verse. 34.
Amen, Ps. 77, 24.
amen I say to you, Moses gave you not the bread from heaven, but my Father
gives you the true bread from heaven. The Gospel in the An^iuersarie of the
dead.


The Gospel upon Imber vvenesday in vvhitson-vveeke.
unless the Father that sent me, dravv him: and I vvil raise him up in the last
day. And al shall be docible of God. Esa. 54, 13.
Every one that has heard of the Father, and has learned, comes to me. The
Gospel in a daily Mass for the dead.
he die not. Mt. 26, 26. Mr. 14, 22. Lu. 12, 19. 1. Cor. 11, 24.
and * the bread which I vvil give, is my flesh for the life of the world.

The Gospel upon COR^VS CHRISTI day.


Io. 3, 13.
Does this scandalize you?



ANNOTATIONS CHAP. VI.
27. Work not the meat.] By their greedy seeking after him for meat of the
body, he takes occasion to dravv them to the desire of a more excellent food
which he had to give them, and so by little to open unto them the great meat
and mystery of the B. Sacrament: which (as he proves) does not only far
pass their ordinary bread or his marvelous multiplied loaves, but Manna it
self, which they thought came from heaven, and so much wondered at it.

32. The true bread.] Though the person of Christ incarnate, even out of the
Sacrament also, be meant under the Metaphores of bread and drink from heaven:
and our belief in him, be signified by eating and feeding: Why Christ is
called bread: and believing, eating.
yet the causes why they should be recommended unto us in such terms, Ierem.
11, 19. Genesis 49. 11.
were, that he was to be eaten and drunken in deed in the forms of bread and
wine: for the which cause his body on the cross is called his bread: and his
blood shed on the cross, * the blood of the grape: no doubt because the same
body and blood were in Holy Sacrament to be eaten and drunken. In which
speeches, either of Christ's person generally, or peculiarly of the same as in
the B. Sacrament the true bread is not taken proprely and specially for that
substance which is of corn, and called with us bread: What signifies, The
true bread.
but generally for food or meat, and therefore it has joined with it lightly
a term signifying a more excellent sort of sustenance: as, the true bread, the
bread of heaven, the bread of life, Lu. 24, 35.
Supersubstantial bread. in which sort the holy Sacrament which is Christ's
body, is both here. The B. Sacrament called bread.
and in S. Luke and S. Paul also, Act. 2, 42. 20, 7.
often called bread, even after consecration: not only for that it was made of
bread, but because it is bread more truly, and by more excellent property and
calling, 1 Cor. 10.
then that which ordinarily is named bread.

44. Dravv him] The Father draws us and teaches us to come to his Son,
and to believe these high and hard mysteries of his incarnation and of feeding
us with his own substance in the Sacrament: God draws us with our free
will.
not co^pelling or violenty forcing any against their will or without any
respect of their consent, Aug. cont. duas Ep. Pelag. li. 1 c. 19. and Ser. 2 de
verb. Ap. c. 2.
as Heretics pretend: but by the svveete internal motions and persuasions of
his grace and spirit he wholly makes us of our own will and liking to consent
to the same.

49. Manna, and died.] The Heretics holding the fathers of the old Testament
to have eaten of the same meat, and to have had as good Sacraments as we, be
here refuted: Christ putting a plain difference in the very substance thereof,
The manifold preemine^ces of the B. Sacrament above Manna.
and in the graces and effects much more at large. Manna was only a figure of
the B. Sacrament, though a very excellent figure thereof for many causes. It
came in a sort from heaven, out Sacrament more: it was made by God
miraculously, our Sacrament more: it was to be eaten for the time of their
peregrination, our Sacrament more: it was to every man what he liked best,
our Sacrament more: a little thereof served and sufficed as well as much, our
Sacrament more: it was reserved for such days as it could not be gathered,
and our Sacrament much more: it was kept for a memorial in the arc of the
Testament, our Sacrament much more: the discontented and incredulous murmured
and gainsaid it, at our Sacrament much more it sustained their bodies in the
desert, our Sacrament both body and soul much more.

52. How can this man?] It came not to their mind that nothing was
impossible to God, that wickedly said, In the B. Sacrament, How, is a Jewish
word.
How can this man give us his flesh? but we may make great profit of their
sin, believing the Mysteries, and taking a lesson, never to say or once
think, How? for it is a Jewish word and worthy al punishment, so says S.
Cyril. li. 4 c. 11 in Io. Nevertheless if one asked only for desire to learn
in humility, as our Lady did touching her having a child in her virginity,
then he must take the Angels answer to her, That it is of the Holy Ghost, so
says S. Damascene li. 4. c. 14.

53. unless you eat.) Christ commending the Sacrament of the faithful unto us,
said, Except you eat etc. you can not have life in you. The real presence.
So the life says of life, and to him that thinks the life to be a lier,
this meat shall be death and not life to him. Ser. 6 de ieiun. 7. men's.
August. Ser. 2 de verb. Ap. c. 1. And S. Leo thus, Because our Lord says,
Except you eat etc. let us so communicate that we nothing doubt of the truth
of Christ's body and blood: for that(...)received with mouth, which is
believed in heart: and they answer Amen in vain, that dispute against that
which they receive.

53. And drink.) This the Protestants allege for the necessity of receiving
in both kinds: but in respect of them selves (who lightly hold all this chapter
to pertain nothing to the Sacramental receiving, Receiving in both kinds not
necessary.
but to spiritual feeding on Christ by faith only) it can make nothing for one
kind or other. And in respect of us Catholics, who believe Christ's whole
person both humanity and Divinity, both flesh and blood to be in either
form, and to be wholy received no less in the first, then in the second or
in both, this place commands nothing for both the kinds.

53. You shall not have life.) The Sacramental receiving of Christ's body, not
always necessary to salvation.
Though the Catholics teach these words to be spoken of the Sacrament, yet
they mean not (no more then our Savior here does) to exclude al from
salvation, that receive not actually and Sacramentally under one or both
kinds. For then children that die after they be baptized and never received
Sacramentally, should perish: which to hold, were heretical Neither did S.
Augustine mean, Li. 1 de pec. merit. c. ^
applying these words to infants also, that they could not be saved without
receiving sacramentally, as not only the Heretics, but Erasmus did
unlearnedly mistake him: The true morning of S. Augustine: words touching
infants receiving of the B. Sacrament.
but his sense is that they were by the right of their Baptism joined to
Christ's body Mystical, and thereby spiritually partakers of the other Sacrament
also of Christ's body and blood. As al Catholic men that be in prison, joining
with the Church of God in heart and desire to receive and be partakers with the
Church of this Sacrament, and those specially that devoutly hear Mass and
adore in presence the body and blood of Christ, joining in heart with the
Priest, al these receive life and fruit of the Sacrament, though at every time
they receive not sacramentally in one or both kinds. Co^^. Trid. Ses. 21 c. 4.
And although in the Primitive Church the holy Sacrament in the second kind
were often given even to infants to sanctify them, yet (as the holy Council
has declared) it was never ministered unto them with opinion that they could
not be saved without it, and therefore the Heretics do untruly charge the
Church and the Fathers with that error.

54. I vvil raise him.) Cyril. li. 4 c. 14, 15.
As the Son lives by the Father, even so do we live by his flesh, says S.
Hilarie. li. 8. de Trin. The effects of the B. Sacrament both in our body and
soul.
And S. Cyril again thus, Though by nature of our flesh we be corruptible,
yet by participation of life we are reformed is the property of life. For not
only our souls were to be lifted up by the holy Ghost to life everlasting,
but this rude gross terrestrial body of ours is to be reduced to immoralitie,
by touching, Tertul. de resur. ^ar. nu. 7.
tasting, and eating this agreeable food of Christ's body. And when Christ
says, I vvil raise him up, he means that this body which he eats, shall
raise him. Our flesh (says Tertullian) eats the body and blood of Christ,
that the soul may also be fatted. therefore they shall both have one revvard at
the Resurrection. Li 4, c. 34.
And S. Irenaeus, How do they affirm that our bodies be not capable of life
everlasting, which is nourished by the body and blood of our Lord? Either let
them change their opinion, or else cease to offer the Eucharist. Nyss. in orat.
catech. magna.
S. Gregory Nyssene also says, That lively body entering into our body,
changes it and makes it like and immortal.

55. Meat in deed.) The B. Sacrament is the true Manna and water of the
rock.
Manna, was not the true meat: nor the water of the rock, the drink in
deed: for they did but drive away death or famine for a time and for this
life. But the holy Body of Christ is the true food nourishing to life
everlasting, and his blood the true drink that drives death away utterly,
for they be not the body and blood of a mere man, but of him that being joined
to life is made life: and therefore are we the body and members of Christ,
because by this benediction of the mystery we receive the son of God him
self. So says S. Cyril li. 4 c. 16 in Io.

58. He that eats this bread.) Co^^. Trid. Ses. 21 c. 1.
By this place the holy Council proves that for the grace and effect of the
Sacrament, The whole grace and effect thereof in one kind, and therefore the
people not defrauded.
which is the life of the soul, there is no difference whether a man receive
both kinds or one, because our Savior who before attributed life to the
eating and drinking of his body and blood, does here also affirm the same
effect, which is life everlasting, to come of eating only under one form.
Therefore the Heretics be seditious calumniators that would make the people
believe, the Catholic Church and Priests to have defrauded them of the grace
and benefit of one of the kinds in the Sacrament. Receiui^g in one or both
kinds, i^differe^t, according to the holy Churches appointment.
Nay, it is they that have defrauded the world, by taking away both the real
substance of Christ, and the grace from one kind and both kinds, and from al
other Sacraments. The Church does only (by the wisdom of Gods Spirit and by
instruction of Christ and his Apostles, according to time and place, for Gods
most honor, the reverence of the Sacrament, and the peoples most profit
thereby) dispose of the manner and order, how the Priest, Ep. 118 c. 6 ad
Ianuarium.
how the people shall receive, and al other particular points, Which him self
(says S. Augustine) did not take order for, Authority of Scriptures and the
Primitive Church for receiving in one kind.
that he might commit that to the Apostles, by whom he was to dispose his
Churches affairs, though both he and the Apostles and the Fathers of the
primitive Church left us example of receiving under one kind, Lu. 24, 35.
Christ * at Emmaus, The Apostles Act. 2, 42. The primitive Church in giving
the blood only to children, Cypr. li. de lapsis, nu. 10. in reserving most
commonly the body only, Tertul. li. 2 ad vxo. nu. 4. Cypr. li. de lapsis, nu.
10. in houseling the sick therewith, Eusebius. Ec. hist. li. 6 c. 36. in the holy
Eremites also that received and reserved it commonly and not the blood, in the
wilderness, Basil. ep. ad Caesariam Patritiam. and in diverse other cases which
were to long to rehearse.

Whereby the Church being warranted and in the ruling of such things fully
taught by Gods spirit, The causes of the Churches practice and ordinance
concerning one kind.
as well for the reproving of certain heresies, that Christ God and man was
not whole and al in every part of the Sacrament, as specially for that the
Christian people being now enlarged, and the communicants often so many at
once, that neither so much wine could be conveniently consecrated, nor
without manifold accidents of sheading or abusing be received (whereof the
Protestants have no regard, because it is but common wine which they occupy,
but the Church knovving it to be Christ's own blood, must have al dreadful
regard) therefore I say she has decreed and for some hundredth years put in use,
The Priests that say Mass, must receive both kinds.
that the Priest saying Mass, should alvvaies both consecrate and also receive
both kinds, because he must express lively the Passion of Christ, and the
separation of his blood from his body in the same, and for to imitate the
whole action and institution as well in sacrificing as receiving, Lu. 22, 19.
as to whom properly it was said, Do this, for that was spoken only to such
as have power thereby to offer and consecrate. 1 Cor. 11.
But the Lay men, and the Clergy also when they do not execute or say Mass
them selves, should receive in one kind, being thereby no less partakers of
Christ's whole person and grace, then if they received both. For (as S. Paul
says) He that eats the hosts, 1 Cor. 10, 18.
is partaker of the altar. He that eats, says he: for though there were
drink offerings or libaments joined lightly to every sacrifice, yet it was
enough to eat only of one kind, for to be partaker of the whole.

62. If you shall see.)] Christ insinuates that faithles me^ shall not believe
his presence in the B. Sacrament, because he is ascended.
Our Savior seems to insinuate, that such as believe not his words touching
the holy Sacrament, and think it impossible for him to give his Body to be
eaten in so many places at once, being yet in earth, should be much more
scandalized and tempted after they saw or knew him to be ascended into heaven.
Which is proved true in the Capharnaites of this time. whose principal reason
against Christ's presence in the Sacrament is, that he is ascended into heaven:
yea, who are so bold as to expound this same sentence for them selves thus, It
is not this body or flesh which I will give you, for that I will carry with me to
heaven. Whereby if they meant only that the condition and qualities of his
body in heaven should be other then in the Sacrament, it were tolerable: for S.
Augustine speaks sometime in that sense. but to deny the substance of the
body to be the same, that is wicked.

63. The flesh profits nothing.) If this speech were spoken in the sense of
the Sacramentaries, it would take away Christ's incarnation, manhod, and death,
no less then his corporal presence in the Sacrament. for if his flesh were not
profitable, al these things were vain. Therefore CHRIST denies not his own
flesh to be profitable, but that their gross and carnal conceiving of his
words, of his flesh, and of the manner of eating the same, was unprofitable.
Which is plain by the sentence following, where he warns them, that his
words be spirit and life, of high Mystical meaning, The Capharnaites gross
understanding of Christ's flesh to be given or eaten. And, how his flesh does
profit, and not profit.
and not vulgarly and grossly to be taken, as they took them. And it is the use
of the Scripture to call man's natural sense, reason, and carnal resisting or
not reaching supernatural truths, flesh or blood. as, Flesh and blood revealed
not this to thee etc Mat. 16.

This carnalitie then of theirs, stood in two points specially: first, that
they imagined that he would kill him self, and cut and ma^gel his flesh into
parts, and so give it them raw or roast to be eaten among them. August. de
Doct. Chr. li. 3 c. 13.
Which could not be meant, says S. Augustine: for that had contained an
heinous and barbarous fact, and therefore they might and should have been
assured, that he would command no such thing: but some other sweet sense to
be of his hard, mystical, or figurative words, and to be fulfilled in a
Sacrament, mystery, and a marvelous divine sort, otherwise then they could
comprehend, Secondly, they did err touching his flesh, in that they took it
to be the flesh of a mere man, Christ's flesh gives life because it is the
flesh of God and man.
and of a dead man also, when it should come to be eaten: of which kind of
flesh Christ here pronou^ceth, Li. 4 c. 23 in Io.
that it profits nothing, Whereupon S. Cyrist says, This body is not of
Peter or Paul or any other like, but of Christ JESUS who is the life it self:
and therefore this Body gives life, the very fulness of the Divinity dwelling
in it. And the holy Council of Ephesus in the 11 Anathematisme expounded also
by the said S. Cyril: The Eucharist is not the body of any common person (for
the flesh of a common man could not quicken) but of the WORD it self. But the
Heretic Nestorius dissolueth the virtue of this Mystery, Ignatius apud
Theodor. dial. 3.
holding man's flesh only to be in the Eucharist. Thus there. And S. Ignatius
cited of Theodorete, and many other Fathers have the like. Whereby we may see
that it comes of the Divinity and Spirit (without which Christ's flesh can
not be) that this Sacrament gives life.

64. That believe not.) Judas the chief of them that believe not the real
presence.
It is lack of faith, you seee here, that causes men to spurn against this
high truth of the Sacrament: as also it may be learned here, that it is the
great and merciful gift of God that Catholic men do against their senses and
carnal reasons, believe and submit them selves to the humble acknowledging of
this Mystery: lastly, that it may well verse. 64.
by Christ's insinuation of Judas, be gathered, that he specially spurned
against our Masters speeches of the holy Sacrament.

66. Went back.) Heretics believe nor the real presence, because they see
bread and wine: as the Jews believed not his Godhead because of the shape of a
poor man.
It can be no marvel to us now that so many revolt from the Church, by offense
or scandal unjustly taken at Christ's body and blood in the Sacrament: seeing
many of his Disciples that savv his wonderful life, doctrine, and miracles,
forsook Christ him self, upon the speech and promise of the same Sacrament. for
the mystery of it is so supernatural and divine in it self, and withal so low
and base for our sakes, by the show of the forms of these terrene elements
under which it is, and we eat it: that the unfaithful and infirm do so
stumble at Christ in the Sacrament, as the Jews and Gentiles did at Christ in
his humanity. For, the causes of contradictions of the Incarnation and
Transsubstantion be like. And it may be verily deemed, that whosoever now can
not believe the Sacrament to be Christ, because it is under the forms of bread
and wine, and is eaten and drunken, would not then have believed that Christ had
been God, because he was in shape of man, and crucified. To conclude, it was
not a figure nor a mystery of bare bread and wine, The disciples reuolti^g at
Christ's words, prove that he spoke not metaphorically, as at other ^imes.
nor any Metaphorical or Allegorical speech, that could make such a troop of
his Disciples revolt at once. when he said he was a door, a vine, away, a
Pastor, and such like (unto which kind of speeches the protestants
ridiculously resemble the words of the holy Sacrament) who was so mad to
mistake him, or to forsake him for the same? For the Apostles at the least
would have plucked them by the sleeves, and said, Go not away my masters, he
speaks parables. The cause therefore was their incredulity, and the height of
the Mystery, for that they neither knew the means how it might be present,
nor would believe that he was able to give his flesh to be eaten in many
places. And even such is the unbelief of the Heretics about this matter at
this day.

^^. Peter ansvvered.) As Judas of al unbelieving heretics, so Peter bears
the person of al believing Catholics: namely in the B. Sacrament.
Peter answers for the Twelve, not knowing that Judas in heart was already
naught, and believed not Christ's former words touching the B. Sacrament, but
was to revolt afterward as well as the other. Cypr. ep. 55. nu. 3.
Wherein Peter bears the person of the Church and al Catholic men, that for
no difficulty of his word, nor for any revolt (be it never so general) of
Schismatikes, Heretics, or Apostataes, either for this Sacrament or any other
Article, will ever forsake Christ. And when company draws us to revolt, let us
say thus: Lord, whither or to whom shall we go, when we have forsaken thee? to
Calvin, Luther, or such: and forsake thee and thy Church with the unfaithful
multitude? No, thou have the words of life, and we believe thee, Tract. 27 in
Euang. Io.
and thy Church will not nor can not beguile us. Thou have (says S. Augustine)
life everlasting in the ministration of thy body and blood, and a little after.
Thou art life everlasting it self, and thou give not in thy flesh and blood
but that which thy self art.

CHAP. VII.
The Jews (of Jerusalem) seeking his death, he walks in Galilee: where he
signifies to his brethren, that not in this feast Scenopegia, but in an other
(to wit, Pasche following) the Jews should kill him: that is, not when they
would, but when he vvil. 10 In so much that at this feast he teaches openly
in the Temple, and conuerteth many. 14 both in the middle day 37 and the last
day thereof, without any hurt, though also the Rulers send to apprehend him.

in Galilee,
into Galilee', The Gospel upon Tuesday in Passion week.
for he would not walk in Jury:
into Ievvrie': because the Jews sought to kill him. Scenopegia (Leu. 23
(...)) is the feast of Tabernacles, which the Jews kept from the 7 october. for
eight days together, by Gods commandment, for a memory that their fathers
dwelt by Gods protection forty years in tabernacles or tents, and not in
houses, coming out of Egypt. See Leuit. 23, 34.
Scenopegia, was at hand. Leu. 23, 34.
and go into Ievvrie: that thy Disciples also may see thy works which thou
do. I vvil not yet go up
I go not vp' to this festiual day: because my time is not yet accomplished.



The Gospel upon Tuesday in the 4 week of Lent.
JESUS went up into the temple, and taught, saying, How does this man know
letters, whereas he has not learned? The way to come to know the truth, is
to live well.
vvil do the vvil of him, he shall understand of the doctrine whether it be of
God, or I speak of my self. It is spoken of Antichrist specially, and it is
true in all Heretics August. tract. 29. in Euang. Io.
He that speaks of him self, seeks his own glory. But he that seeks
the glory of him that sent him, he is true, and injustice in him there is not.
Io. 5, 18.
No marvel, when these speak thus to Christ him self, if Heretics call his
vicar Antichrist.
Thou have a devil, who seeks to kill thee? Leu. 12, 3.
not that it is of Moses, but * of the fathers, and in the Sabbath you
circuncise a man. Genesis 17, 10.


chief Priests
Princes' and Pharisees sent ministers to apprehend him. The Gospel upon Mu^day
in Passion week.
Io. 13, 33.
and I go to him that sent me. not find: And where I am, you can not come.

Leu. 23, 36.
the * great day of the festiuitie JESUS stood, and cried, saying, If any man
thirst, let him come to me, and drink. Joel. 2, 28.
Out of his belly shall flow rivers of living water. Act. 2, 1.
of the Spirit that they should receive which believed in him. This was
fulfilled on whitsunday Act. 2, and afterward alvvaies by imposition of hands
in the Sacrament of Confirmation: visibly in the primitive Church, and
inuisibly to the end of the world.
for as yet the Spirit was not given: because JESUS was not yet glorified.)

Ps. 131, 11. Mich. 5, 2.
Christ has some good always even among the wicked, which secretly serve him
and by wise delays auert the execution of unjust laws against him and his
people, as Nicodemus and Gamaliel.
he * that came to him by night, Io. 3, 2.
who was one of them,

CHAP. VIII.
Again in the Temple (absoluing an aduoutresse after his merciful manner, and
yet vvithal declaring against his enemies that he is not a favorer of sin,
no more then Moses) 12 he teaches openly, and is not for all that apprehended,
telling them both of his Godhead, 21 and of their reprobation, 28 of his
exaltation also by their Crucifying of him. 31 exhorting the believers to
persevere: 33 and shevving them that seek his death, that they are neither
free, 39 nor of Abraham, 41 nor of God, 44 but of the Devil. 45 but that him
self is of God, 52 and greater and auncienter then Abraham. 59 For the which
they go about to stone him, but in vain.

The Gospel upon Saturday the 3 Week of Lent.


Leu. 20, 10.
What say thou therefore? We can not conveniently reprehend or condemn other
men's faults, if our selves be guilty of the same or other greater. Cyril in Io.
See Annot. Mt. 7, 1.
He that is without sin of you, let him first throvv the stone at her. S.
Augustine by this example of our Master proves that Clergy men specially
should be given much to mercy: and that they ought often, as the cause and
time require, to get pardon of the secular Magistrates for offenders that be
penitent. Ep. 54.
Neither vvil I condemn thee. Go, and now sin no more.

The Gospel upon Saturday the 4 week in Lent.
Again therefore JESUS spoke to them, saying, I am the light of the world. he
that follows me, walks not in darkness: but shall have the light of life.
Deu. 17, 6. 19, 15.
that * the testimony of two men is true.

The Gospel upon Monday in the 2 week of Le^t.
I go, and you shall seek me, and shall die in your sin. Vvhither I go, you
can not come. So read S. Cyril, S. Ambrose, and S. Augustine: expounding it of
Christ's person, that he is the beginning or cause of al creatures.
The beginning who also speak to you.

Only faith is not sufficient without perseverance or abiding in the keeping
of his commandments.
abide in my word, you shall be my disciples in deed. To. 6, 16
that * every one which commits sin, is the servant of sin. 2 Pet. 2,
19.
Man was never without free will: but having the grace of Christ, his will is
truly made free (as S. Augustine says) from servitude of sin also. tract.
41 in Euang. Io.
free in deed. Not only faith but good works also make men the children of
Abraham. according as S. James also speaks of Abraham's works c. 2.
do the works of Abraham. God were your father: verily you would love me.
for from God I proceeded, and came: for I came not of my self, but he sent me:
S. Augustine compares Heretics in their spiritual murder by driui^g Christian
men out of the Church, to the Devil that drove our parents out of Paradise.
Cont. lit. Petil. li. 2. c. 11.
mankiller from the beginning, and he stood not in the verity: because
verity is not in him. when he speaks a lie, he speaks of his own,
because he is a liar, and the father thereof. The Gospel upon PASSION Sunday.
Therefore you hear not, because you are not of God. He denies not that he is
a Samaritane, because he is our keeper or protector, as the word signifies,
and because he is in deed that merciful Samaritane^ in the parable of the
vvounded man Luc. 10, 33. Aug. tract. 41 in Joan.
I have no devil: but I do honor my Father, and you have dishonored me.



ANNOTATIONS CHAP. VIII.
34. Amen, amen.] Why Amen, amen, is not translated.
What is it (says S. Augustine upon this place) when our Lord says, Amen,
amen? He does much commend and urge the thing that he so utters, doubling it.
It is a certain oath of his, if a man may so say. for Ame^ in Hebrew
signifies verum, a truth. Yet is it not translated, whereas it might have been
said, verum, veru^ di^o vobis, but neither the (...).
Greek interpreter durst do it, nor the Latin, the Hebrew word has remained
still, that so it might be the more esteemed. Tract. 41 in Joan. By which
words and the like See the preface, and Annot. in Apocal. ^. 19, 4.
recorded in other places of this new Testament, the Reader may see great
reason, why we also say, Amen, amen. and durst not translate it and such like
words into our English tongue.

CHAP. IX.
To show that by his Baptism (being the Sacrament of illumination or faith) he
vvil take away the blindness of the world, he gives with strange ceremonies
sight to one borne blind. 8 By which wonderful miracle (the attestation of
the party him self and of his parents concurring) first the neighbors, then
also the Pharisees them selves are plainly confounded. Yet so obstinate they
are, that because it was the Sabbath when he wrought it. they infer that he
is not of God: yea and throvv out of their Synagogue the party for confessing
him. 35 But our Lord receives him: 39 and foretells by this occasion, the
excecation of the Ievve^ (because of their willful obstinacy) and illumination
of the Gentiles who confess their own blindness.

The Gospel upon wenesday in the 4 week of Le^t.
savv a man blind from his nativity: Though many infirmities fall for sin,
yet not al, some coming for probation, and some sent that God by the cure
thereof may be glorified.
Neither has this man sinned, nor his parents: but that the works of God may
be manifested in him. The time of working, and meriting, i^ in this life: after
death we can deserve no more by our deeds, but must only receive good or il,
according to the difference of works here.
when no man can work. This was a figure of Baptism, to which al men borne
in sin and blindness are sent for health and sight. Ambr. li. ^ c. 2 de
Sacramentis.
vvash in the poole of Siloe, which is interpreted, Sent. He went therefore,
and vvashed: and he came seeing.



was a schism among them. So say the Heretics when they derogat from
miracles done by Saints or their Relikes, pharisaically pretending the glory
of God. As though it were not Gods glory, when his Saints do it by his power
and virtue: yea his greater glory, that does such things by his servants, and
by the meanest things belonging to them, as Peter's shadow Act. 5. and Paul's
napkin Act. 9.
Give glory to God. we know that this man is a sinner.

said, I believe Lord. And falling down he adored him. By this we see that
this miracle was not only marvelous and beneficial to the blind, but also
significatiue of taking away spiritual blindness.
that they that see not, may see: and they that see, may become blind.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. IX.
6. Made clay.] External ceremonies.
Christ that could have cured this man by his only will or word, yet used
certain creatures as his instruments in working, and diverse circumstances and
ceremonies, clay, water, anointing, washing, etc. No marvel then that he and
his Church use such diversities of Sacraments and ceremonies external in curing
our souls.

22. Put out of the Synagogue.) Heretical translation.
The Heretics untruly translate here (and v. 35.) Excommunicate: to make the
simple conceive the Churches Excommunication to be no other, or no better, or
no more rightly used against them, then this casting our of the Synagogue of
such as confesssed our Savior. They might as well have translated for
Synagogue, Casting out of the Synagogue.
Church: for the Old Testament, the new: for Law, grace: for flesh, spirit: for
Moses, Christ. For no less difference is there between, casting out of the
Synagogue, and, Excommunication. Besides that, not every one which was not of
the Jews Synagogue, was therefore out of the communion of the Faithful, many
true believers being in other parts of the world not subject to the Jews
Synagogue, The Churches Exco^municatio^.
Law, nor Sacraments. And therefore it was not al one to be out of the
Synagogue, and to be excommunicated, as now, whosoever is out of the Churches
communion, See in the Annot. Mat. 18, 17.
either by his own will, or for his just deserts thrust out of it by the
spiritual Magistrate, he is quite abandoned out of all the society of Saints
in heaven and earth, so long as he so continues.

As for the cause of thrusting this poor man and such other out of the
Synagogue, and excommunicating Heretics, there is as great odds as betwixt
heaven and hell: he being used so for following Christ and his Church, these for
forsaking Christ and his Church. Some more agreement there is between that
corrupt sentence of the Jews against the folowers of Christ, and the pretended
excommunication executed against Catholic men by our Heretics. although in
truth there is no great resemblance. For, the Jews though they abused their
power sometimes, yet had they authority in deed by Gods law so to punish
contemners of their Law, The Heretics ridiculous Excommunication.
and therefore it was feared and respected even of good men. But the
excommunication used by heretics against Catholics or any offenders, is not
to be respected at al, being no more but a ridiculous usurpation of the
Churches right and fashion of the same. for, out of their Synagogues al
faithful men ought to flee, and not tarry to be thrust out: according to the
warning given against Core and Dathan. Be ye separated from their tabernacles,
Number. 16.
lest you be vvrapped in their sins.

CHAP. X.
He continues his talk to the Pharisees, shevving that they and al other that
will not enter in by him, are wolves: and that they which hear them, are not
the true sheep. 11 But that him self is the good Pastor, and therefore to save
the sheep from these wolves, he will yield his life, which otherwise no might
of theirs could take from him: foretelling also his Resurrection, and vocation
of the Gentiles. 22 Again an other time, he tells these Jews openly, that
they are not of his sheep, and that no might of theirs shall take from him his
true sheep, because he is God, even as his Father is God. 31 Which by his
miracles and by Scripture he shows to be no blasphemy: and they in vain
seeking to stone and to apprehend him, 40 he goes out to the place where John
Baptist had given open witness of him.

The Gospel upon Tuesday in whitson week.
amen I say to you, he that enters not by the door into the fold of the
sheep, but climeth up an other way: he is The thief, is the Heretic
specially, and any other that unlawfully break in upon the sheep to kill and
destroy them by false doctrine and otherwise.
a thief and a robber. That is the fashion of Iewrie and other countries,
signifying that the shepherd or Pastor must teach the sheep, and not they him.
goes before them: and the sheep follow him, because they know his voice.

The Gospel upon the 2 Sunday after Easter, and for S. Thomas of Canterbury,
December. 29.
Esa. 40, 11. Ezec. 34, 23.
* The good Pastor gives his life for his sheep. Christ's death was so
necessary for the flock, that when he might have escaped, he voluntarily
offered him self to death for his flock.
I yield my life for my sheep. He means the Church of the Gentiles.
other sheep I have that are not of this fold: them also I must bring, and
they shall hear my voice, and there shall be made * one fold and one Pastor.
Ezec. 37, 24.
Esa. 53, 7.
but * I yield it of my self. and I have power to yield it: and I have power to
take it again. This commandment I received of my father.

of blind men?

1 Match. 4, 56. 59*
and it was vvinter. The Gospel upon Wenesday in Passion week.
An other reading is, My father that has given me, etc.
vnum.
one.

Ps. 81, 6.
that I said, you are gods?



ANNOTATIONS CHAP. X.
1. Climeth an other way.) whosoever takes upon him to preach without lawful
sending, to minister Sacraments, and is not Canonically ordered of a true
Catholic Bishop, to be a Curate of souls, Person, Bishop, or what other
spiritual Pastor so ever, and comes not in by lawful election and holy
Churches ordinance to that dignity, Arch-heretikes specially, are the thieves
that clime in an other way, not by the door.
but breaks in against order by force or favor of men, and by humane laws,
he is a thief and a murderer. So came in Arius, Calvin, Luther, and al
Heretics: and all that suceede them in room and doctrine. And generally every
one that descends not by Lawful succession in the known ordinary line of
Catholic Bishops and Pastors that have been in all Countries since their
conversion. And according to this rule S. (...) li. ^ c. 3* uses the true
shepherds from the thieves and Heretics. So do Tertul. de Praeser. nu. 11.
S. Cypr. de unit. (...), nu. 1. S. August. ep. 165. and cont. ep. Manich. c. 4.
and Lirinensit.

11. Good Pastor.) The good Pastor, is he whose special care is not of his own
advantage, but of the safty of the flock. The hireling, is he that respects
not the profit and good of the flock, but his own lucre. The Would is the
Heretic, or any persecutor of the Church, which is Christ's flock.

^^. Flees.) When the Pastor must tarry, or may flee.
Every Bishop and Pastor is bound to abide with his flock in times of danger
and persecution even to death, except him self be personally sought for, rather
then the flock, or the flock it self forsake him* for in such cases the
Pastor may flee, as the Apostles did, and S. Athanasius, and others. S. Athan.
Apol. de sua fu^^. August. ep. 1^0.

21. The dedication.) Judas Machabaeus.
This is the feast of Dedication instituted by Judas Machabaeus li. 1 Match. c.
4. Christ vouchsafed to honouran keep that feast instituted by him: and our
Heretics vouchsafe not to pray and sacrifice for the dead, Dedication of
Churches.
2 Macha. 12.
used and approved by him. The Dedication also of Christian Churches is
warranted thereby, with the annual memories thereof. And it proves that such
things may be instituted without any express commandment in Scripture.

2^. That which he gave me.) Christ's essence and divine nature of the Father.
Thus read also diverse of the Fathers, namely S. Hilar. Trin. li. 7 post
medium. S. Ambr. de Sp. S. li. 3. c. 18. S. August. in Io. tract. 4^. S. Cyril.
li. 7 in Io c. 10. and use it to prove that Christ had his essence and nature
of the Father. And therefore some Heretics of our time wickedly accuse the
Council of Laterane for falsifying this place and applying it to the same
purpose. Caluins autotheisme.
Which they less can abide, for that it is against Caluins Autotheisme,
holding that Christ took his person of the Father, but not his substance. See
the 2 Annot. in 1 Io. v. 1.

CHAP. XI.
He comes once again into Ievvrie boldly (the time that he would be killed
of them, being not yet come) and raises Lazarus four days buried. 47. At
which miracle the blind malice of the rulers so increases, that in Council
they conclude to make him away. howbeit the high Priest prophecieth
vnavvares, of the salvation of the world by his death. ^4 He thereupon goes
again out of the way.

The Gospel upon Friday in the 4 week of Lent.
Lazarus of Bethania, Lu. 7, 37*
of the town of Marie and Martha her sister. Mat, 26, 7. Mar. 14, 3. Io. 12,
3.
( go thou thither again? de dormitione somni.
of the sleeping of sleep.

The Gospel in a Mass for the dead upon the day of the burial or deposition.


she was come where JESUS was, seeing him, fell at his feet, and says to
him, Lord, if thou had been here, my brother had not died. Io. 9, 6.
make that this man should not die? S. Cyril li. 76. vlt. in Io. and S. August.
Tract. 49 in Io. apply this to the Apostles and Priests authority of absoluing
sinners: affirming Christ to revive none from sin, but in the Church and by
the Priests ministry.
Loose him, and let him go.

The Gospel upon friday in Passion week.
All men, but specially Nations must take hee-de, that vvhiles to save their
temporal state, they forsake God: they lose not both as the Jews did. Aug.
tract. 49 in Io.
take away our place and nation. therefore vvalked no more openly among the
Jews, but he went into the country beside the desert unto a city that is
called Ephrem, and there he abode with his Disciples.



ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XI.
31. Being the high Priest.] The privilege of the office and order; though in a
wicked person.
Marvel not that Christ preserves his truth in the Church as well by the
unworthy as the worthy Prelates thereof: the gifts of the Holy Ghost following
their Order and office, as we see here in Caiphas, and not their merits or
person. And if this man being many ways wicked, and in part an usurper, and
the Law and Priesthod being to decline and to give place to Christ's new
ordinance, had yet some assistance of God for utterance of truth which him self
meant not, nor knew not: how much more may we be assured, that Christ will not
leave Peter's Seat, Lu. 22, 23.
* whose faith he promised should never fall, though the persons which occupy
the same, were as il as the blasphemous and malicious mouths of Heretics do
affirm?

CHAP. XII.
The Rulers dealing as if he hid him self, 1 he comes to Bethania, ^ Where by
occasion of Judas the thief murmuring at Marie Magdalens costly devotion, The
4 part. THE 4 Pasche, and holy week of his Passion in Jerusalem.
he foretells his death. 12 From thence, though they did now intend to kill
Lazarus also, he rides openly into Jerusalem, the people (because he had
raised Lazarus) confessing with their acclamations that he is Christ. 20 Where
certain Gentiles desiring to see him, 22 he foretells the conversion of the
whole world from the Devil to him, to be now instant, as the effect of his
death upon the Cross. 28 The Father also answering from heaven to his prayer
made to that purpose, 37 yet after all this, the Jews continue incredulous as
Esaias prophesied of them: 42 though many believed, but were ashamed to confess
him. 44 Whereupon he shows that it is glorious before God, and salvation to
them selves, to believe in him, and confess him: and damnable, to despise him.

Mt. 26, 6. Mar. 14, 3.
where Lazarus was, The Gospel vp^^ Monday in Holy week.
that had been dead, PALM SUNDAY eve.
whom JESUS raised. Of this woman's extraordinary offices of devotion, and how
acceptable they were to Christ, see the Annot. Mt. 26.
Marie therefore took a povvnd of ointement of right spikenard, precious, and
anointed the feet of JESUS, and wiped his feet with her hear: and the
house was filled of the odor of the ointme^t. The devout offices of balming
and anointing the dead bodies of the faithful are here also allowed.
burial. Not in visible and mortal condition, to receive alms of you or such
like offices for supply of my necessities.
me you shall not have alvvaies. The Gospel upon Saturday in Passion week.
and believed in JESUS.

PALM SUNDAY.
when they had heard that JESUS comes to Jerusalem: Mt. 21, 7. Mr. 11, 7.
Lu. 19, 35.
boughs of palms, and went forth to meet him, and cried, Ps. 117, 26.
Hosanna, blessed is he that comes in the name of our Lord, the king of
Israel. Zach. 9, 9.
and sat upon it, as it is written, Fear not daughter of Sion: behold, thy
king comes sitting upon an asses colt.

We may see there is a great difference where a man pray or adore, at home or
i^ the Church and holy places: when the Gentiles also came of devotion a
pilgrimage to the Temple in Jerusalem.
came up to adore in the festiual day. The Gospel for S. Ignatius Febr. 1. And
for a martyr that is no Bishop, as namely S. Laurence Aug. 10.
Amen, amen I say to you, unless the grain of wheat falling into the ground,
die: it self remains alone. but if it die, it brings much fruit. The
Gospel upon Holy roode day September. 14. in latin. Exaltatio S. Cruci^.
but for your sake. Io. 3, 14.


Es. 53, 1.
Lord, who has believed the hearing of us? and the Arm of our Lord to whom
has it been revealed? If any man ask (says S. Augustine) why they could not
believe: I answer rou^dly, because they would not. Tract. 13. in Io. See the
meani^g of this speech Annot. Mat. 18. 15. Mar. 4, 12.
could not believe, Esa. 6, 9.
because Esaias said again, He has blinded their eyes, Mt. 13, 14. Mr. 4, 12.
Lu 8, (...).
and indurated their heart: that they may not see with their eyes, nor
understand with their heart, and be converted, and I heal them. Act. 28, 27.
This is the case of many principal men in such countries where heresy has
the vpperhand, who know and believe the Catholic faith:
for the Pharisees they did not confess, that they might not be cast out of
the Synagogue.

sees me, sees him that sent me. but making cholse rather to keep man's
favor the^ Gods, they dare not confess the same. Such may pray that God and
the world agree together: for else it is seen whose part they will take.


ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XII.
5. Why was.) Church ornaments.
So wicked, covetous, and sacrilegious persons reprehend good men for bestowing
their goods upon Church ornaments etc. under pretense of better bestowing them
on the poor. such provide for the poor as Judas did.

6. A thief.) Toleration of the evil.
Judas did not then first perish when he should our Lord, for he was a thief
before: and being lost he yet followed Christ, not in heart, but in body only.
Which our Master tolerated, to give us a lesson to tolerate the il, rather
then divide the body. Aug. tract. 50 in Io.

CHAP. XIII.
As his last supper, to give his farevvel, and that in most wonderful loving
manner, 4 he vvasheth his Disciples feet, 6 beginning with Peter, 8 (shevving
how necessaris it is for us to be vvashed by him in Baptism. and needful also
after Baptism) 1^ and by this example teaching them al humility one tovvard
an other. 21 Then he foretells, that (notvvithstanding his exceeding love
tovvard them) (...) even of them vvil betray him, meaning Judas, 22 as to John
he secretly shows. After whose going out, he rejoices and says that even
now the hour is come, 14 commends unto them to love together, as a new
commandment, ^6 and foretells Peter who presumed to much of his own
strength, that even this night he vvil deny him thrice.

The Gospel upon Mau^dy thursday at Mass, and at the washing of feet.
JESUS knovving that his hour was come that he should pass out of this world
to his Father: Mt. 26, 1*
whereas he had loved his that were in the world, Mr. 14,
unto the end he loved them. 1. Luc. 22, 1.
By supper, he means the eating of the Paschal lamb. for, the institution of
the B. Sacrament was after this.
supper was done, MAVNDY THVRSDAY.
whereas the devil now had put into the heart of Judas Iscariote the son of
Simon, to betray him: and lays aside his garments, and having taken a tovvel,
girded him self.

Ps. 40, 10.
He that eats bread with me, shall lift up his heel against me.

Mat. 26, 18. Mar. 14, 16.
and he protested, and said: * Amen, amen I say to you: that one of you shall
betray me. Luc. 22, 21.
doubting of whom he spoke. to whom I shall reach the dipped bread. And when
he had dipped the bread, he gave it to Judas Iscariote Simons son. Christ had
some provision before hand given him by the Collections of the faithful, which
was used both in his own necessities, and bestowed upon the poor.
purse, that JESUS had said to him, Bie those things which are needeful for us
to the festiual day: or that he should give some thing to the poor.

Io. 7, 34.
You shall seek me, and * as I said to the Jews, Vvhither I go, you can not
come: to you also I say now. 1 Io. 3, 23.
as I have loved you, that you also love one an other. Mt. 26, 35. Mr. 14, 29.
Lu. 22, 33.
the cock shall not crovv, until thou deny me thrice.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XIII.
5. Began to vvash.) Purity required to the receiving of the B. Sacrament.
This lotion was not only of curtesy, such as the Jews used tovvard their
ghests, nor only for example of humility: but for mystery and signification
of the great purity that is required before we come to receive the holy
Sacrament, which straight after this washing was to be instituted and given to
the Apostles. Ambr. li. 3. de Sacra. c. 1. Bernard. de ^^na Domini Sermon. 1.

10. To vvash his feet.) Venial sins taken away by sacred ceremonies.
The foulnes of the feet, when all the rest is clean, signifies the earthly
affections and relikes of former sins remitted: which are to be cleansed by
devout acts of charity and humility, as S. Ambrose li. 3 de Sacr. c. 1. and
S. Augustine ep. 10^. and tract. 56. in ^o. do note. And because this was only
a ceremony, and yet had such force, both now and afterward used of the
Apostles, Ambr. and Bern. locis cita^is.
that it purged smaller offenses and filthiness of the soul, as S. Ambrose and
S. Bernard gather, it may not seem strange that holy water and such ceremonies
may remit venial sins.

14. You also ought.) Our Master never spoke plainer, nor seemed to command
more precisely, either of Baptism or the Eucharist or any other Sacrament: and
yet by the Churches judgment directed by the Holy Ghost, we know this to be no
Sacrament nor necessary ceremony, and the other to be. The Church defines
which are Sacraments and which not etc.
And why do they believe the Church in this, and do not credit her affirming
the chalice not to be necessary for the communicants?

34. A new commandment.) The commandment of mutual love was given before,
but manifoldly misconstrued, and abridged by the Jews to friends only, to
this life only, for earthly respects only: but Christ renews it and
enlarges it after the form of his own love toward us, and gives grace to
fulfill it.

CHAP. XIIII.
They being sad, because he said that he must go from them, he comfort them
many ways, as, putting them in hope to follow him unto the same place, so that
they keep his commandments. Where he tells them, that him self is the way
thither according to his Humanity, and also the end according to his
Divinity, no less then his Father, because he is consubstantial, 15 promising
also to send unto them (that is, to his Church) the Holy Ghost to be after his
departure with them for ever. 28 And saying that it is his promotion (according
to his Humanity) to go to the Father, for, whose obedience this his death
shall be, and not for any guilt of his own.

The Gospel upon SS. Philip and Jacobs day Maij. 1.
You believe in God, believe in me also. These mansio^s signify differences of
glory in heaven. Hiero. li. ^. adu. Iouin.
many mansions. If not, I would have told you, Because I go to prepare you a
place.

do know
shall knovv' him, and you have seen him.

name, that will I do: that the Father may be glorified in the Son. The
Gospel in a votiue Mass for the election of the Pope, and upon whitsun eve.
It is then possible both to love Christ, and to keep his commandments.
love me, keep my commandments. Paraclete by interpretation is either a
comforter, or an advocate: and therefore to translate it by any one of them
only, is perhaps to abridge the sense of this place.
Paraclete, that he may abide with you for ever, shall know
knovv' him: because he shall abide with you, and shall be in you.

The Gospel upon whitsunday. And in a Votiue Mass of the holy Ghost.
See the Annot. upon the 16 Chap. us. 12 and 13.
teach you al things, and suggest unto you al things whatsoever I shall say to
you.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XIIII.
12. Greater then these.) li. de Babyla mart. ^o. 5.
S. Chrysostom in a whole book against the Pagans proves that this was
fulfilled not only in Peter's shadow, We may and must easily believe the
miracles of Saints and of their relikes, when Christ him self foretells they
shall do such wonderful things.
and Paul's garments, which as we read in the Act. 5, 15, 19, 1^.
Acts, healed infirmities: but also by the Relikes and monuments of Saints,
namely of S. Babylas, of whom he there treats: thereby inferring that Christ
is God, who could and did perform these wonderful words, by the very ashes of
his servants. The Protestants clean contrary, as patrones of the Pagans
infidelity, as though our Savior had promised these and the like miraculous
works in vain, either not meaning or not able to fulfill the^, so do they
discredit all the approved histories of the Church concerning miracles wrought
by Saints, namely that S. Gregory Thaumaturgus See Annot. Mat. 1^, ^0.
removed a mountain, the miracles of S. Paul the eremite and S. Hilarion
written by S. Hierom, the miracles of S. Martin written by Seuerus Sulpitius,
the miracles testified by S. Augustine de Ciuit. Dei, the miracles approved by
S. Gregory in his Dialoges, the miracles reported by S. Bid in his
Ecclesiastical story and lives of Saints: The Heretics as faithles i^ this
point, as the old Pagans.
and al other miracles never so faithfully recorded in Ecclesiastical writers.
In all which things above their reach of reason and nature, they are as little
persuaded and have no more faith then had the Pagans, against whom S.
Chrysostom in the foresaid book, and S. Augustine de Ciu. Dei li. 22 c. 8, and
other Fathers heretofore have written. No man therefore needs to marvel that
the very Image of our Lady, and the like, do miracles, even as Peter's shadow
did: nor wonder, if such things seem stranger and greater then those which
Christ him self did: whereas our Savior to put us out of doubt, says expressly
that his Saints shall do greater things then him self did.

16. For ever.) The HOLY GHOST is promised to the CHVRCH for ever.
If the Holy Ghost had been promised only to the Apostles, their successors
and the Church after them could not have challenged it, but it was promised
them for ever. Whereby we may learn, both that the privileges and promises
made to the Apostles were not personal, but pertaining to their offices
perpetually: and also that the Church and Pastors in all ages had and have the
same Holy Ghost to govern them, that the Apostles and primitive Church had.

17. The spirit of truth.) They had many particular gifts and graces of the
Holy Ghost before, and many virtues by the same, The Spirit of truth shall
assist the CHVRCH alvvaies.
as al holy men have at al times: but the Holy Ghost here promised to the
Apostles and their successors for ever, is to this use specially promised, to
direct them in all truth and verity: and is contrary to the spirit of error,
heresy, and falshod. And therefore the Church can not fall to Apostasy or
Heresy, or to nothing, as the Adversaries say.

28. Father greater then I.) There is no place of Scripture that seems any
thing so much to make for the Sacramentaries, The Arians allege as plain
Scriptures as the Protestants.
as this and other in outward show of words seemed to make for the Arians, who
denied the equality of the Son with the Father. Which words yet in deed
rightly understood after the Churches sense, make nothing for their false
sect, but only signify that Christ according to his Manhod wa^ inferior in
deed, and that according to his Divinity he came of the Father. And if the
Heresy or disease of this time were Arianisme, we should stand upon these
places and the like against the Arians, as we now do upon others against the
Protestants, whose sect is the disease and bane of this time.

CHAP. XV.
He exhorts them to abide in him (that is, his Church, being the true vine,
and not the Synagogue of the Jews any more) 9 and in his love, loving one an
other, and keeping his commandments: 13 shevving how much he accounts of
them, by this that he dies for them, 15 and reuealeth unto them the secrets
of heaven, 17 and appoints their fruit to be perpetual: 1^ confirming them
also against the persecutions and hatred of the obstinate Jews.

The Gospel for one Martyr.
Christ has some branches in his body mystical that be fruitles. therefore il
livers also may be members of Christ and the Church.
branche in me, not bearing fruit, he vvil take it away: and every one that
bears fruit, he vvil purge it, Man may continually increase in justice and
sanctification, so long as he lives.
that it may bring more fruit. S. Augustine expounds it of the Sacrame^tal
word of Baptism, and not as Heretics do, of preaching only. Tract. 80. in Io.
word which I have spoken to you. If a Schismatike pray never so much, he is
not heard, because he remains not in the body of Christ.
abide in me, and my words abide in you: you shall ask what thing soever you
vvil, and it shall be done to you.

Io. 13, 34
that you love one an other, as I have loved you. The Gospel upon S. Barnabees
day, and on the eve of an Apostle.


The Gospel upon SS. Simon and Iudes day.
Io. 13, 16
* The servant is not greater then his master. Mt. 10, 24. Lu. 6, 40.
If they have persecuted me, you also vvil they persecute. if they have kept my
word, He foresheweth that many will not obey the Churches words, and no
marvel, because they contemned Christ's own precepts.
yours also vvil they keep. do to you for my name sake: because they know
not him that sent me. That they hated me gratis. The Gospel upon Sunday after
the Ascension, and in a Votiue of the B. Trinity.
Ps. 24, 19.
the Spirit of truth, Act. 2, 1.
which proceeds from the Father, he shall give testimony of me:

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XV.
4. Unless you abide.] No man sure of perseverance.
These conditional speeches, If you remain in the vine, If you keep my
commandments, and such like, give us to wit that we be not sure to persist or
persevere, nor to be saved, but under conditions to be fulfilled by us. Aug. de
corrept. and gra. c. 13.

4. Unless it abide.) Whosoever by Heresy or Schism or for any other cause is
cut of or separated from the Church, he can do no meritorious work to
Salvation.

10. Keep my praecepts.] Not only faith.
This careful and often admonition of keeping his commandments, proves that
a Christian man's life is not only or principally in faith, but in good works.

24. If I had.) If the Jews had not sinned by refusing Christ, in case he had
not done greater miracles then any other: then were it a great folly of
Catholics to believe Luthers or Caluins new opinions without any miracles at
all.

26. Whom I vvil send.) The Holy Ghost is sent by the Son, therefore he
proceeds from him also, as from the Father: though the late Schismatical
Greeks think otherwise.

27. You shall give.) He vouchsafes to join together the testimony of the
Holy Ghost, and of the Apostles: that we may see the testimony of truth
jointly to consist in the Holy Ghost and in the Prelates of the Church.

CHAP. XVI.
The cause why be foretells them their persecution by the Jews, is, that
they be not afterward scandalized thereat. 4 Though they think this heavy
nevves, it is for their vantage that he departs, because of the great
benefits that they shall receive by the coming them of the Holy Ghost, who
shall also be his witness against his enemies. 16 Although in this world they
shall so be persecuted, yet to his heavenly Father they and their prayers made
in his name, shall be most acceptable, and at length the child (that is, Christ
in all his members) being borne, their joy shall be such as no persecutor can
take from them. 31 Howbeit at this instant of his apprehension, they vvil al
forsake him.

The Heretics translate, Excommunicate you. See what corruption this is, and
the reason thereof, Annot. c. 9, 22.
cast you: but the hour comes, that every one which kills you, shall
think that he does service to God. The Gospel upon the 4 Sunday after Easter.
And now I go to him that sent me, and none of you asks me: Vvhither go
thou? If he shall teach al truth, and that for ever (as before c. 14. 16:) how
is it possible, that the Church can err, or has erred at any time or in any
point?
he shall teach you al truth for he shall not speak of him self: but what
things soever he shall hear, he shall speak: and the things that are to come he
shall show you. The Gospel upon the 3 Sunday after Easter.
and shall show to you.

amen I say to you, The Gospel for many Martyrs.
that you shall weep, and lament, but the world shall rejoice: and you shall be
made sorovvful, but your sorrow shall be turned into joy. The Gospel upon the 5
Sunday after Easter.
Amen, amen I say to you, if you ask the Father any thing Upon this the Church
concludes al her prayers, Per Christu^ Dominum nostru^, even those also that
be made to Sa^cts.
in my name, he vvil give it you.



Mt. 27, 31. Mr. 14, 27.
and it is now come, that you shall be scattered every man into his own, and
me you shall leave alone: and I am not alone, because the Father is with me.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XVI.
12. Yet many things.) This place conuinceth that the Apostles and the faithful
be taught many things, Christ left many things to be taught by the Church.
which Christ omitted to teach them for their weakness: and that it was the
providence of God that Christ in presence should not teach and order al things,
that we might be no less assured of the things that the Church teaches by the
Holy Ghost, then of the things that him self delivered.

13 The spirit of truth.) Ever note that the Holy Ghost in that he is promised
to the Church, is called the Spirit of truth. Which Holy Spirit for many other
causes is given to diverse private men and to al good men, The Spirit of truth.
to sanctification: but to teach al truth and preserve in truth and from error,
he is promised and performed only to the Church and the chief Gouerner and
general Councels thereof.

CHAP. XVII.
After his Sermon of farevvel, he prays to his Father, that seeing he has
now finished his work, he vvil give him his appointed glory, for the
conversion of al nations, 6 and preserve his Apostles, and his Church after
them in unity and verity (that is, from Schism and Heresy:) 24 finally also
glorify them with him in heaven.

The Gospel upon Ascension eve.
he said, Father, the hour is come, The Father glorifieth the Son by raising
him from death, exalting him up to his right hand, making al creatures to bow
down at his Name, and giving him al power and judgment. The Son again
glorifieth the Father, by making his honor, which only in a manner was in
Iewrie before, now known to al Nations.
glorify thy son, that thy son may glorify thee. The Gospel in a Votiue
Mass against Schism.
His petition is specially to keep the Apostles and his Church in vnit^e and
from Schisms.
keep them in thy name, whom thou have given me: that they may be one, as
also we. Io. 18, 9.
I kept them in thy name. Those * whom thou gave me, have I kept: and none
of them perished, but the son of perdition, Ps. 40, 10. 108, 8.
that the * scripture may be fulfilled. To sanctify him self, is to sacrifice
him self, by dedicating his holy body and blood to his Father, both upon the
Cross, and in the holy Sacrament.
sanctify my self: that they also may be sanctified in truth.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP* XVII.
3. Life everlasting.) True knowledge of God.
Both the life of glory in heaven, and of grace here in the Church, consists
in the knowledge of God: that, in perfect vision: this, in faith working by
charity. for, knowledge of God without keeping his commandments, is not true
knowledge, that is to say, it is an unprofitable knowledge. 1 Io. 2.

17. Sanctify them.) The Church can not err.
Christ prays that the Apostles, their successors, and all that shall be of
their belief, may be sanctified in truth. Which is as much to say, as to
desire that the Church may ever have the Spirit of truth, and be free from
error. Which prayer of Christ had not been heard, if the Church might err.

20. But for them.) The Canon of the Mass.
He expresses (and it is a great comfort) that he prays not only for the
Apostles, but for the whole Church after them, that is, for all believers. And
all this profound and divine prayer is resembled in the holy Canon of the Mass
before the consecration, as here it was made before his visible Sacrifice on
the cross.

CHAP. XVIII.
Being gone to the place that Judas the Traitor did know, 4 he offers him
self to the hand of his enemies, shovveth his Divine might in ouerthrovving
them al with a word, and in saving his Apostles from them also with a word:
10 rebukes Peter that would defend him from them: 1^ and so being
apprehended, is brought bound to Annas and Caipha^, where he is stricken by a
servant, and thrice denied of Peter. 28 Again in the morning he is by them
brought to Pilate. 29 Who demanding their accusation, whereas they would
oppress him with their authority, (...) and examining the point of his
kingdom, pronounces him innocent: yet they cri^ rather to have a thieves life
saved.

THVRSDAY night.
he went forth with his disciples beyond the Torrent-Cedron, Mt. 26, 36. Mr.
14. 32.
where was a garden, The PASSION according to S. John in these two Chapters,
is the Gospel at Mass upon Good friday.
into the which he entered and his Disciples. Lu. 22, 39.
So the PASSION is read in holy week four times, according to the four
Evangelists, as S. Augustine appointed also in his Church at Hippo. Ser. 144.
de tempore.
and of the chief Priests and the Pharisees, Mt. 26, 47. Mr. 14, 43.
ministers, comes thither with lanternes and torches and weapons. Luc. 22,
47.
went forth, and said to them, Whom seek ye? Io. 17, 12*
* That of them whom thou have given me, I have not lost any. Io. 11, 49.
That it is expedient that one man die for the people.

Mt. 26, 58. Mr, 14, 54.
and an other disciple. Lu. 22, 54.
And that Disciple was known to the high priest, and went in with JESUS
into the court of the high priest. It is al one for a man to deny Christ, and,
that he is a disciple of Christ, or a Catholic, or a Christian man, when he
is demanded, Aug. tract, 11^ in Io. for so Peter here denies Christ, in
denying him self to be his Disciple.
I am not.





Mt. 27, 1*
And it was morning: Mr. 15, 1*
and they went not in into the Palace, Lu. 23, 1*
that they might not be contaminated, GOOD FRIDAY.
but that they might eat the Pasche. Io. 12, 33*
The Jews therefore said to him, It is not lavvful for us to kill any man. Mt.
20, 19.


Mt. 27, 11. Mr. 15, 2. Lu. 23, 4.
and called JESUS, and said to him, Art thou the king of the Jews? It pleased
God, that Christ who was to die both for the Jews and the Gentiles, should be
betrayed of the one, and put to death by the other.
Thy nation, and the chief priests have delivered thee up to me: what have
thou done?

And when he had said this, he went forth again to the Jews, Mt. 27, 15.
Mr. 15, 6. Lu* 23, 17.
and says to them, I find no cause in him.

CHAP. XIX.
The Jews are not satisfied with his scourging and irrision. ^ Pilate
hearing them say that he made him self the Son of God, is more afraid. (...)
Yet, they urging him with his loialty tovvard Caesar, and professing that them
selves vvil no king but Caesar, he yeldeth unto them. 17 And so Christ carrying
his own Cross, is crucified between two thieves, 19 Pilate vvriting
notoriously the only cause of his death to be, for that he is their king or
Christ. (...) His garments be so used, even as the Scriptures foretold. 25 He
has special care of his mother to the end. 28 He signifies all that was
written of his Passion, to be fulfilled, and so yeldeth up his ghost. 31 Then
by the jews means also other Scriptures about his legs and side, are
fulfilled. 38 And finally, he is honorably buried.

Mt. 27, 27. Mr. 15, 16.
and scourged him. they cried, saying, Crucify, crucify him. Pilate says to
them, Take him you, and crucify him. for I find no cause in him.



He means midday, counting from sun rising. for so does the Scripture count
the hours of the day. Mat. 20. Mar. 15. Luc. 21. Io. 4. Act. ^ and ^o.
sixth hour, and he says to the Jews, Lo your king.

And they took JESUS, Mt. 27, 33. Mr. 15, 20.
and led him forth. Lu. 23, 33.
in Hebrew Golgotha. These three tongues being for other causes most famous
before in all the world, are now also dedicated to God in the triumpha^s title
of the Cross of Christ, and in them the holy Scriptures are more conveniently
Written, taught, and preseru^d.
Hebrew, in Greek, and in Latin. The king of the Jews: but that he said, I
am king of the Jews.

Mt. 27. 35. Mr. 15, 24. Luc. 23, 34.
souldiars therefore when they had crucified him, took his garments (and they
made four parts, to every soldier a part) and his coat. And his This coat
without seame is a figure of the unity of the Church. Cypr. de unit. Ec. And
Euthymius and other write that our Lady made it.
coat was without seame, wrought from the top through out. Ps. ^1, 19*
They have parted my garments among them: and upon my vesture they have cast
lottes. And the souldiars did these things.

The Gospel in a votiue Mass of our B. Lady between Easter and Whitsuntide.
The great love faith, courage, compassion, and sorrows, that our Lady had:
who forsook* not the Cross and her son, when so many were fled from him,
and his chief Apostles denied him.
his mother, and his mothers sister, Marie of Clephas, and Marie Magdalene.

The Gospel in a votiue Mass of the Passion.
Psa. 68, 22.
that the * scripture might be fulfilled, he says, I thirst.

Exo. 12, 46.
You shall not break a bone of him. Zac. 12, 10.
They shall look on him whom they pearsed.

Mt. 27, 57. Mr. 15, 42.
Joseph of Arimathaea (because he was a disciple of JESUS, but secret for
fear of the Jews) desired Pilate that he might take away the body of JESUS.
Lu. 23, 50.
And Pilate permitted. He came therefore, and took away the body of JESUS. Io.
3, 1. 7, 50.
first came to JESUS by the night, bringing a mixture of myrrh and a^oes,
about an hundred pounds.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XIX.
15. His own cross.] This cross, for that it was the instrument of our
redemption, and as it were the altar of the supreme sacrifice, The HOLY CROSS.
highly sanctified by the touching, bearing, and oblation of the sacred body
and blood of our Lord, is truly called the HOLY CROSS: and has been endued
with virtue of miracles, both the whole and every little piece thereof. For the
which causes, and specially for the most near memorial of Christ's Passion, it
has been visited in Pilgrimages, honored by festiual days and otherwise,
reserved and reuer^nced of the ancient fathers, with all devotion: as
contrariwise it has been abused of Pagans, Apostaraes, and Heretics, seeking
in vain to deface and destroy it. See S. Cyril li. 6. cont. Julian. S. Hierom
ep. 17. S. Paulinus ep. 11. Ruffinus li. 1. c. ^. and 8. Euagr. histo. li. 4.
c. 25. S. Leo ep. 72. and Ser. ^ de Passione. Paulus Diac. li. 18.

26. To his mother.) By this you see why in Catholic Churches MARIE and John
stand by the Roode.
The marvelous respect that Christ had to his mother, vouchsauing to speak to
her, and to take order for her even from the cross in the mids of his
infinite anguishes and mysteries a working for mankind:

27. To the Disciple.) A great honor to John and charge, to have that blessed
jewel in keeping: and an unspeakable comfort, that from that day forward the
one was to the other mother and son. li. 2. adu. Iouinian.
virginem virgini co^mendauit, says S. Hierom. He commended the virgin to a
virgin.

34. Blood and water.) The Sacraments issued out of Christ's side, and thence
have their virtue.
This pearsing of Christ's side, though on the souldiars part it was done
blindly and insolently, yet by Gods ordinance it contained great mysteries, and
was presigured by Moses striking the rock with his rod: Exo. 18.
as this stream of blood and water drawn miraculously out of his dead body,
Number. 30.
running in the Sacraments of the Church after the people of God, was signified
by the water of the same rock following the Israelites in the desert. Out of
this side (says S. Augustine) issued the Sacraments. Tract. 9 in Joan.
Hence (says S. Chrysostom) the great mysteries have their beginning. Who
vvarneth us, that when we come to drink of the holy chalice, we should so
approach, Hom. 14 in Joan.
as though we drevv the blood out of Christ's side. The CHVRCH builded of
Christ's side, as Eve of Adams.
And both blood and water apart did flow forth, to show us the fountain of
the two principal Sacraments, and their several matters, Baptism and the
Eucharist, springing to life everlasting in the Church. The fathers also say
that the Church who is Christ's spouse and his coadiutrice in applying the
blood and water to the benefit of the Faithful, was here formed, builded, and
taken out of this holy side of Christ sleeping on the Cross, Genesis 2, 21.
as * Eve was of Adams side, when he was cast a sleep in Paradise.

CHAP. XX.
Upon Easter day his body is missed in the Sepulcher, first by M. Magdalene, 3
secondly by Peter also and John, the vvinding clothes yet remaining. 11 Then to
M. Magdalene, after she had seen two Angels, JESUS also him self appears.
(...) She having told to the Disciples, he appears to them also the same day,
and sends them as him self was sent, giving them the Holy Ghost to remitte
and to retain sins. 26 Again upon lovv Sunday he appears to them, letting
Thomas see, that he might believe, and commending such as not seeing yet do
believe. 30 The effect of this book.

That is, the first day of the week, as some interpret it, taking Sabbath (as
sometime it is) for a week. This is our Sunday, called Dies Domini^^, because
of our Lords resurrection. See the marg. annot. Lu^. 24, 1.
first of the Sabbath, The Gospel upon Saturday (...) Easter week.
Marie Magdalene comes early, EASTER DAY.
when it was yet dark, Mt. 28, 1*
unto the monument: and she savv the stone taken away from the monument. Mr.
16, 1*
Lu, 24, 1*
and to the other disciple whom JESUS loved, and says to them, They have
taken our Lord out of the monument, and we know not where they have laid him.

Luc. 24. 12.


The Gospel upon Thursday ^ Easter week.
But * Marie stood at the The Sepulchers of Martyrs (says S. Hierom ep. 17)
we do honor every where, and putting their holy ashes to our eles, if we may,
we touch it also with our mouth: and be there some that think the monument
wherein our Lord was laid, is to be neglected: where the Devil and his Angels,
as often as they are cast out of the possessed before the said monument,
tremble and roar as if they stood before the judgment seat of Christ?
monument without, Mt. 28, 1*
weeping. Mr. 16, 5*
Therefore as she was weeping, she stouped down, and looked into the
monument: Luc. 24, 4.
the disciples, That I have seen our Lord, and thus he said unto me. The Gospel
upon Dominica in albis or Lovv Sunday.


Mr. 16, 14. Lu. 24, 36.
the first of the Sabboths, and the doors were shut, where the disciples
were gathered together for fear of the Jews, JESUS came and stood in the
mids, 1. Cor. 15, 5.
and says to them, Peace be to you. Though he gave them his peace hard before,
yet now entering to a new divine action, to prepare their hearts to grace and
attention, he blesses them again.
Peace be to you. As my Father has sent me, I also do send you. The Gospel
upon S. Thomas the Apostles day, December. 21.


LOVV SUNDAY.
again his disciples were within: and Thomas with them. JESUS comes See
the annotation on the 19 verse of this Chapter.
the doors being shut, and stood in the mids, and said, Peace be to you.
They are more happy that believe without sensible argument or sight, then such
as be induced by sense or reason to believe.
blessed are they that have not seen and have believed.

Io. 21, 25*
which are not vvritte^ in this book.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XX.
19. The doors were shut.) Such Heretics as deny Christ's body to be or that
it can be in the B. Sacrament, for that it is in heaven, and can not be in two
places at once, nor without the natural manner of the quantity, The being of
Christ's body in the B Bacrame^t without space or quantity corresponde^t there
unto, is proved by other examples I Scripture.
space or place agreeable to the condition of his humanity, be invincible
refuted by Christ's entering into the Disciples, the doors shut: and by that
that his true natural body, whole and perfect in all his limbs, length, breadth,
and thicknes, distinct and diverse from the substance and corpulence of the
wood, was in the same proper place that the wood was in, and passed through the
same: as he also came out of his mothers womb, the clausure not sturred: and
passed through the stone, out of his Sepulcher. By all which the Heretics being
plainly reproved, and convinced of infidelity, they boldly deny the plain
Scriptures, or so fondly shift them selves from the evidence thereof, that
their impudency is specially to be marked in this point.

Some say, Heretical shifts to avoid plain Scripture.
that he came in at the window: some, that the door opened of it self to let
him in: some, that to come in, the doors being shut, signifies no more, but
that he came in late in the evening, at what time men use to shut their doors:
and such other flightes to defend falshod, against ^^presse Scriptures, and
against the Apostles testimony, who therefore took him to be a Spirit, because
they saw him stand suddenly in the mids of them, all the house being close
shut. And the Fathers al confess that he went in, the doors being shut. See
S. Ambrose li. 10 in Lucam. c. ^4. S. Augustine ep. ^. ad Volusi^n. and li. 22
de ciuit. c. 8, and S. Cyril, in Io. li. 12, c. 53? and S. Hiero. li. 1 cont.
Iouin^anum c. 21. we know it is the natural course od Gods ordinance, that
every body should have but one and his own proper place fitted to the
lineaments, quantity, terms and limits of the same: August. ep. 37.
without which naturally the bodies were no where, Christ can dispose of his
own body and others above nature.
and consequently not at al, as S. Augustine says ad Dardanum. but that God
supernaturally and miraculously can not by his omnipotency dispose otherwise
of his own body, then the natural form or quantity or quality thereof
require, Mat. 19.
that is great incredulity, seeing we must believe that he can do so with any
other body of mere men or other creatures, Aug. li. 2^ c. 8. de ciu. Dei.
the Scripture being plain that he can make a camel pass through a nedles
eye, continuing in his natural figure and quantity still: and S. Augustine
tells of a woman whose ring fell from her girdle, both being fast and whole:
and Rupertus of a Religious man, whose girdle fast buckled fell down before him
from his body. De off. Eccl.

Therefore it is to much unfaithfulness, Vbiquetaries of Brentiani.
by rules of place to embarte Christ of his will or wisdom to be in the
Sacrament how him self list, and on as many altars or places as he likes. We
detest for all that, the wicked heresy of certain Protestants, holding quite
contrary to the Zuinglians, that Christ according to his Humanity is in every
place where the Divinity is: which is both against faith, and the common rules
of nature and divinity.

21. As my Father.) As when he gave them commission to preach and baptize
through the world, Christ shows his commission and so gives the Apostles
power to remit sins.
he made mention to his own power therein: so here before he institute the
Sacrament of Penance, and give them authority to remitte sins, lest the
wicked should ask afterward, by what right they do such great functions, he
shows his Fathers commission given to him self, and then in plain terms
most amply imparteth the same to his Apostle: that whosoever deny the Apostles
and their successors, the Priests of Gods Church, to have right to remitte
sins, should deny consequently Christ as man to have authority to do the
same.

22. He breathed.) He gives the Holy Ghost in and by an external sign, to his
Apostles, Augu. q. no. Test. q. 93 Co^t. ep. Parmen. li. 2, c. 11.
not visibly and to al such purposes as afterward at whitsuntide, The holy
Ghost is here purposely given to the Apostle, to remit sins.
but for the grace of the Sacrament of Orders, as S. Augustine says, and that
none make doubt of the Priests right in remission of sins, seeing the Holy
Ghost is purposly given them to do this same. In which case if any be yet
co^tentious, he must deny the Holy Ghost to be God, and not to have power to
remitte sins. It is not absurd (says S. Cyril) that they forgive sins,
Cyril. li. 12 ^. 56 in Io.
which have the Holy Ghost. For when they remitte or retain, the Holy Ghost
remitteth reteineth in them; and that they do two ways, first in Baptism,
and then in Penance. As S. Ambrose also (li. 1 c. 7^ de poenitentia) restlling
the Nouatians (a Sect of old Heretics which pretending Gods glory as our new
Sectaries do, denied that Priests could remitte sins in the Sacrament of
Penance) asks, why it should be more dishonor to God, or more impossible or
inconvenient for men, to forgive sins by Penance then by Baptism, seeing it
is the Holy Ghost that does it, by the Priests office and ministry in both.

23. Whose sins.) Power to offer Sacrifice which is the principal function
and act of Priesthod, was given them at the institution of the B. Sacrament:
the second and next special faculty of Priesthod, The Sacrament of PENANCE
instituted.
consisting in remitting sins, is here bestowed on them. And withal the holy
Sacrament of Penance implying Contrition, Confession, and Satisfaction in the
Penitent, and absolution on the Priests part, is instituted, for in that, that
express power and commission is given to Priests to remitte or retain al
sins; and in that, that Christ promises, whose sins soever they forgive,
they be of God forgiven also: and whose sin they retain, they be retained
before God: it follows necessarily, Men are bound to confess, al their
mortal sins, and that in particular.
that we be bound to submit our selves to their judgment for release of our
sins. For, this wonderful power were given them in vain, if none were
bound to seek for absolution at their hands. Neither can any rightly seek
for absolution of them, unless they confess particularly at least al their
mortal offenses, whether they be committed in mind, heart, vvil and Cypr. de
laps. nu. 11.
congitation only, or in word, and work, for, Gods priests being in this
Sacrament of Penance co^stituted in Christ's steed as judges in causes of our
conscience, can not rightly rule our cases without full and exact cognition
and knowledge of al our sins, and the necessary circumstances and Hiero. in
16 Mat.
differences of the same, which can not otherwise be had of them being mortal
men, then by our simple, sincere, and distinct utterance to them of our
sins, with humble contrite heart, To retain sins.
ready to take and to do penance according to their iniunction. For that
authority to retain sins, consists specially in enioyning satisfaction
and penitential works of praying, fasting, alms, and such like. Al which
Gods ordinance whosoever condemns or contemns, as Heretics do, or
neglects, as some careless Catholics may perhaps do: let them be assured
they can not be saved. Neither must any such Christian man pretend or look to
have his sins after Baptism, remitted by God only, without this Sacrament:
(which was the old Heresy of the Nouatians Ambr. li. 1. de po^nit. c. 2.
Socrat. li. 7 Ec. hist. c. 25.) more then any may hope to be saved or have his
original or other sins before Baptism, The necessity of this Sac^^ment.
forgiven by God without the same Sacrament. Let no man deceive himself, Hiero.
ad Demetriadem. c. ^, to. 1.
this is the second table or board after shipvvrack^, as S. Hierom calls it.
Whosoever take not hold of it, shall perish without al doubt, because they
contemn Gods counsel and order for their salvation. And therefore S. Augustine
(ep. 180) joining both together, says it is a pitiful case, when by the
absence of Gods Priests, men depart this life, aut non regenerati, aut ligati.
that is, either not regenerated by Baptism, or fast bound, and not absolved by
the Sacrament of penance and reconciliation because they shall be excluded from
eternal life, and destruction follows them. And S. Victor (li. 2 de persecut,
Vandalica) tells the miserable lame^tation of the people, when their Priests
were banished by the Arian Heretics. Who (say they) shall baptize these
infants? Who shall minister penance unto us, and loose us from the bands of
sins etc? And therefore S. Cyprian very often (namely ep. 54) calls it great
cruelty, and such as Priests shall answer for at the later day, to suffer any
man that is poenitent of his sins, to depart this life without this
reconciliation and absolution: Mat. 18.
because (says he) the Lavvmaker him self (Christ) has granted, The
Heretics wrestling against plain Scripture.
that things bound in earth, should also be bound in heaven: and that those
things might there be loosed, which were loosed before here in the Church.
And it is a world to see, how the Heretics wrestle with this so plain a
commission of remitting sins, referring it to preaching, to denouncing Gods
threats upon sinners, and to we can not tell what else. though to our English
Protestants this authority seems so clear, that in their order of visiting
the sick, See the communion book.
their Ministers acknowledge and challenge the same, The English Ministers hear
confessions, and absolve.
using a formal absolution according to the Churches order, after the special
confession of the party. But to conclude the matter, let every one that list
to see the true meaning of Christ's words, and the Priests great power and
dignity given them by the same words and other, mark well these words of S.
Chrysostom. Li. 3 de Sacerd.
For, says he, they that dwell on the earth, and conucrsein it, to them is
commission given to dispense those things that are in heaven. Priests power to
forgive sins, is above the power of Angels or worldly Princes.
to them is it given to have the power which God would not to be given
neither to Angels nor Archangels, for, neither to them was it said, whatsoever
you shall bind in earth, shall be bound in heaven: and whatsoever you shall
loose in earth, shall be loosed in heaven. The earthly Princes in deed have
also power to bind, but the bodies only: but that bond of Priests which I
speak of, touches the very soul is self and reaches even to the heavens: in
so much that vvhatsouer the Priests shall do beneath, the self same God does
ratify above, and the sentence of the servants the Lord does confirm, for in
deed what else is this, then that the power of al heavenly things is granted
them of God? Whose sins so ever, says he, you shall retain, they are
retained. What power (I beseech you) can be greater then this one? The Father
gave al power to the Son: but I see the same power altogether delivered by
the Son unto them. And as this concerns the Priests high authority to
absolve, so thereupon concerning confession also to be made unto them, the
ancient Fathers speak in this sort. S. Cyprian de Lapsis nu. 11. They (says
he) that have greater faith and fear of God, though they did not fall in
persecution, yet because they did only think it in their mind, this very
cogitation they confess to Gods Priests sorovvfully and plainly, Confession
to Priests.
opening their conscience, uttering and discharging the burden of their mind,
and seeking wholesome medicine for their wounds though but small and little. And
a little after. Let every one (my brethren) I beseech you, confess, his sin,
vvhiles he is yet alive, vvhiles his confession may be admitted, vvhiles
satisfaction and remission made by the Priests is acceptable before God. S.
Cyril (or as some think, Origin) li. 2 in Leuit. calls it a great part of
penance, when a man is ashamed, and yet opens his sins to our Lords Priest.
See also Tertul. li. de Poenit. S. Hiero. in c. 10 Ecclesiastae. S. Basil. in
Regulis br^u. quaest. 229. Who compare sinners that refuse to confess, to them
that have some disease in their secret parts, and are ashamed to show it to
the Physicion or Surgeon, that might cure it. Where they must needs mean
secret confession to be made to them that may absolve. And S. Leo ep. 80 most
plainly (as before S. Cyril) expressly names Priests. Secret or auricular
Confession.
That confession is sufficient which is made first to God, then to the Priest
also. And again, It is sufficient that guiltines of men's consciences be
uttered to the Priests only by the secrecy of confession. S. Hierome in 16
Mat. says, that Priests loose or bind, audita peccatorum varietate, having
heard the variety and differences of sins. S. Paulinus writes. of S.
Ambrose, In vita D. Ambr. prope fine^.
that as often as any confessed his sin unto him for too receive penance, he
so wept for compassion, that thereby he caused the peniten^ to weep also. He
adds moreover, that this holy Doctor was so secret in this case, that no man
knew the sins confessed, but God and him self. And S. Augustine ho. 49 de 50
homilijs to. 10. says thus, Do penance such as is done in the Church, Mt. 18.
Let no man say, I do it secretly, I do it to God. in vain then was it
said, Whatsoever you shall loose in earth, shall be loosed in heaven. See S.
Ambrose de poenitentia. through out. S. Cyprian de Lapsis, the book de vera
and falsa panit. in S. Augustine, beside al antiquity which is full of these
speeches concerning absolution, and confession.

CHAP. XXI.
Appearing again in Galilee, where Peter was fishing with his fellows: and
causing them after they had al night taken none, to catch a great multitude,
which Peter draws to land, where he also dineth them: 15 He (expressing what
this fishing signified) makes Peter his Vicar, committing unto him the feeding
of his lambs and sheep: 18 and reuealeth unto him, that he also shall be
crucified, to the glory of God, 20 admonishing him to mind that, rather then
to be curious about John's death.

The Gospel on wenseday in Easter week.
And he manifested thus: See in S. Augustine tract. 122 (...) Io. the great
mystery hereof concerning the CHVRCH, and in S. Gregory hom. 24 in Euang. and
S. Bernard li. 2 c. 8 de consid. Peter's PRIMACIE here mistically signified.
Simon Peter when he had heard that it is our Lord: girded his coat unto him
(for he was naked) and cast him self into the sea. the disciples,
them that sat at meate', durst ask him, Who art thou? knovving that it is
our Lord. Not the third apparition, but the third day of his apparitions. for
he appeared in the very day of his Resurrection often, again upon Low Sunday,
then this third time, And S. Mark saying, last he appeared, c. 16, 14: means
his last apparition the first day.
third time JESUS was manifested to his disciples, after he was risen from
the dead.

Peter, The Gospel on the one of SS. Peter and Paul.
Simon of John, love thou me more then these? He says to him, Yea Lord: thou
know that I love thee. he says to him, FEED MY LAMBS. (...) feed and
rule
FEED MY LAMBS. The Gospel upon S. John the Evangelists day in Christmas
Decembris 27.
And when he had said this, he says to him, Follow me. Io. 13, 23*
following, * who also leaned at the supper upon his breast, and said, Lord
who is he that shall betray thee? So reads S. Ambrose in Ps. 45. and ser. 20
in Ps. 118. S. Aug. tract. 124 in Io. and most ancient copies and service
books extant in Latin, other read, If I vvil: other, If so I vvil etc.
So I vvil have him to remain til I come, what to thee? follow thou me.

How fevv things are written of Christ's acts and doctri^e in comparison of
that which he did and spoke? and yet the Heretics will needs have al in
Scripture, trusting not the Apostles own preaching, or report of any thing
that our Master did or said, if it be not written.
other things also which JESUS did: Io. 20, 30.
which if they were written in particular, neither the world it self I
think were able to contain those books that should be written.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XXI.
17. Feed my sheep.] As it was promised him Mat. 16, that the Church should
be builded upon him, Peter is here made the general Pastor, and the Church is
builded upon him.
and that the keys of heaven should be given to him: so here it is performed,
and he is actually made the general Pastor and Gouerner of al Christ's sheep.
For though the other ten (as Matthias and Paul also afterward) were Apostles,
Bishops, Priests, and had authority to bind and loose, to remitte and
rete^ne, to preach, baptize, and such like, as well as he: Yet in these things
and al other government, Christ would have him to be their head, and they to
depend of him as head of their College, and consequently of the whole flock of
Christ: no Apostle nor no Prince in earth (if he acknowledge him self to be a
sheep of Christ) exempted from his charge; The Protestants otherwise denying
this preeminence of Peter, yet to uphold their Arch bishops, do a^ouch and
prove it against the Puritanes.
And that Christ makes a difference betwixt Peter and the rest, and gives him
some greater preeminence and regiment then the rest, it is plain by that he is
asked whether he love our Lord more then the other Apostles do: Cypr. de unit.
E^.
where, for equal charge no difference of love had been required. To Peter
(says S. Cyprian) our Lord after his Resurrection said, Feed my sheep, and
build^d his Church upon him alone, and to him he gives the charge of feeding
his sheep. For although after his Resurrection he gave his power alike to al,
saying, As my Father sent me, so I send you, take the Holy Ghost, if you
remitte to any their sins, they shall be remitted etc. Yet to manifest unity,
he co^stituted one Chair, and so disposed by his authority that unity should
have origin of one. The rest of the Apostles were that Peter was, in equal
fellowship of honor and power, Li. 2 de Sacerd.
but the beginning comes of unity: the Primacie is given to Peter, that the
Church of Christ may be showed to be one, and one Chair. S. Chrysostom also
says thus: Why did our Lord shede his blood? truly to redeem those sheep,
the cure of which he committed both to Peter and also to his Successors.
Peter's successors succeed hi^ in universal authority.
And a little after, Christ would have Peter endued with such authority, and
to be far above al his other Apostles: for he says: Peter, do thou love me
more then al these do? Whereupon our Master might have inferred. If thou love
me Peter, use much fasting, sleep on the hard flower, vvatch much, be patron
to the oppressed, father to the orphans, and husband to the widow: but
omitting al these things, he says, Feed my sheep. For, all the foresaid
virtues certes may be done easily of many subjects, not only men but women:
but when it comes to the government of the Church and committing the charge
of so many souls, al woman kind must needs wholy give place to the burden
and greatness thereof, and a great number of men also. So writes he.

And, S. Gregory though he misliked the title of Universal Bishop, yet is most
plain both in his writings and doings for the Popes Supremacy, as also S. Leo
the great.
because Protestants would make the unlearned think, that S. Gregory deeme^d
the Popes Supremacy to be wholly unlawful and Antichristian, for that he
condemns John of Constantinople for usurping the name of universal Bishop,
resembling his insolence therein to the pride of Antichrist: note well the
words of this holy father in the very same place and Epistle against the B. of
Constantinople, Grego. li. 4, ep. 76.
by which you shall easily see that to deny him to be universal Bishop, is not
to deny Peter or the Pope to be head of the Church, or supreme Gouerner of the
same, as our Adversaries fraudulently pretend. It is plain to al men, says
he, that ever read the Gospel, that by our Lords mouth the charge of the
whole Church was committed to S. Peter Prince of the Apostles. for to him it
was said, Feed my sheep: for him was the prayer made that his faith should
not fail: to him were the keys of heaven given and authority to bind and
loose: to him the cure of the Church and principality was delivered: and yet
he was not called the universal Apostle. This title in deed was offered for
the honor of S. Peter Prince of the Apostles, to the Pope of Rome by the holy
Council of Chalcedon: but none of that See did ever use it or consent to take
it. Thus much S. Gregory, See li. ^. ep. 72. 73, li. 2 ep. 37. 45. li. 4 ep.
95 li, 7 ep. 62.
who though he both practiced jurisdiction through out al Christendom, as other
of that See have ever done, and also acknowledged the Principality and
Soueraintie to be in Peter and his Successors: yet would he not for just causes
use that title subject to vanity and misconstructio^. But both he and all the
Popes since have rather called them selves, Seruos seruorum Dei, the Servants
of Gods servants. Though the word, universal Bishop, in that sense wherein the
holy Council of Chalcedon offered it to the Sea of Rome, The title of universal
Bishop refused, but universal jurisdiction always acknowledged and practiced.
was true and Lawful. For that Council would not have given any Antichristian
or unjust title to any man. Only in the B. of Constantinople and other, which
in no sense had any right to it, and who usurped it in a very false and
tyrannical meaning, it was insolent, unjust, and Antichristian. Bernard. li. 2.
c. 8. de consider.
See also the Epistles of S. Leo the Great concerning his practice of universal
jurisdiction, though he refused the title of universal Bishop. And S. Bernard
(that you may better perceive that the general charge of Christ's sheep was not
only given to Peter's person, but also to his successors the Popes of Rome, as
S. Chrysostom also before alleged does testify) writes thus to Eugenius,
Thou art he to whom the keys of heaven are delivered, and to whom the sheep
are committed. there be other Porters of heaven, and other Pastors of flocks:
but thou have inherited in more glorious and different sort. The Pope is Pastor
of al Pastors.
For they have every one their particular flock, but to thee al universally,
as one flock to one man are credited: being not only the Pastor of the
sheep, but the one Pastor of all the Pastors them selves, but thou will ask me
how I prove that? even by our Lords word, for to whom of al, I say not only
Bishops, but Apostles, were the sheep so absolutely and without limitation
committed? If thou love me Peter, feed my sheep. He says not, the people of
this kingdom or that city, but, my sheep, without al distinction. So S.
Bernard. And hereunto may be added that the second, (...)
feed, is in greek a word that signifies withal to govern and rule, as Ps.
^. Mich. 5. Mat. 2. Apoc. 2. and therefore it is spoken of David also and other
temporal Gouerners (as the Hebrew word answering thereunto) in the 2 Reg. c. 5.
Ps. 77.
Scriptures very often, and the Greek in profane writers also.

1^. An other shall gird thee.] Beza in hunc locu^.
He Prophecieth of Peter's Martyrdom, and of the kind of death which he should
suffer. Peter crucified at Rome.
that was, crucifying. which * the Heretics fearing that it were a step to
prove he was martyred in Rome, deny: whereas the Fathers and ancient writers
are as plain in this, as that he was at Rome, Origin apud Eusebius. li. 3. c. 1.
Eusebius. li. 2. c. 24. Hist. Ec. Tertul. de praescript. nu. 14. Aug. tract. 123
in Joan. Chrysostom. Beda in hunc locum.

THE SVMME, AND THE ORDER OF THE EVANGELICAL HISTORY, gathered briefly out of
al four, even unto Christ's Ascension. *
Mt. Mr. Lu. Io. 1 THE preface moving the Reader to receive CHRIST, being the
aeternal WORD of God, THE 1 PART, containing the Infancy of Christ and the
time that he lived obscurely.
the life and the light. 1 The Angel tells Zachary of the conception of John
Baptist, Christ's Precursor: and Elizabeth conceiueth him. 1 The same Angel
doing his message to the B. Virgin, CHRIST is incarnate in her womb. 1 Our B.
Lady visits Elizabeth: and John Baptist is borne, and circuncised. 1 The
Angel tells Joseph that his wise is with child by the Holy Ghost. 1 3 The
genealogy of Christ. 2 The birth of Christ in Bethlehem, and his circuncision.
2 The Sages come from the East, and adore Christ. 2 Christ is presented in the
Temle: where Simeon and Anna prophecy of him. 2 Joseph with the child and
his mother, flees into Egypt: and returns to Nazareth. 2 Jesus being sought
of his parents, is found in the Temple among the Doctors. 3 1 3 John the
Baptist preaches and baptizeth, preparing al to receive Christ: and among
other, Christ is baptized of him. The 2 part, containing the time of the
preparation toward his manifestation.
4 1 4 Christ fasteth forty days, and is tempted in the wilderness. 1 John
gives testimony of Christ to the legates of the Jews, to the people, and to
his own disciples. 2 Christ works his first miracle, turning water into
wine at a marriage. 1 In the feast of Pasche he casts out the biers and
sellers in the Temple, insinuating to the Jews his death and resurrection. THE
1. PASCHE.
3 He teaches Nicodemus by night: and baptizeth in Jury by the ministry of
his disciples. whereupon a question is moved to John about their two
baptismes. 14 6 3 John Baptist is put into prison for reprehending Herod's
incestuous aduoutrie. 4 4 After John's emprisonment, Christ returning into
Galilee by Samaria, talks with the Samaritane woman. The 3 part, from the
time that he began (Mat. 4, 1^ and 17.) to manifest him self, by preaching and
miracles.
4 He heals a lords son of an ague. 4 1 4 He preaches in Galilee, and
waxes very famous. 4 1 5 He calls four disciples out of the boat, and
they follow him. 1 4 He heals one possessed of a devil, in the Synagogue. 8 1
4 He cures Simon Peter's mother in law, and many sick persons. 8 9 He
refuses three that offer to follow him. 8 4 8 He appeaseth the tempest on the
sea. 8 5 8 He heals two possessed of devils in the country of the Gerasens,
and permits the devils to enter into swine. 9 2 5 He heals the sick of
the palsy, being let down through the tiles. He calls Matthew from the
custom house, and disputes with John's disciples and the Pharisees of
fasting. 9 5 8 He raises the Archisynagogs daughter, and cures her that had a
flux of blood. 9 He heals two blind, and one possessed. 5 He heals him
on the Sabbath day that lay at the Probatica and had been diseased 38 years.
THE 2 PASCHE.
12 3 6 He confuteth the Pharisees being offended that his disciples bruised
the ears of corn on the Sabbath. 12 He refelleth the Pharisees being offended
because he cured the withered hand on the Sabbath. 5.6.7 3 6 He chooses the
12 Apostles: and makes that divine sermon called Sermo Domini in monte, the
Sermon of our Lord in the mount, containing the pattern of a Christian man's
life. 8 1 5 He cures a leper. 8 7 He heals the Centurions servant. 7 He
raises the widow son at Naim. 11 7.9 John sends out of prison his
disciples unto Christ. 7 He forgiueth M. Magdalens sins, preferring her much
before the Ph^risee that despised her. 12 3 11 He heals him that had a deaf
and dumme devil, and refuteth the blaspheming Pharisees. 12 3 11.8 He
prefers the obseruers of Gods word before carnal mother and brethren. 13 4
8 The parable of the sour. 13 4 The parables of the cockle, of the seed
growing when men sleep, of the mustard seed, and of the leaven. 13 The
parables of the treasure hid in the field, of the precious stone, and of the
net. 13 6 4 Teaching in Nazareth, he condemns it of incredulity. 9.10 6 8
He sends the twelve Apostles to preach. 14 6 9 John is beheaded, and the
fame of Jesus comes to Herod's ears. 14 6 9 6 He feeds 5000 men with five
loaves. 14 6 6 He walks upon the sea, and so makes Peter also to do. 6 He
reasons of Manna, and of the true bread from heaven. THE 3 PASCHE.
15 7 He reprehendeth the Pharisees for cauilling at his disciples because they
did eat with vnvvashed hands. He heals the daughter of the woman of
Canaan. 7 He cures a man that was deaf and dumme. 15 8 He feeds 4000 with
seven loaves. 16 8 He rejects the Pharisees that asked a sign, and bids
his disciples bevvare of their leaven. 8 He heals a blind man in Bethsaida.
16 8 9 The time that he vvil pass out of this world, now dravving nigh, he
makes Peter, for confessing him to be Christ, The 4 part, from the time that
he began (Mat. 16, ^^ to foretell to his Disciples, that he must go and suffer
in Jerusalem.
the Rock upon which he vvil build his Church, promising to give him the
keys of heaven, and vvithal foretells, that he must suffer in Jerusalem,
and that al must be ready to suffer with him. 17 9 The Transfiguration. He
casts out the devil which his disciples could not cast out, commending unto
them fasting and prayer. 17 9 He paieth the didrachmes for him and Poter, after
that Peter had found a stater in the fishes mouth. 18 9 9 His disciples
contending for Superiority, he teaches humility. 18 9 He threateneth the
scandalizers of little ones. 18 He teaches us to forgive our brother sinning
against us. 10 10 9 7 Leaving Galilee he goes into Jury, and the Samaritanes
vvil not receive him. The 5 part, of his going into Ievvrie toward his Passion.
17 In that journey he heals the ten lepers. 7 He teaches in the Temple in
the feast of Scenopegia, that is, of Tabernacles. 8 He absolueth the woman
taken in aduoutrie, teaches in the Temple, and goes out of their hands that
would have stoned him. 9 He restores sight to him that was borne blind. 10
He reasons of the true Pastor and his sheep. 10 He sends the 70 disciples,
and they return. The parable of the Samaritane and the vvounded man. Martha
entertaineth Jesus. 11 He teaches the manner and force of prayer, and
reprehendeth the preposterous cleanness of the Pharisees. 12 He teaches not
to fear them that kill the body only, to cast away the care of riches by the
parable of him that thought his barnes to little, and that the faithful servant
vvil always expect the coming of his lord and master. 13 He threateneth
them, unless they do penance, showing Gods patience by the fruitles figtree
that was suffered to stand one year more. He heals the crooked woman,
teaches the way to heaven to be narrovv. 14 He heals him that had a
dropsy, on the Sabbath: and teaches them to renounce al things in comparison
of him. 10 In the feast of Dedication he goes out of their hands that would
have stoned him. 15 The parables of the lost sheep, of the grote, and of the
prodigal son. 16 The parable of the unjust bailife. 19 10 16 Of the
indissolubilitie of matrimony. 16 The rich glutton and Lazarus. 17 Vvo to
scandalizers. The force of faith even to the moving of trees with a word. 18
Of the Pharisee and the Publicane that went to pray. 19 10 16 He imposes or
lays his hands upon little children, and exhorts a young rich man to
forsake al and become perfect. 10 The parable of the workmen hired into the
vineyard. 11 He raises Lazarus, and the Jews co^sult how to destroy him. 10
10 19 He foretells his death, and denies the request of Zebedees two
sons, asking the two chief places about him. 18 He heals a blind man
before his entering into Jericho. 19 Zachaeus the Publicane entertaineth Christ.
The parable of tho ten pounds delivered to ten servants. 10 10 He heals two
blind men as he goes out of Jericho. 16 14 12 At a supper in Bethania, Marie
povvred ointment upon him. PALM sunday.
21 11 19 12 Riding upon an ass he enters gloriously into Jerusalem. 21 12
He heals the lame and the blind, and Gentiles desire to see him. The 6 part,
containing the holy week of his Passion in Jerusalem.
21 11 19 He curses the figtree, and casts the biers and sellers out of the
Temple. 21 11 19.20 To his enemies the Jews, he avouches his power by John's
Baptism which was of God, and foretells their reprobation, with the
Gentiles vocation in their place, by parables: as the parable of the two
sons, the one promising to do, the other doing his fathers commandment. 21
12 20 The parable of the vineyard let out to husbandmen that killed both the
servants and the son sent to require fruit. 22 The parable of the king that
made a marriage for his son, inuiting ghests to the feast, and they would not
come. 22 12 20 He answers their question of paying tribute to Caesar, and
the Sadducees question of the Resurrection. 22 12 He answers the Pharisees
question, of the greatest commandment. 22 12 20 He puts them to silence
with this question concerning CHRIST, how he could be David's son. 23 12 20
He bids them do as the Scribes teach, but not as they do. 12 12 He
extolleth and prefers the poor widow offering. 24 13 21 He foretells
to some of his Disciples, the destruction of the Temple and of Jerusalem: and
by that occasion, what things shall be before the consummation of the world,
TVESDAY night.
and Antichrist in the consummation, and then incontinent Domesday, warning us
to prepare our selves against his coming. 25 By the parable of the ten
Virgins, and the parable of the talents, he shows, how it shall be at
Domesday with the Faithful that prepare, and that prepare not them selves: and
without parables, that they which do not good works, shall be damned. 26 14
22 Judas bargaineth with the Jews to betray him. and two of his disciples
prepare the Paschal lamb. TENEBRE vvenesday.
13 At the supper he vvasheth his Apostles feet. MAVNDY thursday.
26 14 22 He instituteth the Sacrifice of his body and blood in the B.
Sacrament. The 4 Pasche.
26 14 22 13 He foretells that one of the Twelve shall betray him (appeasing
their contention for the superiority) and that they shall al deny him. 14 His
sermon after supper. 17 His prayer to his father. Al THVRSDAY night and GOOD
FRIDAY.
26.27 14.15 22.23 18.19 The story of his Passion and burial, from thursday at
night, til the next day at euentide. 28 16 24 20 He rises the third day,
EASTER DAY.
16 20 appears first to Marie Magdalene. 28 Then to the other women. 24 Then
to Peter. ver. 34. then to the two disciples going into Emmaus. ver. 15. 16 24
10 Then to the disciples gathered together in a house at Jerusalem, when he
entered the doors being shut, and gave them power to remit and retain sins.
20 Then, upon Lovv-Sunday, LOVV Sunday.
to the disciples likewise gathered together, and Thomas among them. 21 Then,
at the sea of Tiberias, to Peter and the rest that were fishing. where he
commits his sheep to Peter. 18 16 Then, to the disciples upon a mount in
Galilee: giving them commission to preach and baptize through out the whole
world. 24 Then in Bethania, where he promises to send the holy Ghost
(bidding them tarry in the mean time in Jerusalem) 16 24 and so blessing
them, ASCENSION day.
Ascends into heaven.

THE ARGUMENT OF THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES.
THE Gospel having shevved, how the Jews most impiously rejected Christ (as
also Moses and the Prophets had foretold of them:) and therefore deserved to
be rejected themselves also of him: now follows this book of the Acts of
the Apostles ( Hier. in Catal.
written by S. Luke in Rome the fourth y^r^ of Nero, An. Dom. 61) and
shows, how notvvithstanding their deserts, Christ of his mercy (as the
Prophets also had foretold of him) offered him self unto that unworthy
people, yea after that they had Crucified him, sending unto them his twelve
Apostles to move them to penance, and so by Baptism to make them of his
Church: and vvhiles all the Twelve were so occupied about the Jews: how of
a persecuting Jew he made an extraordinary Apostle (who was S. Paul) and
to avoid the sca^dal of the Jews (to whom only him self likewise for the
same cause had preached) sent him, and not any of his Twelve by and by, who
were his known Apostles, unto the Gentiles, who never before had Heard of
Christ, and were worshippers of many Gods, to move them also (for, that
likewise the Prophets had foretold) to faith and penance, and so by Baptism
to make them of his Church: and how the incredulous Jews every where
resisted the same Apostle and his preaching to the Gentiles, persecuting him
and seeking his death, and never ceasing until he fell into the hands of the
Gentiles: Act. 13, 46, 1^, 6* ^9, 9. 28, 28.
that so (as not only he every where, but also the Prophets before him, and
Christ had foretold) the Gospel might be taken away from them, Mat. 21, 23*
and given to the Gentiles: Esa. 1.
even from Jerusalem (whose reprobation also by name had been often foretold)
the headcitie of the Jews, Luc. 13, 33.
where it began, translated to Rome the headcitie of the Gentiles. All this
vvil be evident by the parts of the book: which may be these six.

First, how Christ Ascending in the sight of his Disciples, promised unto them
the Holy ghost, fortelling that of him they should receive strength, and so
begin his Church in Jerusalem: and from thence dilate it into all that
Country, that is into al Jury: yea and into Samaria also yea into al Nations
of the Gentiles, be they never so far of. You shall receive (says he) the
virtue of the Holy ghost coming upon you: and you shall be witnesses unto me in
Jerusalem, and in all Jury, and Samaria, and even to the utmost of the earth.
Chap. 1.

Secondly, the beginning of the Church in Jerusalem, accordingly. Chap. 2.

Thirdly, the propagation of it consequently into al Jury, and also to
Samaria. Chap. 8.

Fourthly, the propagation of it to the Gentiles also. Chap. 10.

Fifthly, the taking of it away from the obstinate Jews, and giving of it to
the Gentiles, by the ministry of S. Paul and S. Barnabee. Chap. 13.

Sixthly, of taking it away from Jerusalem it self, the headcitie of the
Jews, and sending it (as it were) to Rome the headcitie of the Gentiles, and
that, Act. 25. 11.
in their persecuting of Paul so far, * that he appealed to Caesar, and so
delivering him after a sort unto the Romans: Luc. 23, 1.
as they bad * before delivered to them also Christ him self. where as S.
Peter's first coming thither, was upon an other occasion, as shall be said
anon. Of which Romans and Gentiles therefore, the same S. Paul being now
come to Rome (the last Chap. of the Acts) foretells the obstinat Jews
there, Act. 28, 28.
saying: Et ipsi audient. You vvil not hear, but, they vvil hear. that so the
prediction of Christ above rehearsed might be fulfilled: And even to the utmost
of the earth. And there does S. Luke end the book, not caring to tell so much
as the fulfilling of that which our Lord had foretold (Act. 27, 24) to S.
Paul, Thou must appear before Caesar. because his purpose was no more but to
show the new Jerusalem of the Christians, where Christ would place the
chief seat of his Church, as also in deed the Fathers and al other
Catholics have in all ages looked thither, when they were in any great doubt:
no less then the Jews to Jerusalem, as they were appointed in the old
Testament. Deuteronomy. 17, 8.

And so this Book does show the true Church, as plainly, as the Gospel does
show the true Christ, unto all that do not vvilfully shut their own ^ies, to
wit, this to be the true Church, which beginning visibly at Jerusalem, was
taken from the Jews, and translated to the Gentiles (and namely to Rome)
continuing visibly, Romans 11, 25.
and visibly to continue hereafter also, Until the fulness of the Gentiles shall
be come in: that then also Al Israel may be saved. and then is come the end of
the world. Mat. 24, ^4.
For so did Christ most plainly foretell us: This Gospel of the Kingdom shall be
preached in the whole world, for a testimony to al Nations. and then shall
come the consummation. For the conversion of which Nations and accomplishing
the fulness of al Gentiles, the foresaid Church Catholic, being mindful of her
office. to be Christ's witness even to the utmost of the earth, does at this
present (as alvvaies) send preachers to convert and make them also Christians:
Tertul. de pr^^^e.
whereas the protestants and * al other Heretics do nothing else but subvert
such as before were Christians.

And this being the Sum and scope of this Book, thus to give us historically
a just sight of the fulfilling of the Prophets and Christ's prediction about
the Church: it is not to be marueiled at, why it tells not of S. Peter
coming to Rome: considering that his first coming thither, was not, as S.
Paul's was, by the Jews delivery of him, working so to their own
reprobatio^, but upon another occasion, to wit, to confound Simon Magus. Eus.
Hist. li. 2. c. 12. 13. For who also sees not, that it makes no mention of
his preaching to any Gentiles at al, those fevv only Act. 10 excepted, who
were the first, and therefore (lest the Gentiles should seem less cared for
of God, then the Jews) Peter being the Head of al, was elected of God, Act.
15. 7.
to incorporate them into the church, as before he had done the Jews. God
(says he) among us chose, that by my mouth the Gentiles should hear the word
of the Gospel, and believe. and S. James thereupon: Simon has told how God
first visited to take of the Gentiles a people to his name. Act. 15, 14.
But otherwise (I say) here is no mention of Peter's preaching to any Gentiles:
no nor of the other eleven Apostles. Vvil any man therefore infer, that
neither Peter, nor the other Eleven preached to any Nation or city of the
Gentiles? No* the meaning of the Holy ghost was not to write all the Acts of
all the Apostles, no nor the preaching of Peter and his, to the Gentiles, but
only to the Jews: thereby to set out unto the world, the great mercy of
Christ tovvard those unworthy Jews, and consequently their most worthy
reprobation for co^temning such grace and mercy* as also on the other side to
show, how readily the Gentiles in so many Nations, Romans 15, 19.
were converted by one Apostle only, who From Jerusalem even to Illy^icum,
replenished the Gospel of Christ. And this parting of the work so made by S.
Peter with the rest, Gal. 2, 9.
does S. Paul him self touch: That we unto the Gentiles, and they unto the
Circuncision. Nevertheless before his coming to Rome, not only was the
Church come to Rome (as it is evident Act. the last chap.) there planted by S.
Peter and others (as likewise by S. Peter it was planted in the first
Gentiles, before that S. Paul began the taking of it away from the multitude of
the Jews, and the translating of it to the multitude of the Gentiles) but also
so not able was the same Church of Rome, that S. Paul vvriting his Epistle to
the Romans, Romans 1, 8.
before he came thither, says: Your faith is renowned in the whole world.
and therefore they with the rest of the Gentiles, be that Nation whereof
Christ told the Jews, Mat. 21, 43.
saying: The Kingdom of God shall be taken away from you, and shall be given to
a Nation yelding the fruits thereof.



As before we noted the Gospels, as they are read both at Mattins and Mass,
through out the year, in their convenient time and place: so the books
following (as also the books of the old Testament) are read in the said
Service of the Church, for Epistles and Lessons, in their time and place, as
hereafter shall be noted in every of them. See the very same order and custom
of the primitive Church, in S. Ambrose ep. 33. S. Augustine Sermon. de Tempore
139, 140, 141, 144. S. Leo Ser. 2 and 4 de Quadrag. and Ser. 13 and 19 de Pass.
Domini. S. Gregory in his 40 homilies upon the Gospels.

THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. The CHVRCH reads this book at Mattins from Low
Su^day unto the 3 Sunday after Easter: even as in S. Augustines time. See sermon.
83 and 93 de Diuersis. ^o. 10.

CHAP. I. The 1. part.

Christ now ready to ascend, The expectation of the Holy Ghost between the
Ascensio^ of Christ, and the beginning of the Church.
bids the Apostles to expect the Holy Ghost which he had promised.
foretelling where (being strengthened by him) they should begin his Church,
and how far they should carry it. 9 After his Ascension they are warned by
two Angels to set their minds upon his second coming. 14 In the days of
their expectation, 15 Peter begins to execute his vicarship, giving
instruction and order, by which Mathias is elected Apostle in the place of
Judas.

Not al particularly, (for the other Evangelists write diverse things not
touched by him) but all the principal and most necessary things.
al things, Lu. 1, 3.
O Theophilus, The Epistle ^t Mass upon Ascension day.
which JESUS began to do and to teach, Iu. 24, 49.
* he commanded them, that they should not depart from Jerusalem, but should
expect the promise of the Father, Io. 14, 26.
which you * have heard (says he) by my mouth: John's Baptism gave not the
Holy Ghost.
water, but * you shall be The abounda^t pouring of the Holy Ghost upon them on
whitsunday, he calls baptism.
baptized with the holy Ghost after these fevv days. Lu. 3, 16.
^ Lu. 24, 49. Act. 2, 1.
Mar. 16, 19. Lu. 24, 51.
stand you looking into heaven? This JESUS which is assumpted from you into
heaven, shall so come as you have seen him going into heaven.

This visible company was the true Church of Christ, which he left, and
commanded to keep together til the coming of the Holy Ghost by h to be
further informed and furnished to gain al nations to the same Society.
Peter and John, James and Andrew, Philippe and Thomas, Bartholomew and
Matthew, James of Alphaeus and Simon Zelotes, and Jude of James. The Heretics,
some in the text, other in the marge^t, traslate, Wives, to wit, of the
Apostles, most Impudently, knowi^g in their consciences that he means the
Mary's and other holy women that followed Christ. as Lu. 1, 2, 24, 10. See Beza
and the Engl. Bible 1579.
women and MARIE the mother of JESUS, and his brethren.

The Epistle upon S. Mathias day Febr. ^4.
In those days Peter rising up in the mids of the brethren, said: (and the
multitude of persons together, was almost an hundred and twenty) Ps. 40, 9*
who was the * captain of them that apprehended JESUS: Io. 13, 18*
Luc. 22, 47. Io. 18, 3.
Mt. 27, 5. 7.
and being hanged he burst in the mids, and al his bowels gushed out.
Hacel-dema, that is to say, the field of blood. Psa. 68, 26.
Be their habitation made desert, and be there none to dwell in it. And his
Bishoprike let another take. Ps. 108, 8.
No small mystery, that the number of the twelve Apostles must needs be made
up again.
there must one of these be made a witness with us of his resurrection.



ANNOTATIONS CHAP. I.
2. Giving commandment.] He means the power given them to preach to
baptize* to remit sins, and generally the whole commission and charge of
government of the Church after him and in his name, steed, and right* the
which Regiment was given them together with the Holy Ghost to assist them
therein for ever.

7. It is not for you.] The times and moments of things to come pertain not to
us.
It is not for us, nor needful for the Church, to know the times and moment of
the world, the coming of Antichrist, and such other Gods secrets. This is
enough in that case, to be assured that Christ's faith shall be preached, and the
Church spread through out al Nations, the Holy Ghost concurring continually with
the Apostles and their Successors for the same.

11. Assumpted from you.] By this visible Ascending of Christ to heaven and
like return from thence to judgment, Christ is ascended, and yet really in
the B. Sacrament.
the Heretics do incredulously argue, him not to be in the Sacrament. But let
the faithful rather give ear to S. Chrysostom saying thus: O miracle, he that
sits with the Father in heaven above, at the very same time is handled of
men beneath. Christ ascending to heaven, both has his flesh with him, and
left it with us beneath. Eliae^ being taken up, left to his Disciple his cloak
only: but the Son of man ascending left his own flesh to us. Li. ^ de
Sacerd. Ho. 2 ad po. Ant. in fine. Ho. de diuit. and paup. in fine.

14. MARIE the mother of JESUS.] Our B. LADY.
This is the last mention that is made in holy Scripture, of our B Lady. for
though she were full of al divine wisdom, and opened (no doubt) unto the
Evangelists and other writers of holy Scriptures, diverse of Christ's actions,
speeches, and mysteries, whereof she had both experimental and revealed
knowledge: Yet for that she was a woman, and the humblest creature living, and
the pattern of al order and obedience, it pleased not God that there should be
any further note of her life, Her life.
doings, or death, in the Scriptures. She lived the rest of her time with the
Christians (as here she is peculiarly named and noted among them) and specially
with S. John the Apostle, Io. 19, 26. 27.
* to whom our Lord recommended her. Who provided for her al necessaries, her
spouse Joseph (as it may be thought) being deceased before. The common opinion
is that she lived 63 years in all. Dionys. ep. ad Timotheum.
At the time of her death, Her death.
(as S. Denis first, and after him S. Damascene de dormit. Deiparae. writes.)
all the Apostles then dispersed into diverse nations to preach the Gospel, were
miraculously brought together (saving S. Thomas who came the third day after)
to Jerusalem, to honor her divine departure and funeral, as the said S. Denis
witnesses. Who says that him self, S. Timothee, and S. Hierotheus were
present: testifying also of his own hearing, that both before here death and
after for three days, not only the Apostles and other holy men present, but
the Angels also and Powers of heaven did sing most melodious Hymns. They
buried her sacred body in Gethsemaui, but for S. Thomas sake, who desired to
see and to reverence it, Her ASSVMVTION.
they opened the sepulcher the third day, and finding it void of the holy body,
but excedingly fragrant, they returned, assuredly deeming that her body was
assumpted into heaven, as the Church of God holds, being most agreeable to the
singular privilege of the mother of God, and therefore celebrateth most
solemnly the day of her Assumption. And that is consonant not only to the
said S. Denis, and S. Damascene, but to holy Athanasius also, who avouches the
same, Sermon. in Euang. de Deipara. of which Assumption of her body. S. Bernard
also wrote five notable sermons extant in his works.

But neither these holy fathers, The Protestants have no feast of her at al, as
they have of other Saints.
nor the Churches tradition and testimony, do bear any sway now a days with
the Protestants, that have abolished this her greatest feast of her Assumption.
who of reason should at the least celebrate it as the day of her death, as they
do of other Saints. For though they believe not that her body is assumpted,
yet they will not (we trow) deny that she is dead, and her soul in glory:
neither can they ask scriptures for that, no more then they require for the
deaths of Peter, Paul, John, and other, which be not mentioned in scriptures
and yet are still celebrated by the Protestants. But concerning the B. Virgin
MARIE, they have blotted out also both her Nativity, and her Conception: so as
it may be thought the Devil bears a special malice to this woman whose seed
brake his head. For as for the other two days of her Purification and
Aununciation, they be not proper to our Lady, but the one to Christ's
Conception, the other to his Presentation* so that she by this means shall have
no festiuitie at al.

But contrariwise, How the Primitive Church and ancient fathers honored our
B. Lady.
to consider how the ancient Church and fathers esteemed, spoke, and wrote of
this excellent vessel of grace, may make us detest these men's impiety, that
can not abide the praises of her Lu. 1, 48.
whom al generations should call blessed, and that esteem her honors a
derogatio^ to her son. Some of their speeches we will set down, that al men
may see, that we neither praise her, nor pray to her, more amply then they did.
S. Athan^sius in the place alleged, after he had declared how all the Angelical
spirits and every order of them honored and praised her with the AVE, S.
Athanasius.
wherewith S. Gabriel saluted her; We also, says he, of al degrees upon the
earth ^xtol thee with loud voice, saying, Au^ gratia plena etc. Hail full of
grace, our Lord is with thee pray for us (...) Maistresse, S. Ephrem.
and Lady, and Queens, and mother of God. Most holy and ancient Ephrem, also
in a special oration made in praise of our Lady, says thus in diverse places
thereof, Intemerata De^p^^^ etc. Mother of God vndifiled, Queen of al, the
hope of them that despair, my lady most glorious, higher them the heavenly
spirit^, more honorable then the Cherubins, holier then the Seraphins* and
without comparison more glorious the^ the supernal hosts, the hope of the
fathers, the glory of the Prophets, the praise of the Apostles. And a little
after. Virgo ante partum, in partu, and post partum* by thee we are reconciled
to Christ my God, thy son: thou art the helper of sinners, thou the haven for
them that are tossed with storms, the solam of the world, the deliverer of
the emprisoned, the help of orphans, the redemption of captives. And
afterward, Vouchsafe me thy servant to praise thee. Hail lady MARIE full of
grace, hail Virgin most blesed among women. And much more in that sense which
were to long to repeat.

S. Cyril. has the like wonderful speeches of her honor, S. Cyril.
hom. 6. contra Naestorium. Praise and glory be to thee ^ holy Trinitieito
thee also be praise, holy mother of God, for thou art the precious pearl of
the world, thou the candel of unquenchable light, the crown of Virginitis,
the scepter of the Catholic faith. By thee the Trinity is glorified and
adored in all the world: by thee heaven rejoices, Angels and Archangels are
glad, devils are put to flight, and man is called again to heaven, and every
creature that was held with the error of Idols, is turned to the knowledge
of the truth: by thee Churches are founded through the world: thee being their
helper, the Gentiles come to penance* and much more which we omit. Likewise the
Greek Liturgies or Masses of S. James, The Greek Liturgies of S. James, S.
Basil, S. Chrysostom.
S. Basil, and S. Chrysostom, make most honorable mention of our B. Lady,
praying unto her, saluting her with the Angelical hymn, Au^ Maria, and using
these speeches, Most holy, undefiled, blessed above al, our Queen, our Lady,
the mother of God, MARIE, a virgin for over, the sacred arc of Christ's
Incarnation, brother then the heavens that did bear they creator, holy
mother, of unspeakable light, we magnify thee with Angelical hymns. al
things pass understanding, al things are glorious in thee o mother of God* by
thee the mystery before unknown to the Angels, is made manifest and revealed
to them on the earth* thou art more honorable then the Cheerubins, and more
glorious then the Seraphins, to thee, O full of grace, al creatures, both men
and Angels do gratulate and rejoice: glory be to thee, Which art a sanctified
temple, a spiritual paradise, the glory of virgins, of whom God took flesh
and made thy womb to be his throne, etc.

And S. Augustine Sermon. 18. de Sanctis ^o. 10: or (as some think) S.
Fulgentius: S. Augustine.
O blessed MARIE, who can be able vvorthily to praise or thank thee, receive
our prayers, obtain us out requests, for thou art the vnica spes*
special hope of sinners, by thee we hope for pardon of our sins, and in
thee, o most blessed, is the expectation of our rewards. Sancta MARIA succurre
miseris, etc.
And then follow these words now used in the Churches service: Sancta Maria
suscurre miseris, iuua pusillanimes, refoue flebiles, orapro populo, interueni
pro lero, intercede pro deuoto foemineo sexu. Sentiant omnes tuum inuamen,
quicunque celebrant tuam commemorationem. Pray thou continually for the people
of God, which did diserue to bear the redeemer of the world, Who lives
and reigns for ever. S. Damascene.
S. Damascene also ser. de dormitione Deiparae. Let us cry with Gabriel, Aue
gratia plena, Hail full of grace, Hail sea of joy that can not be emptied,
hail the vnicum leuamen
only case of greefes, hail holy virgin, by whom death was expelled, S.
Irenaeus.
and life brought in. See S. Irenaeus li. 3* c. 33. and li. 5 circa medium, and
S. Augustine de side and Symbolo. and de agone Christiano. Where they declare
how both the sexes concur to our salvation, As Adam and Eve, so Christ and
our Lady.
the man and the woman, Christ and our Lady, as Adam and Eve both were the
cause of our fall, though Adam for more then his wife, and so Christ far more
excellently and in an other sort then our Lady: who (though his mother) yet is
but his creature and handmaid, him self being truly both God and man. See S.
Greg Nzian. in fi. Trag. Christus patiens.
In all which places alleged and * many other like to these, if it please the
reader to see and read, and make his own eyes witnesses, he shall perceive that
there is much more said of her, and to her, then we have here recited, and that
the very same or the like speeches and terms were used then, that the Church
uses now, in the honor and invocation of the B. Virgin: The meaning of the
titles and terms given to our B. Lady.
to the confusion of al those that wilfully will not understand in what sense al
such speeches are applied unto her. to wit, either because of her prayer and
intercession for us. whereby she is our hope, our refuge, our advocate etc. or
because she brought forth the author of our redemption and salvation, whereby
she is the mother of mercy, and grace, and life, and whatsoever goodness we
receive by Christ.

15. Peter rising up.) Peter begins to practice his Primacie.
Peter in the mean time practiced his Superiority in the company or Church,
publishing an election to be made of one to supply Judas room. Which Peter did
not upon commandment of Christ written, but by suggestion of Gods Spirit, and
by understanding the Scriptures of the old Testament to that purpose: the sense
whereof Christ had opened to the Apostles before his departure, though in more
full manner afterward at the sending of the Holy Ghost. And this act of Peter in
prescribing to the Apostles and the rest, Beza in no. Test. (...). an. 1565.
this election, and the manner thereof, is so evident for his Supremacy, that *
the Aduersa^ies confess here that he was, Antistes, the chief and Bishop of
this whole College and company.

26. Loties.] When the event or fall of the lot is not expected of Devils, nor
of the stars, nor of any force of fortune, Casting of lottes.
but looked and prayed for to be directed by God and his holy Saints: then may
lottes be used lawfully. And sometimes to discern betwixt two things mere
indifferent, they be necessary, as S. Augustine teaches ^p. 180 ad Honoratum.

CHAP. II.
The Holy Ghost coming to the Faithful upon vvhitsunday. The 2 part.
5 Jews in Jerusalem of al Nations do vv^nder to hear them speaks al
tongues. 14 And Peter to the deriders declares, THE coming of the Holy Ghost
and beginning of the Church in Jerusalem.
that it is not drunkenness, but the Holy Ghost which Joel did prophecy of,
which JESUS (whom they crucified) being now risen again and ascended (as he
shows also out of the Scriptures) has powered ou^ from heaven, co^cluding
therefore that he is CHRIST, and they most horrible murderers. 17 Whereat they
being compuncte, and submitting them selves, he tells them that they must be
baptized, and then they also shall receive the same Holy Ghost, as being
promised to all the baptized. 41 And so 3000 are baptized that very day. 42
Whose godly exercises are here reported, and also their living in state of
perfection. The Apostles work many miracles, and God daily increases the
number of the Church.

Act. 1, 4*
they were al together in one place: The Epistle upon whitsunday.
Mt. 3, 11.
and it sat upon every one of them: Io. 7, 39.
and they began to speak with diverse tongues, according as the HOLY GHOST
gave them to speak.

do v^e hear*
have we heard' each man our own tongue wherein we were borne? do hear*
have heard' them speak in our own tongues the great works of God.

The lesson before the Epistle on Imber wenesday in whitsonweeke.
But Peter the head of the rest and now newly replenished with all knowledge and
fortitude, makes the first Sermon.
Peter standing with the Eleven, lifted up his voice, and spoke to them, Ye
men, Jews, and al you that dwell in Jerusalem, be this known to you, and
with your ears receive my words. suppose, whereas it is the third hour of
the day: Joel. 2* 28.


Ps. 15, 8.
I foresavv the Lord in my sight alvvaies: because he is at my right hand that
I be not moved. Who but an infidel (says S. Augustine) will deny Christ to have
descended to Hell? ep. 99.
in hell, nor give thy Holy one to see As his soul suffered no pains in Hell, so
neither did his body take any corruption in the grave.
corruption. 3. Reg. 2, 10.
that * he died, and was buried: and his sepulcher is with us until this
present day. Ps. 131, 11.
and knevv that by an oath God had sworn to him that of the fruit of his
loins there should sit upon his seat:

this gift which Ps. 109, 1*
this vvhom' you see and hear. Our Lord has said to my Lord, sit on my right
hand,

Contrition.
they were compuncte in heart, and said to Peter and to the rest of the
Apostles, What shall we do men, brethren? Not only amendment of life, but
penance also required be fore Baptism, in such as be of age, though no^ in
that sort as afterward in the Sacrament of penance. Aug. de fid. et oper. c.
11. (...) ep. 108.
Do penance, and be every one of you baptized in the name of JESUS CHRIST for
remission of your sins: and you shall receive the gift of the holy Ghost.
Three thousand were converted at this first sermon, (...) they were put to the
other visible companio and Church.
three thousand souls.

This was the B. Sacrament, which the Apostles daily ministered to the
Christians at least in one kind. See chap. 20, 7.
the breaking of bread, and prayers. Act. 4, 32.
were together, * and had al things common.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. II.
1. The days of Pentecost.) As Christ our Pasche, for correspondence to the
figure, was offered at the Jews great feast of Pasche, The feasts of Pasche
and Pentecost.
so fifty days after (in Greek, Pentecost) for accomplishing the like* figure
of the Law-giuing in Mount Sinal, he sent down the Holy Ghost just on the day
of their Pentecost, which was always on Sunday, as appears Leuit. 23, 15.
Both which days the Church keeps yearly for memory of Christ's death and
Resurrection, and the sending down of the Holy Ghost: as they did the like for
record of their delivery out of Egypt, and their Law giving aforesaid, the
said Feasts with us containing, besides the remembrance of benefits past,
great Sacraments also of the life to come. Aug. ep. 119, C. 16.

4. Al replenished.) Though the Apostles and the rest were baptized before, and
had thereby received the grace of the Holy Ghost to sanctification and
remission of sins, The sending of the Holy Ghost on whitsunday and the
effects thereof.
as for diverse other purposes also: Lu. 24, 49*
Yet as Christ * promised them they should be further endued with strength and
virtue from above, so here he fulfilleth his promise, visibly pouring down the
Holy Ghost upon all the company and upon every one of them, thereby
replenishing the Apostles specially with all truth, wisdom, and knowledge
necessary for the government of the Church, and giving both to them and to al
other present, the grace and effect of the Sacrament of Confirmation,
accomplishing, corroborating, and strengthening them in their says and the
confession of the same. And lastly for a visible token of Gods Spirit, he
endued them al with the gift of diverse strange tongues: al (I say) there
present, Our B. Lady.
as well our Lady, as other holy women and brethren, besides the Apostles.
though ^ the Heretics fondly argue, Beza Annot. in hoc (...) v. 1.
for the desire they have to dishonor Christ's mother, that neither she nor
they were there present, nor had the gift of tongues, contrary to the plain
text that says, They were al together, to wit, all the 120 mentioned before c.
1. 15.

23. By the determinate counsel of God delivered.) Gods determination that
Christ should die, excuses not the Jews.
God delivered him, and he delivered him self, for love and intention of our
salvation, and so the act was holy and Gods own determination. But the Jews
and others which betrayed and crucified him, did it of malice and wicked
purpose, and their fact was damnable, and not of Gods counsel or causing:
though he tolerated it, for that he could and did turn their abominable fact
to the good of our salvation. Therefore abhor those new Manichees of our time,
both Lutherans and Caluinists, that make God the author and cause of Judas
betraying of Christ, B^za.
no less then of Paul's conversion beside the false translation of Beza,
saying for Gods prescience or foreknowledge (in the Greek, (...)) Gods
providence.

24. Loosing the sorrows.) Christ was not in pains him self, but loosed other
men of those dolours of Hell, wherewith it was impossible him self should be
touched. See Li. 12* c. 13* de Genesis (...).
S. Augustine.

27. My soul in Hell.) Corrupt translation against the Article of Christ's
descending into Hell.
Where all the Faithful, according to the Creed, ever have believed, that
Christ according to his soul, went down to Hell, to deliver the Patriarchs and
al just men there holden in bondage til his death, and the Apostle here citing
the Prophets words, most evidently expresses the same, distinguishing his
soul in Hell, from his body in the grave: Yet the Caluinists to defend against
Gods express words, the blasphemy of their Master, that Christ suffered the
pains of Hell, and that no where but upon the Cross, and that otherwise he
descended not into Hell, (...)
most falsely and flatly here corrupt the text, by turning and wresting both
the Hebrew and Greek words from their most proper and usual significations
of, Soul, and Hell, into body, and grave: saying for, my soul in Hell, thus, my
body, Eng. Bible. (...)
life; person, yea (as Beza in his new Testament an. 1556) my carcas in the
grave, and this later they corrupt almost through out the Bible for that
purpose. But for refelling of both corruptions, it shall be sufficient in this
place: first, that al Hebrews and Greeks, and all that understand these tongues,
know that the foresaid Hebrew and Greek words are as proper, peculiar, and
usual to signify, soul and Hell, as anima and infernus in Latin, yea as soul
and Hell in English do properly signify the soul of man, and Hell that is
opposite to heaven: and that they are as vnproprely used to signify body and
grave, as to say in English, soul for body, or Hell for grave, Secondly, it does
so mi^like the Heretics them selves, that Castaleo one of their fine
Translatours reselleth it, and to make it the more sure, he for, in inferno,
translateth, in Orco. that is, in Hell. Thirdly, Beza him self partly recanteth
in his later edition, and confesses that, Carcas, was no fit word for the body
of Christ, and therefore, I have (says he) changed it, but I retain and keep
the sa^^e sense still. meaning that he has now translated it, soul, but that
he means thereby as before, Christ's dead body, fourthly, No. Test. an. 1556.
annot. in 2 Act. v* 27* and 24. and in 1 Pet. ^, 19.
he says plainly, that translating thus, Thou shall not leave my carcas in
the grave, he did it of purpose against Limbus Patrum, Purgatory, and Christ's
descending into Hell, which he calls soul errors, and marueleth, that most of
the ancient fathers were in that error: namely of Christ's descending into
Hell, and delivering the old fathers. What need we more* He opposes himself
both against plain Scriptures and al ancient fathers, perverting the one, and
contemning the other, to overthrow that truth which is an Article of our Creed.
whereby it is evidently false which some of them say for their defense, that
none of them did ever of purpose translate falsely. See the Annotation upon 1
Pet. 3. v. 19.

44. Al things common.) Living in common.
This living in common is not a rule or a precept to al Christian men, as the
Anabaptists falsely pretend: but a life of perfection and counsel, followed of
our Religious in the Catholic Church. See S. Aug. in Ps. 1^2. in principio.
and ep. 109.

47. Increased.) The increase and perpetuity of the VISIBLE CHV^^H.
More and more were added to the Church (as the Greek more plainly expresses)
that we may see the visible propagation and increase of the same. (...).
from which time a diligent man may deduce the very same visible Society of
men joined in Christ, through the whole book, and afterward by the
Ecclesiastical story, down til our days, against the pretensed invisible
Church of the Heretics.

CHAP. III.
A miracle, and a Sermon of Peter's to the people, shevving that I^SVS is
Christ, and exhorting them to faith in him and penance for their sins, and so
they shall have by him (in Baptism) the Benediction which was promised to
Abraham. The Epistle upon SS. Peter and Paul's eve. Iun. 28.


This makes for distinction of Canonical hours and diversity of appointed
times to pray in Se^ Anno^. (...).
ninthe hour of prayer. temple.

The Epistle upon wenesday in Easter week.
made answer to the people, Ye men of Israel, why marvel you at this, or why
look you upon us, as though by our power or holiness we have made this man to
walk? Luc. 23, 28.
This faith was not the faith of the same man (for he looked only for alms)
nor a special faith of the Apostles own salvation: but the whole belief of
Christian Religion.
faith of his name, this man whom you see and know, his name has
strengthened: and the faith which is by him, has given this perfect health in
the sight of al you.

(...)
whom Some Heretics foully corrupt this place, thus, Who must be contained in
heaven, of purpose (as they protest) to hold Christ in heaven, from the B.
Sacrament. Beza. As though his presence there, drew him out of heaven. Neither
ca^ they pretend the Greek, which is word for word as in the vulgar latin, and
as we translate.
heaven truly must receive until the times of the restitution of al things,
which God spoke by the mouth of his holy prophets from the beginni^g of the
world. Deu. 18, 15.
That a prophet shall the Lord your God raise up to you of your brethren, as my
self: him you shall hear according to al things whatsoever he shall speak to
you. Genesis 22, 18. 26, 4*
And in thy seed shall all the families of the earth be blessed.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. III.
^. That which I have.] Saints do miracles and the like, but by the power of
God.
This power of working miracles was in Peter, and Peter properly did give this
man his health, though he received that force and virtue of God, and in and by
him executed the same. Therefore he says, That which I have, I give to thee.
and the Heretics are ridiculous that note here, a miracle done by Christ by
the hands of the Apostles, to make the simple believe that they had no more to
do then a dead instrument in the workemans hand.

12. By our power.] When the Apostles remit sins, or do any other miracles,
they do it not by any humane, proper, or natural power in them selves: but of
supernatural force given them from above, to prove that the faith of Christ is
true, and that he is God whom the Jews crucified, in whose name and faith they
work, and not in their own.

CHAP. IIII.
The Rulers of the Jews oppose them selves and imprison Peter and John. 4 But
yet thousands of the people are converted: 5 and to the Rulers also, Peter
boldly avouches by the forsaid miracle, that JESUS is Christ, telling them of
their heinous fault out of the Psalms, and that without him they can not be
saved. 13 They though confounded with the miracle, yet proceed in their
obstinacy, forbidding them to speak any more of JESUS, adding also threats.
23 Whereupon the Church flees to prayer, wherein they comfort them selves
with the omnipotency of God, and prediction of David, and ask for the gift
of boldness and miracles against those threats. 31 And God shows miraculously
that he has heard their prayer. ^2 The whole Churches unity and community
of life. 36. Of Barnabas by name.

Here again we see the proceeding and increase of the Church visibly.
many of them that had heard the word, believed: and the number of the men
was made five thousand.

The name of JESUS. See Annot. Philip. 2, 10.
whom you did crucify, whom God has raised from the dead, in this same this
man stands before you whole. Psa. 117, 22.
the stone that was rejected of you the builders: which is made into the head
of the corner. The Apostles constancy, learning and wisdom after the coming
of the Holy Ghost, being but idiotes, that is, simple unlettered men and
timorous before.
and of the vulgar sort, they marueled, and they knew them that they had been
with JESUS: Their constancy and courage after their confirmation, being so
weak before. And if any Magistrate command against God, that is to say,
forbid Catholic Christian men to preach or serve God, this same must be their
answer, though they be whipped and killed for their labor. See c. 5. v. 29.
If it be just in the sight of God, to hear you rather then God, judge ye.

to God, and said, Lord, thou that did make heaven and earth, the sea, and al
things that are in them, Why did the Gentiles rage, Ps. 2, 1.
and the people meditate vain things: CHRIST? Christ's death, as needeful for
man's redemption, was of Gods determination: but as of the malice of the Jews,
it was not his act otherwise then by permission.
thy hand and thy counsel decreed to be done.

Act. 2, 44.
but al things were common unto them. Note the ardent charity and contempt of
worldly things in the first Christians: who did not only give great alms, but
sold al their lands to bestow on the Apostles and the rest that were in
necessity, according to Christ's counsel. Mt. 16, 21. Note also the great
honor and credit given to the Apostles, in that the Christian men put all the
goods and possessions they had, to their disposition.
sold and brought the prices of those things which they sold,

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. IIII.
37. Before the feet.) He, as the rest, did not only give his goods as in
vulgar alms, but in all humble and reverent manner as things dedicated to God,
Reverence to holy persons.
he laid them down at the Apostles holy feet, as S. Luke always expresses,
4. reg. 4, ^^*
and gave them not into their hands. The Sunamite fell down and embraced
Elisaeus feet. Many that asked benefits of Christ (as the woman sick of the
bloody fiuxe) fell down at his feet and Ma^ie kissed his feet. Luc. ^, 47.
Such are signs of due reverence done both to Christ and to other sacred
persons, Kissing their feet.
either Prophets, Lu. 7, 38.
Apostles, Popes, or others representing his person in earth. See in S. Hierom
of Epiphanius Bishop in Cypres, how the people of Jerusalem of al sorts
flocked together unto him, offering their children (to take his blessing)
kissing his feet, plucking the hemme^ of his garment, so that he could not
move for the throng. Ep. ^1 c. 4 cont. e^^o. Io. Hierosol.

CHAP. V.
Ananias and his wife Saphira, for their sacrilege, at Peter's word fall down
dead, to the great terror of the rest. 12 By the Apostles miracles, not only
the number, but also their faith so increases, that they seek in the streate^
to the very shadow of Peter, the towns also about bringing their diseased to
Jerusalem. 17 The Rulers again oppose them selves, but in vain. 19 For out
of prison an Angel delivers them, bidding them preach openly to al: 27 and in
their Council Peter is nothing afraid of their big words: 34 Yea Gamaliel
being one of them selves cas^eth a doubt among them, lest the matter be of God,
and therefore impossible to be dissolved. 40 Finally, the Apostles being
scourged by them, count it an honor, and cease no day from preaching.

Hereupon rose great reverence, awe, and fear of the vulgar Christians toward
the holy Apostles, for an example to al Christian people how to behave the^
selves toward their Bishops and Priests.
fear in the whole Church, and upon all that heard these things. The Epistle
upon Imber wenesday in whitson-weeke. And within the octaue, and in a votiue of
SS. Peter and Paul.


none durst join them selves unto them: but the people magnified them. Peter's
shadow.
his shadovv at the least might over shadovv any of them, and they all might be
delivered from their infirmities.

An Angel leads them out of prison.
and leading them forth, said, Act. 4, 18.
Savior God has exalted with his right hand, to give repentance to Israel,
and remission of sins.

Theudas*
saying he was some body, to whom consented a number of men about four
hundred, who was slain: and all that believed him, were dispersed, and
brought to nothing. Time, and the evident success of Christ's Church and
religion, prove it to be of God: no violence of the Jews, no persecution of
the Heathen Princes, no endeavor of domestical Adversaries, heretics,
Schismatikes, or il livers, p^uaili^g against it, as on the other side, many
attempts have been made by Arius Macedonius, Nestorius, Luther, and the like,
who thought them selves some body: but after they had plai^d their parts a
while, their memory is buried, or lives only in maledictio^ and infamy, and
their scholars come to naught Therefore let no Cath. man be scandalized that
this heresy holds up for a time. For the Arians and some others ^lorished
much longer the^ these, and were better supported by Princes and learning, and
yet had an end.
of God, you are not able to dissolve it,
them', lest perhaps you be found to resist God also. And they consented to
him.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. V.
2. Defrauded.) Aug. ser. 9 in append. de diuersis tom. 10.
In that (says S. Augustine) he withdrew any part of that which he promised,
he was guilty at once, both of sacrilege, and of fraud, of sacrilege, because
he robbed God of that which was his by promise: Sacrilege.
of fraud, in that he withheld of the whole gift, a piece. Let now the
Heretics come, and say it was for lying or hypocrisy only that this fact
was condemned: because they be loath to have sacrilege counted any such sin,
who have taught men not only to take away from God some piece of that or all that them selves gave, but plainly to spoil and apply to them selves all that
other men gave.

3. Peter said.) S. Peter (as you see here) without man's relation knew this
fraud and the cogitations of Ananias, Exco^municatio^ joined with corporal
painer.
and as head of the College and of the whole Church against which this robbery
was committed, executed this heavy sentence of Excommunication both against
him, and his wife consenting to the Sacrilege. (...) it was excommunication by
S. Augustines judgment, (li. 5. cont. ep. Parm. c. 1 to. 7) and had this
corporal miraculous death joined withal, as the Excommunication that S. Paul
gave out against the incestuous and others, 1 Cor. 5.
had the corporal vexation of Satan incident unto it.

4. In thy power.) If is displeased God (says S. Augustine) to withdraw of
the money which they had vowed to God, Vow of Chastity, and the breach
thereof.
how is he angry when chastity is vowed and is not performed? for to such
may be said that which S. Peter said of the money: Thy virginity remaining
did it not remain to thee, and before thou did vovv, was it not in thine
own power? for, whosoever have vowed such things and have not paid them, let
them not think to be condemned to corporal deaths, but to everlasting fire.
August. Ser. 10. de diuersis. Greg. li. ^. ep. 13.
And S. Gregory to the same purpose writes thus, Ananias had vowed money to
God, which afterward overcome with devilish persuasion he withdraw: but
with vvha^ death he was punished, thou know. If then he were worthy of
that death, who took away the money that he had given to God, consider what
great peril in Gods judgment thou shall be worthy of, which have
vvithdravven, not money, but thy self from almighty God, to whom thou had
vowed thy self under the habits or vveede of a Monk.

4. Not to men, but) To take from the Church or from the Governors thereof,
things dedicated to their use and the service of God, or to lie unto Gods
Ministers, is so judged of before God, as if the lie were made, and the fraud
done to the Holy Ghost him self, who is the Churches President and Protector.

15. His shadovv.) Peter's shadow and intercession.
Specially they sought to Peter the chief of al, who not only by touching, as
the other, but by his very shadow cured al diseases, whereupon S. Augustine
faith, If then the shadow of his body could help, how much more now the fulness
of power? And if the^ a certain little vvind of him passing by did profit them
that humbly asked, how much more the grace of him now being permanent and
remaining? Ser. 29 de Sanctis, speaking of the miracles done by the Saints now
reigning in heaven.

CHAP. VI.
By occasion of a murmur in the Church (whose number now is so grown that
it can not be numbered) Seven of them being ordered by the Apostles in the holy
order of Deacons: ^ one of them, Steven, works great miracles: and is by such
as he confounded in disputation, falsely accused in the Council, of blasphemy
against the Temple and rites thereof.

The election of the 7 first Deacons.
(...)
stranger of Antioche. also of the Now also the Priests and they of greater
knowledge and estimation began to believe.
priests obeyed the faith.

The Epistle upon S. Steuens day in Christmas.
And Steven full of grace and fortitude did great wonders and signs among the
people. Such is the face of al constant and cheereful* Martyrs, to their
persecutors and judges.
the face of an Angel.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. VI.
1. Murmuring.] Murmuring and emulation.
It comes of humane infirmity, that in every Society of men (be it never so
holy) there is some cause given or taken by the weak, of murmur and
difference, which must ever be provided for and stayed in the beginning* lest
it grow to further schism or sedition. And to al such defects, the more the
Church increases in number and diversity of men and Provinces, the more it is
subject. In all which things the spiritual Magistrates, by the Apostles example
and authority, must take orders, as time and occasion shall require.

3. Seven men.] The 7 Deacons*
We may not think that these Seven (here made Deacons) were only chosen to
serve profane tables or dispose of the Churches mere temporalles, though by
that occasion only they may seem to some now elected, no express mention
being made of any other function, for, diverse circumstances of this same place
give evidence, and so does al antiquity, that their Office stood not
principally about profane things, but about the holy Altar. The persons to be^
elected, must be full of the Holy Ghost and wisdom, they must after public
prayer be ordered and consecrated by the Apostles imposition of hands, 1 Timothy
3. and 4.
as Bishops and Priests were afterward ordered, ep. ad Tim: where S. Paul also
requires in a manner the same conditions in them as in Bishops. Al which would
not have been prescribed for any secular stewardship. Yea straight upon their
Ordering here (no doubt by commission of the Apostles, which they had not
before their election) they preached, baptized, disputed, and as it may appear
by the words spoken of S. Steven, that he was full of grace and fortitude, Act.
6, ^.
they received great increase of grace by their Deaconship.

But S. Ignatius ep. 2 ad Tral. can best witness of their Office and the
Apostles manner and meaning in such things, The office of Deacons.
who writes thus: It behooves also to please by all means the Deacons, which
are for the ministry of JESUS CHRIST. For they are not seruiteurs of meat
and drink, but ministers of the Church of God. For what are Deacons but
imitatours or folovvers of Christ, ministering to the Bishop, as Christ to his
Father, and vvorking unto him a clean and immaculate work, even as S. Steven
to S. James etc. S. Polycarpe, Li. Eccl. Hier. c. 1* part. 2.
has the like in his epistle ad Philippenses. And S. Denis writes that their
Office was about the Altar, and putting the holy bread and chalice upon the
same. S. Clement also (Apost. Constable. li. ^ c. 61.) that their Office among
other things, is to assist the Bishops, and read the Gospel in the Service etc.
S. Cyprian in diverse places (ep. 65. and ep. 49 ad Cornel.) calls Deacons,
the Churches and the Apostles Ministers, and their Office, administrationens
sacram, an holy administration. S. Hierom affirms, in caput 7 Michcae. and in
episto. 85 ad Euagriun^ tom. 2, Where he checketh some of them for preFerring
them selves before Priests, and puts them in remembrance of their first
calling, that they be as the Levites were in respect of the Priests of the old
Law. finally by S. Ambrose li. 1 Off^^ c. 41 and Prudentius in Hymno de S.
Laurent. speaking of S. Laurence the Deacon, We may see their Office was most
holy. See S. Augustine also of the dignity of Deacons ep. 14^ ad Valerium.
Conc. Carthag. 4. can. 37. 38* 39* 41.

CHAP. VII.
Ste^^^ being permitted to answer, beginning at Abraham, shows that God was
with their fathers both in other places, and also long before the Temple. 4^
and that after it was built, it could not be (as they grossly imagined) a house
for God to dwell in. 51 then he inu^igheth against their stifneckednes, and
tells them boldly of their traitorous murdering of Christ, as their fathers
had done his Prophets before him. 54 Whereat they being vvood, he sees heaven
open, and JESUS therein his Divine Majesty. 57 Whereat they become more mad,
so that they stone him to death (Saul consenting) he commending his soul to
JESUS, and humbly praying for them.

Genesis 12, 1.
Go forth out of thy country, and out of thy kindred, and come into a land
that I shall show thee. Genesis 15, 13.
That his seed shall be a sciourner in a strange country, and they shall subdue
them to servitude, and shall evil entreat them fourehundred years: said God.
and after these things they shall goeforth, and (...)
shall serve me in this place.

Gen, 17.
and so he * begat Isaac, Genesis 21.
and circumcised him the eight day: and * Isaac, Genesis 25.
Jacob: and * Jacob, the twelve Patriarchs. Genesis 29. 30. 35.
* sold Joseph into Egypt. and God was with him: Genesis 37.
and he * gave him grace and wisdoms in the sight of Pharao the king of
Egypt, Genesis 41.
and he appointed him Governor over Egypt and over al his house. Genesis 42.
and our fathers found no victuals. fathers first: Genesis 45.
Genesis 46.
Genesis 49.
and * he died, and our fathers. Translation of Saints bodies agreeable to
nature and Scripture. And the desire to be buried in one place more then an
other (which the holy Patriarchs also had Genesis 49, 29. 50, 24. Hebr. 11, 22.)
has sometime great causes. Aug. de Cur. pr^mort. c. 1. and vlt.
translated into Sichem, Genesis 50.
and were * laid in the sepulcher that Abraham * bought for a price of silver
of the sons of Hemor the son of Sichem. Genesis 23.
Ios. 24.


Exo, 1, 7.
the people * increased and was multiplied in Egypt, Exo. 2, 2.
and he was acceptable to God, who was nourished three months in his fathers
house Exo. 2, 11*
Exo. 2, 13.
Who has appointed thee prince and judge over us? What, vvilt thou kill me,
as thou did yesterday kill the Egyptian? Exo. 3, 2.
there * appeared to him in the desert of mount Sina an Angel in the fire of
the flame of a bush. I am the God of thy fathers, the God of Abraham, the God
of Isaac, and the God of Jacob. And Moses being made to tremble, durst not
view it. said to him, Loose of the shoe of thy feet: for the place wherein
thou stand, is holy ground.

Who has appointed the prince and Captain? him God sent prince and Christ is
our Redeemer, and yet Moses is here called redeemer* so Christ is our Mediator
and Advocate, and yet we may have Saints our inferior mediators and advocates
also. See Annot. 1 (...). 2, 1.
redeemer, with the hand of the Angel that appeared to him in the bush. Exo.
7. 8. 9. 10. 11. 12, 37*
and in the red sea, and in the * desert forty years. Exo. 16.
A prophet vvil God raise up to you of your own brethren at my self: Deu. 18.
him you shall hear. Exo. 19, 3. 19.
Make us gods that may go before us* Exo. 32, 1.
for this Moses that brought us out of the land of Egypt, we know not what
is befallen to him. For a just punishment of their former offenses God gave
them up to work what wickedness they would them selves, as it is said of the
Gentiles Romans 1.
delivered them up (...).
to serve the host of heaven, as it is written in the book of the Prophets:
Did you offer victims and hosts unto me forty years in the desert, Amos. 5,
25.
O house of Israel?

Exo. 25. 40.
that he should make it according to the form which he had seen. This is
Iosue, so called in Greek in type of our Savior.
Jesus receiving, Ios. 3, 14.
brought it in also into the possession of the Gentiles, which God expelled
from the face of our fathers, till in the days of David, Ps. 131, 5*
and * desired that he might find a tabernacle for the God of Jacob. 1. Par.
17*
Act. 17, 25.
Heaven is my seat: and the earth the foote-stole of my feet. Esa. 66, 1.
What house vvil you build me, says our Lord? or what place is there of my
resting?

And they slevve them that foretold of the coming of the Just one, of whom
now

The comfort of al Martyrs.
savv the glory of God, and JESUS standing on the right hand of God. Act. 22,
20.
Eusebius Emissenus says, when he prays for his persecutors, he promises to
his worshippers his manifest intercession and suffrages. ^. ^o. S. Steph. and
S. Augustine, Si Stephaniu si^ no^ orasset, Ecclesi^^ Paulu^ no^ habere^. Sermon
1 de Stephano.
Lord, lay not this sin unto them. And when he had said this, he fell a
sleep. And Saul was consenting to his death.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. VII.
33. Holy ground.) The holy land.
If that apparition of God him self or an Angel, could make the place and
ground holy, and to be used of Moses with all signs of reverence and feare-how
much more the corporal birth, Holy places.
abode, and wonders of the Son of God in Iewrie, and his personal presence in
the B. Sacrament, may make that country and al Christian Churches and altars
holy? And it is the greatest blindness that can be, to think it superstition to
reverence any things or places in respect of Gods presence or wondrous
operation in the same. See S. Hierom. ep. 17, 18. 27. of the holy land.

48. Not in houses.) The vulgar Heretics allege this place against the
corporal being of Christ in the B. Sacrament and in Churches: by which reason
they might have driven him out of al houses, Churches, God is not contained in
place, yet he vvil be worshipped in one place more the^ in an other.
and corporal places, when he was visible in earth. But it is meant of the
Divinity only. and spoken to correct the carnal Jews: who thought God either
so to be contained, compassed, and limited to their Temple, that he could be no
where else, or at least that he would not hear or receive men's prayers and
sacrifices in the Churches of the Gentiles, or else where, out of the said
Temple. And so as it makes nothing for the Sacramentaries, no more does it
serve for such as esteem Churches and places of public prayer no more
convenient nor more holy then any other profane houses or chambers. For though
his person or virtue be not limited to any place, yet it pleases him
condescending to our necessity and profit, to work his wonders and to be
worshipped of us in holy places rather then profane.

38. They stoned him.) Read a marvelous narration in S. Augustine of one stone,
that hitting the Martyr on the elbovv, Relikes.
rebounded back to a faithful man that stood near. Who keeping and carrying it
with him, was by revelation warned to leave it at Ancona in Italy:
whereupon a Church or Memory of S. Steven was there erected, and many
miracles done after the said Martyrs body was found out, and not before. Aug.
^o. 10 ser. 38 de diuersis in edit. Paris.

CHAP. VIII.
So far is persecution from prevailing against the Church, The 3. part.
that by it the Church greweth from Jerusalem into al Ievvrie and Samaria. THE
propagation of the Church from Jerusalem into al Iewrie and to Samaria.
5 The second of the Deacons, Philip* conuerteth with his miracles the city
it self of Samaria, and baptizeth them, even Simon Magus also him self among
the rest, 14 But the Apostles Peter and John are the Ministers to give them the
Holy Ghost. 18 Which ministry Simon Magus would bie of them. 16 The same
Philip being sent of an Angel to a great man of Aethiopia, Who came a
Pilgrimage to Jerusalem, first catechizeth him: 16 and then (he professing his
faith and desiring Baptism) does also baptize him.

curauerunt (...)
took order for Steuens funeral, and made great mourning upon him. Act. 22. 4.
and dravving men and women, delivered them into prison.

This persecution wrought much good, being an occasion that the dispersed
preached Christ in diverse Countries where they came.
euangelizing the word.

The Epistle upon Thursday in whitsunweeke.
preached CHRIST unto them.

The Epistle upon Tuesday in whitsu^weeke. And in a votiue of the Holy Ghost.
had heard that Samaria had received the word of God: theysent unto them Sape
sibi so^^^e Petrus facit esse Ioannem: Ecclesiae quia virgo placet. Arator apud
Bedam in Act.
Peter and John. (...)
See Apocal. 9, 21.


The Epistle upon Thursday in Easter week.
And an Angel of our Lord spoke to Philippe, saying: Arise, and go tovvard the
South, to the way that goes down from Jerusalem into Gaza: this is desert.
Note that this Ethiopian came to Jerusalem to adore, that is, on Pilgrimage.
where by we may learn that it is an acceptable act of religion to go from
home to places of greater devotion and sanctification.
to adore: The Scriptures are so written that they can not be understood
without an interpreter, as easy as our Protestants make them. See S. Hierom Ep.
ad Paulinu^ de omnibus diuin^^ historia^ libris, set in the beginning of latin
bibles.
how can I, unless some man show me? and he desired Philippe that he would
come up and sit with him. Es. 53, 7.
was this: As a sheep to slaughter was he led: and as a lamb before his
shearer, without voice, so did he not open his mouth. His generation who shall
declare, for from the earth shall his life be taken? what*
vvho' does let me to be baptized?

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. VIII.
2. Deu^us men.] S. Steuens relikes.
As here great devotion was used in burying his body, so afterward at the
Invention and Translation thereof. And the miracles wrought by the same, and
at every little memory of the same, were infinite: as S. Augustine
witnesses. li. (...) de Civil. Dei. c. ^. and Sermon. de S. Steph. (...). 10.

14. Sent Peter.] Some Protestants use this place to prove S. Peter not to be
head of the Apostles, because he and S. John were sent by the Twelve, by
which reason they might as well conclude that he was not equal to the rest*
for commonly the Master sends the man, and the Superior the inferior, That
Peter was sent, is no reason against his Primacie.
when the word of Sending is exactly used. But it is not alvvaies so taken in
the Scriptures, for then could not the Son be sent by the Father, not the
Holy Ghost from the Father and the Son: nor otherwise in common use of the
world, seeing the inferior or equal may in^ea^e his friend or Superior to do
his business for him, and specially a body Politic or a Corporation may by
election or otherwise choose their Head and send him. so may the Citizens send
their Mayor to the Prince or Parliament, though he be the head of the city,
because he may be more fit to do their business, also the Superior or equal
may be sent by his own consent or desire. Lastly, the College of the Apostles
comprising Peter with the rest, (as every such Body implies both the head and
the members) was greater then Peter their head alone. as the Prince and
Parliament is greater then the Prince alone. And so Peter might be sent as by
authority of the whole College, notvvithstanding he were the head of the
same.

17. Did they impose.] If this Philip had been ^ an Apostle (says S. Bid) he
might have imposed his hands, that they might have received the Holy Ghost,
but this none can do saving Bishops. For though Priests may baptize, The
Sacrament of Confirmation, ministered by Bishops only.
and anoint the Baptized also with Chrisme consecrated by a Bishop: yet he can
not sign his forehead with the same holy oil, because that belongs only to
Bishops* when they give the holy Ghost to the Baptized. So says he touching
the Sacrament of Confirmation in 8 Act. This imposition therefore of hands
together with the prayers here specified (which no doubt were the very same
that the Church yet uses to that purpose) was the ministration of the
Sacrament of Confirmation. Whereof S. Cyptian says thus. ^p. 73. (...). 3 ad
lubaianum.
They that in Samaria were baptized of Philip, because they had lavvful and
Ecclesiastical Baptism, ought not to be baptized any more: but only that
which vvanted, was done by Peter and John, to wit, that by prayer made for
them and imposition of hands, the Holy Ghost might be povvred upon them.
Which now also is done with us, that they which in the Church are baptized,
be by the Rulers of the Church offered, and by our prayer and imposition of
hand receive the Holy Ghost, and be signed with our Lords seal. So S.
Cyprian. But the Heretics object that yet here is no mention of oil. To whom
we say, that many things were done and said in the administration of this and
other Sacraments, and al instituted by Christ him self and delivered to the
Church by the Apostles, which are not particularly written by the Evangelists
or any other in the Scripture, among which this is evident by all antiquity
and most general practice of the Church, to be one.

S. Denis says, Ec. Hier. c. 2 and 4.
The Priests did present the baptized to the Bishop, Chrisme in Confirmation.
that he might sign them diuino and d^ifico vnguento, with the divine and
deifical ointment. And again, Aduentum S. Spiritus consummans inunctio
largitur, the inunction consummating gives the coming of the Holy Ghost.
Tertullian de resur carn. nu. 7 and li. 1 adu. Marcio. speaks of this
Confirmation by Chrisme thus: The flesh is anointed, that the soul may be
consecrated: the flesh is signed, that the soul may be sensed: the flesh by
imposition of hand is shadowed, that the soul by the Spirit may be
illuminated. S. Cyprian likewise, ep. 70. nu. 2. He must also be anointed,
that is baptized, with the oil sanctified on the Altar: And ep. 72 (see also
ep. 73. nu. 3) he expressly calls it a Sacrament, joining it with Baptism,
as Melchiades does (ep. ad omnes Hispania^ Episcopos nu. 2. to 1 Con^.)
shevving the difference betwixt it and Baptism. S. Augustine also, cont. lit.
Petil. li. 2. c. 104. The Sacrament of Chrisme in the kind of visible seals is
sacred and holy, even as Baptism it self. We omit S. Cyril mystag. 3. S.
Ambrose li. 3 de Sacram. c. 2. and de ijs qui mysterijs initiantur c. 7. S. Leo
ep. 88. the ancient Councels also of Laodicea, can. 48. Carthage 3 can. 39.
and Arausicanum 4 can. 1. and others. And S. Clement (Apost. Constable. li. 7* c.
44) reports certain co^stitutions of the Apostles touching the same. Ec.
Hier. c. 4.
S. Denis refers the manner of consecration of the same Chrisme to the
Apostles instruction. S. Basil li. de Sp. sancto c. 27 calls it a tradition
of the Apostles. And the most ancient Martyr S. Fabian ^p. 2 ad omnes
Orientales Episcopos in initio, to. 1 Conc. says plainly that Christ him self
did so instruct the Apostles at the time of the institution of the B. Sacrament
of the Altar. And so does the Author of the book de unction Chrismatis apud
D. Cyprianum nu. 1. telling the excellent effects and graces of this Sacrament,
and why this kind of oil and balsme was taken of the old Law, and used in
the Sacraments of the new Testament. Which thing the Heretics can with
less cause object against the Church, seeing they confess Beza in Act. c. 6.
v. 6.
that Christ and his Apostles took the ceremony of imposition of hands in
this and other Sacraments, from the Jews manner of consecrating their hosts
deputed to sacrifice.

To conclude, Old heresies against confirmation and Chrisme.
never none denied or contemned this Sacrament of Confirmation and holy
Chrisme, but known Heretics. S. Cornelius that B. Martyr so much praised of
S. Cyprian, ep. ad Fabium apud Eusebius. li. 6 c. 35 affirms, that Nouatus fell
to Heresy, for that he had not received the Holy Ghost by the con^ignation of
a Bishop. Whom all the Nouatians did follow, never using that holy Chrisme, as
Theodorete vvriteth, li, 1 Fabul. Haer. And Optatus li. 2 cont Parm. vvriteth
that it was the special barbarous sacrilege of the Donatists, to conculcate
the holy oil. But all this is nothing to the savage disorder of Caluinists in
this point.

17. And they received the Holy Ghost.] The Protestants charge the Catholics,
ke^^nit. in exam. conc. Trid. de Con^ir.
that by approving and commending so much the Sacrament of Confirmation, and by
attributing to it specially the gift of the Holy Ghost, they diminish the force
of Baptism, chalenging also boldly the ancient Fathers for the same. As
though any Catholic or Doctor ever said more then the express words of
Scripture here and else where plainly give them vvarrant for. If they diminish
the virtue of Baptism, then did Christ so, appointing his Apostles and all the
Faithful even after their Baptism to expecte the Holy Ghost and virtue from
above* then did the Apostles injury to Baptism, in that they imposed hands on
the baptized, The effects of Baptism and Confirmation differ.
and gave them the Holy Ghost. And this is the Heretics blindness in this case,
that they can not, or vvil not see that the Holy Ghost is given in Baptism to
remission of sins, life, and sanctification: and in Confirmation, for force,
strength, and corroboration to fight against al our spiritual enemies, and to
stand constantly in confession of our faith, even to death, in times of
persecution either of the Heathen or of Heretics, with great increase of
grace. And let the good Reader note here our Adversaries great peruersity and
corruption of the plain sense of the Scriptures in this point: Haeretical
shifts and euasio^s against manifest Scriptures, and against this Sacrament of
Confirmation.
some of them affirming the Holy Ghost here to be no other but the gift of
wisdoms in the Apostles and a fevv more to the government of the Church, when
it is plain that not only the Gouerners but all that were baptized, received
this grace, both men and women. Some, that it was no internal grace, but only
the gift of diverse languages: Which is very false, the gift of Tongues being
but a sequel and an accident to the grace, and an external token of the
inward gift of the Holy Ghost, and our Savior calls it virtue from above.
Some say, that whatsoever it was, it was but a miraculous thing, and dured
no longer then the gift of the Tongues joined thereunto, by which evasion they
deny also the Sacrament of Extreme Unction, and the force of Excommunication,
because the corporal punishments which were annexed often times in the
Primitive Church unto it, cease, and so may they take away (as they mean to
do) al Christ's faith or religion, Tractat. 6 in ^p. 10.
because it has not the like operation of miracles as in the beginning. But S.
Augustine touches this point fully. Is there any man (says he) of so perverse
an heart, to deny these Children on whom we now imposed hands, to have
received the Holy Ghost, because they speak not with Tongues? etc. Lastly,
some of them make no more of Con^irmation or the Apostles fact, but as of a
doctrine, instruction, or exhortation to continue in the says received.
Whereupon they have turned this holy Sacrament See Con^. Trid. Sess. ^ can. 1
de Confirmat.
into a Catechism. Cone. Trid. sess. ^ can. 14 de Bapt.
There are also that put the baptized coming to years of discretion, to their
own choice whether they vvil co^tinevv Christians or no. To such devilish
and diverse inventions they fall, that will not obey Gods Church nor the
express Scriptures, which tell us of prayer, of imposition of hands, of the
Holy Ghost, of grace and virtue from above, and not of instruction, which
might and may be done as well before Baptism, and by others, as by Apostles
and Bishops, Bishoping.
to whom only this Holy function pertains, in so much that in our Country
it is called Bishoping.

18. Offered money.) This wicked sorcerer Simon is noted by S. Irenaeus li, 1
c. 20. and others, to have been the first Heretic, and father of al Heretics
to come, in the Church of God. He taught, only faith in him, without good life
and works, to be enough to salvation* ^e gave the onset to purchase with his
money a spiritual function, that is to be made a Bishop* for, to have power to
give the Holy Ghost by imposition of hands, is to be a Bishop: as to bye the
power to remitte sins or to consecrate Christ's body, Simonie.
is to bye to be a Priest, or to bye Priesthod: and to bye the authority to
minister Sacraments, to preach or to have cure of souls, is to bye a benefice,
and likewise in all other spiritual things, whereof either to make sale or
purchase for money or money vvorth, is a great horrible sin called Simonie:
and in such as think it lavvful (as here Simon judged it) it is named
Simoniacal Heresy, of this detestable man who first attempted to bie a
spiritual function or office. D. Greg. apud ^oan. Diac. in vit. li. ^, c. 2. ^.
4. 5.

22. Do penance.) S. Augustine (ep. 108) understanding this of the penance
done in the Primitive Church for heinous offenses* Penance.
does teach us to translate this and the like places (2 Cor. 12, 21. Apoc. 9,
21) as we do, and as it is in the vulgar Latin, and consequently that the
Greek (...) does signify so much. Yea when he adds, that very good men do
daily penance for venial sins by fasting, prayer, and alms, he vvarranteth
this phrase and translation through out the new Testament, specially him self
also reading so as it is in the vulgar Latin, and as we translate.

22. If perhaps.] You may see, great penance is here required for remission of
sin, and that men must stand in fear and dread lest they be not worthy to
be heard or to obtain mercy. Whereby al men that bye or sell any spiritual
functions, dignities, offices, or livings, may specially be vva^ned that the
sin is exceeding great.

24. Pray you for me.] As this Sorc^^er had more knowledge of the true
religion then the Protestants have, Simon Magus more religious then the
Protestants.
who see not that the Apostles and Bishops can give the Holy Ghost in this
Sacrament, or other, which he plainly perceived and confessed, so surely he
was more religious then they, that being so sharply checked by the Apostle,
yet blasphemed not as they do when they be blamed by the Gouerners of the
Church, but desired the Apostles to pray for him.

27. This is desert.] Intolerable boldness of some Protestants, here also (as in
other places) against al copies both Greek and Latin, to surmise corruption or
falshod of the text, saying it can not be so: Beza.
Which is to accuse the holy Evangelist, Annot. (...). Test. 155^.
and to blaspheme the Holy Ghost him self. See Beza, who is often very saucie
with S. Luke.

38. He baptized him.] When the Heretics of this time find mention made in
Scripture of any Sacrament ministered by the Apostles or other in the Primitive
Church, The ceremonies of Sacraments done, though not mentioned.
they imagine no more was done then there is expressly told, nor scarsly
believe so much. As if imposition of hands in the Sacrament of Confirmation be
only expressed, they think there was no chrisme nor other work or word
used. De fid. and ^p. ^. 9.
So they think no more ceremony was used in the baptizing of this noble man,
then here is mentioned. Whereupon S. Augustine has these memorable words,
In that that he says, Philip baptized him, he would have it understood that
al things were done, which though in the Scriptures for brevity sake they
are not mentioned, yet by order of tradition we know were to be done.

CHAP. IX.
Saul not content to persecute so cruelly in Jerusalem, 3 is in the way to
Da^^scus told by our Lord JESUS of his vain attempt, and miraculously
converted to be an Apostle: and after great penance, restored to his sight by
Ananias, and baptized. 20 And presently he deals mightily against the Jews,
proving JESUS to be Christ, to their great admiration. 23 But such is their
obstinacy, that they lay al Damascus to kill him, 26 From thence he goes to
Jerusalem, and there joins with the Apostles, and again by the obstinate
Jews his death is sought. 31 The Church being now grown over al Ievvrie,
Galilee, and Samaria, Peter visits al: and in his visitation, 33 healing a
lameman, 36 and raising a dead woman, conuerteth very many.

Act. 22, 4 Gal. 1, 13.
came to the high priest, The Epistle upon the Conversion of S. Paul Ian. 25.
1. Cor. 15, 8.
and * suddenly a light from heaven shined round about him. The heretics that
conclude CHRIST so in heaven that he ca^ be no where else til the day of
Judgment, shall hardly resolve a man that would know where CHRIST was when he
appeared here in the way, and spoke these words to Saul.
Saul, Saul why persecutest thou me?



were scales, and he received sight. and rising he was Paul also him self,
though with the divine and heavenly voice prostrated and instructed, yet was
sent to a man to receive the Sacraments, and to be joined to the Church.
August. de doct. Chr. lib. 1. in Pr^^m.
baptized.

And he was with the disciples that were at Damascus, for certain days. 2
Cor. 11, 32.
And * they kept the gates also day and night, that they might kill him.



The Church visibly proceeds still with much comfort and manifold increase
even by persecution.
and was edified, vvalking in the fear of our Lord, and was replenished
with the consolation of the holy Ghost.

heals
heale' thee: arise, and make thy bed. And incontinent he arose.

Behold good works and almes-deedes, and the force thereof reaching even to
the next life.
good works and almes-deedes which she did. The prayers of our Alms folk
and beadsmen may do us great good eue^ after our departure. For if they
procured her temporal life, much more may they help us to Gods merc^e and to
release of punishment in Purgatory.
and shevving him the coats and garments which Dorcas made them.

CHAP. X.
Because the Jews so much abhorred the Gentiles, The 4 part.
for the better vvarrant of their Christening, THE propagation of the Church to
the Gentiles also.
an Angel appears to Cornelius the devout Italian. 9 and a vision is shevved
to Peter him self (the chief and Pastor of al) 19 and the Spirit speaks to
him, 34 yea and as he is Catechizing them about JESUS, 44 the holy Ghost
comes visibly upon them: and therefore not fearing any longer the offense of
the Jews, he commands to baptize them.

unto Ioppe, and call hither one Simon that is surnamed Peter.

Here God first uttered to Peter that the time was come to preach also to the
Gentiles, and to co^uerse with them for their salvation, no less then with the
Jews, with full freedo^ to eat al meats without respect of the prohibition
of certain, made in the old Law.
a voice came to him again the second time, That which God has purified, do
not thou call common.

And the day following he arose and went with them: and certain of the
brethren of Ioppe accompanied him. friends. In the Greek, fasting and praying.
until this hour, I was At the time of prayer specially God sends men
comfortable visitations.
praying the ninthe hour in my house, and behold Note these apparitions and
visions to S. Peter, Cornelius, and others, in the Scriptures very often,
against the incredulity of our Heretics, that will believe neither vision nor
miracle, not expressed in Scripture: these being believed of Christian men eue^
before they were written.
a man stood before me in white apparel,

Not such as believe only, but such as fear God and work justice, are
acceptable to him.
works justice, is acceptable to him. The Epistle upon Monday in Easter
week.
You know the word that has been made through al Ievvrie, Mat. 4, 12,
for * beginning from Galilee, after the baptism which John preached. The
Epistle upon Monday in vvhitso^vveeke.




ANNOTATIONS CHAP. X.
2. Doing many alms deeds.] He knevv God creator of al, but that his
omnipotent Son was incarnate, Good works before faith, are preparatiues to
the same, not properly meritorious.
he knevv not: and in that faith he made prayers and gave alms which pleased
God. and by well doing he deserved to know God perfectly, to believe the
mystery of the Incarnation, and to come to the Sacrament of Baptism. ^ed. in
hu^c locum.
So says Venerable Bede out of S. Gregory. And S. Augustine thus, li. 1 de
Bapt. c. 8. Because whatsoever goodness he had in prayers and alms, the same
could not profit him unless he were by the band of Christian Society and
peace, incorporated to the Church, he is bidden to send unto Peter, that by him
he may learn Christ, by him he may be baptized, etc. Whereby it appears
that such works as are done before justification, though they suffice not to
salvation, yet be acceptable preparatiues to the grace of justification, and
such as move God to mercy, as it might appear also by Gods like provident
mercifulnes * to the Eunuche. Act. 8.
though al such works preparatiue come of grace also: otherwise they could
never deserve at Gods hand of congruity or any otherwise tovvard justification.

9. To pray about the sixth hour.] The hour is specified, for that there were
certain appointed times of prays used in the Law, The Canonical hours.
which devout persons, according to the public service in the Temple,
observed also privately: and which the Apostles and holy Church afterward
both kept and increased. De Orat.
Whereof thus vvriteth S. Cyprian very notably. In celebrating their prayers,
we find that the three children with Daniel observed the third sixth, Dom. nu.
15.
and ninthe hour, as in Sacrament (or mystery) of the holy Trinity. etc. And
a little after, Which spaces of hours the worshippers of God spiritually (or
mystically) determining long since, observed set times to pray: and afterward
the thing became manifest, that it was for Sacrament (or mystery) that the
just so prayed. For at the third hour the holy Ghost descended upon the
Apostles, Act. 2.
fulfilling the grace of our Lords promis, and at the sixth hour Peter going up
to the higher room of the house, Act. 10.
was both by voice and sign from God instructed, that al Nations should be
admitted to the grace of salvation, Luc. 23.
whereas of cleansing the Gentiles he doubted before, and our Lord being
crucified at the sixth hour, at ninthe vvashed away our sins with his
blood. But to us (deerly beloved) beside the seasons observed of old, both the
times and sacraments of praying be increased. for we must pray in the morning
early, Mattins.
that the Resurrection of our Lord may be celebrated by morning prayer: as of
old the holy Ghost designed in the Psalm, Psalm. 5.
saying, In the morning early vvil I stand up to thee, early in the morning
vvilt thou hear my voice. Euensong.
Tovvard the evening also when the sun departs, and the day ends, we
must of necessity pray again.

S. Hierom also vvriting of Daniels praying three times in a day, Dan. 6.
says: There are three times, wherein we must bovv our knees to God. The
third, the sixth, and the ninthe hour the Ecclesiastical tradition does well
understand. Moreover at the third hour the Holy Ghost descended upon the
Apostles. at the sixth, Act. 3.
Peter went up into a higher chamber to pray. at the ninthe, * Peter and John
went to the Temple. Again vvriting to Eustochium a virgin and Nonne ep. 22.
c. 16. Though the Apostle bid us pray alvvaies, and to holy persons their very
sleep is prayer: yet we must have distinct hours of prayer, that if perhaps
we be otherwise occupied, the very time may admonish us of our office or
duty. The third, sixth, ninthe hour, morning early, and the evening, no man
can be ignorant of. And to Demetrias ep. 8. c. 8. that in the Psalms and
prayer she must keep alvvaies the third, sixth, ninthe hour, evening,
midnight, and morning. He has the like ep. 7 c. 5. And (ep. 27 c. 10.) he
tells how Paula the holy Abbess with her religious Nonnes sang the Psalter
in order, in the morning, at the third, sixth, ninthe hour, evening, midnight.
by midnight meaning the time of Martins (therefore called Nocturnes agreably to
S. Cyprian de Orat. Do. number. 15) and by the morning, the first hour called
Prime: al correspondent to the times and hours of Christ's Passion, as in S.
Matthew is noted c* 26. 27. By all which we see how agreeable the use of the
Churches service is even at this time to the Scriptures and primitive Church:
and how wicked the Puritan Caluinistes be, that count al such order and set
seasons of prayer, superstition: and lastly, how insufficient and unlike the
new pretended Church-seruice of England is to the primitive use, which has
no such hours of night or day, saving a little imitation of the old Mattins and
Euensong, and that in Schism and Heresy, and therefore not only unprofitable,
but also damnable.

^5. Adored.] S. Chrysostom ho. 21 in Act. thinks Peter refused this
adoration of humility only, because every falling down to the g^ound for
worship sake, is not Divine worship or dew only to God, Adoration of
creatures.
(...).
the word of adoration and prostration being commonly used in the Scriptures
tovvard men. But S. Hierom adu. Vigil. c. 2 to. ^. rather thinks that
Cornelius by error of Gentility, and of Peter's person, did go about to adore
him with Divine honor, and therefore was lifted up by the Apostle, adding
that he was but a man.

40. Gave him.] Christ did not utter his Resurrection and other mysteries to al
at once, and immediately to the vulgar: but to a fevv chosen men that should be
the governors of the rest. instructing us thereby to take our faith and al
necessary things of salvation, at the hands of our Superiors.

47. Baptized, which have received.] They that are justified before, must not
omit the Sacraments.
Such may be the grace of God sometimes tovvard men, and their charity and
contrition so great, that they may have remission, justification, and
sanctification before the external Sacrament of Baptism, Confirmation, or
Penance be received. as we see in this example, where at Peter's preaching
they al receive the Holy Ghost before any Sacrament. but in the same we learn
one necessary lesson, that such notvvithstanding must needs receive the
Sacraments appointed by Christ, which whosoever contemns, can never be
justified. Aug. super Leuit. q. ^4 to. 4.

CHAP. XI.
The Christian Jews reprehend the foresaid fact of Peter in baptizing the
Gentiles 4 But he alleging his foresaid warrants, and shevving plainly that it
was of God, 1^ they like good Catholics do yield. 19 By the foresaid
persecution, the Church is yet further dilated, not only into al Ievvrie,
Galilee, and Samaria, but also into other Countries: specially in Antiochia
Syria the increase among the Greeks, is (...), first by the foresaid
dispersed, 23 then by Barnabas, thirdly by him and Saul together: so that there
begins the name of Christians: 27 with perfect unity between them and the
Church that was before them a^ Jerusalem.

Act. 10, 9.
saying: fowls of the air. Act. 1, 5.
John in deed baptized with water, but you shall be baptized with the holy
Ghost. Good Christians hear and obey gladly such truths as be opened unto
them from God by their chief Pastors, by vision, revelation, or otherwise.
held their peace: and glorified God, saying, God then to the Gentiles also
has given repentance unto life.

Act. 8, 1.
vvalked through out unto Phoenice and Cypres and Antioche, speaking the word
to none, but to the Jews only. The Epistle upon S. Barnabees day Iun. 11.
Act. 4, 36.
touching these things: and they sent * Barnabas as far as Antioche. Act. 9,
30.
to seek Saul: in the church a whole year: and they taught a great multitude,
The name of CHRISTIANS.
so that the disciples were at Antioche first named CHRISTIANS.



ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XI.
24. Multitude added.) As before (c. 10) a fevv, so now great numbers of
Gentiles are adjoined also to the visible Church, The Church visible.
consisting before only of the Jews. Which Church has been ever since
Christ's Ascension, notoriously seen and known: their preaching open, their
Sacraments visible, their discipline visible, their Heads and Governors
visible, the provision for their maintenance visible, the persecution visible,
their dispersion visible: the Heretics that went out from them, visible: the
joining either of men or Nations unto them, visible: their peace and rest after
persecutions, visible: their Governors in prison, visible: the Church prays
for them visibly, their Councels visible, their gifts and graces visible, their
name (Christians) known to all the world, of the Protestants invisible Church
we hear not one word.

26. Christians.) This name, Christian, ought to be common to all the Faithful,
and other new names of Schismatikes and Sectaries must be abhorred. Hierony.
cont. Lucif c. 7. in fine.
If thou hear (says S. Hierom) any where, such as be said to be of Christ,
not to have their names of our Lord JESUS CHRIST, but to be called after some
other certain name, as Marcionites, Valentinians, (as now also the Lutherans,
Caluinists, Protestants) know thou that they belong not to the Church of
Christ, but to the Synagogue of Antichrist. Lactantius also (li. 7 Divine.
instit. c. 30) says thus, when Phrygians, or Nouatians, or Valentinians, or
Marcionites, Names of Sectaries and Heretics.
or Anthropomorphites, or Arrians, or any other be named, they cease to be
Christians, who having lost the name of Christ, have done on the names of men.
Neither can our new Sectaries discharge them selves, for that they take not to
them selves these names, but are forced to bear them as given by their
Adversaries. For, so were the names of Arians and the rest of old, imposed by
others, and not chosen commonly of them selves: Which notvvithstanding were
callings that proved them to be Heretics. Protestants.
And as for the name of Protestants, our men hold them well content therevvith.
But concerning the Heretics turning of the argument against the peculiar
callings of our Religious, Diverse religious orders are not diverse sects.
as Dominica^s, Franciscans, Jesuits, Thomists, or such like, it is nothing,
except they could prove that the orders and persons so named, were of diverse
faithes and Sects, or differed in any necessary point of religion, or were
not al of one Christian name and Communion: and it is as ridiculous as if it
were objected, that some be Ciceronians, some Plinians, some good Augustine
men, some Hieronymians, Ierem. 35.
some Oxford me^, some Cambrige men, and (which is most like) some *
Rechabites, Number. 6.
* Nazareite^.

Neither does their objection, Papists, Catholics, and true Christians, al
one.
that we be called Papists, help or excuse them in their new names. for,
besides that it is by them scornfully invented (as the name Homousians was of
the Arians) this name is not of any one man B. of Rome or else where, known
to be the author of any schism or sect, as their callings be: but it is of a
whole state and order of governors, and that of the chief Governors, to
whom we are bound to cleave in religion and to obey in all things. So to be a
Papist, is to be a Christian man, a child of the Church, and subject to
Christ's Vicar. And therefore against such impudent Sectaries as compare the
faithful for following the Pope, to the diversity of Heretics bearing the
names of new Masters, Not to be with the Pope, is to be with Antichrist.
let us ever have in readiness this saying of S. Hierom to Pope Damasus, (...).
ep. 37 and ep. 58 ad Damas.
Vitalis I know not, Meletius I refuse, I know not Paulinus, whosoever
gathers not with thee, scatters: that is to say, whosoever is not Christ's,
is Antichrists. And again, If any man join with Peter's Chair, he is mine.

We must here further observe that this name, The name of CHRISTIANS.
Christian, given to al believers and to the whole Church, was specially taken
to distinguish them from the Jews and Heathens which believed not at al in
Christ, and the same now seuereth and makes known al Christian men from
Turks and others that hold not of Christ at al. But when Heretics began to
rise from among the Christians, The name of CATHOLICS.
who professed Christ's name and sundry Articles of faith as true believers
do, the name Christian was to common to sever the Heretics from true
faithful men: and thereupon the Apostles by the holy Ghost imposed this name
Catholic upon the Believers which in all points were obedient to the Churches
doctrine. When heresies were risen (says S. Pacianus ep. ad Symphorianum) and
endeavored by diverse names to tears the dove of God and Queen, and to rent her
in pieces, the Apostolical people required their surname, whereby the
incorrupt people might be distinguished. etc. and so those that before were
called Christians, are now surnamed also Catholics. Christian is my name,
says he, Catholic my surname. And this word, Catholic, is the proper note
whereby the holy Apostles in their Creed taught us to discern the true Church
from the false heretical congregation of what sort soever. CREDO ECCLESIAM
CATHOLICAM.
And not only the meaning of the word, which signifies universality of
times, places, and persons, but the very name and word it self, by Gods
providence, alvvaies and only appropriated to the true beleuers, and (though
sometimes at the beginning of Sects challenged) yet never obtained by
Heretics, gives so plain a mark and evidence, that S. Augustine said, In
the lap of the Church the very name of Catholic keeps me. cont. ep. fund.
c. 4. And again tract. 32 in Io. we receive the Holy Ghost if we love the
Church, if we be joined together by charity, if we rejoice in the Catholic
name and faith. And again de ver. rel. c. 7. to. 1. We must hold the communion
of that Church which is named Catholic, not only of her own, but also of al
her enemies. for, vvil they nil they, the Heretics also and Schismatikes them
selves, when they speak not with their own fellows but with strangers,
call the Catholic Church nothing else but the Catholic Church: for they could
not be understood unless they discern it by this name vvherevvith she is called
of all the world. The Heretics when they see them selves prevented of this
name Catholic, The Protestants deride the name CATHOLIC.
then they plainly reject it and deride the name, as the Donatistes did,
calling it an humane forgeris or fiction, which S. Augustine calls words
of blasphemy, li. 1. c. 3^ cont. Gaudrat. and some Heretics of this time call
them scornefully cartholikes, and cacolikes. An other calls it, the most
vain term Catholic. Beza in praf. no. Test. an. 1565. An other calls the
Catholic religion, a Catholic Apostasy or defection, Humfrey in vit. Iuel.
page ^13. Yea and some have taken the word out of the Creed, In the
Catechismes of the Lutherans.
putting Christian for it. But against these good fellows let us follow that
which S. Augustine (de vtil. cred. c. 8. to. 6.) gives as a rule to direct a
man the right and sure way from the diversity and doubtfulnes of al error,
saying, If after these trouble of mind thou seem to thy self sufficiently
tossed and vexed, and vvilt have an end of these molestations, follow the way
of Catholic discipline, which from Christ him self by the Apostles has
proceeded even unto us, and shall proceed from hence to the posterity. See the
Annotation 1 Timothy 3, c. 15.

CHAP. XII.
Herod the first king that persecuted the Church, having at Jerusalem (when
Barnabas and Saul were there with the collation of the Antiochians) killed
James the Apostle, 3 and to please the jews imprisoned Peter with the mind
to kill him also, but frustrate by an Angel sent of God at the continual prayers
of the Church made for her chief Pastor, The Epistle upon ^ S. Peter and
Paul's day Iun. ^9.
19 being puffed up with such pride that at Casarea he refuses not to be
honored as God: 23 is miraculously stricken of Gods Angel. 24 And so after the
persecutors death, the Churches preaching prospers excedingly.

As Peter's person was more notorious then others, and therefore better guarded
then other, for fear he should escape: so Gods providence in preserving and
delivering him for the longer government of his Church, is very marvelous.
four quaternio^s of souldiars to be kept, meaning after the Pasche to bring
him forth to the people. unto God for him.

It is much for the praise of these good Christians that the assemble to Gods
service and prayer was kept in their houses in the time of persecution, and
that the Apostle came thither straight out of prison, as his first refuge, as
now Christian people do much to their co^mendatio^, in places where Heresy
does reign.
house of Marie the mother of John, who was surnamed Mark, where many were
gathered and praying. Though God had so miraculously delivered him, yet he
would not te^pt God by ta^ying among his persecutors, but according to Christ's
commandment fled for a time.
into an other place.

Princes that take delight in the flattery and praises of the people, so much
that they forget them selves to be me^, and to give the honor to God, may be
warned by this example.
struck him, because he had not given the honor to God: and being consumed of
worms, he gave up the ghost. Act. 11, 29.
having accomplished their * ministry, taking with them John that was
surnamed Mark.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XII.
5. Prayer was made.] The Church prayed incessantly for her chief Pastor, and
was heard of God: and al Christian people are warned thereby to pray for their
Bishopes and Pastors in prison.

6. Two chains.] S. Peter's chains.
These chains are famous for miracles, and were brought from Jerusalem to
Rome by Eudoxia the Emperesse, wife to Theodosius the younger, where they
were matched and placed with an other chain that the same Apostle was tied
with by Nero, and a Church founded thereupon, named Petri ad vincula, Where
they are religiously kept and reverenced until this day, and there is a Feast
in the whole Church for the same, the first of August, which we call, Lammas
day.

15. His Angel] If proper Angels (says S. Chrysostom) be deputed by our Lord
to such as have only charge of their own life, Patronage of Angels.
(as one of the just said, Genesis 41, 16*
* The Angel which has delivered me from my youth vpvvard) much more are
supernal Spirits at hand to help them unto whom the charge and burden of the
world is committed. Chrysostom. in laud. Pauli. ho. 7* to. 3.

17. Tell James.] Public prayer for S. Peter the head.
He wills them to show this to S. James Bishop of Jerusalem and to the
Christians, that they might see the effect of their prayers for him, and give
God thanks, for S. James no doubt published common prayer for S. Peter.

CHAP. XIII.
The preachers of the Church of Antioche preparing themselves, The 5 part.
the Holy Ghost out of them al, THE taking of the Gospel away from the
obstinate Jews, and giving of it to the Gentiles, by the ministry of Paul and
Barnabas.
chooses Saul and Barnabas. 3 They being first consecrated Bishops, 4 go^
their appointed circuit over al the land of Cypres, the Proconsul whereof is
also converted, seeing the miraculous excecation of a Jew by Paul. 13 Thence,
into Pamphilia: 14 and Pisidia, where in Antioche Paul preaches to the
Jews, shevving that JESUS is Christ, 38 and that in him is salvation, and not
in their Law of Moses: 40 warning them to bevvare of the reprobation
foretold by the Prophets* 44 But the next Sabbath, they blasphening, he in
plain terms forsakes them, and turns to the Gentiles. Whereat the Gentiles
be as glad on the contrary side. 50 Finally the Jews raising persecution,
they forsake them, pronouncing them to be obstinate contemners.

(...)
as they were ministering to our Lord, and fasting, the holy Ghost said:
Separate me Saul and Barnabas unto the work, vvhereto I have taken them.

Barieu*
Bar-iesu',

Exodus
and in a mighty arm brought them out thereof, Iosue.
Iud.
until Samuel the prophet. 1, Reg. 8.
and he gave them * Saul the son of Cis, 1. Reg. 16*
a man of the tribe of Benjamin, forty years. Ps. 88, 21*
he raised them up * David to be king: to whom giving testimony, he said, I
have found David the son of Iesse, Psa. 131, 11.
a man according to my heart, who shall do al my vvilles.

Lu. 3, 3.
Lu. 3, 15.
he said, Whom do * you think me to be? I am not he, but behold there
comes after me, whose shoes of his feet I am not vvorthie to unloose.

The Epistle upon Tuesday in Easter week.
children of the stock of Abraham, and they among you that fear God, to you
the word of this salvation was sent. Lu. 23, 1*
Act. 1, 3.
who until this present are his vvitnesses to the people. to us their
children, Ps. 2, 7.
to our children', raising up JESUS, as in the second Psalm also it is
written: My son art thou, this day have I begotten thee. That I vvil give
you the holy things of David faithful. Esa. 55, 3.
in an other place also he says, Ps. 15, 10*
Thou shall not give thy holy one to see corruption.

Abac. 1, 5*
See ye co^temners, and vvonder, and perish: because I work a work in your
days, a work which you vvil not believe, if any man shall tell it you.

the Gentiles desired*
they desired them that the Sabbath following they would speak unto them these
words. devout proselytes,
strangers serving God, followed Paul and Barnabas: who speaking exhorted them
to continue in the grace of God. The Jews of their own free vvil repelling
the truth, are unworthy of Christ and vvorthily forsaken: and the Gentiles
though they believed specially by Gods grace and preordination, yet they
believe also by their own free vvil, which stands well with Gods
providence.
you repel it, and judge your selves unworthy of eternal life: behold we
turn to the Gentiles. I have put thee to be the light of the Gentiles: that thou
may be salvation unto the utmost of the earth. Es. 46, 6*
Lu. 9, 5.


ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XIII.
2. As they were ministering.] (...)
If we should, as our Adversaries do, boldly turn what text we list, The
Apostles liturgy or Mass.
and flee from one language to an other for the advantage of our cause, we
might have translated for ministering, sacrificing, for so * the Greek does
signify, and so Erasmus translated. yea we might have translated, Saying
Mass, for so they did: and the Greek Fathers here of had their name,
Liturgy, which Erasmus translateth Mass, saying, Missa Chrysostomi. But we
keep our text, as the translators of the Scriptures should do most religiously.

2. Separate me.] Gal. ^.
Though Paul were taught by God him self and specially designed by Christ to
be an Apostle, Paul and Barnabas are consecrated by men.
and here chosen by the Holy Ghost together with Barnabas, yet they were to
be ordered, consecrated, and admitted by men. Which wholy condemns al these
new rebellious disordered spirits, that challenge and usurp the office of
preaching and other sacred actions from heaven, without the Churches admission.

3. Fasting.] Hereof the Church of God uses and prescribes public fastes at
the four soleue times of giving holy Orders (which are our Imber days) as a
necessary preparatiue to so great a work* Imber days.
as S. Leo ep. 81 c. 1.
Leo declares by this place, naming it also an Apostolical tradition. See. S.
Leo Ser. 9 de ieiuni^ 7 mensis, Praescript times of fasts.
and Calixtus ep. 1. to. 1. Conc. Conc. Magunt. c. 34. 35. to 3. And this
fasting was not fasting from sin, Epipha. in compend.
nor moral or Christian temperance, as the Protestants ridiculously affirm,
for such fasting they were bound ever to keep: but it was abstinence for a
time from al meats or from some certain kinds of meats, Leo ser. 3 et 4 de
(...) 7 mensis.
which was joined with prayer and sacrifice, and done specially at such
seasons as the Church prescribed, of al together (as in Lent, the Imber days,
Friday, Saturday) and not when every man list, as Aerius and such Heretics
did hold.. S. August. har. 53.

3. Imposing hands.] Imposition of hands.
Because al blessings and consecrations were done in the Apostles time by the
external ceremony of imposition of hands, diverse Sacraments were named of the
same, specially Confirmation, Holy orders.
as is noted before, and holy Ordering or consecrating Bishops, Priests, and
Deacons, and Subdeacons, as we see here and else where. In which though there
were many holy words and ceremonies and a very solemn action: yet
whatsoever is done in those Sacraments, is altogether called Imposition of
hands: as whatsoever was done in the whole divine mystery of the B. Act. 2,
42*
Sacrament, is named fraction of bread. for the Apostles (as S. Denis Eccl.
bier. c. 1 in fine vvriteth) purposely kept close in their open speeches and
vvritings which might come to the hands or ears of Infidels, the sacred
words and actions of the Sacraments. And S. Ambrose says, in 1 Timothy c. 4.
The imposition of the hand is mystical words vvherevvith the elected is
conformed and made apt to his function, receiving authority (his conscience
bearing witness) that he may be bold in our Lords steed to offer sacrifice to
God. Hiero. (...) c. 58 Esa.
And S. Hierom, The imposition of hand is the Ordering of Clerks. Which is
done by prayer of the voice, and imposition of the hand. And this is in some
inferior orders also, but Paul and Barnabas were ordered to a higher function
then inferior Priests, even to be Bishops through out al Nations.

4. Sent of the Holy Ghost.] Spiritual officers of out souls.
Whosoever be sent by the Church, are sent of the Holy Ghost, though in such
an extraordinary sort it be not done. Whereby we see how far the Officers
of our souls in the Church do pass the temporal Magistrates, who though they
be of Gods ordinance, yet not of the Holy Ghosts special calling.

CHAP. XIIII.
Naxt in Iconi^^ they preach, where many being converted of both sorts, the
obstinate Jews raise persecution, 6 Then in the towns of Lyca^ni^a, where
the Heathen first seeing that Paul had healed one borne lame, are hardly
persuaded but they are Gods. 18 but afterward, by the instigation of the
malicious Jews, they stone Paul, leaving him for dead. 20 And so having done
their circuit, they return the same way confirming the Christians, and
making Priests for every Church. 2^ And being come home to Antioche in Syria,
they report al to the Church there.



(...)
Jupiter that was before the city, bringing oxen and garlands before the
gates, would with the people sacrifice. The Heathen might by the daily
benefits of God have known him at the least to have been their Creator and
only Lord, though the mystery of our Redemption were not opened to them.
without testimony, being beneficial from heaven, giving raines, and
fruiteful seasons, filling our hearts with food and gladness. the multitudes
from sacrificing to them. 2. Cor. 11, 25.
and * stoning Paul, they drevv him out of the city, thinking him to be dead.

We see by this, first that SS. Paul and Barnabas were Bishops, having here
authority to give holy Orders: secondly, that there was even then a
difference betwixt Bishops and Priests, though the name in the primitive Church
was often used indifferently: lastly, that alvvaies fasting and praying were
preparatiues to the giving of holy Orders.
they had ordained to them Priests in every Church, and had prayed with
fastings, they commended them to our Lord in whom they believed. Act, 13, 2*
* whence they had been delivered to the grace of God unto the work which
they accomplished.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XIIII.
12. They would sacrifice.) This lo is the divine worship, consisting in
external sacrifice, and in acknovvledging the parties worshipped to be gods
Aug. li. 10. de Ciu. Dei. ^. 1.
which * may be done to no man nor creature, (...).
and therefore the Apostles refuse it with al possible diligence, and all the
Angels and Saints in heaven refuse that adoration by sacrifice. The Catholic
Church suffers no Priest nor other so to worship any Saint in heaven or
earth. She has but one external Sacrifice, which is in the holy Mass, of
Christ's body and blood: Aug. li. 8. de Ciu. 6. 27.
that she offers to God alone, and neither to Peter nor to Paul (says S.
Augustine) though the Priest that sacrifices stands over their bodies, and
offers in their memories. Dulta.
But other kinds of honors and duties, inferior without al comparison (how
great so ever they be) to this, we do, as the Scriptures and Nature teach us,
to al Superiors in heaven and earth, according to the degrees of grace, honor,
and blessedness that God has called them unto, from our B. Lady Christ's own
mother, to the lest servant he has in the world, for which the Heretics
would never accuse Christian people of Idolatry, if they had either grace,
learning, faith, or natural affection.

^^. Had ordained.) The Heretics, to make the world believe that al Priests
ought to be chosen by the voices of the people, (...)
and that they need no other Ordering or Consecration by Bishops, pressing the
pro^ane use of the * Greek word more then the very natural signification
requires and Ecclesiastical use bears, Heretical translation against holy
orders.
translate thus, Ordained by election. Whereas in deed this word in
Scripture signifies, (...).
Ordering by imposition of hands, as is plain by other words equivalent,
Act. 6, 13. 1 Timothy 4. ^. 2 Timothy 1. Where the Ordering of Deacons, Priests, and
others is called * Imposition of hands: not of the people, but of the Apostles.
And this to be the Ecclesiastical use of the word, Hiero. in 11. Esa.
appears by S. Hierom saying (as is before alleged) that (...) i^ the
Ordering of Clerks or Clergy men by prayer of voice and imposition of hand.

^^. Priests.) Heretical translation against Priesthod.
Even so here also, as before, fleing from the proper, apt, known, word and
which is most precisely correspondent to the very Greek in our tongue and al
nations, they translate for Priest, Elder, that is, for a calling of Office, a
word of age: for a term of art and by consent of all the Church and Apostolic
authority and Fathers, appropriated to holy Order, a vulgar, common, and
profane term: With as little grace as if they should translate Pontificem, a
bridgemaker, the Mayor of London, the Bigger of London. And thus you see
within three words compass they flee guilefully from the Latin to the
Greek, and again guilefully from the Greek to the vulgar English. Such
corruption of Scriptures their hatred of Priesthod drives them unto. If they
had translated it so when the Scriptures were first written, (at which time
the word was but newly received into the special and Ecclesiastical
signification, and when it was yet taken sometimes in common profane sort, as
1 Timothy 5. or there only where our ancient Latin version turns Presbyter
into Senior, because the word was not yet wholy and only appropriated to
holy Orders, as afterward by use of many hundred years it was and is) their
dealing might have had some color of honest^e and plainness, which now can
not be but of plain falshod and corruption, and that of further purpose then
the simple can see. Which is to take away the office of Sacrificing and other
functions of Priests, proper in the new Testament to such as the Apostles
often, and the posteritle in manner altogether call Priests, Presbyteros. Which
word does so certainly imply the authority of sacrificing, If Sa^^rdos. be a
Priest, much more Presbyter.
that it is by use made also the only English of Sacerdos, the Adversaries
them selves as well as we, so translating it in all the old and new Testament:
though they can not be ignorant that Priest comes of Presbyter, and not of
Sacerdos: and that antiquity for no other cause applied the signification of
Presbyter to Sacerdos, but to show that Presbyter is in the new Law, that
which Sacerdos was in the old: the Apostles abstaining from this and other
like old names at the first, and rather using the words, Bishops, Pastors,
and Priests, because they might be distinguished from the Governors and
sacrificers of Aarons order, who as yet in the Apostles time did their old
functions still in the Temple. And this to be true, and that to be a Priest, is
to be a man appointed to sacrifice, the Heretics them selves calling Sacerdos
alvvaies a Priest, must needs be driven to confess. Presbyter.
Although their folly is therein notorious, to apply vvillngly the word Priest
to Sacerdos, and to take it from Presbyter whereof it is properly derived,
Priest.
not only in English, but in other languages both french and Italian. Preb^re.
Which is to take away the name that the Apostles and fathers gave to the
Priests of the Church, Preti.
and to give it wholy and only to the order of Aaron, which never had it
before our Priesthod began. Never did there Heretics stand so much upon
doubtful deriuations and descant of words as these Protestants do, and yet
never men behaved them selves more fondly in the same: as whosoever marketh
the distinction of their Elders, Ministers, Deacons, and such like, shall
perceive.

CHAP. XV.
Some of those Jews also that were Christians, do fall, and are authors of
the Heresy of Iudaizing. 2 They refer the matter to Council: 7 Wherein after
great disputation, Peter striking the stroke, 12 and other confirming his
sentence with miracles, 13 and with Scriptures: 22 and the Apostles and
Priests do write and co^ma^nd in the name of the Holy Ghost what is to be
done. 30 And the faithful thereby are straightvvaies quieted in mind. 36 After
which, Paul and Barnabas thinking to go again their above said circuit
together, are by occasion of Mark parted, to the greater increase of the
Church.

Gal. 5, 2.
That * unless you be circumcised according to the manner of Moses, you can not
be saved. them,
the rest', to the Apostles and (...)
priests unto Jerusalem, upon this question.



Au^cients here, and often in this chapter, are the same that Priests verse. 2
as S. Hierom takes it also 1 Pet. 5. and the greek approves, being alvvaies
one, (...), Priests. Hiero. in 1 ad Tit. et 4 ad Galat.
Ancients, (...)
declaring whatsoever God had done with them.

See the Annot. verse. 28 toward the end.
great disputation, Peter rising up said to them, Act. 10, 20.
Men brethren, you know that * of old days God among us chose, that by my
mouth the Gentiles should hear the word of the Gospel, and believe. Act. 10,
45.
gave testimony, * giving unto them the holy Ghost as well as to us, By that
faith which works by charity* for a dead faith can not purify the heart of
man, See chap. 16, 31.
by faith purifying their hearts.



Amos. 9, 11.
After these things I vvil return, and vvil reedifie the tabernacle of David*
which was fallen, and the ruins thereof I vvil reedifie, and set it up:

Other latin copies and the greek read thus writing by their hands an epistle
cont^ining these things.
vvriting by their hands.

The Apostles and Ancients, the brethren, to the brethren of the Gentiles that
are at Antioche and in Syria and Cilicia, greeting.



Hereof our Catholic Bishops took up the necessary use of often visiting
their flocks and cures committed to their charge, for confirmation in faith
and virtue, and reformation of manners both of clergy and laity.
visit our brethren in all cities wherein we * have preached the word of our
Lord, Act. 13, 14.
how they do. Act. 13, 13.
Paul chosing Silas departed, being delivered of the brethren to the grace of
God.

Not only the things commanded by Christ's express word, or written in the
Scriptures (as our Heretics hold) but whatsoever the Apostles and Rulers of
the Church command, is to be kept and obeyed. See these words repeated again
c. 16, 4. and that in the greek, lest any man cauil, because here the greek
has them not.
Commanding them to keep the praecepts of the Apostles and the Ancients.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XV.
1. Appointed] We learn by this example, what is to be done when any
controversy arises in religion between the teachers or other Christian
people. We see it is not enough to contend by allegations of Scriptures or
other proofs seeming to make for either part: for so of contentious part
taking there should be no end, but the more vvriting, wrestling, striving
there were, every one for his own fancy, cloking it with the title of Gods
word and Scripture, the more Schisms, Sects, and divisions would fall: as
we see specially in the restles Heresies of our time. Whose fa^tors admitting
no judges, stand to no trial of mortal men, to no tribunal of Pope, Councels,
Bishops, Synodes, but each man to his own fantastical spirit, his own
sense of Scriptures, and his own willful obdurate rebellion against Gods
Church and his Superiors in the same. The way to end dissension in religion, is
to commit it to a Counsel.
But here we see S. Paul and Barnabas, men that were Apostles and full of the
Spirit of God, and the other parties, though never so much partial to the
ceremonies of their Law by their former long use and education therein, yet
not to stand stiffly to their own opinion on either side, but to condescend to
refer the whole controversy and the determination thereof to the Apostles*
Priests or Ancients of Jerusalem, that is to say, to commit the matter to be
tried by the heads and Bishops and their determination in Council. This is Gods
holy and wise providence among other judgments in his Church, to keep the
Christian people in truth and unity, and to condemn sects and false teachers
and troublers of the Church. By which judgments and order, whosoever vvil
not or dare not be tried in all their doctrine and doings, they show them
selves to mistrust their own cause, and to flee from the light, and ordinance
of God* Without which order of appeasing al differences in faith and
constructions of the Scriptures, the Church had been more defectual and
insufficient, then any Commonwealth or Society of men in the world: none of
which ever wants good means to decide al discordes and dissension arising
among the subjects and citizens of the same.

6. Apostles and Ancients.] The Heresies of our Protestants which would have
al men to give voice, or to be present in Councels, and of others that would
have none but the holy or elect to be admitted, are refuted by this example,
where we see none but Apostles and Priests or Ancients assembled to dispute
of the matter, Of what persons a Council consists.
though many devout people were in the city the same time. Neither did ever
any other in the Ancient Councels of the Church assemble to debate and define
the matter, but such, though many other for other causes be ever present.
Secular men or women, be their gifts never so great, Deuteronomy. ^^
can not be judges in causes of faith and religion. If any thing, says God ^e
hard and doubtful, thou shall come to the Priests of the Leuitical stock, and
thou shall follow their sentence. Mal. 2, 7.
Again, The lips of the Priest shall keep knowledge, and the Law thou
shall require of his mouth. Agga. 2, 12.
Again, Ask the Law of the Priest. Much more must we refer al to our
Bishops and Pastors, whom God has placed in the regiment of the Church with
much larger privilege, then ever he did the old Priests over the Synagogue. A
general Counsel represents the whole Church.
to whom it is said, Luc. 10, 16
He that despises you, despises me. And it is to be noted that the Bishops so
gathered in Council, represent the whole Church, have the authority of the
whole Church, and the Spirit of God to protect them from error, as the whole
Church: li. 1. c. 1^. de bapt.
SS. Paul and Barnabas come hither for the definition of the whole Church. The
sentence of a plenarie or general Council (says S. Augustine) is the consent
of the whole Church. And so it must needs be in the Church, because the
Magistrates, Senate, Council or deputies of al commonvvealthes, represent the
whole body: and to have it otherwise (as the Churches Rebels vvish) were to
bring al to hell and horror, and them selves to be perpetually, by the
seditious and popular persons, vpholden against Law, reason, and religion, in
their wickedness.

^. Assembled.] The first Council at Jerusalem.
A Council was called to discuss the matter. which Council was the more
easily gathered, because the Christian Bishops and countries were not yet so
many, but that the principal Governors of the Church being not far dispersed,
and as many learned men as were necessary, might be in Jerusalem, or easily
called thither. And it was not a Prouincial Council or Synod only, but a
general Council, consisting of the chief Apostles and Bishops that then were,
though the number was nothing so great as afterward used to assemble, when
the Church was spread into al nations.

7. Peter rising up.] Peter head of the Council, and his successors after him.
S. Peter as the head of the Church speaks first, as his Successors have ever
had, not only in their personal presence, but in their absence by their legates
and substitutes, the chief voice in all Councels general, none ever received
into authority and credit in the Church without their Confirmation. And
therefore the Councels of the Arians and of other Heretics, were they never
so great, vvanting the Popes assent, assistance, or Confirmation, did shamfully
err, as Ariminense for the Arians, and Ephesinum secundum for the Nestorians,
and such like condemned Assemblies.

7. Chose that by my mouth.] Peter's preeminence both toward Jews and Gentiles.
Though Paul were called and appointed specially to be the Apostle of the
Gentiles, yet that was S. Peter's special privilege by Gods own choice, that
the first Gentiles should be called by his mouth, and that he first should utter
to the Church that truth of the admission of the Gentiles him self, for that he
was Christ's Vicar, being notvvithstanding (as his Master was) Minister
Circuncisionis, To. 15, 8.
that is, Apostle of the Jews, Christ deferring al preeminence unto him in
that point also. Gal. 2, 7.


1^. James.] S. James because he was an Apostle and also Bishop of Jerusalem,
gave his sentence next. for the speech interposed of SS. Paul and Barnabas,
was but for their better information in the decision of the matter, and for
confirmation of S. Peter's sentence, though they being Apostles, S. James and
the rest follow S. Peter's sentence.
and Bishops, had voices in the Council also: as many m^ had, though their
sentences be not hear reported. And where S. James in his speech says, I
judge, it is not meant that he gave the principal definitive sentence: for he
(as all the rest) followed and allowed the sentence of S. Peter, as it is
plain in the text, the whole assembly for reverence of his person and
approbation of his sentence, Hiero. to. 2. ep. 89 ad August. C. 2.
holding their peace. All the multitude (says S. Hierom) held their peace, and
into his sentence James the Apostle and all the Priests did pass together. For
though S. James did particularise certain points incident to the question
debated, as of eating strangled meats etc. yet the proper controversy for
which the Council assembled, The principal question.
was, Whether the Gentiles converted were bound to observe the Law of
Moses. and it was concluded, that they were not bound, nor ought not to be
charged with Moses Law or the Sacraments and ceremonies of the same. this is
the substance and principal purpose of this Councels decree, which does bind
for ever: and Peter (says S. Hierom in the same place) was Prince or author
of this decree, Incident questions.
the matter of fornication and Idolothytes being but incident to the question
or resolution, and the forbidding of eating strangled and blood, but a temporal
prohibition, which by the consent of the Church or otherwise afterward was
abrogated, the Church of God having the true sense of difference of times, How
later councils alter the former.
place, and persons, when and how far such things are to be observed, and
when not. And in such things as these, and in other like which according to
circunstances require alteration, it is, that S. Augustine says, li. 2 de
bapt. c. 3. to. 7. The former general or plenarie Councels may be amended by
the later.

^^. Fornication.] Fornication and contamination with Idols, are of them
selves mortal sins, and therefore can never be lavvful: yet because the
Gentiles by custom were prone to both, and of fornication made very small
account, The Churches authority in making Decrees.
it pleased the Holy Ghost to forbid both specially. Concerning the other
points of absteining from blood and stiffled meats, they were things of their
own nature indifferent, in which for a time the Jews were to be borne
vvithal, and the Gentiles to b^ a little exercised to obedience. By which we
may see the great authority of Gods Church and Councels, which may command
for ever, or for a time, such things as be fit for the state of times and
nations, without any express Scriptures at al, and so by commandment make
things necessary that were before indifferent.

24. Going forth from us.] Going out, a mark of heretics.
A proper description or note of Heretics, Schismatikes, and seditious
teachers, to go out from their spiritual Pastors and Governors, and to teach
without their commission and approbation, to disquiet the Catholic people
with multitude of words and svveete speeches, and finally to overthrow
their souls.

28. To the Holy Ghost and to us.] God and our Lady, and the like speeches.
By this first we note, that it is not such a fault as the Heretics would
make it in the sight of the simple, or any incongruitie at al, to join God and
his creatures, as the principal cause and the secondarie, in one speech, and
to attribute that to both, which though diuersely, yet proceeds of both. God
and you, say good people commonly: God and our Lady, Christ and S. John: We
confess to God and to Peter and Paul. as, Genesis 48, 15. 16.
God and his Angel, To our Lord and Gedeon, Iud. 7* 18. 20.
The svvord of our Lord and of Gedeon, Our Lord and Moses, Christ and his
Angels. Our Lord and al Saints. ep. ad Philem. S. Paul and our Lord, 1 These.
1, 6. Al these speeches being partly Scriptures, Exodus 14, 31.
partly like unto the Scriptures speeches, VISVM EST Sp. sancto and nobis.
are vvarra^ted also by this Council, which says boldly, and has given the
form thereof to al other Councels lavvfully called and confirmed, to say the
like, 1. Tim. 5, ^1.
It has pleased the Holy Ghost and us. S Cyprian ep. 54. nu. 2. reporting the
like of a Synod holden in Afrike, says, It has pleased us by the suggestion
of the Holy Ghost.

Secondly we note, that the holy Councels lavvfully kept for determination or
clearing of doubts, or condemning of errors and Heresies, or appeasing of
Schisms and troubles, or reformation of life, and such like important matters,
have ever the assistance of Gods Spirit, and therefore can not err in their
sentences and determinations concerning the same, The holy Ghost assistant in all lawful councils, to the worlds end, and that by Christ's promise.
because the Holy Ghost can not err, from whom (as you see here) jointly
with the Council the resolution proceeds.

Thirdly we learn, Io. 16, 1^.
that in the holy Councels specially (though otherwise and in other Tribunals
of the Church it be also verified) Christ's promise is fulfilled, * that the
Holy Ghost should suggest them and teach them al truth, and that not in the
Apostles time only, but to the worlds end for so long shall Councels, the
Church, and her Pastors have this privilege of Gods assistance, as there be
either doubts to resolve, or Heretics to condemn, or truths to be opened,
or evil men to be reformed, or Schisms to be appeased. for which cause S.
Gregory li. 1 ep. 24 sub fin. reuerenceth the four general Councels (Nicen,
Constantinop, Ephesians, Chalced.) as the four books of the holy Gospel, S.
Gregory's reverence of General Councels.
alluding to the number: and of the fifth also he says that he does reverence
it alike: and so would he have done more, if they had been before his time,
who says of them thus, Whiles they are concluded and made by universal
consent, him self does he destroy, and not them, whosoever presumes either to
loose whom they bind, or to bind, whom they loose.

S. Gregory therefore reuerencing al five alike, The Protestants fond
distinction between the 4 first and the later Councels.
it may be marueled whence the Heretics have their fond difference betwixt
those four first and other later: attributing much to them, and nothing to the
rest. Whereas in deed the later can err no more then the first four, being
holden and approved as they were, and having the Holy Ghost as they had. But
in those first also when a man finds any thing against their Heresies (as
there be diverse things) then they say plainly that they also may err, and
that the Holy Ghost is not tied to men's voices, nor to the number of sentences:
Which is directly to reprove this first Council also of the Apostles, and
Christ's promise of the Holy Ghosts assistance to teach al truth. Yea that you
may know and abhor these Heretics thoroughly, Bezas blasphemy against the
first general Councels.
hear ye what a principal Sect-Maister with his blasphemous mouth or pen
utters, Beza in praef. Test. No. an. 1565.
saying, that In the very best times such was partly the ambition of Bishops,
partly their folishnes and ignorance, that the very blind may easily perceive,
Satan verily to have been president of their assemblies. Good Lord deliver the
people and the world from such blasphemous tongues and books, and give men
grace to attend to the holy Scriptures and Doctors, that they may see how
much, What the Fathers attribute to Councels, and namely S. Augustine.
not only S. Augustine and other fathers attribute to al general Councels
specially, (to which they refer them selves in all doubts among them selves
and in all their controversies with Heretics:) but to which even S. Paul him
self (so specially taught by God) and others also yielded them selves. Notorious
is the saying of S. Augustine concerning S. Cyprian, Who being a blessed
Catholic Bishop and Martyr, yet erred about the rebaptizing of such as were
Christened by Heretics. If he had lived (says S. Augustine li. 2 de bapt c.
4,) to have seen the determination of a plenarie Council, which he savv not in
his life time, he would for his great humility and charity straight way
have yielded, and preferred the general Council before his own judgment and
his fellovv Bishops in a Prouincial Council only. P^ouincial Councels.
Whereby also we learn, that Prouincial Councels may err, though many times
they do not, and being conformable to the general Councels, or confirmed and
allowed by them or the Sea Apostolic, their resolutions be infallible as the
others are.

If any here ask, Notvvithstanding the Holy Ghosts assistance, yet humane
means must be used to search the truth.
what need so much disputing, study, and trauail in Councels to find out and
determine the truth, if the Holy Ghost infallibly guide them? We answer that
such is the ordinary providence of God in this case, to assist them when they
do their endeavor, and use all humane means of industry, and not else. And so
(though somvvhat otherwise) God assisted the Evangelists and other vvriters
of the holy Scriptures, that they could not err in penning the same, but yet
they did and ought to use al possible humane diligence to know and learn out
the histories and truth of matters, Lu. 1, 3.
as is plain in the beginning of S. Lukes Gospel: else the Holy Ghost would
not have assisted them. Even so in this Council of the Apostles, though they
had the holy Ghost assistant, yet the text says, cum magna conquisitio fieret,
When there was great disputation, search and examination of the case, Though
the Sea Apostolic it self have the same assistance, yet councels be also
necessary for many causes.
then Peter spoke etc. If again it be demanded, what need is there to
expect the Councels determination, if the Popes or See Apostolikes judgment be
infallible and have the assistance of God also, as the Catholics affirm? We
answer, that for the Catholic and peaceable obedient children of the Church
it is a comfort to have such various means of determination, trial, and
declaration of the truth, and that it is necessary for the recovery of
Heretics, and for the contentation of the vveake, who not alvvaies giving
over to one man's determination, yet vvil either yield to the judgment of all the
learned men and Bishops of al Nations, or else remain desperate and condemned
before God and man for ever. And as I said before, this assistance of the Holy
Ghost promised to Peter's See, presupposes humane means of searching out the
truth, which the Pope alvvaies has used, and vvil, and must use in matters of
great importance, by calling Councels, even as here you see SS. Peter and Paul
them selves and all the Apostles, though endued with the Holy Ghost, yet
thought it notvvithstanding necessary for further trial and clearing of truth
and maintenance of unity, to keep a Council.

Lastly it is to be noted, that as Christ and the Holy Ghost be present by his
promise, to al such assemblies as gather in the obedience and unity of the
Church, with full mind to obey whatsoever shall be determined, whereby the
assembled though of diverse judgments before, do most peaceably yield to truth,
and agree in one uniform determination of the same: so al such as gather out
of the Church, Heretical or Schismatical assembles.
without humility or intention to yield one to an other, or to any Superior,
man or Council, or what else so ever, but challenge to them selves learning,
spirit, and we can not tell what: such, how many meetings so ever they make,
being destitute of the Holy Ghost the author of truth and concord, are further
of and further out, then ever before: as God has shevved by the success of al
Heretical Colloquies, Synodes, and Assemblies in Germany, France, Poole, and
other places in our days. Read a notable place in S. Cyprian, that the promise
of Christ, de unit. Ec. nu. 7.
that he would be in the mids of two or three gathered in his name,
pertains not to them that assemble out of the Church.

3^. Rejoiced upon the consolation.] Straight upon the intelligence of the
Councels determination, Al good Christians rest upon the determination of a
general Council.
not only the Gentiles, but even the Masters of the former troubles and
dissension, were at rest, and al took great comfort that the controversy
was so ended And so should al Christian men do, when they see the sects of
our time condemned by the like authority and most grave judgment of the holy
Council of Trent. Against which the Heretics of our time make the like
frivolous exceptions and false cauillations, as did the old Heretics
heretofore against those Councels that specially condemned their errors. The
Pope and Bishopes (say they) are a party, and they ought not to be our judges:
Al Heretics make exceptio^s against the councils that condemn them.
they are partial and come with preiudicate minds to condemn us, and we
accuse them al of Idolatry and other crimes, and we vvil be tried by Gods
word only, and we vvil expound it according to an other rule, that is to say,
as we list. So say they against this Council, and the like said the Arians
against the first Nicene Council, and al such like against those Councels
namely that condemned their heresies. And so say al thieves against their
correctors and punishers, and would both say and do more against temporal
tribunals, Judges, Justices, and Iuries, if they had as much license and
liberty in those matters, as men have now in religion.

37. Dissension] Such occasions of differences fall out even among the perfect
men often, without any great offense. And this their departing fell out to the
great increase of Christians. And therefore it is very ridiculously applied to
excuse the disagreing of the Heretics among them selves in the principal
points of religion, namely the Sacrament.

CHAP. XVI.
Paul having for his part visited the Churches of Syria, Cilicia, and Lycaonia,
delivering unto them vvithal to keep the Decrees of the Council: 6 begins a
new journey, over Phrygia, Galatia, Mysia: 8 Yea into Europe also he passes,
admonished by a vision, and comes into Macedonia, 12 and there he begins
the Church of the Philippians, vvorking miracles, and suffering persecution.

Jew
the son of a ^vvidovv' woman that believed, of a father a Gentile.

Here again they take order that the decrees and articles of faith agreed upon
in the Council of Jerusalem* should be executed and observed, whereby we see
both the great authority of Councels, and the diligence that al Prelates ought
to have to see the decrees and Canons of the Councils put in execution.
decrees that were decreed of the Apostles and Ancients which were at
Jerusalem.

This people had not the Gospel denied unto them altogether, but for a time:
because (as Venerable Bede thinks) God foresavv they would not believe, and
so should have been more grievously damned.
forbidden by the holy Ghost to preach the word in Asia.

Colonia, is such a city where the most inhabitants are strangers, sent
thither from other great cities and States, namely from the Romans.
colonia. And we were in this city certain days, abiding. Either the Devil
was compelled by the virtue of Paul's presence to say truth, or else (as such
do often times) he spoke truth now, that they might the more trust him, and he
better beguile them at other times.
These men are the servants of the high God, which preach unto you the way of
salvation. them to be beaten with rods. 2. Cor. 11.
they did cast them into prison, commanding the keeper that he should keep
them diligently. It is no other faith that saves but that which works by
Charity. Aug. Enchirid. ^. 67.
Believe in our Lord JESUS: and thou shall be saved and thy house. Happy
Gailers that do mercy tovvard their godly prisoners, and receive again by
them such spiritual benefits.
vvashed their vvounds: and him self was baptized and al his house
incontinent.

CHAP. XVII.
How in other parts of Macedonia he planted the Church, and namely at
Thessalonica, 5 where the obstinate Jews are so malicious, that they pursue
him also into Ber^a* 14 From whence being conducted into Greece, he preaches
at Athens both to the Jews and Gentiles, disputing with the Philosophers, 19
and in Areopagods, persuading them from their Idols unto one God and JESUS
CHRIST raised from the dead.

Zelantes. This is the zeal of Heretics, and a lively pattern of their
dealing at this day against Catholic Priests and preachers and the good Iasons
that receive them.
envying, and taking unto them of the rascal sort certain naughty men, and
making a tumult, stirred the city: and besetting Iasons house, sought to bring
them forth unto the people.

Who when they were come, entered into the synagogue of the Jews. brethren
sent away Paul, to go unto the sea: but Silas and Timothee remained there.

(...)
vvord-sovver would say? But others, He seems to be a preacher of new
daemoniorum.
gods. because he preached to them JESUS and the resurrection. The Epistle for
S. Dionysius Areopagita. October. 9.
or to hear some nevves*)

Ye men of Athens, in all things I perceive you as it were superstitious. (...)
The Adversaries (in the new Test. 1580) translate, your devotions, most
corruptly against the nature of the Greek word (2 These. 2, 4) and most
wickedly, against the laudable devotion of good Christians, calling the Paga^s
idolatry and superstition, their devotions.
Idols, I found an altar also whereupon was written, To the unknown God.
That therefore which you vvorshippe, not knovving it, the same do I preach to
you. God is not concluded in Temples, nor needs them for his necessity of
dwelling, or other uses of indigence. See Annot. c. 7. Act. v. 48.
not in * temples made with hand, Act. 7, 48.
Aratus.
For of his kind also we are. where do penance,

Dyonysius Areopagita.
among whom was also Dionysius Areopagita, and a woman named Damaris, and
others with them.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XVII.
11. Searching the Scriptures.) The Heretics use this place to prove that the
heaters must try and judge by the Scriptures, The people may not judge of the
sense of Scriptures.
whether their teachers and preachers doctrine be true, and so reject that
that they find not in the Scriptures, as though here the sheep were made
judges of their Pastors, the people of the Priests, and men and women of al
sorts, even of S. Paul's doctrine it self: which were the most folish
disorder in the world. And they did not therefore read the Scriptures of the
old Testament (for none of the new were yet extant commonly) to dispute with
the Apostle, or to try and judge of his doctrine, or whether they should
believe him or no: for they were bound to believe him and obey his word,
whether he alleged Scripture or no, and whether they could read or
understand the Scriptures or no, but it was a great comfort and confirmation
for the Jews that had the Scriptures, to find even as S. Paul said, that
Christ was God, crucified, risen, The comfort of Christian men by hearing or
reading the Scriptures.
and ascended to heaven: which by his preaching and expounding they
understood, and never before, though they read them, and heard them read every
Sabbath. As it is a great comfort to a Catholic man, to hear the Scriptures
declared and alleged most evidently for the Churches truth against Heretics,
in Sennons or otherwise. And it does the Catholics good and much confirms
them, to view diligently the places alleged by the Catholic preachers. Yet
they must not be judges for all that, over their own Pastors, whom Christ
commands them to hear and obey, and by whom they hear the true sense of
Scriptures.

22. Superstitious.) S. Paul calls not them superstitious for adoring the
true and only God with much devotion or many ceremonies or in comely
prescribed order, The Protestants call devotion, superstition.
or for doing due reverence to holy Sacraments, to Saints and their memories,
Images, or Monuments: or for keeping the prescribed laws, days, and fastes
of the Church, or for fulfilling vows made to God, or for blessing with the
sign of the Cross, or for capping and kneeling at the name of JESUS, or for
religiously using creatures sanctified in the same name, or any other Christian
observation, for which our new Masters condemn the Catholic people of
Superstition: them selves wholy void of that vice by all wise men's judgment,
The Apostle speaks of the Heathens superstition.
because they have in manner taken away al religion, and are become Epicureians
and Atheists: who are never troubled with superstition, because it is a vice
consisting in excess of worship or religion, whereof they are void, but the
Apostle calls them superstitious for worshipping the Idols and gods of the
Heathen, and (...)
for the fear that they had, lest they should leave out any God that was
unknown to them: for thus their Altar was inscribed: Dijs Asia, Europa, and
Lybia, Deo ignoto and peregrino. that is, To the gods of Asia, Europe, and
Lybia: Aug. de co^s. Eua^g. li. 1 ^. 26.
to the unknown and strange God. This superstition (says S. Augustine) is
wholy taken away from the Church by Christ's incarnation, The Catholic Church
allows no superstition.
and by the Apostles preaching, and by Martyrs holy life and death. Neither
does the Catholic Church allow this or any other kind of superstitious
observation. Only we must take heed that we believe not her Adversaries
definition of superstition, for they would imply therein al true religion.

29. This Divinity to be like.) Nothing can be made by man's hand of what
form or sort so ever, that is like to Gods essence, or to the form or shape
of his Godhead or Divinity. therefore howsoever the Heathens did paint or
grave their Idols, they were nothing like to God* And this also is
impertinently alleged by Heretics against the Churches images: Which are not
made, either to be adored with godly honor, or to be any resemblance of the
Divinity or any of the three persons in Godhead, but only of Christ as he was
in form of man, who in that respect may be truly expressed, as other men by
their purtraites: and of the Holy Ghost, not as he is in him self, but as he
appeared in fiery tongues or in the similitude of a doo^e, How there may be
Images or resembla^ces of the three persons in Trinity, and of Angels.
or such like. And so to paint or grave any of the three persons as they
appeared visibly and corporally, is no more inconvenient or unlawful, then it
was indecent for them to appear in such forms. And therefore to paint or
portraite the Father also being the first person, Dan. 7, 22.
as he has shevved him self in vision to any of the Prophets of the old or
new Testament (namely to Daniel as an old man) or the three Angels
representing the three Persons to Abraham, Genesis 18, 2.
or the one Angel that vvrastling with Jacob bare our Lords Person, Genesis 32, 24
no such thing is any where forbidden, but is very agreeable to the peoples
instruction. Exo. 37, 7,
In which sort the Angels were commonly pourtered (and namely the Cherubins
over the Propitiatory) as they be now in the Church, not in their natural
form, but with corporal wings (as the Seraphins appeared to Esaias the
Prophet) to express their quality and office of being Gods Angels, Esa. 6, 2.
that is, Messengers: and God the Father with the world in his hand, to
signify his creation and government of the same, and such like: Whereof the
people being well instructed may take much good, Images are for the peoples
instruction.
and no harm in the world, being now through their faith in Christ far from
al fond imagination of the false gods of the Pagans. And therefore S. Gregory
says of the Churches Images, Grego. li. 9 ep. 9.
That which scripture or vvriting does to the readers, the same does the
picture to the simple that look thereupon. for in it even the ignorant see
what they ought to follow, in it they do read, that know no letters. Where
he calls it a matter of antiquity and very convenient, that in holy places
Images were painted to the peoples instruction, so they be taught that they
may not be adored with divine honor. and he in the same place sharply
rebukes Serenus the Bishop of Massilia, that of indiscrete zele he would take
away Images, rather then teach the people how to use them.

34. Dionysius Areopagita.) This is that famous Denis that first converted
France, and vvrote those notable and divine works de Ecclesiastica and
ca^lesti hierarchia, de diuinis nominibus, S. Dionysius Areopagita is al for
the Catholics.
and others, in which he confirms and proves plainly almost al things that
the Church now uses in the ministration of the holy Sacraments, and affirms
that he learned them of the Apostles, giving also testimony for the Catholic
faith in most things now controuersed, so plainly, that our Adversaries have
no shift but to deny this Denis to have been the author of them, ^eyning that
they be an others of later age. Which is an old flight of Heretics, but most
proper to these of al others. Who seeing al antiquity against them, are
forced to be more bold or rather impudent then others in that point.

CHAP. XVIII.
As Corinth in Achaia, he works with his own hands, preaching JESUS to be
CHRIST, unto the Jews upon their Sabboths. 6 But they being obstinate and
blaspheming, he in plain terms forsakes them, and turns to the Gentiles,
among whom according to a vision that he had to embolden him, he planteth the
Church in great numbers, 12 the obstinat Jews in vain soliciting the
Proconsul against him. 18 From thence as length departing he returns 19 by
Ephesus (where he promises the Jews to return to them) 22 and so to
Antioch in Syria (from whence he began his journey Act. 15) 23 but not
resting, by and by he goes again to visit the new Churches that he planted
Act. 16 in Galatia and Phrygia: 24 Apollo in his absence mightily confounding
the Jews at Ephesus, 27 and afterward at Corinth.

he disputed in the synagogue every Sabbath, interposing the name of our Lord
JESUS, and he exhorted the Jews and the Greeks.



Nu. 6, 18. Act. 21, 24.




Apollo.
named Apollo, borne at Alexandria, an eloquent man, came to Ephesus, mighty in
the scriptures.

CHAP. XIX.
How Paul began the Church of Ephesus, first in 1^ that were baptized with
John's baptism, ^ then preaching three months in the Synagogue of the Jews,
until for their obstinacy and blaspheming, he forsook them, disputing
afterward in a certain school for two years space to the marvelous increase
of the Church, specially through his great miracles also, in healing diseases
with the touch of his clothes, and expelling di^els, 13 who yet contemned
the Exorcists of the Jews. 18 How the Christians there confess their acts,
and burn their unlawful books: 21 and how he foretold that after he had
been at Jerusalem, he must see Rome. 23 and what a great sedition was raised
against him at Ephesus, by them that got their living of vvorking to the
idolatrous Temple of Diana.

The Epistle upon whitson-eue.
that Paul having gone through the higher parts came to Ephesus, and found
certain disciples: John's baptism no^ sufficient.
In John's baptism. Mt, 3, 11.
* John baptized the people with the baptism of penance, Mr. 1, 8.
saying: That they should believe in him that was to come after him, Lu. 3, 16.
that is to say, Christ's baptism necessary.
in JESUS. S. Paul ministered the Sacrament of Co^firmatio^. See an^ot, c. 8,
(...).
imposed hands on them, the holy Ghost came upon them, and they spoke with
tongues, and prophesied.



them
both', prevailed against them, so that they fled out of that house naked and
vvounded. They made not only a general confession wherein al me^ show the^
selves alike to be sinners, as our Protestants do: but every one confessed his
own proper deeds and faults.
their deeds. The 6 part.


Of taking away the Gospel from Jerusalem the head city of the Jews, and
giving it to ROME the head city of the Gentiles.
Rome also.

the way of our Lord. (...)
that made silver The Protestants translate, shrines, in the bible an. 1577: to
make the people think that it touches the holy shrines of Saints: most
corruptly, the greek signifyng plainly, temples, and that of heathen gods:
temples of Diana, procured to the artificers no small gain: (...).
and Here the Heretics add to the text this word, image, more then is in the
greek, to put a scruple into the peoples mind concerning holy Images.
Jupiters child? whereas there is no man guilty by whom we may give an
account of this concourse. And when he had said these things, he dimissed the
assembly.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XIX.
12. Napkins.] Touching of Relikes, and miracles done by the same.
The napkins that had touched S. Paul's body, wrought miracles, and it was no
superstition to attribute that virtue to them which God gave to them in deed:
nor to seek to touch them for health, Act. 5, 15.
was any dishonor to God, but it much proved Christ's religion to be true,
and him to be the only God, whose servants, yea whose servants * shades and
napkins could do such wonders, as S. Chrysostom (to. 5. cont. Gentiles, quod
Christus sit Deus, in vit. Babyla.) shovveth in a whole book to that purpose,
against the Pagans, proving hereby and by the like virtue of other Saints and
their Relikes, that Christ their Lord and Master is God* for it is al one
concerning the bodies of Saints, relics, garments, staves, books, or any
thing that belonged to them, al which may and have done and yet do (when it
is necessary to our edification) the like wonders to Gods great honor: not
only in their life time, but after their death much more* for S. Paul's napkins
had as great force when he was dead, as when he lived, and so much more, as
his grace and dignity with God is greater then before. Which S. Chrysostom
in the place alleged proves at large by the shrine of S. Babylas the Martyr:
and to think the contrary, is the Heresy of Vigilantius, condemned so long
since as S. Hieroms time, and by him refuted abundantly.

16. Paul I know.] The name, or presence, or Relics of Saints and holy men,
confound the Devil.
Both the said napkins taken from S. Paul's body, and his name also, were
dreadful and able to expel devils. Whereby we learn that not only Christ's
name, which is the principal, but his servants names also inuocated upon the
possessed, have power over devils: which is a marvelous honor to Saints,
and nothing diminishes the glory of Christ, but excedingly increases the
same, In vit. Hilarionis.
not only him self, but his servants also being able to do such things, and to
be stronger then any Devil in Hell. So we read in * S. Hierom that many did
invoke the name of S. Hilar^on upon the possessed, Chrysostom. loco citato.
and the Devils straight departed. so did the Devil know * S. Babylas and
other Saints, even after they were dead, when they could not speak for the
presence of their Relikes, and when they were tormented and expelled by them:
whereof al antiquity is full of testimonies. But our Heretics Luther and
Calvin and their Scholars attempting to cast out Devils, sp^d much like as
these good fellows did.

19. Curious things.] Curious and unlawful sciences, as Vvitcheraft,
Necromancie, and other means of divination by southsaying, Superstitious,
heretical, and al hurtful books must be made away.
figure-^asting, interpretation of dreams, or any way not allowed by God and
his Church, must much more be abhorred of old Christians, when these so lately
converted were so zealous and diligent to leave them And by this example all that are newly reconciled to the Church, are taught, the first thing they do,
to burn their heretical and naughty books.

19. Books.] A Christian man is bound to burn or deface al wicked books of
what sort so ever, Decrees and penal laws against heretical books.
specially Heretical books. Which though they infect not him alvvaies that
keeps them, yet being forth coming, they may be noisome and pernicious to
others that shall have them and read them after his death, or otherwise.
Therefore has the Church taken order for condemning al such books, and against
the reading of them, where danger may ensue: and the Christian Emperoures,
Constantinus Magnus, Valentin^an, Theodosius, Martian, Justinian, made penal
laws for the burning or defacing of them. Sozem. li. 1 c. 20. li. 2c. (...).
Conc. Chalac. act. 3. in fine, cap. Amplae. and in fine totius Conc. ^.
Imperator. Conc. Constantinop. 2. conses. 5. cap. Debitam. and Act. 1 cap. 1.
and cap. Rem. See Eusebius li. ^ de vita Constant. c. 61. 62. 63. 64. The
danger of reading them, as it is manifest, so it is signified by Eusebius. li. 7
c. 6. s. Augustine li. 3 de bapt. 6. 14. S. Greg. li. 5 ep. 64.

CHAP. XX.
Having visited the Churches of Macedonia and Achaia (as he purposed Act. 19)
and now about to sail from Corinth tovvard Jerusalem, because of the Jews
lying in wait for him, he is constrained to return into Maced^nia, and And
so (...) Philippos taking boat, comes to Troas, where upon the Sunday,
with a sermon, and a miracle, he greatly confirms that Church. 13 Thence
coming to Miletum, 17 he sends to Ephesus for the Clergy of those parts:
to whom he makes a Pastoral sermon, committing unto their charge the stock
begu^ne by him there, and now like to be seen of him no more, considering the
troubles that by revelation he looks for at Jerusalem.



S. Paul did here break bread on the Sunday as it is broken in the Sacrament
of the body of Christ, and had both before and after the celebrating of the
Sacrament a sermon to the people. Aug. ep. ^6 ad Casulanu^. V^ner. Beda in 20
Act.
break bread, Paul disputed with them, being to depart on the morovv, and he
continued the sermon until midnight.



(...) That is, Priests as Act. 15. 4. See the marginal annot. there.
Ancients of the Church. assembled together, Act. 19, 1
he said to them, You know * from the first day that I entered into Asia, in
what manner I have been with you all the time, Apostolic preaching commends
not faith only but penance also to the people.
penance tovvard God and faith in our Lord JESUS CHRIST. Bishops or Priests
(for then these names were sometime used indifferently) governors of the
Church of God, and placed in that room and high function by the Holy Ghost.
Holy Ghost has placed you bishops, to rule the Church of God which he has
purchased with his own blood.

made of al, and falling upon the neck of Paul, they kissed him,

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XX.
16. Pentecost.] The Christian Pentecost*
Though the Apostles might desire to come to the Jews Festiuities, by reason
of the general concourse of people to the same, the better to deal for their
salvation and ^o spread the Gospel of Christ, yet it is like that they now kept
solemly the Christian Pentecost or vvhitsontide, for memory of the Holy Ghost,
and that S. Paul went to that Feast of the Christians rather then the other of
the Jews. And Ven. Bid says here, The Apostle makes have to keep the
fifteth day, that is, of remission and of the Holy Ghost. For, that the
Christians already kept the eight day, that is, Sunday.
the Sunday or our Lords day, and had altered already the ordinary Sabbath
into the same, it is plain by the Scriptures (1 Cor. 16, 2. Apoc. 1, 10.) and
by antiquity. Justin. Mart. Apolog. 2 ad Anton. Pium in fine. And it is as
like that they changed the Jews Pasche and Pentecost as that, specially when
it is evident that * these Festiuities be kept by Apostolic tradition, Avg.
ep. 118 c. 1.
and approved by the use of al ancient Churches and Councels.

^9. Ravening wolves.] Ravening wolves are the Heretics of al ages.
The governors of the Church are foretold of the great danger that should fall
to the people by wolves, that is to say, by Heretics, whose cruelty tovvard
the Catholics is noted by this term. They be knovve^ by the forsaking the
unity of the Church whereof they were before, by going out and dravving many
disciples after them, and by their perverse doctrine. Such wolves came
afterward in deed in diverse ages, Arius, M^cedonius, Nestorius, Eutyches,
Luther, Calvin, great bloudsucking wolves, and vvasters of the flock of
Christ.

35. More blessed to give.] Christ's speeches not written in the Gospel.
Among many other infinite goodly things and speeches which Christ spoke and
be not written in the Gospels, this sentence is one: which S. Paul heard of
some of the Apostles daily conversant with him, or else learned of Christ him
self, or of the Holy Ghost* And it signifies, that whereas the world
commonly counts him happy that receives any benefit, as alms either
temporal or spiritual, Great almesmen blessed.
yet in deed he that gives or bestows, is more happy. Which if the
world did well consider, men would give alms faster then they do, if it
were but for their own benefit.

CHAP. XXI.
From Mile^tum going on his journey, 4 he can not be dissuaded neither as Tire,
8 nor at Caesarea (in both which places the Holy Ghost reveled how he should
be handled in Jerusalem, 10 the Prophet Agabu^ expressly foretelling that the
Jews there should deliver him to the Gentiles) 15 but to Jerusalem he
comes: where being vvelcome to the Christians, and namely to James the
Bishop, and to the Priests, while he goes about to satisfy the Christian
Jews there, who had been misinformed of him as if he had taught it to be
unlawful for the Jews to keep Moses Law: 27 he is invaded by the infidel
Jews, and ready to be murdered by them, until the Roman souldiars do rescue
him.

into Syria, and came to Tire: for there the ship was to discharge her lode.
Act. 6, 5
And entering into the house of * Philip the Evangelist, who was one of the
seven, we tarried with him. As S. Peter had a wife, but used her not after his
calling, as it is noted else where out of S. Hierom Lu^. 4, 38: so may it ^e
^a^d of S. Philip being De^con.
four daughters virgins, that did prophecy.



that are among the Gentiles, to depart from Moses: saying that they ought not
to circumcise their children, nor walk according to the custom. Nu. 6, 18.
that they may * shave their heads: and al shall know that the things which
they heard of thee, are false: but that thy self also vvalkest ^ keeping the
Law. Act. 15, 20.
* we have written, decre^ing that they should refrain them selves from the
immolated to Idols, and blood, and suffocated, and fornication. Nu. 6, 13
until an oblation was offered for every one of them.

In castra. So in the places following.
into the castle. of the violence of the people. Act. 22, 3.
* I am a man truly a Ievv^ of Tarsus, a citizen not of an obscure city of
Cilicia. And I desire thee, permit me to speak to the people.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XXI.
9. Virgins.] Virgins.
S. Luke notes specially that his daughters were Virgins, meaning (no doubt)
that they were of the state, profession, or purpose of perpetual virginity,
not only that they were young maids unmarried: and that they were the rather
for that, endued with the gift of prophecy, as S. Hierom says li. 1 adu.
Iouin. c. 24. See Oecum. c. 29 in hunc locum.

^4. Keeping the Law.] Avoiding of sca^dal in things not unlawful.
All the observations of the Law were now in them selves dead and
unprofitable, yet til further propagation of the Gospel, they were not
damnable to the keepers, nor offensiu^ to God, but might be observed even of
the Christian Jews. and for fear of scandalizing the vveake of that nation,
newly converted or prone to receive the faith, the Apostles by Gods suggestion
did think it good to observe them as occasion required.

CHAP. XXII.
Being licensed by the Tribune to speak to the people, he shows them that
he was once as earnest on that side as they now be: 6 and how strange and
miraculous his conversion was. 17 They hear him quietly, until he began to
make mention of a vision that sent him away from them to the Gentiles. 22 Then
they cry out upon him so, 23 that for their crying the Tribune commands him
to be scourged* as Which yet by his wisdoms he escapes.

Act. 21, 39.
* I am a man a Jew, borne at Tarsus in Cilicia, but brought up in this
city, at the feet of Gamaliel instructed according to the verity of the law
of the fathers, an emulatour of the Law as also al you are this day: Act. 8, 3
binding and delivering into custodies men and vvome^, Act. 9, 2
and all the ancients. The Sacramc of Baptism does it self vvash away sins
as here is plain, and therefore does not only signify (as the Heretics
affirm) that out sins be forgiven before, or otherwise by faith only
remitted Whereby the Churches doctrine is proved to be fully agreeable to the
Scriptures, that the Sacraments give grace ex opere operato* that is, by the
force and virtue of the work and word, done and said in the Sacrament.
vvash away thy sins inuocating his name. (...)
witness was shed, Not only the Principals but all that consent to the death or
vexation of Christian men for the Catholic says, do highly offend. which the
Apostle confesses here, that Gods mercy may be more notoriously glorified in
him hereby.
I stood by and consented, and kept the garments of them that killed him. Act.
7, 38.


out, and threvv of their garments, and cast dust into the air, (...)
Priests to come together and all the Council: and bringing forth Paul, he set
him among them.

CHAP. XXIII.
As the people in the tumult, so also the very ch^efe of the Jews in their
Council show them selves obstina^^, and willful persecutors of the truth in S.
Paul's person. Whose behavior toward them is full of constancy, modesty,
and wisdoms, 11 (Christ also by a vision encouraging him, and foretelling that
he shall to Rome.) 12 Yea they conspire with 40 men to kill him traitorously. 1^
But the matter being detected, the Roman Tribune conueigheth him strongly to
Caesarea.

He said not this through perturbation of mind or of a passion, but by way of
prophecy, that this figurative high priesthod then trimmed l^ke a vvhited
wall, was to be destroyed, whereas now the true priesthod of Christ was co^t.
Beda. in hun^ Io.
God shall strike thee, thou vvhited wall. And thou sitting iudgest me
according to the law, and contrary to law do thou command me to be
smitten? Exo. 22, 28.
The prince of thy people thou shall not misspeake. knovving that the one part
was of Sadducees, and the other of Pharisees, Such prudent euasions from
danger are lawful. which S. Chrysosto^e calls (specially in this Apostle)
the wisdom of the serpent, as otherwise in his teaching and preaching and
patie^co he used the simplicity of dooue,
he cried out in the Council, Men brethren, * I am a Pharisee, Phil. 3, 5.
the son of Pharisees: of the hope and resurrection of the dead am I judged.
Mt. 22, 23.
and the multitude was divided. Though God who could not lie, had promised
Paul that he should go to Rome: yet the Apostle omitted not humane means to
defend him self from his enemies and otherwise. neither said he as the
Heretics called Predestinates, Let them do what they will* they ca^ not hurt
me, for I am pr^destinate to go^ to Rome, See his doings and sayings to save
him self, in the chap. following.
must thou testify at Rome also.

See the courtesy and equiti^ of Heathen Officers tovvard their prisoners, to
save them from al injury and villainy.
And he taking him, brought him to the Tribune, and said, The prisoner Paul
desired me to bring this young man unto thee, having some thing to say to thee.
of them, which have vowed neither to eat nor to drink, til they kill him:
and they are now ready, expecting thy promise.

Claudius Lysias to the most excellent President Felix, greeting.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XXIII.
^. I knevv not.] Our Lord (says S. Cyprian) in the Gospel, when it was said
to him, Answerest thou the high Priest (...) teaching that the honor of
Priesthod must be kept, The honor of Priesthod.
said nothing to the high Priest, Cypr. ep. 65. 69. (...). 2.
but only purging his innocence, said, If I have spoken evil, bear witness of
evil: but if well, why smitest thou me? Also the blessed Apostle when it was
said to him* Do thou assail the high Priest so with il words? spoke not
any thing co^tumeliously against the Priest, whereas he might have put forth
him self stoutly against them which had both crucified our (...) and which had
now also lost their God and Christ, Temple and Priesthod* but though in false
and spoiled Priests, yet considering the very bare shadovv of the name of
Priests, he said, I knew not brethren that he was high Priest. By which
words of the Apostle, either it man be thought he knevv not in deed that he
was in that function, because he had not been of long time in those parts:
or else that he so said in respect of the abrogation of the high Priesthod of
the Jews, whereby he knevv this man not to be truly any Priest* as also
because at this time they came not orderly to it by succession of Aaron and
Law of Moses, See Annot. Io. c. 11, 51.
but by the Roman Emperors f^uour, * as is said before* though (as it is
lavvful in such a case) the Iesse to irritate them, he frames his speech so
(...) they might not take occasion of further accusation against him.

8. The Sadducees.] The Sadducees (as it seems) denied prayer for the dead.
This was the vvorst Heresy among the Jews, denying that there be any
Angels, or spirits, the Resurrection also of the bodies: and consequently (as
it may very well be gathered by the book of the Machabees) they denied prayer
for the dead. Mac. li. 2. c. 12, 43.
for to offer or pray for the dead, and to think rightly and religiously of
the Resurrection, are made there sequels one of an other. Of this sect of
Sadducees was (as Eusebius vvriteth li. 2. c. 2^. Ec. hist.) this Ananias the
High Priest* that caused Paul to be smitten, for their Priesthod had now no
more the protection of God to preserve it in truth and right judgment, the
Christian Priesthod being then established.

12. Vowed them selues*] Such vow, other, or execrations as this, bind no
man before God, yea they must in no wise be observed. Unlawful other and
vows must no^ to kept.
It is a great offense either to vovv voluntarily, or to take any such thing
upon a man, for fear or by commandment. For example, if thou have rashly by
promise, vow, or oath, appointed to be revenged upon any man, thou bindest not
thy self thereby, neither must thou keep thy promise. If thou be put to an oath
to accuse Catholics for serving God as they ought to do, or to utter any
innocent man to Gods enemies and his, thou ought first to refuse such
unlawful oaths: but if thou have not constancy and courage so to do, yet know
thou that such oaths bind not at al in conscience and Law of God, but may and
must be broken under pain of damnation. For to make or take such vows or
oaths, is one sin, and to keep them, Mat. 14. 9.
is an other far greater* as when Herod, to keep his oath, killed John
Baptist. And such vows and oaths to God as these, are unlawful and must be
broken: and not the vows of Chastity and Religion, as our new Ministers
teach by their words and works.

CHAP. XXIIII.
They prosecute him to Caesarea, bringing with them an orator, who before
the President Felix a^cuseth him, 10 He answers, defending him self from the
crimes they charged him with, but confessing his religion plainly. (...) The
Judge perceiving his religion to be irreprehensible* yeldeth not to condemn
him at their pleasure, 24 yea he oftentimes with his wife hears his
preaching, 37 but yet does not his duty to deliver him out of prison.



Whereas we live in much peace by thee, and many things are corrected by thy
providence* (...)
of the sect of the Nazarenes, whom also being apprehended we would have
judged according to our law.



Knovving that of many years tho^ art judge over this nation, I vvil with good
courage answer for my self. (...)
according to the Because Tertullus the Jews orator called Christian religion
the sect or (as it is there verse. ^ in the Greek) the heresy of the Nazarens:
S. Paul answers and shows that it is no heresy. And as for the word,
Sect. in this place: it is in the Greek, According to the way, which they
call heresy, as also Act. 9, 2. 24* 22. And therefore the word sect here is so
taken. See Annot. c. ^^, ^2.
sect, which they call heresy, I do so serve the God of my fathers,
the father my God', believing al things that are written in the Law and the
Prophets: To. 15, 28
Act. 21, 26.
Act. 23, 6.
That * of the resurrection of the dead am I judged this day of you.

The Apostolic teaching was not of only or special faith, but of justice, and
chastity, and judgment, that is to say, of the terror of Hell and other Gods
judgments in the next life answerable to our deeds in this world: by which
the hearers were first terrified, and so induced to penance. How say
Heretics then that such things make men hypocrit^s.
justice and chastiti^, and of the judgment to come, Felix being terrified,
ansvvered, For this time, go thy way: but in time convenient I vvil send for
thee.

CHAP. XXV.
After two years emprisonment the Jews continue their suit against him,
soliciting the new President Festus, ^ first at Jerusalem, then at Caesarea:
9 where through the Jews partiality he is feign to appeal unto the
Emperor: 13 and is in the mean time brought forth by Festus (giving him good
testimony, notvvithstanding the exclamations of the Jews against him) unto
king Agrippa and his Queen Bernice.



crimes as ^. 27.
causes which, they could not prove, well know. If S. Paul both to save
him self from whipping and from death sought by the Jews, doubted not to
cry for succor of the Roman laws, and to appeal to Caesar the Prince of
the Romans not yet Christened: how much more may we call for aid of
Christian Princes and their laws, for the punishment of Heretics, and for
the Churches defense against them? S. Augustine ep. 50.
I appeal to Caesar.

This whom he terms by contempt, one JESUS, has now made all the Roman
Emperors and Princes of the world to know him, and has given the seat of the
Caesar's to his poor servants, Peter and his successors.
one JESUS deceased, whom Paul affirmed to live.

have brought him forth to you, and especially to thee, king Agrippa, that
examination being made, I may have what to write. (...)
his causes.

CHAP. XXVI.
In that honorable Audience being permitted to speak, 2 he declares to the
king what he first was, 1^ and how miraculously he was converted, 19 and
that he has preached sin^^, as he was commanded from heaven, and as the
Prophets had foretold of Christ. 24 Which strange tale Festus the Heathen
President hearing, says that he is mad. 25 But he answers, and exhorts
them al to be Christians as he is. ^0 They finally pronounce that he might be
set at liberty, but only for his appeal.



(...)
sect of our religion I lived a Pharisee. inqua^
the which, our twelve tribes (...)
serving night and day, hope to come unto. Of the which hope, o king, I am
accused of the Jews. Act. 8, 3.
detuli sententi^^.
I brought the sentence. and yet more mad against them, I persecuted them even
unto foraine cities. Act. 9, 3.
Act. 9, 20.
and to the Gentiles * did I preach that they should do Penance often
inculcated, and works agreeable to the same.
penance, and turn to God, doing works vvorthie of penance. Act. 21, 30.
* apprehending me, attempted meaning to kill me.

A little thou persuadest me to become a CHRISTIAN.

CHAP. XXVII.
What a dangerous navigations he had toward Rom^: and that by his prediction
and counsel the ship might have been saved. And for his sake (as God also
revealed to him before) all the company was preserved, being 276 persons.

Myra'
Lystra', which is in Lycia:

It may signify the Jews fast of the seventh month September, after which
the navigations was perilous, vvinter approaching.
fast now was past, Paul comforted them, Centurion believed the governor and
master of the ship, more then those things which were said of Paul. names of
vvindes.
Afrike and the Chore. Graec. Clauda.
Cauda, we could scarce get the cock-boate. a place of quick sands.
the Syrte, letting down the vessel, so were they carried.

(...).
whom I serve, stood by me this night, Paul (says S. Hierom) had so many
souls in the ship given him, that is, so many men saved for his sake: and
after he is with Christ, shall he shut his mouth, and not be able once to
speak for them that have believed in his Gospel? Hiero. adu. vigil. Whereby
he proves that if ^od do much for the merits of Saints in this life, much
more at their intercession and pr^^r in heaven.
given thee all that sail with thee. that day were come.



ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XXVII.
23. An Angel.] Gods providence to the Sea of ROME.
S. Paul had many visions, specially to assure him that he should to Rome and
stand before Caesar, our Lord him self before (23, ^^) appearing to him, and
here an Angel, for that purpose. Whereby we plaiuely see the special
providence of God tovvard that See, vvher his two principal Apostles were
designed to preach, plant the faith, live, die, be buried, and honored til the
worlds end.

^1. Unless these tari^] When God reuealeth to us any thing, Gods
predestination and appointment takes not away man's free vvil and endeavors.
or assures us of any event to come, he discharges us not thereby of our
requisite endeavors and labors for atcheiuing the same, not executing
ordinarily his designements toward men otherwise then by their own free
vvil and actions. S. Paul said not here. Let us do what we list: work we
or sit we still, whether the mariners go out or tarry within, we are al
sure to be saved, for so God has revealed to me, and he can not lie, neither
can it fall otherwise* but contrarievvise says he* If these mariners leave
the ship, you can not be saved. So say al true Catholic preachers to Christian
people, What providence, predestination, or foresight so ever God have of your
salvation, you are not thereby constrained any way, you have free vvil still,
and can not be saved (though you be predestinate) except you keep Gods
commandments, repent you of your sins, believe, live and die well. And if
it were revealed to any man, 1 Cor. 9, 2^*
that he were one of Gods elect, and that he should finally die in grace and
be saved, Philip. ^, 18.
yet he were bound to work his salvation with fear and trembling, as ^ S.
Paul both did, and taught, lest he become reprobate: no less then the same
Apostle here and his sellovves, though they had their life promised to them of
God, yet were bound to labor and use al possible diligence that they might
not be drowned.

CHAP. XXVIII.
After their shipwreck having vvintered in the Island (now named Malta)
where many miracles were wrought by Paul, they take ship again, and so by
Sicile they co^^ to Puteoli in Itali, the Christian Romans coming a great way
to meet him, to his great joy. 16 Finally being come to Rome, in his lodging
he declares to the Jews his cause, 23 and on day appointed preaches JESUS
unto them. 25 And seeing their incredulity, he shows how it was foretold
by Esaias: 2^ but that the Gentil^ vvil not be incredulous. 10 To whom be there
preaches two whole years without prohibition.

This island (now Malta) is the seat of the knights of the Rhodes, the
inahbitants vvherof have a special devotion to S. Paul: to who^ both the chief
Church (being the Bishops Seat) is dedicated, and the whole Island (as they
count it) consecrated. Where the people show yet to strangers, his prison and
other memories of his miracles.
island was called Melita*
Mitylene. But the Barbarous shevved us no small courtesy. (...)
Vengeance does not suffer him to live. receiving us, for three days entreated
us courteously.

Apij-forum, and the Three-tauerns. Whom when Paul had seen, giving thanks to
God, he took courage.

Men brethren, I doing nothing against the people, or the custom of the
fathers, was delivered prisoner from Jerusalem into the hands of the Romans,

(...)
sect, it is knovve^ to us that it is gain said every where. of JESUS out of
the law of Moses and the Prophets, from morning until evening. Esa 6, 9.
Mat. 13, 14. Mr. 4, 12.
Go to this people, and say to them, With the care you shall hear, and shall
not understand: and seeing you shall see, and shall not perceive. Lu. 8, 10*
and with their ears have they heavily heard, and their eyes Here also (as
Man. 1^.) it is plain that they would not see, northeare, and that their
excecatio^ is to be attributed to the^ selves and not to God. See annota. Io.
12, 40.
they have shut: Io. 12, 40*
left perhaps they may see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, To.
11, 8*
and understand with their heart, and be converted, and I heal them.



ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XXVIII.
^. Shaking of the beast.] The promise of Christ (Marc. 16) that venomous
serpents should not hurt them that believe in him, is fulfilled not in all
beleuers, but in such as had the gift of miracles, as S. Paul had. Whom here a
viper by nature so venomous that the people thought he should have died out of
hand, Malta has S. Paul's blessing and grace until this day.
did no whit annoy: he extinguishing by the power of Christ all the poison of
the beast. The. Fazellus de rebus Siculis decad. ^ li. (...). 1.
Yea and (as the Christian people there til this day believe) by S. Paul's
prayers the Island was delivered for ever from al such venomous serpents, in so
much that children there play with scorpions ever since that time, and
Pilgrims daily carry with them pieces of stones out of the place where. S.
Paul abode, by which they affirm that they heal them which in other
countries adjoining are bitten of scorpions, Gods miraculous virtue in certain
countries and creatures, by his Saints.
the medicine therefore being called, S. Paul's grace. The Heretics that know
not the power of God, nor the miraculous virtues given to his Saints, marvel
and blaspheme, when they bear such things as be proper to certain countries,
attributed sometimes to Gods miracles done by his Saints ^ as though that
were not possible, or were not as much to Gods honor, and more, then things
proceeding only of natural causes. Such profane men would not have attributed
the holsom^es of the waters of Jericho to Eliseus his virtue and miracles, 4
Reg. 2, 19*
amending them by casting salt into them, if the Scripture had not expressly
testified the same. It is the part of al faithful men to refer such things to
God, when any just occasion is given thereunto, rather then to nature: though
the incredulous do alvvaies contrary, for fear of superstition and
dishonouring God. As though this escape of drowning, might better and more to
Gods glory, be referted to chance and the mariners industry, then to S.
Paul's prayers and extraordinary vvorking.

^0. Chain.] S. Paul's chains h^onoured.
I would vvish now (says S. Chrystome) to be for a time in the place where
these chains remain, and to see the ^etters which Devils fear, and Angels
reverence. homil. 5 ad populum Antiochenum. See also S. Gregory lib. ^.
episto. ^0. of the miracles done by S. Paul's chains, and that he sends to
the Emperesse Constantia some dust thereof (...) of, for a great Relike and
holy gift.

22. Concerning this sect.) The Heretics of al sorts comfort them selves
much, when they find here or else where the Christian faith called of the
Jews or incredulous persons, a Sect or an Heresy, The name of Sect is well
given to al Heresies, though the Christian religion at the first was falsely
so called.
and sometimes in contempt of Christ's person the Master of the same, the
Sect of the Nazarens: as though the Church of God might as well err in naming
their doctrine Heresy, as the Jews and Pagans might and did miss in
condemning Christian religion for an Heresy: or as though the Protestants
doctrine were as well proved and tried to be no Heresy, by the Proph^ts and
other Scriptures, miracles, and consent of al Nations and ages, as Christ's
blessed doctrine is. Whereas in deed the Protestants doctrine is evidently
convinced to be heretical, by the same arguments that Christ's religion is
proved to be the only true doctrine of salvation, and not an heresy. And
whosoever can deduce the Christian faith from Adam to this day, through out all the Fathers, Patriarchs, Prophets, Priests, Apostles, and Bishops, by descent
and succession of al laws and states of true worshippers and believers
(which is the only or special way to prove that the Christian faith is no
heresy) he shall by the same means al at once prove the Protestants doctrine
to be an heresy and a false sect. That the Jews therefore and il men in all
places contradicted the Christian religion, calling it an Heresy or a Sect, as
though it had a beginning of some certain Sect-Maister other them God him
self, they were deceived: and the Church of God nevertheless calling the
Protestants doctrine Heresy in the vvorst part that can be, and in the vvorst
sort that ever was, does right and most justly.

The end of the Acts of the Apostles.
Whereunto we join for the readers behalf, two Tables of the two chief
Apostles, and a note of the rest, as an abridgement of the said book, and a
supply of some things not there mentioned.
THE SVMME OF THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES, CONTAINING SPECIALLY THE GESTES OF THE
TWO PRINCIPAL Apostles, SS. Peter and Paul, in such order of time and years of
the Emperors, and from Christ's Natiuitia, and Ascension, as they were done:
so ^^r as by holy Scriptures or Ecclesiastical vvriters may be gathered.
Wherein though is be not possible to set down the procise and undoubted time
or year of every thing, because neither S. Luke nor others do note particularly
and orderly the moments of every action of the said Apostles: no^ we follow
the most probable and plain (...) that we find in holy Scripture and
ancient vvriters. See the annot.
Whereby the studious reader may easily discover the folly of the Protestants,
Romans 16, 15.
that can find no time when * Peter might possibly come to Rome, be Bishop.
and die there* diverse things in S. Paul's acts being no less hard to
reconcile to the course of S. Lukes narration. Gal. 1.
then any thing touching the history of S. Peter namely his * three years
preaching in Arabia: al which must needs be true, whether we bit the very
just time or no, and how so ever authors differ about the same.

A TABLE OF S. PETER.
Tiberij Not. Dn^i. Ascen. 18 34 1 PETER causes the Disciples to proceed to
the election of an other Apostle in Judas room. Act. 1. Receiving with the
rest the gifts of the Holy Ghost on Vvhit-sunday, Tiberij 18
he made the first Sermon, Not. (...). 34
and converted 3000. Act. 2. Asce^. 1
He cures one borne lame, preaches Christ and penance to the Jews: so that
5000 believed. Act. 3 and 4. He is imprisoned, released again, threatened and
commanded to preach no more: but he with John answers, that they must
obey God more then man. Act. 4. He strikes to death with a word, Ananias and
Saphira, for sacrilege. Act. 5. He is sent with John to Samaria, to confirm
the newly baptized, where he reproves Simon Magu^. Act. 8. 19 35 2 He
heals Aeneas at Lydda, Tiberij 19
and raises Tabitha from death at Ioppe. Not. (...). 35
Act. 9. Asce^. 2
He is vvarried and taught by a vision, to preach so Cornelius a Gentil. Act.
10. He defends his receiving of the Gentiles Act. 11. and records (Act. 15)
that God called the first Gentiles by his ministry, so that Paul's first
preaching to them, and his going to Arabia, must be after this. See S. Chrysostom.
in Act. ho. 22. Eusebius. li. 2 c. 3. 20 36 3 He continues preaching in diverse
parts of Jury and the provinces adjoining. Tiberij 20
About two years after this, Not. (...). 36
S. Paul visits him at Jerusalem. Asce^. 3
Gal. 1. He preaches in Syria and the Provinces of Asia minor, Bythynia,
Poutus, Galatia, Cappodocia, ordaining Bishops and Priests in diverse places. 1
Pet. 1. Nacepho. li. 2 c. 35. Platina in Petro. 23 39 6 He goes to Antioche,
Tiberij 29
preaching there, Not. (...). 39
and making that his Seat, Asce^. 6
yet not remaining there continually, but for the affairs of the Church,
departing thence, sometime to Jerusalem, sometime to other places. Hiero. in
Catalogo. Ignat. ad Magnesianos. At Jerusalem he is cast into prison after the
putting of S. James to death, by the commandment of Herod. he is prayed for
by the whole Church, and delivered out of prison by an Angel. Act. 12. Claudij
Not. Dn^i. Ascen. 2 44 11 Avoiding the fury of Herod, he leaves Jury again.
He appoints Euodius Bishop in Antioche, Eusebius. in Chron. Claudij 2
and li. ^ c. 16. Suid^s, Not. (...). 44
Ignat, Asce^. 11
ad Antiochen. And passing by Corinth, HE CAME TO ROME, to convince Simon
Magus. Hiero. in Catalogo. Eusebius. li. 2 c. 12. 13. 24. Council. to. 1. He
approves and declares the Gospel of S. Mark to be Canonical. Hiero. in
Catal^. Eusebius. li. 2 c. 14. Having founded the Church at Rome, and planted his
Apostolical Seat there, afterward absent from the city (either expelled
thence with other Jews, Cornel. Tacit, in Claudio: or rather according to
the office of his Apostleship) leaving it for a time, he visited other
Churches, and came to Jerusalem again, using both in his absence and
presence, Linus and Cletus for his coadiutors. To. 2 Council. page ^56, Epiph,
to. 2. Haeres. 27. 9 52 18 He holds the first Council. Claudij 9
Act. 15. Not. (...). 52
He is reprehended at Antioche by S. Paul. Asce^. 18
Galat. 1. except that difference fell before the Council, as some think.
August. ^p. 19. He returns to Rome again, the Roman faith by his diligence
now made famous through the world. To. 1. and 15. Theodoret. in 16. To.
Thence he vvriteth his first epistle. 1 Pet. 5. Eusebius. li. 2 c. 14. Hiero. in
Catalogo. He sends S. Mark to Alexandria, and others to plant the faith in
diverse parts of the world. Grego. li. 5 ep. 60. and li. 6 ep. 37. Ni^opho.
li. 2 c. 35. He vvriteth his second epistle a little before his death, which
Christ revealed to him to be at hand, 2 Pet. 1. He takes order for his
successor. Neronis Not. Dn^i. Ascen. 14 70 37 He was finally crucified at
Rome. Neronis (...)
See the last Annot. Not. (...). 70
Joan. c. 21. Asce^. 37


FOELIX ECCLESIA, cui totam doctrinam Apostoli cum suo sanguine profuderunt:
vbi PETRVS Passioni Domini adaequatur, vbi PAVLVS Ioannis (Baptissae) exitu
coronatur. Tertul. de Praescript. NON ita coelum splendescit, quando radios sol
demittit, quemadmodum ROMANORVM VRBS duas illas lampades vbique tertarum
effundens. Chrysostom. in ep. To. hom. 32 in moral. Prudent in Hymno de S. Laurent.
Hi^ nempe iam regnant du^
Apostolorum principes:
Alter vocator Gentium,
Alter cathedram possidens
Primam, recludis creditas
Aeternitatis ianuas.
Merita Petri and Pauli propter eundem Passionis diem celebrius and solenniter
Roma commendat. S. Aug. de cons. Euang. li. 1 c. 10. A TABLE OF S. PAVL.
Tiberij Natiuit. Ascen. 18 34 1 SEVEN Deacons are elected and ordered by
imposition of hands. Act. 6. Steven the principal of them makes a blessed
sermon, Tiberij 18
for which he was stoned to death, Natiuit. 34
Saul (afterward Paul) consenting and aiding thereunto. Ascen. 1
Act. ^. 19 35 2 Saul by commission persecuteth. Tiberij 19
Act. 9. Natiuit. 35
Ascen. 2
In his journey to Damascus he is converted. Ibid. He goes into Arabia and
preaches there. Galat. 1. 22 38 5 Paul returns to Damascus, Tiberij 22
where being in danger he escapes, Natiuit. 38
let down in a basket by the wall. Ascen. 5
Act. 9. Thente he comes to Jerusalem to see Peter, Galat. 1. Where being
in danger of his life, the brethren convey him out of the city to Caesarea,
and thence to Tarsus. Act. 9. He preaches in the parts of Syria and Cilicia.
Galat. 1. and at Antioche, where the Christians were first called by that
name. Act. 11. He and Barnabas being severed from the rest of the Disciples by
the appointment of the holy Ghost, and after fasting and prayer, by imposition
of hands consecrated Apostles and Bishops, they comme to Cypres, where he
converted the Proconsul. Act. 13. He preaches in Lycaonia, and at Lystra is
almost stoned to death. He appoints Priests in every Church, and returning by
Pisidia, came again to Antioche whence they first departed. Act. 14. Claudij
Natiuit. Ascen. 9 52 18 At Antioche and there about he remains (Act. 14)
until the controversy touching the observation of Moses law, for resolution
whereof he and Barnabas ascend to Jerusalem. Where they are appointed to
bring the determination of the Council to Antioche. Claudij 9
And from thence passing through Syria and Cilicia, Natiuit. 52
they teach the Christians to observe the decrees of the Apostles and
Ancients. Ascen. 18
Act. 15. Doing the same in the cities of Lycaonia and others adioining, by a
vision he is warned to pass over the sea, and so comes into Macedonia.
where he planteth the Gospel. Act. 16. Hence forvvard S. Luke pursues S.
Paul's story, chapter by chapter, until his apprehension in Jerusalem, and
arriual at Rome, in this order. He returns from Macedonia by Thessalonica to
Athens, where he conuetteth many, namely S. Denis Areopagita. Act. 17. From
Athens he comes to Corinth, where he remains 18 months. Act. 1^. and
having visited the Churches of Asia Act. 19) he comes back to Corinth Act.
20. Whence he vvriteth his epistle to the Romans. To. 15. From Corinth he
saileth to Troas in Asia, where upon a Sunday he raised Eutychus from death,
preaching til midnight* from Troas he comes to Miletum by sea, and there
sends for the Bishops and Ancients of Ephesus, and exhorts them. Act. 20.
Thence coming to Jerusalem he is taken, Act. 21: and from the Tribune Lysias
delivered to Felix the Governor, Neronis 2
Act. 23: Natiuit. 58
and by him left to Festus, Ascen. 25
Act. 24. he appealeth to Caesar, Act. 25: and so is SENT TO ROME, Act. 27:
where he arriueth. Act. 28. Neronis Natiuit. Ascen. 2 58 25 At Rome he
remains in free prison two year, Act. 28. and then is delivered, 2 Timothy 4.
After his delivery he preached in sundry countries of the west, namely in
Spain. Hiero. in Cataloge. Epiph. Hares. 27. Him self vvriteth that he
purposed so to do. To. 15. In his Epistle to the Philippians (c. ^) he minded
to vis^e the Churches of Asia, which also he did. Genebrard. in Chron. He
vvriteth last of al, his second Epistle to Timothee a little before his death. 2 Timothy 4. being now the second time apprehended and in bands at Rome.
Theodoret. 14 70 37 He was beheaded at Rome, Neronis 14
the same day that Peter was crucified. Natiuit. 70
S. Ambros. ser. (...). 68. S Maximus. Ascen. 37


OF THE OTHER APOSTLES.
THE Acts of the rest of the twelve Apostles be not much written of in this
book: Genebr. out of diverse authors.
but as * other Eccles^^stical writers do te^tifie, they preached specially in
these nations, as follows. Andrew in A^haia, John in Asia. Philip in
Pbrygia, James in Ievvrie, Bartholomew in Scythia, Thomas in India, Matthew
in Aethiopia, Simon in Persia, Thadd^us in Mesopotamia, the other James in
Spain, Matthias in Palestine. So distributing them selves through out the
world, to gather one Catholic Church of al Nations, according as Christ gave
them commission Mat. 28, 19: and as it was prophesied of them before Psalm. 18.
Their sound is gone forth into every country, and their words into the ends
of the whole world. But before they departed one from an other (the time
whereof is not certainly known) * al Twelve assembling together, Ruffi. in
expos. Symb. Apost. Ambr. ^er. 38. Hiero. ep. 61* c. 9. aduers erro. Io. Hieros.
and full of the Holy Ghost, each laying down his sentence, agreed upon
twelve principal articles of the Christian faith, and appointed them for a
rule to al believers: Which is therefore called and is THE APOSTLES CREED: Not
written in paper, as the Scripture, but from the Apostles delivered by
tradition. Ruff. and Hiero. locis citatis. Which, as of old (Hiero. cont.
Lucifer) so at this day al solemnly profess in their Baptism, either by them
selves or by others: and all that be of age and capacity, are bound to know and
believe every article of the ^ame. Which are these that follow.

THE APOSTLES CREED, or SYMBOLVM APOSTOLORVM.
1 I Believe in God the Father, almighty, creator of heaven and earth. 2 And
in JESUS CHRIST, his only Son, our Lord. 3 Who was conceived by the Holy
Ghost, borne of the Virgin MARIE. 4 Suffered under Pontius Pilate, was
crucified, dead, and buried: Descended into Hell. 5 The third day be rose again
from death: 6 Ascended into heaven: Sits at the right hand of God the Father
almighty. 7 From thence he shall come to judge the quick and the dead. 8 I
believe in the Holy Ghost. 9 The holy Catholic Church: the communion of
saints. 10 Forgiveness of sins. 11 Resurrection of the flesh. 12 Life
everlasting. Amen.
THE ARGUMENT OF THE EPISTLES IN GENERAL.
AFTER the Gospels, which is a story of Christ himself, and after the Acts
of the Apostles, Which is a story of Christ's Church: now follow the
Epistles of the Apostles, which they vvrote of such matters, as they had then
occasion to write of. For being the founders and the Doctors of the Church,
they did in their time, as the Doctors that succeeded them, did after them;
who from the beginning unto this day, have written Epistles and Books
against heresies, ever as they arose* and of al other Ecclesiastical matters,
as they had occasion ministered unto them. Of which their doing the Apostles
first gave here the ensample: as also S. Luke in the Acts of the Apostles, led
the way to all the writers of the Ecclesiastical History after him. For all
though there be no comparison between them for authority, for as much as these
are Cannonical Scripture, and so are not any vvritings of their successors: yet
the occasions and matters (as I have said) are like.

Most of these Epistles are S. Paul's Epistles: Eusebius. li 2. Eccl. hist. c. 22.
the rest are called * Catholicae Epistolae, the Epistles Catholic. For S.
Paul vvriteth not any Epistle to al (howbeit every one of them is for all the
Church:) but some to particular Churches of the Gentiles, as to the Romans, to
the Corinthians, to the Galatians, to the Ephesians, to the Philippians, to the
Colossians, to the Thessalonians: some to particular persons, as to Timothee,
to Tite (who were Bishops among the Gentiles, to wit, of Ephesus, and of
Crete) and to Philemon, and then one to the Hebrews, who were the Jews of
Jerusalem and Jury. But the Epistles of the other Apostles, that is, of S.
James, S. Peter, S. John, and S. Jude, are not so entitled to any one Church
or person (except S. John's two later short Epistles, which yet might not be
separated from his first, because they were al of one Author) and therefore
they are termed Catholic, that is, universal. For so vvriteth S. James: To the
twelve tribes that are in dispersion, greeting* and S. Peter in his first
Epistle, thus: To the elect strangers of the dispersion of Pontus, Galatia,
Cappadocia, Asia, and Bithynia. in his second, thus: To them that have obtained
equal faith with us. likewise S. Jude: To them that are in God the father
beloved, and in Jesus Christ preserved, and called. S. John's first is without
title.

Now, for the occasions of their vvriting, whereby we shall perceive the
matters or arguments that they handle: it must be remembered (as the Story of
that time in the Acts of the Apostles does at large declare) that the Church
then beginning, was planted by the Apostles not only in the Jews, but also
in the Gentiles: yea and specially in the Gentiles. Which thing offended the
Jews many ways. For, they could not abide to see, so much as their own
Country to receive him for CHRIST, whom they had rejected and crucified: much
less, to see, them preach him to the Gentiles also, that offended even those
Jews also, that believed him to be Christ. Howbeit such of them as were
Catholics, and therefore not obstinat, were satisfied when they understood
by the Apostles that it was Gods pleasure, as Act. 11. we read. But others
of the became heretics, and preached to the Christian Gentiles, that it was
necessary for them to receive also the Jews religion. Of such we read Act.
15. Unless you be circumcised, you can not be saved. And as these did so preach
against the truth, so did the unchristened Jews not only them selves
persecute, but also stir up the Idolatrous Gentiles every where to persecute
the Christians: by such obstinacy provoking God to reprobate their Nation:
which yet they thought impossible to be done, because they were the seed of
Abraham, and were circumcised, and had received the Law by Moses, for such
carnal respects they trusted in themselves, as though God and Christ were
unseparably bound unto them: attributing also so much to their own works,
(which they thought they did of them selves, being helped with the knowledge
of their law,) that they would not acknovvledge the death of Christ to be
necessary for their salvation: but looked for such a Christ, as should be like
other princes of this world, and make them great men temporally.

Hereupon did S. Paul write his Epistles, to show both the vocation of the
Gentiles, and the reprobation of the Jews. Moreover, to admonish both the
Christian Gentiles, not to receive Circumcision and other ceremonies of Moses
law, in no wise: and the Jews also, not to put their trust in the same, but
rather to understand, that now, Christ being come, they must cease. Again, to
show the necessity of Christ's coming and of his death: that without it,
neither the Gentiles could be saved: no nor the Jews, by no works that they
could do of them selves, although they were also helped by the Law, telling
them what was good and what was bad: for so much as al were sinners, and
therefore also impotent or infirm: and the Law could not take away sin, and
infirmity, and give strength to fulfill that which it gave knowledge of* but
this was God only able to do, and for Christ's sake only would he do it.
Therefore it is necessary for all to believe in Christ, and to be made his
members, being incorporat into his Body which is his Catholic Church. For so
(although they never yet did good work, but al il) they shall have remission
of their sins, and new strength vvithal, to make them able to fulfill the
co^mau^deme^ts of Gods law, yea and their works after this shall be so
gracious in Gods sight, that for them he vvil give them lift everlasting. This
is the necessity, this is also the fruit of Christian Religion. And therefore
be exhorts al, both Gentiles and Jews, as to receive it humbly, so also to
persevere in it constantly unto the end, against al seduction of heresy, and
against al terror of persecution: and to walk al their time in good works,
as now God has made them able to do.

The same doctrine does the Catholic Church teach unto this day most exactly:
The doctrine of the Cath. Church concerning good works.
to wit, that no works of the unbelieving or unbaptized, whether they be
Jews or Gentiles, can save them: no nor of any Heretic, or Schismatike,
although he be baptized, because he is not a member of Christ: yea more then
that, no work of any that is not a lively member of Christ, although
otherwise he be baptized, and continue within his Church, yet because he is
not in grace but in mortal sin, no work that he does, is meritorious or
able to save him.

This very same is S. Paul's doctrine: S. Paul's doctrine concerning faith and
good works.
he denies to the works of such as have not the Spirit of Christ, al virtue
to justify or to save: neither requires he a man to have had knowledge of
the Law, or to have kept it afortime, as though otherwise he might not be
saved by Christ: but yet when he is Christened, he requires of necessity,
that he keep Gods commandments, by avoiding of al sin, and doing good
works: and to such a man's good works he attributes as much virtue as any
Catholic of this time.

Nevertheless there were certain at that time (as also all the Heretics of
this our time) whom S. Peter terms unlearned and unstable, 2. Pet. 3.
who reading S. Paul's Epistles, did misconster his meaning, as though he
required not good works no more after Baptism, then before Baptism: but
held that only Faith did justify and save a man. Thereupon the other Apostles
vvrote their Epistles, as S. Augustine notes in these words: Aug. de fide
and oper. ca. 14. Et praef. psalm. 31.
Therefore because this opinion (Ad salutem obtinendam sufficere Solam sidem,
that only faith is sufficient to obtain salvation) was then risen: the other
Apostolical Epistles, of Peter, John, James, Jude, do against it specially
direct their intention: to avouch vehemently, fidem sine operibus nihil
prodesse, that says without works profits nothing, As also Paul him self
did not define it to be quamlibet fidem, qua in Deum creditur, whatsoever manner
of faith, vvherevvith we believe in God, but that wholesome and express
Euangelical faith, whose works proceed from love, Gal. 5.
and the faith (quoth he) that works by love. whereupon that faith, which
some think to be sufficient to salvation, 1. Cor. 1^.
he so affirms to profit nothing, that he says. If I should have al faith
so that I could remove mountains, and have not charity, I am nothing.

He therefore that will not err in this point, nor in any other, reading
either S. Paul's Epistles, or the rest of the holy Scriptures, must stick fast
to the doctrine of the Catholic Church, 1. Tim. 3.
which Church S. Paul terms the pillar and ground of the truth: assuring him
self that if any thing there found to him as contrary hereunto, he fails of
the right sense: and bearing alvvaies in his mind the admonition of S. Peter,
2. Pet. 3.
saying: As also our most dear brother Paul according to the wisdoms given to
him, has written to you: as also in all his Epistles, speaking in them of
these things, in the which are certain things hard to understand, which the
unlearned and unstable deprave, as also the rest of the Scriptures, to their
own perdition. You therefore brethren, foreknovving, take heed lest ye be led
amiss by the error of the unwise, and fall away from your own stedfastnes.

THE TIME WHEN THE EPISTLE TO THE ROMANS WAS WRITTEN, and the Argument
thereof.
THE history of S. Paul, until be came to Rome, S. Luke in the Acts of the
Apostles vvrote exactly: and though without any mention of his Epistles, yet
certain it is, that some of them he vvrote before he came there, to wit, the
^vvo unto the Corinthians, and this to the Romans: and (* as it seems)
before them al, Gal. 2.
the Epistle to the Galatians. Wherein yet because he makes mention of the
fouretenth year after his conversion, it appears, that he preached so long
without any vvriting.

And this order may thus briefly be gathered. First he preached to the
Galatians Act. 16: and passing through Phrygia and the country of Galatia.
Whereof he makes mention himself also, Gal. 1: We euangelized to you. and
Gal. 4: I euangelized to you heretofore. After which the false Apostles came
and persuaded them to receive Circumcision. Whereupon he says Gal. 1: I
marvel that thus so soon you are tra^sferred from him that called you to the
grace of Christ, unto an other Gospel. and wishes therefore Gal. 4. saying:
And I would I were with you now. And accordingly he came unto them
afterward, as we read Act. 18: Vvalking in order through the country of
Galatia and phrygia, confirming all the Disciples. At which time also it
seems, that he took order with them about those contributions to help the
need of the Christians in Jerusalem, whereof he speaks 1. Cor. 16: And
concerning the collections that are made for the saints, as I have ordained to
the Churches of Galatia, so do you also. By which words also it is evident,
that the Corinthians had not at then made their gathering. But when he vvrote
the Second to them (where in the 11 Chapter he makes mention of 14 years, not
only after his Conversion, as to the Galatians, but also after his Rapte,
which seems to have been when he was at Jerusalem Act. 9. four years
after his Conversion, in a trance, as he calls it Act. 22, 17) then were
they ready. For so he says 2. Cor. 8: You have begone from the year past. and
2. Cor. 9: For the which I do glory of you to the Macedonians: that also
Achaia is ready from the year past. howbeit it follows their: But I have
sent the brethren, that (as I have said) you may be ready: lest when the
Macedonians come with me, and find you unready, we be ashamed. But when he
vvrote to the Romans, then was he now come to Corinth for the purpose, and
had received their contribution, and was ready to go with it unto
Jerusalem. For so he says Romans 15. Now therefore I vvil go unto Jerusalem
to minister to the saints. For Macedonia and Achaia have liked well to make
some co^tribution upon the poor saints that are in Jerusalem. The argument
of the Epistle to the Romans.


So then, the Epistle to the Romans was not the first that he vvrote. But yet
it is Epih. Haer. 42* Marcionis. Aug. in Expos. incho. Ep. ad Romans
and alvvaies was set first, because of the primacie of that Church, for
which cause also he handles in it, such matters as perteined not to them
alone, but to the universal Church, and specially to all the Gentiles: to wit,
the very frame (as it were) of the Church of Christ. Tanquam enim 2. Cor. 5.
pro ipso Domino legatione fungens, hoc est, pro Ephesians. 2.
lapide angulari, vtrumque populum tam ex Iudais quam ex Gentibus connectis in
Christo per vinculum gratiae. so says S. Augustine, giving us briefly the
arguments. in english thus: As being a legate for our Lord him self, that is,
for the corner stone, he knitteth together in Christ by the ba^d of Grace, both
peoples, as well of the Jews as of the Gentiles. Shevving, that neither of
them had in their Gentilitie or Iudaisme any works to brag of, or to
challenge to them selves justification or salvation thereby, but rather sins
they had to be sorry for, and to humble themselves to the faith of Christ, that
so they might have remission of them, and strength to do meritorius works
afterward. In which sort, because the Gentiles did humble them selves,
therefore had they found mercy, though they never wist of the Law of Moses.
But the Jews, because they stood upon their own works, which they did
by their own strength, with the knowledge of the Law (being therefore also
called the works of the Law,) The works of the Law.
and so would not humble themselves to believe in Christ crucified, they missed
of mercy, and became reprobate, excepting a few Reliquiae that God of his
goodness had reserved to himself. Howbeit in the end, when the fulness of the
Gentiles is come into the Church, then shall the fulness of the Jews also open
their eyes, acknowledge their error, and submit themselves to Christ and his
Church, in like manner. In the mean time, those that have found the grace to be
Christians, he exhorts to perseuera^ce (as it was specially needeful in
those times of persecutions) and to lead their whole life now after Baptism
in good works: and to be careful of unity, bearing therefore one with an
other, both Jew and Gentil, all that they may, and giving no offense to them
that are weak. Thus he disputes, and thus be exhorts through the whole
Epistle: though, if we will divide it by that which is principal in each part,
we may say, that unto the 12 chapter is his disputation: and from thence to
the end, his exhortation.

Now, in those points of faith, and in all others (as also in example of life)
the commendation that he gives to the Church of Rome, Romans 1.
is much to be noted. Your faith is renoumed in the whole world. and your
obedience is published into every place. Romans 16.
I rejoice therefore in you. And again: Romans 6.
you have obeyed from the heart unto that form of doctrine, which has been
delivered to you. And thereupon again: I desire you brethren, Romans 16.
to mark them that make dissensions and scandals contrary to the doctrine
which you have learned, and avoid them. For such do not serve Christ our
Lord, but their own belly: and by svveete speeches ad benedictions seduce
the hearts of innocents. Therefore to shun Luther and Calvin, and al their
crewes, we have just reason and good vvarrant. They make dissensions and
scandals against the doctrine of the Roman Church. Let no man therefore be
seduced by their sugared words.

THE EPISTLE OF PAVL THE APOSTLE TO THE ROMANS. The church reads S. Paul's
epistles at Martins from Sunday in Christmas unto Septuagesme.

CHAP. I.
The foundation of his Apostleship being laid, (...) he highly commends the
Romans, and protests his affection toward them. and so coming to the
matter, says, our Christian Catholic doctrine (that teaches al to believe)
to be the way to salvation: 118 because the Gentiles (first of al) could not
be saved by their Philosophy, whereby they knevv God, for so much as they did
not serve him, but Idol^^ he therefore justly permitting them to fall into al
kind of most damnable sin.

The Epistle upon Christmas eve.
* separated into the Gospel of God, Act. 13. 2.
^ Faith must not be subject to sense, reason, arguing or understanding, but
must command and be obeyed in humility and simplicity.
(...).
for obedience to the faith S. Augustine uses this place and the like against
Heretics, which would dravv the common Catholic faith of al nations, to
some certain countries or corners of the world. Aug. ep. 161.
in all Nations for the name of him,

(...)
whom I serve in my spirit in the Gospel of his Son, that He prays without
intermission that omitteth no day certain times of prayer. Aug. here is. 57.
without intermission I make a memory of you The Romans were converted and
taught by S. Peter before. therefore he uses that speech, to confirm them in
their says. Author Com. apud Hierony. Theodoret. in 16. Romans and Chrysostom.
confirm you:

He means not Gods own justice in him self, but that justice vvhervvith God
endueth man when he justifies him. Aug. de Sp. and lit. c. 9. Whereby you may
gather the vanity of the Heretical imputatilue justice.
the justice of God is revealed therein by faith into faith: Abac. 2, 4.
as it is written: And the just lives by faith.

Lo these and the like are the Images or Idol^ so often condemned in the
scriptures, and not the holy Images of Christ and his Saints.
similitude of the image of a corruptible man, and of fowls and foure-footed
beasts and of them that creep. Ephesians. 4, 19. he says, They have delivered or
given up them selves to al uncleanness. By which co^fere^ce of scripture we
learn that them selves are the cause of their own sin and damnation, God
of his justice permitting and leaving them to their own vvil, and so giving
them up into passions etc.
has delivered them up unto the desires of their heart, into uncleanness, for
to abuse their own bodies among them selves ignominiously.) (...)
served the creature rather then the creator, who is blessed for ever. Amen.
they liked not to have God in knowledge: God delivered them up into a
reprobate sense: to do those things that are not convenient:

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. I.
7. Grace to you and peace.] Apostolical salutation or blessing.
It is a kind of blessing rather then a profane salutation, proper to the
Apostles, of greater virtue then the benedictions of the fathers in the old
Testament. The holy fathers of the Church seemed to abstain from it for their
reverence to the Apostles. Epiph. h^res. 6^.
* The Manichees (August. cont. ep. fund^. c. 5. ^.) and other Heretics (as
also these of our time) because they would be counted Apostles, The same used
of Heretics.
often use it.

^. Your faith venoumed.] The holy Doctors upon these words of the Apostle,
and specially by our Masters promis * made to Peter, The Roman faith highly
commended.
that his faith should not fail, Luc. 22.
give great testimony for the providence of God in the preservation of the
Roman faith. S. Cyprian thus: ep. 55. nu. 6. They are so bold to carry letters
from prophan^ Schismatikes to the chair of Peter and the principal Church
whence Priestly unity rose: not considering the Romans to be them whose
faith (the Apostle being the commender) was praised, It can not false, not be
corrupted.
to whom misbel^^^^ can not have access. So. S. Hierom Apolog. adu. Ru^^. li.
3 c. 4. to. 2. Know you, that the Roman faith commended by the Apostles
mouth, vvil receive no such dec^ites, nor can be possibly changed, though an
Angel taught otherwise, being fensed by S. Paul's authority. Again ep. 63 ad
Par^mach. and Ocean^m. c. 4. to. 2. Whatsoever thou be that auouchest new
sects, I pray (...) have respect to the Romans ^^res. spare the faith which
was praised by the Apostles voice. Pro^^. li. 2. Com. in ep. ad Gal.
And in an other place: Wilye know o Paula and Eusto^hium, The Roman
statio^s, a token of greater faith and devotion.
how the Apostle has noted every province with their proprieties? the faith
of the people of Ro^^ is pr^ised. Where is there so g^ea^concourse to Churches
and Martyrs s^pul^hres? Where sounds Amen like thunder from heaven, or where
are the temples (void of Idols) so shaken as there? Not that the Romans have
an other faith then the rest of the Christian Churches, but that there is in
them more devotion and simplicity of faith. In an other place the same holy
Doctor signifies that it is al one to say, The Catholic and Roman faith al
one.
the Roman faith, and, the Catholic. Apolog. 1 adu. Ruff. c. 1. So does S.
Cyprian ep. (...). number. 1. ad Antonianum: and S. Ambrose de ^bitu fratris, in
med. Whereupon, this word, Roman, is added to, Catholic, in many countries
where Sects do abound, for the better distinction of true believers from
Heretics: which in all ages did hate and abhor the Roman faith and Church,
as al malefactors do their Judges and correctors.

9. Serve in spirit.] Diverse Heretics when they hear that God is a spirit,
and must be served and ado^ed in spirit, How God is served in spirit.
imagine, that he must be honored only inwardly, without ceremonies and
external works: which you see is otherwise, for that the Apostle served God
in spirit, by preaching the Gospel. To serve God then in spirit, is to serve
him with faith, hope, and charity, and with al works proceeding of them: as
to serve him carnally, is with works external, without the said internal
virtues.

9. A memory of you.] A great example of charity for all men, specially for
Prelates and Pastors, not only to preach, Prays for conversion of souls.
but to pray continually for the conversion of people to Christ's faith: Which
the Apostle did for them whom he never knevv, in respect of Gods honor only
and the zeal of souls.

15. To euang^liza.] The Gospel is not only the life of our Savior written by
the four Evangelists, The Gospel is not only the written word.
nor only that which is written in the new Testament: but these whole
course of preaching and teaching the faith. Which faith comes ordinarily of
preaching and hearing, and not of vvriting or reading. And therefore S. Paul
thought not him self discharged by vvriting to the Romans, but his desire was
to preach unto them: for that was the proper commission given to the Apostles,
Mat. 28.
to preach to al nations. The Apostles vvriting, and preaching, whether more
necessary, and how.
The vvriting of the books of the Testament, is an other part of Gods
providence, necessary for the Church in general, but not necessary for every
man in particular: as to be taught and preached unto, is for every one of age
and understanding. And therefore S. Peter (who was the chief of the
Commission) vvrote little: many of them, vvrote nothing at al: and S. Paul that
vvrote most, vvrote but little in comparison of his preaching: nor to any but
such as were converted to the faith by preaching before.

17. Lives by faith.] In the 10. to the Hebrews, he shows by this place
of the Prophet (Abacue's) that the just though he live here in peregrination,
and sees not presently nor enjoys the life everlasting promised to him, yet
holds fast the hope thereof by faith. In this place he applies the Prophets
words further to this sense, The Catholic or Christian ^aith with good
works justifies, and without this faith, no works whatsoever.
That it is our faith, that is to say, the Catholic belief (says S.
Augustine li. ^ cont. ^. ep. Pelag.) Which makes a just man, and
distinguishes between the just and unjust, and that by the law of faith, and
not by the law of works. Whereof it rises, that the Jew, the Heathen
Philosopher, and the Heretic, though they excelled in all works of moral
virtues, could not yet be just: and a Catholic Christian man living but an
ordinary honest life, either not sinning greatly, or supplying his faults by
penance, is just, And this difference rises by faith, not that faith can save
any man without works, For it is not a reprobate faith that we speak of,
(as the holy Doctor says) but that which works by charity, and therefore
remitteth sins and makes one just. See S. Augustines place.

18. Is revealed.] Not only faith.
By all the passage following you may see, that the Gospel and Christ's law
consists not only in preaching faith, (though that be the ground, and is
first alvvaies to be done:) but to teach virtuous life and good works, and to
denounce damnation to al them that commit dealdy sins and repent not. And
again we see that not only lack of faith is a sin, but al other acts done
against Gods commandments.

26. Has delivered them up.] God is not the author of sin.
As he says here, God delivered them up, so to the Ephesians (c. 4, 19) he
says of the same persons and things, They delivered them selves up to al
uncleanness. So that it is not meant here that God does drive, force, or cause
any man to sin, as diverse blasphemous Heretics do hold: God punishes sin
by permitting men to fall further and further.
but only that by his just judgment, for their own deserving, and for due
punishment of their former grievous, offenses, he vvithholdeth his grace from
them, and so suffers them to fall further into other sins. As, for their
crime of Idolatry, to suffer them to fall into unnatural abominations: as now
for heresy, he takes his grace and mercy from many, and so they fall
headlong into al kind of turpitude as contrarievvise, for il life, he suffers
many to fall into heresy. And for Christ's sake let every one that is
entangled with the ldolatrie of this time, that is to say, with these new
sects, look well into his ovvneconscience, whether his forsaking the true
God, may not come unto him for a punishment of his former or present il life
which he lives.

12. Worthy of death.] Sins mortal and venial.
Here you see why the Church takes some sins to be deadly, and calls them
mortal: to wit, because al tha^ do them, are worthy of damnation: others be
venial, that is to say, pardonable of their own nature and not worthy of
damnation.

CHAP. II.
N^vv also he shows that neither the jews could be saved by the knowledge
of the Law, of the which they did so much bragg^ against the Gen^ils, seeing
they did notvvithstanding sin as the Gentiles did. 14 And therefore that the
true levv is the Christian (though he be a Gentil) who by grace in his heart
does the good works that the Law commands.

thou contemn the riches of his goodness, and patience, and longanimity, not
knovving that the benignity of God brings thee to penance? Good men also
according to the merits of their good vvil shall have their reward. Aug. ^p. 4^.
Ps. 61, 13*
seek glory and honor and incorruption, life eternal. That is. the Gentile.
Greek: Deu. 10, 17. Act. 10. 34.
Mt. 7, 21*
but the doers of the Law shall be justified. Ia. 1, 22*


It is a shameful and damnable thing for preachers, teachers, or other guides
of men's life, to commit the same things them selves which they reprove in other.
that teach an other, teach not thy self: that preachest, men ought not
to steal, thou stealest: Es. 52, 5.
thou by preuatication of the Law do dishonor God. Ez. 36, 20.
( It is a great sin that by the i^ life of the faithful, our Lords name
should be il spoken of among the misbeleuers, and many vvithdravven from the
true religion thereby*
the name of God through you is blasphemed among the Gentiles, as it is
written.) preuaricatour of the Law, thy circumcision is become Prepuce is the
foreskinne not circumcised, and therefore signifies the Gentiles, or the state
and condition of the Gentiles: as circumcision, the Jews and their state.
prepuce.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. II.
1. Thou that iudgest.) Such as by public authority either spiritual or
temporal have to punish offenders, be not forbidden to judge or condemn any
for their offenses, though them selves be sometimes guilty in their conscience
of the same or greater: yet may it be matter of aggravating sins before God,
Judging other men.
when they vvil not repent of those offenses them selves, for the which they
punish others. but if they be open offenders them selves, in the same sort for
which they judge other, they give scandal, and thereby aggrauate their sins
very much. Proprely here he forbids to charge an other falsely or truly
with these crimes whereof him self is as far guilty or more then the other,
as the Jews specially did the Gentiles, to whom he speaks here.

4. Do thou contemn?) This proves that God offers his grace and mercy
to many, Gods long suffering is for our repentance.
and by long patience and sufferance expects their repentance, differring
their punishment of purpose that they may amend, and that he is not delighted
in their perdition, nor is the cause of their sin: but contrarievvise that
they harden their own hearts, and of their own free vvil relect his grace
and contemn his benignity.

6. According to his works.) Though the holy Apostles special purpose be in
this Epistle, to commend unto the Gentiles that trusted so much in their moral
works, the faith in Christ: yet lest any man should think or gather untruly
of his words, Good works meritoriou^.
that Christian men's works were not meritorious or the cause of Salvation,
he expressly vvriteth, that God gives as well everlasting life and glory to
men, for and according to their good works, as he gives damnation for the
contrary works. Li. de great. and lib. arb. c. 8.
And how so ever Heretics fondly flee from the evidence of these places, yet
S. Augustine says, Life everlasting to be rendered for good works according
to this manifest Scripture, God shall render to every man according to his
works.

13. Not the hearers.) This same sentence agreeable also to Christ's words
(Mat. ^, 21*) is the very ground of S. James disputation, that not faith alone,
but good works also do justify. Therefore S. Paul (howsoever some peruersly
conster his words in other place) means the same that S. James. And here *
he speaks not properly of the first justification, Aug. de Sp. and lit. c.
16. to. 3.
when an Infidel or il man is made just, The first, justification, without
works: the second, by works.
who had no acceptable works before to be justified by (of which kind he
specially means in other places of this Epistle) but he speaks of the
second justification or increase of former justice, which he that is in Gods
grace, daily proceeds in, by doing al kind of good works, S. Paul speaks
of the first specially, S. James of the second.
which be justices, and for doing of which, he is just in deed before God.
and of this kind does S. James namely treat. Which is directly against the
Heretics of this time, who not only attribute nothing to the works done in
sin and infidelity, but esteem nothing at al of al Christian men's works
tovvard justification and salvation, condemning them as unclean, sinful, hy
pocritical, Pharisaical: which is directly against these and other Scripture,
and plain blaspheming of Christ and his grace, by whose spirit and
cooperation we do them.

13. Shall be justified.) Of al other Articles deceitfully handled by Heretics,
they use most guile in this of Justification: Against imputative justice.
and specially by the equivocation of certain words, which is proper to al
contentious vvranglers, and namely in this word, Justify, Which because they
find sometime to signify the acquiting of a guilty man of some crime where
of he is in deed guilty, and for which he ought to be condemned, (as by man's
judgment either of ignorance or of purpose often a very malefactor is deemed
or declared and pronounced innocent) they falsely make it so signify in this
place and the like, wheresoever man is said to be justified of God for his
works or otherwise: as though it were said, that God justifies man, that
is to say, imputes to him the justice of Christ, though he be not in deed
just: or of favor reputeth him as just, when in deed he is wicked, impious,
and unjust. Which is a most blasphemous doctrine against God, making him
either ignorant who is just, and so to err in his judgment, or not good,
that can love and save him whom he knovveth to be evil. True inherent justice
more for Gods glory, and for the commendation of Christ's merits.
And a marvelous pitiful blindness it is in the Churches Adversaries, that they
should think it more to Gods glory, and more to the commendation of Christ's
justice, merits, and mercy, to call and count an il man so continuing, for
just: then by his grace and mercy to make him of an il one, just in deed, and
so truly to justify him, or as the word does here signify, to esteem and
approve for just in deed, him, that by his grace keeps his law and
commandments. For, that the keepers or doers of the commandments be just
and so reputed, it is plain by the correspondence to the former words, Not
the hearers are just, but the doers. Whereupon S. Augustine de Sp. and lit. c.
26. to. ^. has these words, When it is said, The doers of the Law shall be
justified, what other thing is said, then. The just shall be justified? for the
doers of the Law verily are just.

26. Keep the justices.) If a Gentile either now since Christ, by his grace
and faith, or any other before Christ, not of the stock of Abraham, through
the Spirit of God keep the justices of the Law, True justice both in Jew and
Gentile, is by keeping the Law.
he is just no less then if he had been outvvardl^ circumcised, and shall
condemn the circumcised Jew not keeping the Law, without which, his
outvvard Sacrament can not serve him, but shall be much to his condemnation,
that having the Law and peculiar Sacraments of God, he did not keep the Law,
nor inwardly exercise that in his heart which the outvvard sign did import.
And all this is no more but to insinuate that true justice is not in faith only
or knowledge of the Law, or in the name either of Jew or Christian, but in
doing good works and keeping the Law by Gods grace.

29. In spirit, not letter.] The outvvard ceremonies, Sacraments, threats, and
commandments of God in the Law, The letter, and the spirit.
are called the letter: the inward vvorking of God in men's heart, and enduing
him with faith, The carnal, and spiritual Jew.
hope, and charity, and with love, liking, vvil, and ability to keep his
commandments by the grace and merits of Christ, are called the spirit. In
which sense, the carnal Jew was a Jew according to the letter, and he was
circumcised after the letter: but the true believing Gentil observing by Gods
grace in heart and in Gods sight, that which was meant by that carnal sign,
de sp. and lit. to. 3.
is a Jew according to the spirit, and justified by God. Of the spirit and
letter S. Augustine made a famous work, very necessary for the understanding
of this Epistle.

CHAP. III.
He grants that the Jews did pass the Heathen Gentiles, in Gods benefits,
9 but not in their own works. concluding, that he has shevved, both Jew
and Gentil to be sinners: 18 and therefore (inferring) that there must be some
other way to Salvation, indifferent to both* which is to believe in JESUS
CHRIST, that for his sake their sins may be forgiven them.

Io. 3, 33.
^od only by nature is true, al mere men by nature may lie, deceive and be
deceived: yet God by his grace and spirit may and does preserve the Apostles
and principal Gouerners of his people and the Church and Councels in all truth,
though they were and are mere men.
every man a liar, Ps. 115, 11.
as it is written: That thou may be justified in thy words, Ps. 50, 6.
and overcome when thou art judged. do evil, that there may come good? whose
damnation is just.

What then? do we excel them? No, not so. For we have argued the Jews and
the Greeks, al to be under sin: Ps. 13, 1. 52, 3.
That there is not any man just, Ps. 5, 11.
Ps. 139, 4*
The venim Aspidum. A kind of little serpents.
of aspes under their lips. Ps, 9, 7.
Es. 19, 7.
Pro. 1, 16*
Ps. 35, 2.
to them it speaks that are in the Law: that every mouth may be stopped, and
all the world may be made subject to God: Gal. 2, 16.
For by the Law is the knowledge of sin.

To believe in him, here compriseth not only the act of faith, but of hope and
charity, as the Apostle explicateth him self. Galat. 5, 6.
believe in him. For there is no distinction. No man atteineth his first
justification by the merits either of his faith or works, but merely by
Christ's grace and mercy: though his faith and works proced^g of grace be
dispositio^s and preparations thereunto.
gratis by his grace, by the redemption that is in CHRIST JESUS, propitiatour*
propitiation', by faith in his blood, to the shevving of his justice, for the
remission of former sins,



ANNOTATIONS CHAP. III.
5. If your iniquity.) No marvel that many now a da^es deduce false and
detestable conclusions out of this Apostles high and hard vvritings, 2. ^et. 3.
seeing that S. Peter noted it in his days, S. Paul's speeches mistaken of the
wicked*
and him self here confesses that his preaching and speeches were then
falsely misconstrued: as though he ^ad taught that the Jews and Gentiles il
life and incredulity had been directly the cause of Gods more mercy, and that
therefore sin comes of God to the advancement of his glory, and
consequently that men might or should do il, To. 5, 2^.
that good might ensue thereof. Which blasphemous constructions they took of
these and the like words: To. 3, 4.
where sin abounded, there did grace more abound, and, The Law entered in,
that sin might abound. and our our of the Psalm 50. That thou may be
justified in thy words, and overcome when thou art iu^ged. As though he
meant that men do sin, to the end that God may be justified. And at al these
and the like places of the Apostle though forevvarned by S. Peter, and by the
Apostles own defense and Protestation, that he never meant such horrible
things, The sense of the places that sound, as if God caused sin.
yet the wicked also of this time do stumble and fall. But the true meaning is
in all such places, that God can and does when it pleases him, convert those
sins which man commits against him and his commandments, to his glory:
though the sins them selves stand not with his vvil, intention, nor honor,
but be directly against the same, and therefore may not be committed that any
good may fall. for, what good so ever accidentally falls, it proceeds not
of the sin, but of Gods mercy that can pardon, and of his omnipotency that
can turn il to good. And therefore against those earnal interpretations, S.
Paul very carefully and diligently gives reason also in this place v. 6, that
it is impossible: because God could not justly punish any man, nor sit in
judgment at the later day for sin without plain injury, if either him
self would have sin committed, or man might do it to his glory. Therefore
let al sincere readers of the Scriptures, and specially of S. Paul's vvritings,
hold this for a certainty, as the Apostles own defense (whatsoever he seem
to say hereafter sounding in their sense, that sin comes of God, or may
therefore be committed that he may work good thereof) that the Apostle him
self condemns that sense as slanderous and blasphemous.

10. Not any iust] These general speeches, that both Jew and Gentile be in
sin, and none at al just, Job. 1.
are not so to be taken, How it is said, none just.
that none in neither sort were ever good: the Scriptures expressly saying that
Job, Luc. 1^
Zachary, Elisabeth, and such like, were just before God, and it were
blasphemy to say that these words alleged out of the 13 Psalm, were meant
in Christ's mother, in S. John the Baptist, in the Apostles etc. For, this only
is the sense: that neither by the law of nature, nor law of Moses, could any
man be just or avoid such sins as here be reckened, but by faith and the
grace of God, by which there were a number in all ages (specially among the
Jews) that were just and holy, whom these words touch not, being spoken
only to the multitude of the wicked, which the Prophet makes as it were a
several body conspiring against Christ, and persecuting the just and godly, of
which il company he says, that none was just nor feared God.

20. By the works of the Law.) S. Hierom and S. Chrysostom expound this of
the ceremonial works only, No works avail without faith and grace.
and in that sense the Apostle specially prosecuteth this proposition in his
Epistle to the Galatians but it is true also of al man's moral works done
without faith and the grace of God: which can not be acceptable or auailable
in Gods sight, to justify any man, And so S. Augustine takes it de Sp. and
lit. c. ^. to. ^.

22. Justice of God) Bevvare of the wicked and vain commentary of the
Caluinistes, glosing, the justice of God to be that which is resident in
Christ, The Heretics fantastical or imputative justice.
apprehended by our faith: and so that imputed to us which we in deed have
not, Wherein at once they have forged them selves against Gods manifest word,
a new no justice, a fantastical apprehension of that which is not, a false
faith and untrue imputation, whereas the justice of God here, is that
vvherevvith he endueth a man at his first conversion, and is now in a man, and
therefore man's justice: but yet Gods Justice also, because it is of God. De
p^^mer. li. 1 ^. 9. 10.
Of this justice in us, whereby we be truly justified and in deed made
just, S. Augustine speaks thus: The grace of Christ does work our
illumination and justification inwardly also. True inhaerent justice.
And again, He gives to the faithful the most secret grace of his Spirit,
which se^retly he povvreth into infants also. And again, They are justified
in Christ that believe in him through the secret communication and inspiration
of spiritual grace, whereby every one leans to our Lord. And again,
Hemaketh just ^e^evving by the Spirit, and regeneration by grace.

28. By faith, without works.) This is the place whereupon the Protestants
gather falsely their only faith, What works are excluded from justification.
and which they commonly avouch, as though the Apostle said, that only faith
does justify. Where he both in words and meaning excepteth only the works
of the Law done without Christ before our conversion: neither excluding the
Sacraments of Baptism or Penance, not hope and charity, or other Christian
virtues, al which be the justice of faith, as the good works proceeding
thereof, be likewise the law and justice of faith. Al which the Adversaries
would exclude by foisting in the ter^e, de great, and lib. arb. c. 7.
only. Of which kind of men S. Augustine upon this place faith thus: Men not
understanding that which the Apostle says, (we count a man to be justified
by faith without the works of the Law) did think that he said, faith
would suffice a man though he lived il and had no good works. Gal. 1.
Which God forbid the vessel of election should think: who in a certain
place after he had said, * In Christ JESUS neither circumcision nor prepuce
avails any whit, he straight added, but faith which works by love.

CHAP. IIII.
That Abraham was not justified by his own power, but by Gods grace, in
whom he believed (6 which is a way for the sinner also to come to justice.)
9 And that, seeing he was not as then circumcised, not only the circumcised
lovv, but also the uncircumcised Gentil may by believing the Christian faith,
come to justice, as Abraham did: (...) specially considering also, that Abraham
was promised to be Father of the whole world, and not only of the Jews, to
whom only the Law was given: and that, not to fulfill the promise, but for
an other cause.

Genesis 5, 6.
but not with God. Gal. 3, 6.
Abraham believed God, Ia. 2, 23.
and it was reputed him to justice. (...)
imputed according to grace, but according to debt. (...)
reputed to justice according to the purpose of the grace of God. Ps. 31, 1.
Blessed are they, whose iniquities be forgiven, and whose sins be covered.

The word. Reputed. does not diminish the truth of the justice, as though it
were reputed for justice, being not justice in deed, but signifies, that as
it was in it self, so God esteemed and reputed it, as the same greek word
must needs be taken v. 4. next going before, and 1 Cor. 4, ^. and else where.
reputed to justice. Our Sacraments of the new Law give ex opere operato that
grace and justice of faith which here is commended. whereas circu^cisio^ was
but a sign or mark of the same.
the sign of circumcision, Genesis 17, 10.
a seal of the justice of faith that is in prepuce: that he might be the
father of all that believe by the prepuce, that unto them also it may be reputed
to justice: the father of us al, Genesis 17, 4.
(as it is written: For, a father of many nations have I appointed thee)
before God, whom he believed,
thou did beleeue', who quickens the dead: and calls those things that
are not, as those things that are. Genesis 15, 5.
according to that which was * said to him: So shall thy seed be, as the
stars of heaven, and the sand of the sea.



ANNOTATIONS CHAP. IIII.
1. Abraham.] The Apostle disputing in this chapter, as before, against them
that thought they might be justified by their works done without the grace
of Christ and faith in him, Abraham's Works before faith.
proposes Abraham for an example, and proves that he had no justice nor
estimation of justice before God by any works done before he had faith, or
that proceeded not of faith and Gods grace.

2. By workers.] If Abraham did any commendable works before he believed
Christ, as many Philosophers did, Justice before men, and justice before God.
men might count him just therefore, but in Gods sign (who accepts nothing
without faith in him, or that proceeds not from his grace) he should never
have had the estimation of a just man. Therefore God in the Scriptures reputing
him as a just man, gives the cause thereof, saying. Abraham believed God, and
it was reputed to him for justice.

4* To him that works.] Not works, but mere grace is cause of our first
justification.
That is to say, He that presumes of his own works as done of him self
without faith, Gods help, and grace: and saying, that grace or justification
were given to him for his works: this man does challenge his justification as
debt, and not as of favor and grace.

5. To him that works not] He works not (in this place) that has no
works or alleges not his works done in his infidelity as cause of his
justification, but faith in Christ, and that proceeding of mere grace.
Whereupon S. Augustine says: Know thou that faith found thee unjust. And if
faith given to thee, made the just, it found thee a wicked one whom it might
make just. If it found thee wicked, and of such an one made thee just, what
works had thou being then wicked? None could thou have (nor can have)
before thou beleeudst. Believe then in him that justifies the impious, that
thy good works may be good works in deed. August. in Psalm. 31.

6. As David terms.] The Protestants for, (...)
terms, translato, describes, for that they would have the ignorant
believe, Heretical translation.
the whole nature and definition of Justification to be nothing else but
remission of sins, and no grace or inherent justice given from God at al.
When the Apostle would say nothing else, but that in the first justificatio^
God finds no good works or merits to revvard, but only sins, to forgive
unto such as have faith in him.

7. Covered. 8. not imputed.] What is, Sins covered or not imputed.
You may not gather (as the Heretics do) of these terms, covered, and not
imputed, that the sins of men be never truly forgiven, but hidden only, for
that derogateth much to the force of Christ's blood and to the grace of God, by
which our offenses be truly remitted. Io. 1, 29, 2 Cor. 6, 11.
He is the Lamb that takes away the sins of the world, that vvasheth, and
blotteth out our sins, therefore to cover them, or, not to impute them, is,
not to charge us with our sins, Apoc. 1, 5.
because by remission they be clean taken away: otherwise it were but a
^eined forgiveness. See S. Augustine in psalm. 3^ enarrat. ^.

11. A seal.] The Heretics would prove hereby, that the Sacraments of the
Church give not grace or justice of faith, but that they be notes, marks, and
badges only of our remission of sins had by faith before: The Sacraments are
not mere marks, but causes of justification.
because Abraham was just before, and took this Sacrament for a seal thereof
only. To which must be ansvvered, that it follows not that it is so in all,
because it was so in the Patriarch, who was just before, and was therefore
as it were the found: of Circumcision, or he in whom God would first
establish the same: no more then it follows that, because the Holy Sacrament
of the Altar remitted not sins to Christ nor justified him, therefore it has
that effect in none. Look S. Augustine de baptismo contra Donatistas li. 4. c.
24. Where you shall see that (though not in Abraham) yet in Isaac his son,
and so consequently in the rest, the Sacrament went before, and justice
followed.

24. For us, to whom it shall be reputed.] By this it is most plain against
our Adversaries, that the says which was reputed for justice to Abraham,
was his belief of an Article revealed to him by God, that is to say, his
assent and credit given to Gods speeches: as in us his posterity according to
the spirit, By what faith we are justified.
it is here plainly said, that justice shall be reputed to us by believing the
Articles of Christ's death and Resurrection, and not by any fond special faith,
fiducia or confidence of each man's own salvation, to establish the which
fiction, they make no account of the faith Catholic, that is, vvherevvith we
believe the Articles of the faith, which only justifies, but call it by
contempt, an historical faith: so as they may term Abraham's faith, and our
Ladies faith, of which it was * said, Luc. 1, 45.
Beata quae credidisti, Blessed art thou that have believed. And so in truth
they deny as well the justification by faith, as by works.

CHAP. V.
Having therefore through faith in Christ, obtained the beginning, he shows
what great cause we have to hope for the accomplishment. 12 And then he
proceeds in his arguing, and shows that as by one, ^l were made sinners,
so by one, al must he made just.

The Epistle on Imber Saturday in vvhitsonweeke, And for many Martyrs.
let us have peace tovvard God by our Lord JESUS CHRIST: Christian me^ do not
vaunt the^ selves of the certai^tie of their salvation, but glory in the hope
thereof only, which hope is here insinuated to be given in our justification,
and is afterward to be confirmed by probation in tribulation.
in the hope of the glory of the sons of God. (...)
when we as yet were The Heretics falsely translate, of no strength, to
take away al free vvil. No. Test. 15^0.
vveake, according to the time die for the impious? by him.

sinner,
sinne', so also the gift, for judgment in deed is of one, to condemnation:
but grace is of many offenses, to justification. Here we may see against the
Heretics, that they which, be borne of Christ and justified by him, be made
and constituted just in deed, and not by imputation only: as all that be borne
of Adam, be unjust and sinners in truth, and not by imputation.
shall be made just.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. V.
1. Let us have.) Against the Heretics special faith and security.
Whether we read, (...)
Let us have peace, as diverse also of the Greek Doctors (Chrysostom. Orig.
Theodor. O^^um. Theophyl.) do, or, We have peace: it makes nothing for the
vain security and infallible certainty which our Adversaries say, every man
ought to have upon his presumed justification by faith, that him self is in
Gods favor, and sure to be saved: peace toward God, being here nothing else,
but the sincere rest, tranquillity and comfort of mind and conscience, upon
the hope he has, that he is reconciled to God. Sure it is that the Catholic
faith, by which, and none other, men be justified, neither teaches nor
breeds any such security of salvation. And therefore they have made to them
selves an other faith which they call Fiducia^, quite without the compass of
the Creed and Scriptures.

2. Access through faith.) Justification attributed much to faith as to the
f^ndation*
Justification, implies al grace and virtues received by Christ's merits, but
the entrance and access to this grace and happy state is by faith, because
faith is the ground and first foundation to build on, and port to enter into
the rest. Which is the cause that out lustification is attributed to faith,
namely in this Epistle, though faith it self be of grace also.

4. Probation hope.) Our hope is strengthened by well doing.
This refelleth the error also of the Protestants, that would have our hope
to hold only on Gods promises, and not a whit on our doings. Where we see
that it stands (and is strengthened also) upon patience and constancy, and
good probation and trial of our selves in adversities: and that so grounded
upon Gods promises and our own doing, it never confounds.

5. Charity is povvred.) Charity is a quality in us.
Charity also is given us in our first justification, and not only imputed
unto us, but in deed inwardly povvred into our hearts by the Holy Ghost, who
with and in his gifts and grace is bestovved upon us. for this Charity of
God is not that which is in God, but that which he gives us, as S. Augustine
expounds it: li. de Sp. and lit. c. 32. Who refers this place also to the
grace of God given in the Sacrament of Confirmation, de bapt. cont. Donat. li.
^ c. 16.

12. By one man sin entered.) By this place specially the Church of God
defends and proves against the old Heretics the Pelagians, Conc. Tri. sess.
s^ decr. de pe^. orig.
that denied children to have any original sin, or to be baptized for the
remission thereof: Al by Adam borne in original sin.
that in and by Adam al be conceived, borne, and constituted sinners. Which no
less makes against the Caluinists also, that affirm, Christian men's children
to be holy from their mothers womb. And the same reason which S. Augustine
deduceth (li. ^ c. ^. 9. de pec. meritis.) out of this text, to prove against
the said Pelagians, that the Apostle means not of the general imitation of
Adam in actual sins, serves against Erasmus and others, inclining rather to
that new exposition, then to the Churches and fathers grave judgment herein.
Cone. Mileuitanum c. 2.

14. unto Moses.) Even in the time of the Law of nature, when men knevv not
sin, and therefore it could not by man's judgment be imputed: and in the time
of Moses Law, when the commandment taught them to know it, but gave them
no strength nor grace to avoid it, sin did reign, Christ only not conceived
in sin, and (as it is thought) our B. Lady.
and thereupon death and damnation, even til Moses inclusiue, that is to say,
even til the end of his Law. And that not in them only which actually
sinned, as Adam did, but in infants which never did actually offend, but only
were borne and conceived in sin, that is to say, having their natures
defiled, destitute of justice, and auerted from God in Adam, and by their
descent from him: Christ only excepted, being conceived without man's seed,
and his mother for his honor and by his special protection (as many godly
deuou^ men judge) preserved from the same.

20. That sin might abound.) The Law did not cause more sin, though that
were the sequel thereof.
That, here has not the signification of causalitie, as though the Law were
given for that cause to make sin abound: but it notes the sequel, because
that followed thereof, and so it came to pass, that by the prohibition of
sin, sin increased: by occasion whereof, the force of Christ's grace is
more amply and abundantly bestovved in the new Testament.

CHAP. VI.
He exhorts us, now after Baptism, to live no more in sin, but to walk
in good works: because there we died to the one, and rose again to the
other 14 (grace also giving us sufficient strength) 16 and were made free to
the one, and servants to the other, 21 and specially because of the fruit
here, and the end afterward, both of the one and of the other.

The Epistle upon the 6 Su^day after Pentecost.
Are you ignorant that al we which are baptized in Christ JESUS, in his death
we are baptized? Remission of sin, new life, sanctification, and
justification, are given by baptism, because it resembles in us and applies
to us Christ's death and resurrection, and engraffeth us into him.
we are buried together with him by Baptism into death: that as Christ is
risen from the dead by the glory of the father, so we also may walk in
nevvnesse of life. we shall be also of his resurrection.



Io. 8, 34.
but under grace? God forbid. 2. Pet. 2, 19.
you are the servants of him whom you obey, whether it be of sin, to death,
or of obedience, to justice. Here again is signified, that our discharge from
the bondage of sin, is by the Christian faith, and by obedience to the whole
doctri^e of Christ's religion: in that the Apostle attributes this their
deliverance from sin, to their humble receiving of the Catholic faith.
have obeyed from the heart, unto that form of doctrine, into the which you
have been delivered. The Epistle upon the 7 Sunday after Pentecost.
He signifies that as when they were subject to sin by continual and often
vvorking wickedness, they increased their iniquity: that so also now being
justified, they may and should by external works of Justice, increase their
justice and sanctification.
unto sanctification.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. VI.
3. We that are baptized.) That which before he challenged from the Law of
Moses, to faith, is now attributed to baptism, Not only faith.
which is the first Sacrament of our faith and the entrance to Christian
religion. Whereby it is plain that he means not only faith to justify, but
the Sacraments also, and al Christian religion, which he calls the Law of
spirit, grace, and faith.

6. Old man, body of sin.) The old man, and the new.
Our corrupt state subject to sin and concupiscence, coming to us from Adam,
is called the Old man: as our person reformed in and by Christ, is named the
New man. And the lump and mass of sins which then ruled, is called the
corpse or body of sin.

10. To sin he died.) Dying to sin.
Christ died to sin, when by his death he destroyed sin: We die to sin,
Living to God.
in that we be discharged of the power thereof, which before was as it
were the life of our persons, and commanded all the parts and faculties of
our soul and body: as contrarievvise we live to God, when his grace rules
and works in us, as the soul does rule our mortal bodies.

12. Sin reign.) How concupisce^ce is called sin.
Concupiscence is here named sin, because it is the effect, occasion, and
matter of sin, and is as it were a disease or infirmity in us, inclining us
to il, remaining also after Baptism according to the substance or matter
thereof: but it is not properly a sin, nor forbidden by commandment, til it
reign in us, and we obey and follow the desires thereof. August. ^i. de nup^.
and concupise. c. 23. Cont. 2 epist. Pelag. li. 1 c. 13. Conc. Trident. Sess.
5. decret. de pec. orig.

17. Form of doctrine.) The doctrine of our first Apostles.
At the first conversion of every nation to the Catholic faith, there is a
form and rule of belief set down, unto which when the people is once put
by their Apostles, they must never by any persuasion of men alter the same, nor
take of man or Angel, any new doctrine or Analogy of faith, as the
Protestants call it.

23. The grace of God, Life everlasting a stipend, and yet grace.
life everlasting.) The sequel of speech required, that as he said, death or
damnation is the stipend of sin, so life everlasting is the stipend of
justice, and so it is, and in the same sense he spoke in the last chapter: that
as sin reigns to death, so grace reigns by justice to life everlasting.
but here he changed the sentence somevvhat, calling life everlasting grace,
rather then revvard: because the merits by which we attain unto life, be al
of Gods gift and grace. August. Ep. 105 ad Sixtum.

CHAP. VII.
Our former husband (sin) with his law, is dead in Baptism: and now we
are married to an other husband (to Christ) to bring forth children to God, that
is, good works. 7 And how the Law being good, was yet to us the law of
sin and death, because concupiscence reigned in us. 17 But now by Baptism
grace reigns in us, though also concupiscence does remain and tempt us still.

1. Cor. 7, 39.
Nothing but death dissolueth the band betwixt man and wife: though for
fornication one may depart from an others company. therefore to mary again is
aduoutrie, during the life of the party separated.
her husband living is bound to the law* but if her husband be dead, she is
loosed from the law of her husband. with an other man. Being now baptized
and dead to sin, and engraffed in Christ's mystical body, you are discharged
of the Law of Moses, and are free in Christ.
you also are made dead to the Law by the body of Christ: that you may be an
other man's who is risen again from the dead, that we may fructify to God.
(...)
in so much we serve in By Baptism we have not Christ's justice imputed to
us, but an inward nevvnesse of spirit given us and resident in us.
nevvnesse of spirit, and not in the oldnes of the letter.

Exo. 20, 17. Deu. 5, ^1.
unless the law did say: Thou shall not covet. Sin or con^upisce^ce which
was a sleep before, was wakened by prohibition, the Law not being the cause
thereof, not giving occasion thereunto, but occasion being taken by our corrupt
nature to resist that which was commanded.
ocoasion being taken, sin by the commandment wrought in me al
concupiscence. For without the Law sin was dead. 1 Timothy 1, 8.




The Epistle in a Votiue Mass for sins.
that evil is present with me. is in my members. (...)
serve the law of God, but with the flesh, the law of sin.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. VII.
^. Thou shall not ^^uet.) Actual concupiscence forbidden, not habitual.
It is not the habitual concupiscence or infirmity of our nature or sensual
desire or inclination to evil, coveting against the spirit, that is forbidden
properly in this precept: but the consent of our reason and mind unto it, to
obey and follow the lusts thereof, that is a sin and prohibited.

15. That which I work.) Soden inuolu^ta^ie motions are no sin.
This being understood of S. Paul himself or any other just person, the sense
is, that the flesh and inferior part stirs up diverse disordered motions
and passions or perturbations against the mind, and upon such a soden
sometimes inuadeth the same, that before it atte^deth, or reason can gather it
self to deliberate, man is in a sort (though vnvvittingly) entangled. Which as
soon as it is perceived, being of the just condemned, rejected, and resisted,
never makes him a sinner.

15. Not that which I vvil) He means not, Concupiscence takes not away
free vvil.
that he can do no good that he wills or desires, or that he is ever forced
to do that which his will agrees not unto: but that by reason of the
forciblenesse of concupiscence, where of he can not rid him self during life,
he can not accomplish c. 5, 17.
all the desire of his spirit and mind, according as he says to the Galatians,
The flesh coue^eth against the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh, that
not whatsoever you will, you can do.

19. Not the good which I will.) Sin is voluntary, and, otherwise it is no
sin.
So may the just also be forced by the rage of concupiscence or sensual
appetite, to do or suffer many things in his inferior part or external
members, which his will consents not unto. ep. ad As^l^cum ^00.
And so long it is so far from sin, that (as * S. Augustine faith) he need
never say to God, forgive us our sins, for the same. for, sin is
voluntary, and so be not these passions.

19. Which I vvil not.) It makes not any thing against free will that the
Apostle says, that good men do or suffer sometimes in their bodies, that
which the ^vill agrees not unto: but it proves plainly free vvil. because
the proper act thereof, that is, to will or nill, to consent or dissent, is
ever (as you may see here) free in it self: though there may be internal or
external force to stay the members of a man, that they obey not in every act,
that which the will commands or prescribes. And therefore that is never
imputed to man which he does in his external or internal faculties, when vvil
concurreth not. Yea afterward (v, 20) the Apostle says, No^ ego op^ror, man
does not that which is not done by his will: which does most evidently
prove free will.

^5. With the mind, with the flesh.) Nothing done by concupiscence (which
the Apostle here calls sin) whereunto the spirit, Concupiscence defiles
not a just man's actio^^ as the Luther^s say.
reason, or mind of man consents not, can make him guilty before God.
Neither can the motions of the flesh in a just man ever any whit de^file the
operatio^s of his spirit, as the Lutherans do hold: but make them often more
meritorious, for the continual combat that he has with them. for it is plain
that the operations of the flesh and of the spirit do not concur together to
make one act, as they imagine: the Apostle concluding clean contrary* That
in mind he serves the Law of God, in flesh the law of sin, that is to
say, concupiscence.

CHAP. VIII.
That now after Baptism we are no more in state of damnation, because by the
grace which we have received, we are able to fulfill the Law: unless we do
vvilfully give the dominion again to concupis^ence. 1^ Then (because of the
persecutions that then were) he comfort and exhorts them with many
reasons.

This conuinceth against the Churches adversaries, that the law, that is, Gods
co^maundeme^ts may be kept, and that the keeping thereof is justice, and that
in christian men that is fulfilled by Christ's grace which by the force of the
Law could never be fulfilled.
the justification of the law might be fulfilled in us, who walk not
according to the flesh, but according to the spirit. enmity
an enemie' to God: for to the law of God it is not subject, neither can it be.
The Epistle upon the 8 Sunday after Pentecost.
He means not that the Children of God be violently compelled against their
vvilles, but that they be sweetly dravve^, moved, or induced to do good. Aug.
Enchirid. c. 64. De verb. Do. ser. 43 c. 7. et de verb. Apost. ser. 13* c. 11.
12.
are led by the spirit of God, 2 Timothy 1, 7, Gal. 4, 5.
they are the sons of God.

The Epistle upon the 4 Sunday after Pentecost, and for many Martyrs.
condignae ad gloriam*
expects the revelation of the sons of God. The Epistle for S. Ignatius
Febr. 1.
Ps. 43, 22.
or persecution? or the svvord? ( For we are killed for thy sake all the day:
we are esteemed as sheep of slaughter.) (...)
separate us from the charity of God which is in Christ JESUS our Lord.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. VIII.
16. The spirit gives testimony.) This place makes not for the Heretics
special faith, or their presumptuous certainty that every one of them is in
grace: The testimony of the Spirit.
the testimony of the Spirit being nothing else, but the inward good motions,
comfort, and contentment, which the children of God do daily feel more and
more in their hearts by serving him: by which they have as it were an
attestation of his favor toward them, whereby the hope of their
justification and salvation is much corroborated and strengthened.

17. Yet if they suffer,) Novvithstandi^g Christ's satisfaction and Passion, yet
ours also is required.
Christ's pains or passions have not so satisfied for all, that Christian men
be discharged of their particular suffering or satisfying for each man's own
part: neither be our pains nothing vvorth to the attainement of heaven,
because Christ has done enough, but quite contrary: he was by his passion
exalted to the glory of heaven: therefore we by compassion or partaking with
him in the like passions, shall attain to be fellows with him in his kingdom.

18. Condig^^.) Our Adversaries ground hereon, that the works or sufferances
of this life be not meritorious or worthy of life everlasting, where the
Apostle says no such thing, no more then he says that Christ's Passions be not
meritorious of his glory, Al suffering in this life is nothing in comparison
of the heavenly glory: and yet it is meritorious and worthy of the same.
which I think they dare not much avouch in our Saviors actions. He
expresses only, that the very afflictions of their own nature, which we
suffer with or for him, be but short, mome^tanie and of no account in
comparison of the recompense which we shall have in heaven. no more in deed
were Christ's pains of their own nature, compared to his glory, any whit
comparable: yet they were meritorious or worthy of heaven, and so be ours.
And therefore to express the said comparison, here he says, They art not
condign ad gloria^ (...)
to the glory. He says not, of the glory, as the Heretics falsely translate:
though the Scripture speaks so also, when it signifies only a comparison.
as Prou. in the greek, Omne pretiosum non est (...)
illa dignu^ S. Augustine, i^^i dignum. S. Hierom, non valet huic comparari.
that is, No precious thing is vvorthie of, wisdoms, or to be compared with
it. Heretical translation.
See the like Eccle. 26, 20. Tob. 9, 2. But when the Apostle vvil express
that they are condign, worthy, or meritorious of the glory, he says
plainly, That our tribulation which presently is moment^nie and light, 1.
Cor. 4. 1^*
works above measure excedingly an eternal weight of gloris in us. The
value of Christ's actions rises not of the leingth or greatness of them in
them selves, though so also they passed al men's doings: but of the worthiness
o^ the person. And so the value of ours also rises of the grace of our
adoption, which makes those actions that of their natures be not meritorious
nor answerable to the joys of heaven in them selves, Whence the merit of
works rises.
to be worthy of heaven. And they might as well prove that the works of
sin do not demerite damnation. for, sintre in deed for the quantity and
nature of the vorke is not answerable in pleasure to the pain of Hell: but
because it has a departing or au auersion from God, be it never so short, it
deserves damnation, because it alvvaies proceeds from the enemy of God, as
good works that be meritorious, proceed from the child of God.

24. By hope saved) As sometime faith only is named, so else where only hope,
and only charity, as the cause of our salvation.
That which in other places he attributes to faith, is here attributed to
hope, for whensoever there be many causes of one thing, the holy vvriters (as
matter is ministered and occasion given by the doctrine then handled) sometimes
refer it to one of the causes, sometime to an other: not by naming one alone,
to exclude the other, as our Adversaries captiously and ignorantly do argue:
but at diverse times and in sundry places to express that, which in every
discourse could not, nor needed not to be uttered. In some discourse, faith is
to be recommended: in others, charity: in an other, hope: sometimes, alms,
mercies else where, other virtues. One while, Every one that believes, is
borne of God. 1 Io. ^. 1. An other while, Every one that loves, is borne of
God. 1* Io. 4, 7. Sometimes, faith purifieth man's heart, Act. 15, 9. And an
other time, Charity remitteth sins. 1 Pet. 4, ^. Of faith it is said, The
just lives by faith. To. 1, 17. Of charity, We know that we are transferred
from death to life, because we love etc. 1* Io. 3, 14.

27. The Spirit desires.) Scripture abused against the Godhead of the Holy
Ghost.
Arius and Macedonius old Heretics had their places to contend upon, against
the Churches sense, as our new Masters now have. They abused this text to
prove the Holy Ghost not to be God, because he needed not to pray or ask, but
he might command if he were God. Therefore S. Augustine expounds it thus,
The Spirit prays, that is, causes and teaches us to pray, and what to pray
or ask. August. de anima and eius orig. li. 4, c. 9. and ep. 121. c. 15.

30. Whom he has predestined.) The doctrine of predestination, how to be
reverenced, and what it teaches us.
Gods eternal foresight, love, purpose, predestination, and election of his
dear children, and in time their calling, justifying, glorifying by Christ, as
al other acts and intentions of his divine vvil and providence toward their
salvation, ought to be reverenced of al men with dreadful humility, and not
to be sought out or disputed on with presumptuous boldness and audacitie, for
it is the gulf that many proud persons, both in this age and alvvaies, have by
Gods just judgment perished in, founding thereon most horrible blasphemies
against Gods mercy, nature, and goodness, and diverse damnable errors against
man's free vvil, and against al good life and religion. This high conclusion is
here set down for us, that we may learn to know of whom we ought to
depend in all our life, by whom we expect our salvation, by whose providence
al our graces, gifts, and vyorkes do stand: by what an everlasting gracious
determination, our redemption, which is in Christ JESUS, was designed: and to
give God incessable thanks for our vocation and preferment to the state we be
in, Gods predestition takes not away free will.
before the Jews, who deserved no better then they, before the light of his
mercy shining upon us accepted us, and rejected them. But this said eminent
truth of Gods eternal predestination stands (as we are bound to believe
under pain of damnation, whether we understand how or no) and so S.
Augustiue in all his divine works written of the same (De gratia and lib,
arb. De corrept. and gratia. Ad articulos falso impositos.) defends,
declares, proves, and conuinceth, that it does stand (I say) with man's free
vvil and the true liberty of his actions, and forces no man to be either il
or good, to sin or virtue, to salvation or damnation, nor takes away the
means or nature of merits, and cooperation with God to our own and other
men's salvation.

38. I am sure.) This speech is common in S. Paul according to the latin
translation, when he had no other assured knowledge but by hope: (...),
Confide. Hiero. q. 9 ad Algas.
as To. 15, 14, 2 Timothy 1, 5. Heb. 6, 9: Where the Greek word signifies only
a probable persuasion. No man ordinarily is sure of his salvation, but only in
hope.
And therefore except he mean of him self by special revelation, or of the
predestinate in general, (in which two cases it may stand for the certitude
of says or infallible knowledge) otherwise that every particular man should
be assured infallibly that him self should be justified, and not that only,
but sure also never to sin, or to have the gift of perseverance, and certain
knowledge of his predestination: that is a most damnable false illusion and
presumption, condemned by the Fathers of the holy Council of Trent. Sess. ^. c.
9. 12. 13.

With a protestation of his sorrow for it (lest they should think him to
rejoice in their perdition) he insinuates the Jews to be reprobate, although
they come of Abraham's flesh. 6 saying, to be the sons of God goes not by
that, but by Gods grace: 19 considering that al were one damned mass. 24 by
which grace the Gentiles to be made his people: and so the prophess to have
foretold of them both. 30 And the cause hereof to be, that the Gentiles submit
them selves to the faith of Christ, which the Jews vvil not.

(...),
the service, and the promises:

Genesis 21, ^2.
al be children: but in Isaac shall the seed be called unto thee: promise is
this, Genesis 18, 10.
According to this time vvil I come: and Sarae shall have a son. S. Hierom. q.
to. ad Hedibiam.
Genesis 25, 21.
of Isaac our father. All the epistle surely to the Romans needs (...), and
is (...) wrapped with (...) that to understand it we need the help of the
Holy Ghost, who by the Apostle did dictat these same things: but especiaally
this place. How^eit nothing pleases us but that which is Ecclesiastical, that
is, the sense of the Church.
nor had done any good or evil (that the purpose of God according to election
might stand) Genesis 25, 23.
but of the caller it was said to her: That the elder shall serve the younger,
Jacob I loved, but Esau I hated. Mal. 1, 2.


Exo. 33, 19.
I vvil have mercy on whom I have mercy: and I vvil show mercy to whom I
vvil show mercy. Exo. 9, 16.
That to this very purpose have I raised thee, that in thee I may show my
power: and that my name may be venovvmed in the whole earth.

That God is not the cause of any man's reprobation or damnation, otherwise
then for punishment of his sins, he shows by that he expec^teth al men's
amendment with great patience, and consequently that they have also freo vvil.
sustained in much patience the vessels of wrath apted, fitted*
apt to destruction,

Os. 2, 23.
I vvil call that which is not my people, my people: and her that was not
beloved, beloved: and her that has not obtained mercy, having obtained
mercy. Os. 1, 10*
you are not my people: there they shall be called the sons of the living God.
Es. 10, 22.
And Esaie cries for Israel, If the number of the children of Israel be as the
sand of the sea, the remains shall be saved. Unless the Lord of Sabbath had left
us seed: Es, 1, 9.
we had been made like Sodom, and we had been like as Gomorrha.

not of faith, but as it were of works, for Here we see that they are the
cause of their own damnation by infidelity.
they have stombled at the stone of stombling, Es. 8, 14. 28, 16.
Behold I put in Sion a stone of stombling, and a rock of scandal: and
whosoever believes in him, shall not be confounded.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. IX.
^. Anathema.] Anathema, by use of Scripture is either that which by
separation from profane use, and by dedication to God, is holy, dreadful, and
not vulgarly to be touched: Anathema?
or contrarievvise, that which is rejected, severed, or abandoned from God, as
cursed and detested, and therefore is to be avoided. And in this later sense
(according as S. Paul takes it 1 Cor. 16. If any love not our Lord JESUS
CHRIST, be he Anathema, that is to say, Away with him, Accursed be he,
Bevvare you company not with him) the Church and holy Councels use the word
for a curse and excommunication against Heretics and other notorious offenders
and blasphemers. In what sense S. Paul wishes to be anathema.
Now how the Apostle, vvishing him self to be Anathema from Christ to save
his Country men's souls, did take this word, it is a very hard thing to
determine. Some think, he desired only to die for their salvation. Others,
that being very loath to be kept from the fruition of Christ, yet he could be
con^ent to be so still for to save their souls. Others, that he wished what
inalediction or separation from Christ so ever that did not imply the disfavor
of God toward him, nor take away his love tovvard God. This only is certain
that it is a point of unspeakable charity in the Apostles breast, and a
pattern to al Bishops and Priests, how to love the salvation of their flock.
As the like was uttered by Moses when he said, Either forgive this people,
(...). ^2, 12.
or blot me out of thy book.

6. Not al of Israel.] Though the people of the Jews were many ways
honored and privileged, Gods promis not made to carnal Israel.
and namely by Christ's taking flesh of them: yet the promis of grace and
salvation was neither only made to them, nor to al them that carnally came of
them or their fathers: Gods election and mercy depending upon his own
purpose, vvil, and determination, and not tied to any nation, family, or
person.

7. But in Isaac.] The promise made to Abraham was not in Ismael, Isaac
preferred before Ismael.
who was a son borne only by flesh and nature: but in Isaac, who was a
son obtained by promise, faith, and miracle: and was a figure of the
Churches children borne to God in Baptism.

10. Of one copulation.] Jacob before Esau.
It is proved also by Gods choosing of Jacob before Esau (who were not only
brethren by father and mother, but also tvvinnes, and Esau the elder of the
two, which according to carnal count should have had the preeminence) that
God in giving graces follows not the temporal or carnal prerogatives of men
or families.

11. Not yet borne.] By the same example of those tvvinnes, it is evident also,
that neither nations nor particular persons be elected eternally, By the
example of Jacob and Esau, is showed Gods mere mercy in the elect, and justice
in the reprobate.
or called temporally, or preferred to Gods favor before others, by their
own merits: because God, when he made choice, and first loved Jacob, and
refused Esau, respected them both as il, and the one no less then the other
guilty of damnation for original sin, which was alike in them both. And
therefore where justly he might have reprobated both, he saved of mercy one.
Which one therefore, being as il and as void of good as the other, must hold of
Gods eternal purpose, mercy, and election, that he was preferred before his
brother which was elder then him self, and no worse them him self. And his
brother Esau on the other side has no cause to complain, for that God neither
did nor suffered any thing to be done toward him, that his sin did not
deserve, for although God elect eternally and give his first grace without al
merits, yet he does not reprobate or hate any man but for sin, or the
foresight thereof.

14. Is there iniquitie^] Upon the former discourse that of two persons equal,
That God is not unjust, or an accepter of persons, is declared by familiar
examples.
God calls the one to mercy, and leaves the other in his sin, one might
infer that God were unjust and an accepter of persons. To which the Apostle
answers, that God were not just nor indifferent in deed, so to use the
matter where grace or salvation were due. As if two men being Christened,
both believe well, and live well: if God should give heaven to the one, and
should damn the other, then were he unjust, partial, and forgetful of his
promise: but respecting or taking two, who both be worthy of damnation (as
al are before they be first called to mercy) then the matter stands on mere
mercy, and of the giuers vvil and liberality, in which case partiality has
no place. As for example.

1 Two malefactors' being condemned both for one crime, S. Augustines example
is of two debtors: the one forgiven all, and the other put to pay all, by the
same creditor. li. de predest. and gra. cap. 4.
the Prince pardons the one, and lets the law proceed on the other. 2 The
thief that is pardoned, can not attribute his escape to his own deseruings,
but to the Princes mercy. 3 The thief that is executed, can not challenge the
Prince that he was not pardoned also: but must acknowledge that he has his
deserving. 4 The standers by, must not say, that he was executed because the
Prince would not pardon him, for that was not the cause, but his offense. 5
If they ask: further, why the Prince pardoned not both, or executed not both:
the answer it, that as mercy is a goodly virtue, so justice is necessary and
commendable. 6 But if it be further demanded why John rather then Thomas was
executed: or Thomas rather then John pardoned: answer, that (the parties being
otherwise equal) it hangs merely and wholy upon the Princes vvil and
pleasure.
1 So likewise, God seeing al mankind and every one of the same in a general
condemnation, and mass of sin, in and by Adam, delivers some, and not
othersome. 2 All that be delivered out of that common damnation, be delivered by
grace and pardon, through the means and merits of Christ. 3 Such as be left in
the common case of damnation, can not complain, because they have their
deserving for sin. 4 We may not say that such be damned, because God did not
pardon them, but because they had siaue, and therefore deserved it. 5 That some
should be damned, and not al pardoned, and other some pardoned rather then al
condemned, is agreeable to Gods justice and mercy: both which virtues in Gods
providence toward us are recommended. 6 That Saul should be rather pardoned
them Calphas (I mean where two be equally evil and vnderseruing) that is
only Gods holy will and appointment, by which many an unworthy man gets
pardon, but no good or just or innocent person is ever damned.
In all this mercy of God toward some, and justice toward other some, both
the pardoned works by their own free vvil, Predestination and reprobatio^
take not away free vvil, neither must any man be retchlesse and desperate.
and thereby deserve their salvation: and the other no less by their own
free vvil, without al necessity, work wickedness, and them selves and only
of them selves procure their own damnation. Therefore no man may without
blasphemy say, or can truly say, that he has nothing to do toward his
own salvation, but vvil live, and thinks he may live without care or
cogitation of his end the one way or the other, saying, If I be appointed to
be saved, be it so: if I be one designed to damnation, I can not help the
matter: come what come may. Al these speeches and cogitations are sinful and
come of the enemy, and be rather signs of reprobation, then of election.
Therefore the good, man must without search of Gods secrets, work his own
salvation and (as S. Peter says) make his election sure by good works, ^.
Pet. ^ 10.
with continual hope of Gods mercy, being assured that if he believe well and
do well, he shall have well* for example, if a husband man should say, If God
vvil, I shall have corn enough: if not, I can not make it, and so neglect to
till his ground: he may be sure that he shall have none, because he wrought not
for it. An other man uses his diligence in tilling and ploughing, and
commits the rest to God, he finds the fruit of his labors.

16. Not of the vviller.] If our election, calling, or first coming to God,
lay wholy or principally upon our own vvil or works: or if our vvilling or
endeavoring to be good, would serve without: Our election or conversion is
not of our selves, but of Gods grace and mercy.
the help and grace of God, as the Pelagians taught, then our election were
wholy in our selves, which the Apostle denies* and then might Pharao and
other indurate persons (whom God has permitted to be obstinate, to show his
power and just judgment upon them) be converted when them selves lift,
without Gods help and assistance: whereas we see the contrary in all such
obstinate offenders, whom God for punishment of former sins, visits not
with his grace, that by no threats, miracles, nor persuation, they can be
converted. Whereupon we may not with Heretics infer, that man has not
free vvil, or that our will works nothing in our conversion or coming to
God: but this only, that our vvilling or vvorking of any good to our
salvation, comes of Gods special motion, grace, and assistance, and that it
is the secondary cause, not the principal.

17. To this purpose have I raised.] He does not say, that he has of purpose
raised or set him up to sin, or that he was the cause of the same in Pharao,
or that he intended his damnation directly or absolutely, or any otherwise but
in respect of his demerits: but rather (as the Apostle says straight after in
this chapter of such hardened and obstinate offenders) that he with long
patience and toleration expected his conversion, and (as S. Chrysostom
interprets this word, Excitaui) preserved him alive to repent, whom he
might lustly have condemned before. Exo. 9, 16.
In the 9 of Exodus, In what sense, God raised up Pharao etc.
whence this allegation is, we read, Posui^e, I have put or set thee up, as
here, I have raised thee, that is to say, I have purposely advanced thee to be
so great a king, and chosen thee out to be a notorious example both of the
obdurate obstinacy that is in such who I have for so great sin, forsaken,
and also to show to the world, that no obstinacy of never so mighty
offenders can resist me to do any thing which shall not fall to my glory.
Which is no more to say, but that God often for the punishment of Nations, and
to show his justice and glory, gives wicked Princes unto them, and indueth
them with power and al prosperity, and taking his grace from them upon their
deserts, hardens their hearts so, as they vvithsand and contemn God, and
afflict his people* in whose end and fall, either temporal or eternal, at the
length God vvil ever be glorified. Neither would he either raise or suffer any
such, or give them power and prosperity in this life, whereupon he knovveth
they vvil be worse, but that he can work all that to his honor and glory*
mary, that he uses not such rigorous justice on all that deserve it, that is
his great grace and mercy. And that he exercises his justice upon some
certain persons, rather then upon other some of equal deserts, that lies
wholy upon his vvil, in whose judgments there be many things secret, but
nothing unjust.

20. Who art thou?] Here the Apostle staieth the rashness and presumption of
such poor worms, Heretical books concerning predestination.
as take upon them to question with God of their election or reprobation: as
certain impious Heretics of our time have done, setting out books farsed
with most blasphemous and erroneous doctrine concerning this high and hidden
mystery, and have given occasion to the ignorant which alvvaies be curious,
to iangle, and perniciously to err in these things, that are impossible to be
understood of any, or well thought of, but of the obedient and humble.

31. The potter.] This example of the pot and potter reaches no further but to
declare, that the creature may not reason with God his maker, why he gives
not one so great grace, as an other, or why he pardons not one as well as an
other: no more then the chamber pot may challenge the Potter why he was not
made a drinking pot, The example of the pot and the potter.
as well as an other. And therefore the Heretics that extend this similitude to
prove that man has no free vvil no more then a piece of clay, do untruly and
deceitfully apply the example* specially when we may see expressly in the
book of Exodus, that Pharao notvvithsta^ding his indurate heart, had free vvil:
where both it is said, He would not dismiss the people: and He indurated his
own heart him self. Exo. c. ^, 15. and (in the Hebrew) v. 32. etc. 9. 35. 1
Reg. 6, 6. And this Apostle also vvritheth, 2 Timothy 2, 21.
that * a man may cleanse him self from the filthy, and so become a vessel of
honor in the house of God.

CHAP. X.
The Law war not (as the Jews ignorant zeal supposed) for them to justify
them selves by it (considering that they could not fulfill it ^) but to bring
them to Christ, to believe in him, and so for his sake to be justified by the
grace of God: 5 according to Moses saying, and the Apostles preaching: 11 that
so the Gentiles also (according to the Prophets) hearing and believing might
come to justice: the Jews in the mean time (though inexcusably) remaining
incredulous.

The Law was not given to make a man just or perfect by it self, but to bring
us to Christ to be justified by him.
the end of the Law is Christ: unto justice to every one that believes. The
justice of the Law of Moses went no further of it self, but to save a man from
the temporal death and punishment prescribed to the tra^sgressors of the same.
that, the justice which is of the Law, Leu. 18, 5.
the man that has done it, shall live in it. Deu. 30, 12.
says thus, Say not in thy heart, Who shall ascend into heaven? that is to
bring Christ down. Or who descends into the depth? that is to call Christ
again from the dead. The word is nigh, in thy mouth, and in thy heart. this is
the word of faith which we preach. The Epistle upon S. Andrews day,
Nouemb. 30.
thou shall be saved.

Es. 28. 16
Whosoever believes in him, shall not be confounded. Joel. 2, 22.
For every one To believe in him and to invoke him, is to serve him with all
love and sincere affection. All that so do, shall doubtless be saved and shall
never be confounded.
whosoever shall innocate the name of our Lord, shall be saved. Es. 52, 7.
How beautiful are the feet of them that euangelize peace, of them that
euangelize good things? We see then that it is in a man's free will to believe or
not to believe, to obey or disobey the Gospel or truth preached.
do not obey the Gospel. Es. 53, 1.
For Esaias says, Lord, who has believed the hearing of us? Ps. 18. 5.
into all the earth has the sound of them gone forth: and unto the ends of the
whole world the words of them.

Deu. 32, 21.
has not Israel known? Moses first says, I vvil bring you to emulation in
that which is not a nation: in a folish nation, I vvil drive you into anger.
Es. 65, 1.
I was found of them that did not seek me: openly I appeared to them that
asked not of me. Es. 63, 2.
But to Israel he says, All the day have I spread my hands to a people that
believes not, and contradicts me.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. X.
^. The justice of God.] Gods justice, and the Jews own justice.
The justice of God, is that which God gives us through Christ the Jews
own or proper justice, is that which they had or challenged to have of them
selves and by their own strength, helped only by the knowledge of the Law
without the help or grace of Christ.

6. The justice of faith] The justice which is of faith, reaches to the life
to come, making man assured of the truth of such Articles as concern the same*
as, of Christ's Ascension to heaven, Justice of faith.
of his Descending to Hell, of his coming down to be Incarnate, and his
Resurrection and return again to be glorified: by which his actions we be
pardoned, justified, and saved, as by the Law we could never be.

8. The word of faith.] The word of faith is the whole Law of Christ,
concerning both life and doctrine, Open confession and protestation of our
faith is sometime necessary.
grounded upon this, that Christ is our Savior, and that he is risen again.
Which point (as al other) must both be believed in heart, and also be confessed
by mouth* for though a man be justified inwardly when he has the virtues of
faith, hope, and charity from God: yet if occasion be given, he is also bound
to confess with his mouth, and by all his external actions, without shame or
fear of the world, that which he inwardly believes: Eusebius. li. 6 c. 31
histor. Eccles.
or else he can not be saved. Which is against certain * old Heretics that
taught, a man might say or do what he would, for fear or danger, so that he
kept his faith in heart.

14. How shall they inuocat?] This makes not (as Heretics pretend) against
invocation of Saints: The place alleged against invocation of Saints,
ansvvered.
the Apostle saying nothing else, but that they can not invoke Christ as their
Lord and Master, in whom they do not believe, and whom they never heard of.
For he speaks of Gentiles or Pagans, who could not invoke him, unless they
did first believe in him. To the due invocation of Christ, we must know him
and our duties to him. And so is it true also that we can not pray to our B.
Lady nor any Saint in heaven, til we believe and know their persons,
dignity, and grace, and trust that they can help us. But if our adversaries
think that we can not invoke them, because we can not believe in them: let
them understand that the Scripture uses also this speech, to believe in men:
and it is the very Hebrew phrase, which they should not be ignorant of that
brag thereof so much. Exodus 14, 31. They believed in God and in Moses* and ^
Paral. 20, 20. in the Hebrew. Ep. ad Thilem. v. 5. And the ancient fathers'
did read in the Creed indifferently, I believe in the Catholic Church* and, I
believe the Catholic Church, Conc. Nicen. apud Epiphan, in fine Ancorat,
Hieron. contr. Lucif. Cyril. Hieros. Cathec. (...).

15. unless they be sent.) Preachers not lavvfully called not sent.
This place of the Apostle inuincibly condemns all the preachings, vvritings,
ordinances, innouations and usurpations of Church; pulpit, and whatsoever our
new Evangelists have intruded them selves and entered into by the vvindovv:
shevving that they be every one from the highest to the lowest, false
prophets, running and usurping, being never lavvfully called. Which is so
evident in the Heretics of our days that the Caluinists confess it in them
selves, Confess. des Egli. de France.
and say that there is an exception to be made in them, because they found the
state of the Church interrupted.

20. That asked not.] The first justification of mere grace.
That Christ was found of those that never asked after him, it proves that
the first grace and our first justification is without merits. That God
called so continually and earnestly by his Prophets and by other his signs and
wonders, upon the Jews, Free vvil.
and they withstood it: free vvil is proved, and that God would have men
saved, and that they be the cause of their own damnation them selves.

CHAP. XI.
Not all the Jews were reprobate, but some elect: and they by grace obtained
justice, the rest (according to the Prophets) being excecated. 11. Against
whom not vvithstanding the Christian Gentiles (to whom by that occasion Christ
is come) must not insult: but rather fear every man him self to be likewise
cut of the tree (which is the Catholic Church) 25 and know that when all the
Gentiles are brought into the Church, then (about the end of the world) shall
the multitude of the Jews also come in: 33 according to the disposition of
the wonderful wisdoms of God.

Lord, 3. reg. 19. 20.
they have slain thy Prophets, they have dug down thine altares: and I am
left alone, and they seek my life. answer unto him? I have left me seven
thousand men, that have not borred their knees to The Heretics add here also,
Image, to the text, as Act: 19, ^5.
Baal?

Es. 6, 9.
God has given them the spirit of compunction: eyes, that they may not see:
and ears, that they may not hear: until this present day. Ps. 68, 23
Be their table made for a snare and for a trappe and for a scandal and for a
retribution unto them. Be their eyes darkened, that they may not see: and their
back make thou alvvaies crooked. The Jews are not relected wholy and
incurably for ever: but for a part, and for a time suffered to fall. Which God
did turn to the Gentiles general good.
that they should fall? God forbid. but by their offense, salvation is to the
Gentiles, that they may emulate them. If God could and did turn their fall and
sin into the good of the Gentiles, much more vvil he work good of their
general conversion, which shall be at length the accomplishme^t of the Church
consisting of both the Nations.
the riches of the Gentiles: how much more the fullness of them?

We see that he which stands by faith, may fall from it, and therefore must
live in fear, and not in the vain presumption and security of the Heretics.
fear. nature, shall be graffed into their own olive? Esa. 59, 20.
as it is written: There shall come out of Sion, he that shall deliver, and shall
auert impiety from Jacob. And this to them the testament from me: when I shall
have taken away their sins. The Epistle upon Trinity Sunday.
how incomprehensible are his judgments, Esa. 40, 13.
and his ways unsearchable?

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XI.
4. Seven thousand.] The Heretics allege this place and example very
impertinently to prove that the Church may be wholy secret, Gods answer to
Elias of 7000, makes nothing for the Protestants Invisible Church,
hid, or, unknown. for though the faithful were forced to keep close in
that persecution of Achab and Iezabel, which was only in the kingdom of the
ten tribes, that is, of Isaael: yet at the very same time, in Jerusalem and all the kingdom of Judah, the external worship and profession of faith was open to
all the world, 2 Par. 17.
and well known to Elias and the faithful, so many, that * the very souldiars
only were numbered above ten hundred thousand. besides that there is a great
difference between the Christian Church and the Jews, ours resting upon
better promises then theirs. And we vvil not put the Protestants to prove
that there were 7000 of their Sect, when their new Elias Luther began: but
let them prove that there were seven, or any one, either then or in all ages
before him, that was in all points of his belief. Heretics there were
before him, as Iouinian, Vigilantius, Heluidius, Vvicleffe etc. and with him,
Zuinglius, Calvin, etc. Who believed as he did in some things, but not in all.

6. Not now of works.] If salvation be attributed to good works done of
nature without faith and Gods help, What works are not, and what are the
cause of salvation.
the same can not be of grace. for such works exclude grace, favor, and
mercy: and challenge only of debt, and not of gift. Therefore take heed here
of the Heretics exposition, that untruly exclude Christian men's works from
necessity or merit of salvation, which are done with and by Gods grace, and
therefore evidently consist with the same, and be joined with Gods grace as
causes of our salvation. Our Adversaries are like if Potecaries, ever taking
quid pro quo, either of ignorance, or of intent to deceive the simple.

^. God has given.] God is not anthor of sin.
It does not signify his vvorking or action, but his permission. Chris. ho. 19
in ep. To. And S. Augustine says, Aug. Ep. 105. ad Sixtum.
not by putting malice into them, but by not imparting his grace unto them, and
that through their own deserts alvvaies, and their own wills ever properly
working the same. See Annot. Mat. c. 13, 14. To. c. 1, 24.

20. Because of incredulity.] A paraphrastical explication of the text,
conceruing the Jews and Gentiles, their standing, falling, rising again, etc.
He represseth the pride of the Gentiles vaunting them selves of their
receiving, and of the Jews reiection, namely in that they thought the Jews
to be forsaken for no other cause, but that they might come into their rooms:
declaring that the direct and proper cause of their forsaking, was their
incredulity, exhorting the Gentiles to bevvare of the same, because they may
fall as well as the other, and that God is as like to execute justice against
them as against the Jews, as he has done in many nations falling to heresy.

28. According to the Gospel.] In respect, or as concerning belief in Christ
and receiving the Gospel, they are Gods enemies: by occasion of which their
incredulity, the Gentiles found mercy: otherwise in respect of his special
election of that nation, and the promises made to the Patriarchs, the Jews
are dear to him still* for God never promises but he performs, nor
repents him self of the privileges given to that nation.

30. For as you.] As the Gentiles which before believed not, found mercy and
came to faith, when the Jews did fall: so the Jews not now believing,
when all the Gentiles have obtained mercy, shall in the end of the world by
Gods disposition obtain grace and pardon as the Gentiles have done.

32. Concluded al.] That so God taking al Nations and al men in sin (which
they fell into, not by his drift or causing, but of their own free vvil) may
of his mercy call and convert whom and in what order he will: and the
parties have no cause to brag of their deseruings: but both countries and
particular men may refer their eternal election and their first calling and
conversion to Christ, and to his mercy only: no works which they had before
in their incredulity, deserving any such thing, though their works afterward
proceeding of faith and grace do merit heaven.

33. O depth*] How far to deal and to know, in the doctrine of predestination.
The Apostle concludes that no man ought to search further into Gods secret
and unsearchable counsels of the vocation of the Gentiles, and rejecting the
Jews, otherwise then this, that al which be rejected, for their sins be
justly rejected: and all that be saved, by Gods great mercy and Christ's grace
be saved. And whosoever seeks among the people to spread contagion of
curiosity by seeking further after things (...) man's and Angels reach, they
ouerreache and overthrow them selves. If thou vvilt be saved, believe, obey
the Church, fear God and keep his commandments: that is thy part and every
man's else. Thou may not examine whether thou be predestinate or reprobate,
nor seek to know the ways of Gods secret judgment tovvard thy self or
other men. It is the common enemy of our souls, The Heretics writings of
predestination.
that in this unhappy time has opened blasphemous tongues, and directed the
proud pens of Calvin, Beza, Verone, and such reprobates to the discussing of
such particulars, to the perdition of many a simple man, and specially of young
Scholars in Universities, which with less study may learn to be provvd and
curious, then to be humble, wise, and obedient.

CHAP. XII.
He exhorts them to mortification of the body, The second part of this
Epistle, moral.
2 to renouation of the mind, 3 to keeping of unity by humility, ^ to the
right using of their gifts and functions, 9 to many other good actions, 17 and
specially to loving of their enemies.

The Epistle upon the 1 Sunday after the Epiphanie.
* that you exhibit your bodies a living host, Phil. 4, 18.
holy, pleasing God, your reasonable service. Ephesians. 5, 17. 1. Th. 4, 3.
* that you may prove what the good, and acceptable, and perfect vvil of God
is. None must presume to meddle above the measure of Godsgift, or out of the
compass of his state and vocation.
not to be more wise then behooves to be wise, but to be wise unto
sobriety, 2 Cor. 12, 11. Ephesians. 4, 7.
* to every one as God has divided the measure of faith. The Epistle upon the
2 Sunday after the Epiphanie.
Prophecy is interpretation of the Scriptures, which is according to the rule
of faith, when it is not against the right faith, or when it is profitable to
edify charity, as S. Augustine speaks li. 5. Doct. Chr. c. 27 and li. 1. c.
3^. and in effect he says the same li. 12. Confess. c. 18 unto c. 32.
prophecy according to the rule of faith, dilectio
Love without simulation. Hating evil* cleaving to good. memories
necessities' of the saints. Pursuing hospitality. Cursing is a vice
whereunto the common people is much given, who often curse the^ on whom they
can not otherwise be revenged, they may see here that it is a great fault.
curse not. The Epistle upon the 3 Su^day after the Epiphanie.
Be not wise in your own conceit. Deu. 32, 35.
but give place unto wrath, for it is written: Revenge to me: I vvil revvard,
says our Lord. if thine enemy hunger, give him meat: Pro. 25, 21.
if he thirst, give him drink* for, doing this, thou shall heap coals of
fire upon his head.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XII.
1. A living host.] Lest men should think by the former discourse of Gods
eternal predestination, that no reward were to be had of good life and works,
the Apostle now earnestly recommendeth to them holiness of life.

1. A living host.] The body chastifed by penance is a grateful sacrifice.
Man makes his body a sacrifice to God by giving it to suffer for him, by
chastising it with fasting, watching, and such like, and by occupying it in
works of charity and virtue to Gods honor, whereby appears how acceptable
these works are to God and grateful in his sight, being compared to a
sacrifice, which is an high service done to him.

6. According to the rule of faith.] By this, and many places of holy write, we
may gather, that the Apostles by the holy Ghost, The Apostolical rule or
analogy of faith.
before they were sundered into diverse Nations, set down among them selves a
certain Rule and form of faith and doctrine, containing not only the
Articles of the Creed, but al other principles, grounds, and the whole
platform of all the Christian religion. Which Rule was before any of the books
of the new Testment were written, and before the faith was preached, among the
Gentiles: by which not only every other inseriout teachers doctrine was
tried, but all the Apostles, and Evangelists preaching, vvriting, interpreting
(which is here called prophesying) were of gods Church appointed and admitted,
or disproued and rejected. This form, by mouth and not by Scripture, every
Apostle delivered to the country by them converted. c. 6, 17. c. 16, 17.
For keeping of this form, the Apostle before praised the Romans, and
afterward earnestly warns them by no man (...) speech to be drawn from the
same. This he commends to Timothee, 1. Tim. 6, 20.
calling it his (...) For not holding this fast and sure, he blames the
Galatians, further also denouncing to him self or an Angel that should write,
teach, or expound against that which they first received, Gal. 1, 6.
(...), and commanding always to bevvare of them that taught otherwise. Gal.
2, 1.
For fear of missing this line of truth, him self notwithstanding he had the
Holy Ghost, yet lest he might have preached in vain and lost his labor, he
went to confer with Peter and the rest, Act. ^5, 6.
for tho fast keeping of this Rule of truth, the Apostles held Councels, and
their successors by their example. For the holding of this Rule, and by the
measure thereof, were all the holy Scriptures written, for and by the same, all the glorious doctors have made their sermons, commendries, and interpretations*
Gods work al vvritings and interpretatio^s no otherwise admitted nor deemed to
be of God, but as they be agreeable to this Rule.

And this is the sure Analogies (...) measure of faith, The Heretics
pha^tastical rule, or rather rules of faith, many and diverse one from an other.
set down and commended to us every where for the Apostles tradition: and not
the fantastical rule or square that every Sectmaister pretends to gather out
of the Scriptures falsely understood and wrested to his purpose, by which they
judge of doctor, Scripture, Church and al. Arius had by that means a rule of
his own, Luther had his false weightes, and Calvin his own also. According to
which several measure of every Sect, they have their expositions of Gods word:
and in England (as in other infected Countries) they kept of lare an apish
imitation of this prophesying which S. Paul here and in other places speaks
of, and which was an exercise in the primitive Church, measured not by every
man's peculiar spirit, but by the former Rule of faith first set down by the
Apostles. And therefore all this new fantastical Prophesying and al other
preaching in Caluins school, is justly by this note of the Apostle condemned,
for that it is not according to, but quite against the Rule of faith.

CHAP. XIII.
To yield obedience and al other duties unto Potestats: 8 to love their
neighbor which is the fulfilling of the Law: 11 and specially to consider,
that now being the time of grace, we must do nothing that may not beseem
day light.

Tit. 3, 7.
for there is no power but of God. 1. Pet. 2, 13.
And those that are, of God are ordained. Mt. 22, 21.
The Epistle upon the 4 Sunday after the Epiphanie.
* to whom tribute, tribute: to whom custom, custom: to whom fear, fear: to
vvho^ honor, honor. no man any thing: but, that you love one an other. For he
that loves his neighbor, Exo. 20, 13.
has Here we learn that the Law may be and is fulfilled by love in this
life: against the Adversaries saying it is impossible to keep the
commandments.
fulfilled the law. Thou shall not commit aduoutrie, Thou shall not kill, Thou
shall not steal, Thou shall not bear false witness, Thou shall not covet, and
if there be any other commandment: Leu. 19, 18.
it is comprised in this word, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self. The
Epistle upon the 1 Sunday in Aduent.
that it is now the hour for us to rise from sleep. For now our salvation
is nearer then when we believed.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XIII.
1. Every soul be subject.] Because the Apostles preached liberty by Christ
from the yoke of the Law and servitude of sin, and gave all the faithful both
example and commandment to obey God more then men, and withal ever charged
them expressly to be obedient and subject to their Prelates as to them which had
cure of their souls and were by the Holy Ghost placed over the Church of God:
there were many in those days newly converted, that thougt them solues free
from* al temporal Botestats, carnal Lords, and humane creatures or powers:
whereupon the bondsman took him self to be loose from his servitude, the
subject from his Sovereign, were he Emperor, King, Duke, or what other
secular, Obedience to temporal rulers, and in what cases.
Magistrate so ever, specially the Princes of those days being Heathens and
persecutors of the Apostles, and of Christ's religion. for which cause and for
that the Apostles were untruly charged of their Adversaries, that they
withdrevv^ men from order and obedience to Civil laws and Officers: S. Paul
here (as S. Peter does 1 Chap. 2.) cleereth him self, and expressly charge
every man to be subject to his temporal Prince and Superior: Not every man to
all that be in Office or Superiority, but every one to him whom God has put in
authority over him, by that he is his Master, Lord, king, or such like: (...)
either to them in matters of religion or regiment of their souls (for most
part were Pagans, whom the Apostle could not will men to obey in matters of
faith,) but to them in such things only as (...), and what other causes so
ever consist with Gods holy will and ordinance, Act. 4, 19, 3, 29.
for * against God no power may be (...).

1. No power but of God.] In what sense, al power or superiority is of God.
S. Chrysostom here notes, that power (...) and Superiority, is Gods
ordinance, Chrysostom. in ep. To. ho. (...).
but not of^somes al Princes: because to any may vsur (...) who reign by his
permission only, and not by his appointment: nor al actions that every one
does in and by his sovereign power, as Iu^ians apostaste and (...) of
Catholics, (...) oppression of the Israelites, Acha^s persecution of the
Prophets, Neros executing of the Apostles, Herod's and Pilats condemning of
Christ: al which things God permitted them, by (he abuse of their power to
accomplish, (...) they were out of the compass of his causing and ordinance.

2. They that resist.] In things lawfully commanded it is mortal sin not to
obey our Superiors.
Whosoever resists or obeieth not his lavvful Superior in those causes
wherein he is subject unto him, withstandeth Gods appointment, and sins
^oadly, and is worthy to be punished both in this world by his Superior, and
by God in the next life. for in temporal government, and causes, the
Christians were bound in conscience to obey their Heathen Imperours: though on
the other side, they were bound under pain of de^^ation to obey their Apostles
and Prelates, and not to obey their kings or Emperors, in matters of religion.
Whereby it is clear that when we be commanded to obey our Superiors, it is
meant alvvaies and only in such things as they may lawfully command, and in
respect of such matters Wherein they be our Superiors.

4. Bears not the sword.] That the Apostle means here specially of temporal
powers, we may see by the svvord, The Apostle speaks of temporal powers.
tribute, and external compulsion, which he here attributes to them. And the
Christian men then had no doubt whether they should obey their Spiritual
powers. but now the disease is clean contrary for all is given to the
secular, power, and nothing to the spiritual, which expressly is ordained by
Christ and the Holy Ghost: and all the faithful are commanded to be subject
there unto as to Christ's own word and will. Heresies against rule and
Superiority.
There were Heretics called Begardi, that took away al rule and
Superiority: The w^^lefists would obey nor Prince nor Prelate, if he were
once in deadly sin. The Protestants of our time (as we may see in all
Countrie^ where the secular svvord is drawn against their Sects) care
neither for the one nor for the other, though they extol only the secular
when it makes for them. The obedience of Catholics both to Spiritual and
temporal Superiors.
The Catholics only most humbly obey both, even according to Gods ordinance,
the one in temporal causes, and the other in Spiritual: in which order both
these States have blessedly flourished in all Christian countries ever since
Christian time, and it is the very way to preserve both, as one day all the
world shall confess with us.

6. Ten give tributes.] Though every man ought to be ready to serve his
temporal Prince with his goods, Hiero. in Mat. 17.
by tributes of what other lavvful taxes and subsidies so ever: yet they may
exempt by privileges whom they think good. The Clergy exempted from tribute.
As in all countries Christian: Priests for the honor of Christ, whose
Ministers they be, have by the grauntes and ancient charters or kings be he
excepted and exempted. Notvvithstanding they were never unready to serve
voluntarely their, sovereign, in all common causes, with whatsoever they had.
See Annot. in Mat. 17, 26.

^^. Not in (...).] This was the very place which S. Augustine, that glorious
Doctor, S. Augustines conversion.
was by a voice from heaven directed unto, at his first miraculous and happy
conversion, not only to the Catholic faith, but also to perpetual continency,
by this voice coming from heaven, Toll, lege: Toll, lege, Take up and read,
take up and read. as him self tells li. 8 Confes^e. 12.

CHAP. XIIII.
Like a moderator and peacemaker between the firm Christians (who were the
Gentiles) and the infirm (who were the Christian Jews, having yet a scruple
to cease from keeping the ceremonial me^tes and days of Moses Law) be
exhorts the Jew (...) to condemn the Gentil using his liberty: and the
Gentil again, (...) to condemn the ^^rupulous ^ew: but rather to abstain
from using his liberty, and them offending the Jew, (...) be an occasions
unto him of aposting.

eats*
let him eate' herbs. Lord. And he that eats, eats to our Lord: for he
gives thanks to God. And he that eats not, to our Lord he eats not, and
gives thanks to God. 2. Cor. 5, 10.
For * we shall al stand before the judgment seat of Christ. Live I, says
our Lord, Es. 45, 23.
that every knee shall bow to me: and every tongue shall confess to God.
Common, that is, unclean. See Annot. Marc. 7, 2. Though he vvish the vveake to
be borne vvithal, yet he utters his mind plainly, that in deed all the
meats forbidden and unclean in the Law, are now throught Christ cleansed
and lawful for every man to use.
common of it self, but to him that supposes, any thing to be common, to him
it is common. 1. Cor. 8.
Tit. 1, 15*
* Al things in deed are clean: but it is il for the man that eats by
giving offense.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XIIII.
2. Eat al things.] By similitude of words the simple are soon deceived,
and Heretics make their vauntage of any thing to seduce the unlearned. There
were diverse meats forbidden in the Law of Moses, and for signification,
made and counted unclean, whereof the Jews might not eat a^ al, The
Apostles meaning about eating or not eating certain meats.
as porke, hare, conny, and such like, both of fishes, fowls, and beasts, a
great number: Christ discharged al them that became Christians, after his
Passion of that observance and al other ceremonies of the old Law:
Notvvithstanding, because diverse that were brought up in the Law, had a
religion and conscience, suddenly to foresake their former manner, the Apostle
here admonishes such as bestronger and (...) instructed in the case to hear
with the weaker sort, that being Christians could not ye find in their
hearts to eat and use the meats forbidden by God in the Law: as on the other
side he vvarneth the vveake that would not eat, not to take offense or
scandal at them that did eat without scruple, any of the irregular or
forbidden meats in the Law, nor in any wise to judge or condemn the eater,
but to commit that to God, and finally that neither another should condemn the
other for eating or not eating. The Heretics fondly abuse this place against
the fastes of the Church.
Now the Protestants fo^ndly apply all this to the fastes of the Church, and
differences of meats in the same: as though the Church did forbid any meat
wholy never to be eaten or touched, or made any creatures unclean, or
otherwise prescribed any abstinence, then for chastising of men's bodies and
service of God. It is a great blindness that they can put no difference
betwixt Christ's fast of forty days, Mat. 4. John's abstaining from al
delicate meats and drinks, Mat. 11. the widow Annes, Luc. ^, 1^. the
Nazareites, Number. 6. the Recabites, Ierem. 15, 14. the Niniuities, Ion. 3. S.
Paul's, 2 Cor. 11, 27. S. Timothees, 1 Timothy 5, 23. John's Disciples and Christ's
Disciples fast Mat. 9, 14. 15. Folish Heretics see not the differences of
things.
(which he said they should keep after his departure from them:) and the
ceremonial distinction of creatures and meats, clean, and unclean, in the
old Law. of which it is evident the Apostle treats in all this chapter, and
of none other at al. Therefore when the Protestants by the words of this
place would prove, that we be either made free: from fasting and from obeying
the Churches commandment or following Christ's example in that matter, or
that the obseruers of Christian fastes be vveake in faith, and ought not in any
wise condemn of sin the breakers of the prescribed fastes of the holy
Church, they do abuse ignorantly or vvilfully the Apostles words and
discourse.

5. Between day and day.] Distinction of days.
By the like deceit they abuse this place against the Holydaies of Christ and
his B. mother and Saints, which concerns only the Jews festiuities and
observation of times, whereof in the Epistle to the Galatians c, 4. 10.

6. Every one in his own sense.) The text explicated concerning every man's
conscience in Iudaical meats and drinks.
The Apostle does not give freedom; as the Churches enemies would have it,
that every man may do or think what he list. but in this matter of Iudaical
observation of days and meats, and that for a time only, til the Christian
religion should be perfectly established, he would have no restrainte made, but
that every one should be borne vvithal in his own sense: yet so, that they
should not condemn one an other, nor make necessity of salvation in the
observation of the Iudaical rites of meats, days, etc.

17. Not meat and drink.] The substance of religion or the kingdom of God
stands not in meat or drink, Not, eating, but disobedience damnable.
and therefore the better might they use indifferency and toleration in that
point for a time, for peace sake and to avoid scandal. but if the precept of
Moses Law had bound still as before, then (not for the meats sake, but for
the disobedience) it had been damnable to have eaten the unclean meats.

22. Have it with thy self.] Thou that art perfect, and bleeuest or know
certainly that thou art free from the Law concerning meats and festiuities,
yet to the trouble and hinderance of the feeble that can not yet be brought so
far, be discrete and utter not thy self out of season.

23. He that discerns.] If the vveake have a conscience, and should be driven
to eat the things which in his own heart he thinks he should not do, To
do against our conscience, is sin.
he commits deadly sin, because he does against his conscience, Chrysostom, h^,
26. in ep. R^.
or against his own pretensed knowledge.

^^. All this is not of faith] The proper sense of this speech is, that every
thing that a man does against his knowledge or conscience, is a sin, for so
by the circumstance of the letter, What actions of infidels are sin, and
what are not.
faith must here be taken though S. Augustine sometimes applies it also to
prove that all the actions of infidels (meaning those works which directly
proceed of their lack of faith) be sins. But in any wise take heed of the
Heretics commentary, who hereby would prove that the infidel sins in
honoring his parents, fighting for his country, tilling his ground, Luther.
and in all other works. And no marvel that they so hold of infidels, who
maintain. * that Christian men also offend deadly in every good deed.

CHAP. XV.
He proceeds to make peace between the Christian Gentiles and Jews. 8 with
this resolution, that the Jews vocation is of promis in deed, but the
Gentiles also of mercy, and foretold by the Scriptures. 14 Then dravving to his
end, he excuses him self to the Romans for vvriting thus unto them. 21
hoping now at length to see them, after that he has been at Jerusalem, ^9
whereunto also he requesteth their prayers.

Psa. 68, 10.
Christ did not please him self, but as it is written, The reproaches of them
that reproched thee, fell upon me. The Epistle upon the 2. Sunday in Aduent.
He means all that it vvitten in the old Testament: much more al things
written in the new Testament, are for our learning and comfort.
what things soever have been written, to our learning they are written:
that by the patience and consolation of the Scriptures, we may have hope.
Unity in religion commended.
one mind, with one mouth you may glorify God and the Father of our Lord
JESUS Christ. Christ did execute his office and ministry only toward the
people of Circumcision, that is, the Jews.
minister of the circumcision for the verity of God to confirm the promises
of the fathers. Psa. 17. 50.
as it is written: Therefore vvil I confess to thee in the Gentiles o Lord,
Deu. 32. 43.
and vvil sing to thy name. Rejoice ye Ge^tils with his people. Praise al ye
Gentiles our Lord: Psa. 116, 1.
and magnify him al ye peoples. Esa. 11, 10.
There shall be the root of Iesse: and he that shall rise up to rule the
Gentiles, in him the Gentiles shall hope.

Ghost. Es. 52. 13*
They to whom it has not been preached of him shall see: and they that have
not heard, shall, understand. He (...) the holy persons that having forsaken al
their goods for Christ, were wholy (...) to (...) our Lord with al their
mind. ^. Hiero. against Vigilantius the Heretic reprehending the alms given
to (...), as do the Heretics also of our time.
saints. In that the Apostle desired to be prayed for, we may be moved to
seek the same as a great benefit.
help me in your prayers for me to God,

CHAP. XVI.
(...) and him self to many there by name. (...) he declares the doctrine
which the Romans had learned, to be the touchstone is know Seducers. 21 he
does unto them the commendations of all the Churches and of certain persons by
names ^5 and concludes.



The only salutation of so worthy a man is sufficient to fill him with great
grace that is so saluted. Chrysostom. in 2. Tim. 4.
Salute Prisca and Aquila my helpers in Christ JESUS, ( This domestical Church
was either that faith full and Christian household, or rather the Christians
meeting together there and in such good houses to hear divine service and the
Apostles preaching in those times of persecution.
domestical Church. Salute Epaenetus my beloved: who is the first fruit of
Asia in Christ. Iunia
(...)
approved in Christ. Salute them that are of Aristobolus house. The Protestants
here teaso^ thus, Peter is not here saluted, therefore he was neu^r at Rome.
See the Annotation.


Of the Prince of the Apostle;, says Theodorete upon this place.
learned, and avoid them. The special way that Heretics have ever had to
beguile, was and is by svveete words and gay speeches. which their sheep
cote see before described particularly in the Aunotations upon S. Matthew. c.
7, 15.
by svveete speeches and benedictions seduce the hearts of innocents.

the whole Churches, saluteth you. Erastus the Cofferer of the city saluteth
you, and Quartus, a brother.



ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XVI.
14. Salute one an other.] Never Sectmaisters made more foul or hard shifts to
prove or defend falsehood, then the Protestants: but in two points, about S.
Peter specially, they pass even them selves in impudency. The first is, that
they hold he was not preferred before the other Apostles, which is against al
Scriptures most evidently. The second is, that he was never at Rome, which is
against all the Ecclesiastical histories, all the Fathers Greek and Latin,
against the very sense and sight of the monuments of his Seat, That S. Peter
was at Rome.
Sepulcher, doctrine, life, and death there. Greater evidence certes there is
thereof and more weighty testimony, then of Romulus, Numas, Caesar's, or
Ciceros being there: yet were he a very brutish man that would deny this to
the discredit of so many vvriters and the whole world. Much more monstrous
it is, to hear any deny the other. Theodorete says he was there, vvriting
upon this chapter. Prosper also carmine de ingratis in principio, S. Leo de
natali Petri, S. Augustine to 6 c. 4. cont. ep. fund. Orosius li. 7 c. 6. S.
Chrysostom in ps. 48. S. Ep^phanius haer. 27. Prudentius in hymno 2. S.
Laurentij, and hymno 12. Optatus li. 2. contra Donatistas. S. Hierome in
Catalogo. Lactantius li. 4. c. 21, de vera sapientia. Eusebius hist. Eccl. li.
2, c. 13, 15. S. Athanasius de fuga sua. S. Cyprian. ep. 55. nu. 6, Tertullian
de prascriptionibus nu. 14. and li 4, contra Marcionem nu, 4. Origin in Genes.
apud Eusebius. li. 3, c. 1. Irenaeus li. 3, c. ^. Hegesippus li. 3. c. 2 de excid.
Hierosolym. Caius and Papias the Apostles own scholars, Chalced. conc. act. 1.
and Dionysius the B. of Corinth, alleged by Eusebius li. 2, c. 14. and 24.
Ignatius ep. ad Romanos: The holy Council of Chalcedon, and many other affirm
it. yea Peter him self (according to the judgment of the ancient Fathers)
confesses he was at Rome, calling it Babylon 1. ep. c. 5. Eusebius. li. 2. c.
14. hist. Ec. See the Annotations 1 Peto c. 5, 18.
Some of these tell the time and cause of his first going thither: some, how
long he lived there: some, the manner of his death there: some, the place of his
burial: and al, that he was the first Bishop there. How could so many of such
wisdoms and spirit, so near the Apostles time deceive or be deceived? how
could Calvin and his, after fiftene hundred years know that which none of
them could see?

Some great argument must they needs have to control the credit of the
whole world. This of truth is here their argument, The Protestants great
argument, that Peter was never at Rome.
neither have they a better in any place, to wit, If S. Peter bad been at
Rome, S. Paul would have saluted him, as he did others here in the end of his
letter to the Romans. Is not this a high point to disprove al antiquity by?
Any man of discretion may straight see, Epiph. har. 27.
that S. Peter might be known unto S. Paul to be out of the City, either for
persecution or business, when this epistle was written, (for he went often out
as S. Epiphanius declares) and so the omitting to salute him, can prove no
more, but that then he was not in Rome. but it proves not so much neither,
because the Apostle might for respect of his dignity and other the Churches
affairs, write unto him special letters, and so had no cause to salute him in
his common Epistle. Or how know they that this Epistle was not sent enclosed
to S. Peter's to be delivered by his means to the whole Church of the Romans
in some of the assemblies? it is very like it was recommended to some one
principal man or other that is not here named: and twenty causes there may be
unknown to us. Why he saluted him not ^but no cause why our Adversaries upon
such frivolous reasons should reprove an approved truth. For even as well might
they say that S. John was never at Ephesus, because S. Paul in his Epistle to
the Ephesians does not salute him. And plain it is, that it is the Roman
seat and faith of Peter, which they (as all Heretics before them) do fear
and hate, The Heretics hatred of the Roman see.
and which will be their bane: and they know that there is no argument which
conuinceth in their conscience, that Peter was never at Rome. Therefore to
conclude, we say to them in S. Augustines words, li. 2. cont. li. Petil. c.
51.
Why call you the Apostolic chair, the chair of pestilence? What has the
Church of Rome done against you, in which S. Peter did sit, and from which by
nefarious fury you have separated your selves?

16. Holy kiss.] Kissing the Pax.
Hereof, and by the common usage of the first Christians, who had special
regard of unity and peace among them selves, and for ^signe and protestation
thereof, Orig. in 1^. ad To.
kissed one an other, came our holy ceremony of giving the Pax, or kissing one
an other in the Sacrifice of the blessed Mass.

17. To mark them.] Against Sect-maisters how to examine our says.
He carefully warns them to take heed of seditions sovvers of Sects and
dissension in religion, and this ever to be their mark, if they should teach
or move them to any thing which was not agreeable to that which they had
learned at their conversion: not bidding them to examine the case by the
Scriptures, but by their first form of faith and religion delivered to them
before they had or did read any book of the new Testament.

18. But their own belly.] Heretics given to voluptuousnes.
Howsoever Heretics pretend in words and external show of their sheep
cote, in deed they seek but after their own profit and pleasure, and by
the Apostles to own testimony we be warranted so to judge of them as of men
that in deed have no religion nor conscience.

19. Your obedience.] Against Heretics and their illusions, there is no better
way then in simplicity to cleave unto that which has been taught before: for
the which the Roman obedience is much commended. See Annot. upon the first
chap. verse. 8.

THE ARGUMENT OF THE FIRST EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS.
HOW S. Paul planted the Church at Corinth, continuing there a year and an
half together, we read Act. 18. After that, when he was at Ephesus Act.
19, about the end of the three years that he abode there, he vvrote this first
Epistle to the Corinthians. For even as S. Luke there vvriteth, when these
things were ended, Act. 19, 21.
Paul purposed in the Spirit, when he had gone over Macedonia and Achaia, to
go to Jerusalem: so likewise does S. Paul himself write here: 1 Cor. 16, 5.
I vvil come to you in Achaia, when I shall have gone over Macedonia, for I
will go over Macedonia. but I vvil tarry at Ephesus until Pentecost,

The matter that he vvriteth of, is not one, as in the Epistle to the Romans,
but diverse* partly such faults of theirs, as were signified unto him by them
that were of Chloe 1 Cor. 1, 11. partly such questions as them selves vvrote
to him of, And concerning the things that you vvrote to me. 1 Cor. 7, 1. for so
we may (as it seems) divide the Epistle into these two parts. Or, to put
al together, he vvriteth of eight things: 1 Of (...) Schisms beginning among
them, by occasion of certain preachers, whom in (...) Second Epistle he
touches more plainly as being False apostles. chap. 1. ^. 3* 4. 2 Of an
incestuous fornicator, and some that went to law before infidel* chap. 5. 6.
3 Of Matrimony and Continency. chap. 7. 4 Of (...) sa^raficed to Idols. chap.
8. 9. 10. 5 Of his Traditions. chap. 11. 6 Of the Gifts of the Holy Ghost*
chap. 12. 13. 14. 7 of the Resurrection. chap. (...) of the Gentiles, to
succor the Christian* (...) at Hieru salem* chap. 16.

THE FIRST EPISTLE OF PAVL TO THE CORINTHIANS.
CHAP. I.
After salutation, The 1. part, Of Schisms that were about their baptizers
and preachers.
4 having acknowledged the graces of their Church, 10 he dehorteth them from
their Schismatical boasting against one an other in their baptizers (telling
them that they must boast only in Christ for their Baptism) 17 and in their
preachers, who had the wisdoms of words: telling them that it is the
preaching of the Cross, whereby God saves the world, and wherein only
Christians should boast: 26 seeing God of purpose chose the contemptible, that
so him self might have the glory.





in one knowledge. The beginning of al Schisms is over much admiring and
addicting men's selves to their own particular Masters.
I certes am Paul's, and I Apollos, but I Cephas, and I Christ's. Act. 18, 8.
that I baptized none of you, but * Crispus and Caius:

Es. 38, 18
it is the power of God. I vvil destroy the wisdoms of the wise: and the
prudence of the prudent I vvil reiecte. Has not God made the wisdoms of this
world folish? The Epistle for S. Agatha, Febr. 5.
is vviser then men: and that which is the infirm of God, is stronger then
men. Ier. 9, 23
and justice, and sanctification, and redemption: He that does glory, may
glory in our Lord.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. I.
5. In all knowledge.] Faith comes by hearing rather then reading.
Observe that the Apostles never vvrote their letters but to such as were
converted to Christ's faith before* for men can not lightly learn the
Christian religion by reading Scriptures, but by hearing, and by the presence
of their teachers, which may instruct them at large and particularly of every
Article, as clearly and breefely by letters they could not do. Neither does
now any man learn his faith first, but by hearing of his parents and
Masters* for if we should when we come to years of discretion, ^e set to
pick our faith out of the Scriptures, there would be a mad work and many
faithes among us.

30. Who is made.] Christ is made our justice, because he is the author of the
justice in us.
He means not, as our Adversaries captiously take it, that we have no
justice, sapience, nor sanctity of our own, other then Christ's imputed to
us: but the sense is, that he is made the author, giver, and meritorious cause
of al these virtues in us* for so the Apostle interprets him self plainly in
the 6 Chapter following, when he vvriteth thus, You be vvashed, you be
justified, you be sanctified in the name of our Lord JESUS CHRIST and in the
Spirit of our God.

CHAP. II.
That his own preaching among them, was in humble manner in the sight of man.
3 Howbeit it is most profound wisdoms (as they should and would perceive, if
they were not carnal) which is taught in the Church of Christ.

Act. 18, 1.
and fear and much trembling:

But we speak wisdoms among the perfect. Es. 6 4, 4.
That which eye has not seen, nor ear has heard, neither has it ascended
into the heart of man, what things God has prepared for them that love him.
Spirit searches al things, yea the profoundities of God.

Esa. 40, 13.
and him self is judged of no man.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. II.
11. But the spirit of man.] How Angels and Saints and mortal men know our
cogitations.
One man can not know an others cogitations naturally: but God gives to
Prophets and other, even in this world oftentimes, by extraordinary grace to
know men's secrets. Act. 5. 4. reg. ^ and 6.
As he did to S. Peter, to know the fraud of Ananias and Sapphira: and to
Eliseus, his servants bribery in his absence, and what was done in the king
of Syria his chamber* and as he gives to al Luc. 15, 7.
Angels and Saints (so far as is convenient to our necessities and their
heavenly glory) to understand not only our vocal prayers, but our inward
repentance and desires.

12. That we may know.] The Heretics allegatio^ for their vain security,
ansvvered.
The Protestants that challenge a particular spirit revealing to each one his
own predestination, justification, and salvation, would dravv this text to
that purpose. Which imports nothing else (as is plain by the Apostles
discourse) but that the holy Ghost has given to the Apostles, and by them to
other Christian men, to know Gods ineffable gifts bestovved upon the believers
in this time of grace: that is, Christ's Incarnation, Passion, presence in the
Sacrament, and the incomprehensible joys of heaven, which Pagans, Jews, and
Heretics deride.

14. The sensual man.] The sensual man.
The sensual man is he specially, that measures these heavenly mysteries by
natural reason, humane prudence, external sense, and vvorldly affection, as the
Jew, Pagane, and Heretic do: and sometime both here and else where, the more
infirm and ignorant sort of Christian men be called sensual or carnal also,
who being occupied in secular affairs, and given to sensual joy and
vvorldlines, have no such sense nor feeling of these great gifts of God, as the
perfecter sort of the faithful have. Who trying these high points of
religion, not by reason and sense, but by grace, faith, and Spirit, be therefore
called spiritual. The spiritual man.
The spiritual then is he, that judges and discerns the truth of such things
as the carnal can not attain unto: that does by the spirit of the Church,
whereof he is partaker in the unity of the same, not only see the errors of
the carnal, but condemns them and judges every power resisting Gods spirit
and word: the carnal Jew, Heathen, How the spiritual man ^udgeth al, and is
judged of none.
or Heretic, having no means nor right to judge of the said spiritual man.
For when the spiritual is said to be judged of none, the meaning is not that
he should not be subject or obedient to his Pastors and spiritual Powers and
to the whole Church, specially for the trial or examination of al his life,
doctrine, and faith: but that a Catholic man and namely a teacher of Catholic
doctrine in the Church, should not be any whit subject to the judgment of the
Heathen or the Heretic, nor care what of ignorance or infidelity they say
against him: for such carnal men have no judgment in such things, nor can
attain to the Churches wisdoms in any ceremony, mystery, or matter which
they condemn.

Therefore S. Irenaeus excellently declaring that the Church and query spiritual
child thereof, judges and condemns al false Prophets and Heretics of what
sort so ever, at length he concludes with these notable words: The
spiritual shall judge also all that make schisms, Iren. li. 4. ^. 6^.
which be cruel, The Church is under no man's judgment.
not having the love of God, and respecting their own private, more then the
unity of the Church: mangle, divide, and (as much as in them lies) kill for
small causes the great and glorious body of Christ, speaking peace, and seeking
battle. He shall judge also them that be out of the truth, that is to say, out
of the Church: which Church shall be under no man's judgment* for to the Church
are al things known, in which is perfect faith of the Father, and of all the
dispensation of Christ, and firm knowledge of the Holy Ghost that teaches
all truth.

CHA. III.
If they vvil not be carnal still, they must boast in God only, and not in their
preachers, which are but his ministers, 10 and need to look well how they
preach: 12 because not al preaching, though it be Catholic, is meritorious:
but rather it builds matter to be purged by fire, when it is vain and
unfruitful (as also any other like works of other Catholics.) marie if it be
heretical, destroying the temple of God, then it works damnation. 18 The
remedy is, to humble them selves and refer al to God.

The Church only has truth both in her milk and in her bread: that is,
whether she instruct the perfect, or the imperfect who are called carnal. Aug.
li. 15. c. ^. cont. Faust.
milk to drink, not meat: for you could not as yet. but neither can you now
verily, for yet you are carnal. carnal*
^men'? What is Apollo then? and what is Paul? A marvelous dignity of
spiritual pastors, that they be not only the instruments or ministers of
Christ, but also Gods coadiutors in the work of our Salvation.
(...)
coadiutors: you are Gods husbandry, you are Gods building. kind it is, the
fire shall try. Job 5, 13.
For it is written, I vvil compass the wise in their subteltie. Ps. 93, 11
Our Lord knovveth the cogitations of the wise that they be ^aine.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. III.
8. Every man shall receive according.] A most plain text for proof that men
by their labors, and by the diversities thereof, shall be diversely revvarded in
heaven: and therefore that by their works proceeding of grace, they do deserve
or merit heaven, and the more or less joy in the same* for though the holy
Scripture commonly use not this word merit, Good works meritorious, and the
rewards in heaven are different according to the same.
yet in places innumerable of the old and new Testament, the very true sense
of merit is contained, and so often as the word, merces, and the like be
used, they be ever understood as correlatiues or correspondent unto it. for if
the joy of heaven be ^erribution, repaiment, hire, wages for works (as in
infinite places of holy Scripture,) then the works can be none other but the
valor, deseit, price, vvorth, and merit of the same. Merces (...).
And in deed this word, revvard, which in our English tongue may signify a
volutary or bountiful gift, does not so well express the nature of the * Latin
word, or the Greek, which are rather the very stipend that the hired
vvorkeman or iournieman couenanteth to have of him whose work he does, and
is a thing equally and justly answering to the time and weight of his travels
and works (in which sense the Scripture says, 1. Tim. 5, 18.
Dignus est operarius mercede sua. the vvorkeman is worthy of his hire) rather
then a free gift. though, because faithful men must acknovvledge that their
merits be the gifts and graces of God, they rather use the word revvard,
then hire, Apoc. ^2, 12. Mat. 16, 27. To. 22, 12.
stipend, or repaiment. though in deed it be al one, as you may see by diverse
places of holy write. as, * My merces (revvard) is with me to render to every
one * according to his works. And Our Lord vvil ^ender unto me according to
my justice. Ps. 1^. And the very word it self merit (equivalent to the
Greek) is used thus. (...).
Mercy shall make a place to every one * according to the merit of works.
Eccl^i 16, 15. And If you do your justice before men, you shall not have
reward* in heaven. Mat. 6, 1. Where you see that the revvard of heaven is
recompense of justice. And the evasion of the Heretics is frivolous and
evidently false, as the former and like words do convince, for they say
heaven is our Merces or revvard, not because is is due to our works, but to
the promise of God: where the words be plain, According to every man's
works or labors. upon which works, and for which works conditionally,
the promise of heaven was made.

12. Upon this foundation.] The foundaion is Christ, and faith in him vvorking
by charity. The vppes building may be either pure and perfect matter of gold,
Building of gold, or stubble.
silver, and precious stone, which (according to the most authentical and
probable exposition) be good works of charity and al Christian justice done
by Gods grace: or else, vvood, hay, stubble, which signify the manifold acts
of man's infirmity and his venial sins. Which more or less mixed and meddled
with the better matter aforesaid, require more or less punishment or
purgation at the day of our death. At which day, if by penance or other means
in the Church, the said venial sins be before hand cleansed, there shall need
no purgiug at al, but they shall straight receive the reward due to them.

13. Shall be manifest.] Whether our life and works be pure and need no
cleansing, Our works shall be manifested by fire.
now in this world is hard to judge: but the day of our Lord, which is at
our death, vvil make it plain in what terms every man's life is toward God*
for then Purgatory fire shall reveal and prove it* for, whosoever has any
impure matter of venial sins or such other dettes, to Gods justice paiable
and purgable, must into that fire, and after due payment and cleansing, be
saved through the same. Where the works of the perfect men and such as died
with al dettes paid, cleansed, or forgiven, are quitted from the fire, and
never incur damage, pain, or loss thereby. The places of fathers expounding
this for Purgatory, be very many most evident, which are cited in the last
Annotation following.

1^. The day of our Lord shall declare.] That this purgation rather signifies
the place of Gods justice after our death, then any affliction in this life,
the Apostles precise specifying of fire declares, and of revealing and
notifying the difference of men's works by the same: which is not done
evidently ever in this life: What is signified by, the day of our Lord.
and namely the word, day of our Lord: which commonly and properly signifies
in Scripture and namely in this Apostle (1 Cor. 3, 5. 2 Cor. 1, 1^. Philip. 1,
10. 6. 1 These. ^, 2. 2 These. 2, 2.) either the particular, or the general
judgment: and therefore that the trial spoken of, is not properly nor
literally meant any affliction or adversity of this life, Calu. in hunc locum.
as Calvin also confesses, coining a folish new construction of his own.
Where you may note also in that man's Commentary, that this word, dies
Domini, was so prejudicial against him and al other expositions of the trial
to be made in this world, that he would gladly have (Domini) ou^, reading
thus, A day shall ^^me which shall open etc. (...)
Where understand, that if it were only Dies (as * in the Greek) yet thereby
also the Scripture is wont to signify the self same thing: as, 2 Timothy 1, 12.
28. and 2 Timothy 4, 8. and Heb. 10, 25, the day, as in this place, with the
greek article only, which is al one with Dies illa, or Dies Domini.

15. As by fire.] S. Augustine upon these words of the Psalm 37. Lord rebuke
me not in thine indignation, nor amend me in thy wrath. For it shall come to
pass (says he) that some be amended in the wrath of God, and be rebuked in
his indignation. And not al perhaps that are rebuked, shall be amended, but yet
some there shall be saved by amending. Two fires after this life: one eternal,
the other temporal, that is, the purging or amending fire.
It shall be so surely, because amending it ^amed: yet so as by fire. but some
there shall be that shall be rebuked, and not amended, to whom he shall say, Go ye
into everlasting fire. Fearing therefore these more grievous pains, he desires
that he may neither be rebuked in indignation by eternal fire, nor amended in
his wrath. that is to say, Purge me in this life, and make me such an one as
shall not need the amending fire, being for them which shall be saved, yet so as
by fire. Wherefore? but because here they build upon this foundation, vvood,
hay, stubble? for if they did build gold, silver, and precious stones, they
should be secure from both fires, not only from that eternal which shall
torment the impious eternally: but also from that which shall amend them that
shall be saved by fire. for it is said, he shall be safe, yet so as by fire. And
because it is said, he shall be safe, that fire is contemned. Yea verily though
safe by fire, yet that fire shall be more grievous, Purgatory fire passes all the
pains of this life.
then whatsoever a man can suffer in this life. And you know how great evils
the wicked have suffered, and may suffer: yet they have suffered such as the
good also might suffer. for what has any malefactor suffered by the laws,
that a Martyr has not suffered in the confession of Christ? These evils
therefore that are here* be much more easy, and yet see how men, not to suffer
them, do whatsoever thou co^maundest. How much better do they that which
God commands, that they may not suffer th^se greater pains? Thus far. S.
Augustine. See S. Ambr. upon this place 1 Cor. 3. and Ser. 20 in Psalm. ^18.
Hiero. li. 2 c. 13 adu. Iouinianum. Gieg. li. 4. Dialog. c. ^9. and in Psalm. 1.
P^nit. in principie. Origin. (...). ^ in c. 15. Exodus and b^. 14 in c. 24.
Leuit.

CHAP. IIII.
He requires to be esteemed for his office, but regards not to be praised of
man for his virtue: considering that neither his own conscience is a
sufficient judge thereof, but only God who sees al. 8 He touches them for
contemning in their pride, the Apostles them selves as miserable: 18
threatening to come to those proud Falseapostles who were the authors of al
these schisms.

The Epistle upon the 4 Sunday of Aduent.
and the dispensers of the mysteries of God.

Lo when he named him self, and Apollo, and Cephas: he mea^t other seditious
and factious preachers whose names he spared.
I have transfigured into my self and Apollo, for you: that in us you may
learn, one not to be puffed up against an other, above that is written. The
Epistle upon S. James day, Iul. 25.
For I think that God has shevved us Apostles the last, as it were deputed
to death: because The Epistle for a Confessor that is not a Bishop.
we are made a spectacle to the world, and to Angels and men. So may S.
Augustine our Apostle say to us English men.
if you have ten thousand paedagoges in Christ: yet not many fathers. For in
Christ JESUS by the Gospel I begat you. of them that be puffed up, but the
power.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. IIII.
4. But not justified.] No man sure of grace or justification.
The Heretics are certain that they be in Gods grace, but S. Paul though
guilty of no crime in his conscience, durst not assure him self that he was
justified, neither could take upon him to be judge of his own heart and
cogitations, whether they were pure or no: but the trial thereof he left
only to Gods judging day.

21. In rod.] Spiritual power to punish or pardon.
The Apostles have power of discipline and censures against offenders, and
power of gentleness, meekenes, and indulgence also: to use either punishing or
pardoning, according to their wisdom, and according to the occasions of time
and place.

CHAP. V.
Sharply rebuking their Clergies negligence, The second part of the Epistle: of
the incestuous fornicator: and lavving before Infidels.
3 him self absent excommunicateth that public incestuous person: 6
commanding that hereafter no Christian be so tolerated in any open crime, but
excommunicated.

Leu. 18, 8. 20, 11
Christian men should be sorovvful to see grievous offenses borne vvithal, and
ought zelously to seek the offenders punishment by excommunication.
have not mourned rather, that he might be taken away from among you, that
has done this deed. The Epistle upon Easter day.


Either this Epistle in the words before, or some other.
an epistle, Not to keep company with fornicatours. world, or the covetous,
or the extorsioners, or seruers of Idols: otherwise you should have gone out
of this world. A notorious wilful corruption in the bible 1562: translating in
the verse before, Idolaters: and here, worshipper of images: the Apostles
word being one, (...), Idolater.
a seruer of Idols, or a railer, or a drunkarde, or an extorsioner: with such
an one not so much as to take meat.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. V.
2. I absent.] S. Paul here uses his Apostolic power, of binding this
incestuous person, excommunicating him by his letters and Manda^^^, though
absent.

4. You being gathered.] Though he commanded the act should be done in the
face of the Church, The authority of Ecclesiastical censures is in the Clergy
only, and is executed in the name of Christ.
as such sentences and censures be at this day executed also, yet the judgment
and authority of giving sentence vva^ in him self, and not in the whole
multitude, as the Protestants and the popular Sectaries affirm. for the power
of binding and loosing was not given to the whole Church, but as in the
persons of the Prelates, and to them for the benefit of the whole. Whereupon
S. Chrysostom upon those words, Dic Ecclesia, Tell the Church. Mat. 18:
Complain to the Church, that is, says he, to the Prelates and Presidents
thereof.

4. With the virtue.] Al such great power over sinners, is holden and
exercised in the name and virtue of CHRIST JESUS. And whosoever sets light
by it, despises our Lords name and power.

5. To Satan.] To assure us that al excommunicate persons be in the power and
possession of the Devil, and quite out of Christ's protection as soon as they
be separated by the Churches sentence, from her body and the Sacraments and
fellowship of Christian Catholic men: it pleased God to give power to the
Apostles and Prelates in the primitive Church, The terrible sentence of
excommunication.
to cause the Devil straight upon their sentence of excommunication, to invade
the body of the excommunicate, and to torment him corporally. so Christ
excommunicated Judas, and the Devil entered into him, and he went forth of the
happy fellowship of the Apostles. Io. 13, 27. so this Apostle excommunicated
Alexander and Hymepaeus, Act. 5.
and Satan straight took them: 1 Timothy 1. Yet it is thought that S. Peter
excommunicated Anauias and Sapphira, and for sign of his power and terror of
the sentence, struck them both stark dead. De mirabil. S. Scriptura li. 3 c.
16 apud D. August. Which miraculous power though it be not joined now to
that sentence, yet as far as concerns the punishment spiritual, which it
specially appartaineth unto, it is as before, and is by the judgment of the
holy Doctors (Cypr. ep. 62. nu. 3. Chrysostom. in 1 Timothy 1. ho. 5. Ambros. in 1 Timothy
1. Hiero. ep. ad Heliod. c. 7. August. de cor. and gra. c. 15.) the terriblest
and greatest punishment in the world, yea far passing al earthly pain and
torment of this life, and being a very resemblance of damnation, and so often
called by the Fathers, locis (...).
namely by S. Augustine. And by this spiritual svvord (says S. Cyprian) al
must die in their souls, that obey not the Priests of Christ in the new law,
as they that were disobedient to the judges of the old law, were slain
with the corporal svvord. Would God the world knevv what a marvelous
punishment Christ has appointed the Priests to execute upon the offenders of
his laws, and specially upon the disobedient, as Heretics namely.

8. Let us feast.] Purity in receiving the B. Sacrament.
The Paschal lamb, which was the most express figure of Christ every way*
* was first sacrificed and afterward eaten with azymes or unleavened bread.
Exo. 1^5.
so Christ our Paschal, being then newly sacrificed on the Cross, is
recommended to them as to be eaten with al purity and sincerity, in the holy
Sacrament. Which mystery the holy Church in these words commends to the
faithful every year at the feast of Easter.

11. Not to take meat.] It is not meant that we should separate our selves
corporally from al sinners, We are bound to avoid, not al sinners, but the
excommunicate only, and them, except in certain cases.
or that we might refuse to live in one Church or fellowship of Sacraments
with them, which was the error and occasion of the Donatistes great
schism: nor that every man is straight after he has committed any deadly
sin, excommunicated, as some Lutherans hold: but that we should avoid them
when the Church has excommunicated them for such. though in mind, and
condemnation of their faults, every one ought to be alvvaies far from them. As
for the Heathen and Pagans, which be not under the Churches discipline, and at
that time in external vvorldly affairs dealt with Christians and lived
amongst them whether they would or no, the Apostle did not forbid Christians
their company.

13. The evil one.] He concludes that though they can not, nor him self
neither, cut of the Heathen, that be public offenders, yet the il person by
him excommunicated being one of their own body, they may cut of, as is
aforesaid, and avoid his company. Upon which commandment of the Apostle, we
see that we are bound by Gods word to avoid al company and conversation
with the excommunicate, except in cases of necessity, and the spiritual
profit of the person excommunicated.

CHAP. VI.
He rebukes them for going to law before Judges that were not Christians, 9
telling that extorsion (as many other offenses likewise) is a mortal sin. 12
And with diverse reasons he inueigheth against fornication, bidding also to
flee al occasion thereof.

The faithful judge and give sentence with God at the later day, specially the
Apostles and the perfect Christians that have forsaken al for Christ's sake.
the saints shall judge of the world? And if the world shall be judged by you:
are you unworthy to judge of the lest things? (...)
Do not err, Neither fornicatours, nor For this, the English bible 1562
falsely translateth, worshippers of images.
seruers of Idols, nor aduouterers, nor the effeminat, nor the liers with
mankind,

the belly to the meats: but God vvil destroy both it and them: and the body
not to fornication, but to our Lord, and our Lord to the body. Genesis 2, 24.
For they shall be, says he, two in one flesh. Fornication is not only enemy
to the soul, but wastes, weakeneth, corrupts and defiles the body, more
properly and directly then any other sins do.
against his own body.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. VI.
6. Contendeth in judgment.] Going to law before heathen or heretical judges.
To be given much to brabling and litigiousnes for every trifle, to spend a
pound rather then lose a penny, the Apostle much reprehendeth in Christian men.
For a Christian man to dravv an other to the judgments seats and courts of
Heathen Princes (which then only reigned) and not to suffer their
controversies and quarrels to be taken up among them selves brotherly and
peaceably, was a great fault: as, for one Catholic to draw an other for mere
trifles, Going to law not for bidde^: but to agree otherwise, better.
before secular or heretical Officers, is a very unchristian part.

7. A fault.] He forbade not al judgments of controversies, but only
signified that it was a fault, and that it proceeded of some injuries done one
to an other, and imperfections, that they so molested one an other: and that it
had been more agreeable to Christian perfection and charity, rather to
tolerate and suffer a small injury, then to draw his fellow to judgment and
seats.

CHAP. VII.
That married folk may ask their debt, The 3. part.
and must pay it, Of Marriage and continency.
though it be better for them to contain, 8 as also for the unmarried and
widow to continue single, though they may marry. 10 That the married may
not depart from one an other (nor in any case marry an other, during the life
of the former) 12 unless it be from one that is unbaptized, which yet he
dissuadeth: 17 counseling also every one to be content with his state wherein
he was Christened. 25 Virginity is not commanded, but counseled as the
better and more meritiorious then Marriage, 39 as also vvidovvhod.

debitu^ reddat
render his debt to the wife: and the wife also in like manner to her
husband. If the lay man can not pray, unless he abstain from his wife: the
Priest that always must offer sacrifices, and alvvaies pray, must therefore
alvvaies be free from matrimony. Hiero. li. 1 c. 1^ aduer. Iouin.
that you may give your self to fasting and prayer:
to praier': and return again together, lest Satan tempt you for your
incontinencie.

Before he treated of the continency of such as were married, now he gives
lessons for the unmarried also.
But I say to the unmarried and to widow: it is good for them if they so
abide even as I also. (...).
to be burnt.

Mt. 5, 32 19, 9.
but our Lord, * that the wife depart not from her husband: Mr. 10, 9. Lu. 16,
18.
or to be reconciled to her husband. And let not the husband put away his
wife.

libertus
franchised of our Lord. likewise he that is called, being free, is the
bondsman of Christ. You must not serve men so that you obey and please them more
then God. The Epistle for holy Virgins not Martyrs.
bo^dmen of men. one, brethren,
brother' wherein he was called, in that let him abide before God.

Virginity counseled as the better: Marriage not forbidden, because it is no
sin.
thou have not sinned. And if a virgin marie, she has not sinned.
nevertheless tribulation of the flesh shall such have. but I spare you. having
power of his own vvil, and has judged this in his heart, to keep his
virgin, does well.

To. 7, 2.
but if her husband sleep, she is at liberty: let her marie to whom she
vvil: only in our Lord. The state of vvidovvhod more blessed, then the state of
matrimony.
more blessed shall she be, if she so remain, according to my counsel. and I
think that I also have the Spirit of God.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. VII.
2. His own wise.] (...)
He says not, as the Protestants here pretend to excuse the unlawful
conjunction of Votaries, The Apostle bids not al to marie, but to keep
their vviues before married.
Let every one mary: but, let every one have, keep, or use his own wise to
whom he was married before his conversion. for the Apostle answers here to
the first question of the Corinthians, which was not, whether it were
lavvful to mary, but whether they were not bound upon their conversion, to
abstain from the company of their vviues married before in their infidelity,
as some did persuade them that they ought to do. Hiero. li. 1 cont. Iouin. c.
4. Chrysostom. in hunc locum be. 19.

3. Let the husband render.] These words open the Apostles intention and
talk to be only of such as are already married, and to iustruct them of the
bond and obligation that is between the married couple for rendering of the
debt of carnal copulation one to an other: declaring that the married persons
have yielded their bodies so one to an other, that they can not without mutual
consent, neither perpetually, nor for a time, defraude one the other.

5. Give your self to prayer.] Continence in married folks for prayer sake.
This time, and the Heretics doctrine, and high estimation of matrimonial
acts, are far from the purity of the Apostolic and primitive Church, when
the Chrisians to make their prayers and fastings more acceptable to God,
abstained by mutual consent even from their lavvful vviues. our new Masters
not much absteining (as it may be thought) from their vviues for any such
matter. And yet S. Augustine says, the Prelate should pass other in this
case, and think that not to be lavvful for him, that may be borne in others,
because he must daily supply Christ's room, offer, baptize, and pray for the
people. So says he li. 1. q. (...) vtroque test. q. 127 in fine. See S. Hiero.
li. 1 c. 19 aduers. Iouin. S. Ambr. li. 1 Offic. c. vlt. But alas for the
people, whose married Pastors are in this point far worse then the vulgar
folk, neither teaching continency, nor giving good example.

6. By indulgence, Perpetual continency, even in married folks, better then
carnal copulation.
not commandment.] Lest some might misconstre his former words, as though
he had precisely commanded married persons not to abstain perpetually from
carnal copulation, or not to give their consent one to an other of continency
but for a time only: he declares plainly that he gave no rule or precept
absolutely therein, but that he spoke all the foresaid, condescending to their
infirmities only, insinuating that continency from carnal copulation is much
better, and that him self kept it continually, Aug. de bon. coniug. c. 10.
Enchirid. c. 78.

7. A proper gift.] To such as may lavvfully mary, or be already married, God
gives not alvvaies that more high and special gift or grace of continency,
though every one of them all that duly ask and labor for it, might have it:
but such are not bound to endeavor or seek for it alvvaies, Who are bound to
live continently: and that God gives this gift to all that ask it.
and therefore can not be commanded to abstain further then they like, but
whensoever a man is bound to abstain, either by vovv or any other necessary
occasion (as if one of the parties be in prison, war, banishment, siknos, or
absent perpetually by lavvful divorce) the other must needs in pain of
damnation abstain, and can not excuse the want of the gift of chastity. for
See S. Augustine li. ^. c. 19. 20. de Adult. Coniug to. 4.
he is bound to ask it and to seek for it of God by fasting, praying, and
chastising his body: and so laboring duly for it, God vvil give the grace of
chastity. So had S. Paul it, and so had all the holy men that ever lived chaste.
Therefore detest the doctrine of the Protestants in this point, that when they
list not fast nor pray for it, say they have not the gift. And it were a great
marvel why so fevv of the new Sects or rather none now a days have that
gift, but that we see it is obtained by those means which our forefathers
used, and they use not at all. To live in marriage continently without the
breach of coniugal fidelitio, is a gift of God also, but men must not break
their faith of vvedlocke for want of it, but must know that God gives that
gift to such as humbly ask it of him. August. de gras. and lib. arbitrio c. 4.
De continent. c. 1.

9. If they contain not.] He means of such as be free: for if they marry
after they have made vow or promise to God of chastity, The Apostle permits
marriage to them that be free, not to vowed persons.
they are vvorthely damned, such being bound to contain, and so may contain
if they list. August. de bono viduit. c. 8. 9. and de adult. coniug. li. 1. c.
15. and de fide ad Petrum c. 3. infine. Ambros. ad virg. lapsam c. 5.

9. Better to marry.] It is better to marry for the said persons that be free,
then to be overthrown and fall into fornication, for, to burn, or, to be
burnt, is not to be tempted only (as the Protestants think that pick quarrels
easily to marry) but it signifies * to yield to concupiscence either in mind
or external work. Theodore^ in hunc locum.
Vvse say also, for such as be free, for concerning others lavvfully made
Priests, and such as otherwise have made vow of chastity, they cannot marry
at al, and therefore there is no comparison in them betwixt marriage and
fornication or burning. for their marriage is but pretensed, and is the vvorst
sort of continency and fornication or burning.

11. To remain unmarried.] Neither party may dimisse the other and mary an
other for any cause. After divorce not to marie.
for though they be separated for fornication, yet neither may marry again.
August. de adult. coniug. li. 1 c. 8. 9. and li. 26. 5. 19. See Annotat. Mat.
19. and S. Augustine in his whole books. de adulter, coniugijs to. 6.

12. I say, not our Lord.] The Apostles precepts.
By this we learn, that there were many matters over and above the things
that Christ taught or prescribed, left to the Apostles order and
interprecation: wherein they might, as the case required, either command or
counsel, and we bound to obey accordingly.

14. Sanctified.] When the infidel party is said to be clean or sanctified
by the faithful, or the children of their marriage to be clean, How the
infidel, or infidels child, are sanctified by the Christian.
we may not think that they be in grace or state of salvation thereby, Hiero.
li. 1. c. 5 aduers. Iouin.
but only that the marriage is * an occasion of sanctification to the infidel
party and to the children. for S. Augustine (li. 3 de pec. mer. and remis. c.
12.) concludes against the Pelagians, as we may do against the Caluinists,
holding Christian men's children to be holy from their mothers womb and not to
need Baptism, that what other sanctification soever it be that is here
meant, it can not be enough to salvation without says, Baptism, etc.

19. But the observation.] Neither to be Jew nor Gentil, bond or free, married
or single, nor the faith it self which is proper to Christian men, vvil serve
to salvation, without good works and keeping the commandments. S. Hierom
adu. Iouin. li. 1 c. 16.

25. Counsel I give.] The difference of counsels and precepts.
A counsel is one thing, a commandment is an other. To do that which is
counseled, is not necessary, because one may be saved notvvithstanding. but he
that vvil do that which he is counseled unto, shall have a higher degree of
glory. He that fulfilleth not a commandment, except he do penance. can not
escape punishment. August. li. de virg. c. 13. and 14.

28. If a virgin marry.] A professed virgin may not marry.
He speaks not of that virgin which has dedicated her self to God, (for if
any, such mary, she shall be damned for breaking her first vow) but only of
young maids unmarried in the world. Hiero. adu. Iouin. li. 1 c. 7. Chrysostom. ho
20. Theodorete, Photius, and the other Greek Doctors upon this place apud
Oecum. Epiph. hares. 61.

28. Tribulation of the flesh.] Virginity counseled as more meritorious.
They are matuelously deceived (says S. Augustine li. de virg. c. 1^) that
think the Apostle counseleth virginity rather then marriage, only for that
marriage has many miseries and molestations joined unto it, which by virginity
shall be avoided, and not in respect of the greater reward in heaven. for the
Apostles provident counseling to virginity, is for the next life, and he
alleges these troubles of marriage in that sense specially as they be a
hinderance from the service of God here, and therefore an impediment to us
toward the next life and the more ample joys thereof.

29. As though they had not.] The continency of married folk.
He exhorts that such as have vviues, should not wholy bestovv them selves
in the vain transitory pleasure and voluptuousnes of their flesh, but live in
such moderation, that their marriage hinder them as little as may be, from
spiritual cogitatio^s. Which is best fulfilled of them that by mutual consent
do wholy contain, Their perpetual continency, best.
whether they have had children or none, contemning carnal issue for the joys
of heaven. And these marriages be more blessed then any other, says S.
Augustine de Ser. Do. in monte li. 1 cap. 14.

32. Careful for the things of our Lord.] The Protestants might here learn if
they list, first that virginity is not only preferred before marriage,
Virginity preferred, and why.
for that it is a more quiet state of life in this world, but for that it is
more convenient for the service of God. Secondly that virginity has a
grateful purity and sanctity both of body and soul, which marriage has not.
Thirdly, they may learn the cause why the Church of God requires chastity in
the clergy, Why continency is required in the clergy.
and forbids not only fornication, but al carnal copulation even in lavvful
vvedlocke: Which is not only to the end that Gods Priests be not divided from
him by the clogges of marriage, but also that they be clean and pure from the
fleshly acts of copulation.

CHAP. VIII.
He rebukes the learned who in pride of their knowledge did eat Idolothyta,
that is things offered to Idols, The 4 part.
using (as they said) their liberty: but not considering that the ignorant
took their doing as an example for them to frequent such meats so, Of meats
sacrificed to Idols.
as they did before in their Paganism, with opinion that they did sanctify
the eaters.

Knowledge without charity pusseth up in pride, and profits nothing at al.
when it is joined with charity, then it edifieth. Aug. li. 9 ciu. Dei c. 20.
Knowledge puffs up: but charity edifieth. To. 14, 15
for whom Christ has died? To. 14, 21.
I vvil never eat flesh, lest I scandalize my brother.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. VIII.
1. We al have knowledge.] The spiritual and perfectly instructed Christians
knevv no meats, No meats unclean.
now to be unclean, neither for signification, as in the Law of Moses nor
always by nature and creation, as the Manichees thought: nor by any other
pollution, as in that they were offered to Idols: and therefore they did eat
boldly of such meats as were sacrificed, contemning and condemning their
Idols as mere nothing, and the worship of them as the honor of things
imaginary. Giving of scandal reprehended.
which their fact, for their want of discretion and charity, and for the
use of that their liberty to the offense and scandal of the vveake, the
Apostle does here reprehend.

7. Some with a conscience.] The perfecter man's fault was, that they gave
offense by their eating, to the weaker Christians. Who seeing them whom they
reputed wise and learned, to eat the meats offered to Idols, conceived that
there was some virtue and sanctification in those meats, from the Idol to
which they were offered: and though: that such things were or might be eaten
with the same conscience and devotion as before their conversion. The
Heretics ridiculously apply S. Paul's words against the Churches fastes and
abstinence.


Therefore the case standing thus, and the Apostles discourse of eating or not
eating meats being so as is declared (a thing so evident that it admits no
other interpretation) if the Protestants apply any of this admonition against
our fastes in the Cath. Church, they be to to ridiculous.

10. In the Idols temple.] Like as now, some Catholics have said, they know
that Caluins communion is but as other bread and wine. But yet the ignorant
seeing such go to the Communion, think that it is a good act of Religion. Yea
whatsoever they pretend, it must needs seem an honor to Caluins Communion,
Going to the Communion, what a sin in Catholics.
when they are seen in the Idols temple solemly sitting or communicating at the
abominable table.

CHAP. IX.
To them that so vaunted their liberty about Idolothyta, he brings his own
example, to wit, that he also had liberty to live by the Gospel, but yet that
he used it not, so to avoid scandal of the infirm, and because it was more
meritorious. 24 Declaiming against their security, and shevving them by
similitudes and examples, 24 both of him self, 1 And of the Israelites, that
salvation is not so lightly come by: 14 and so concludes again against eating
of Idolothyta. because it is also to commit idolatry, 22 and not only to give
il example to the infirm.

He names Cephas (that is Peter) to prove his purpose by the example of the
chief and Prince of the Apostles. S. Ambro. S. Chrysostom. Oecum. upon this place.
Cephas? Deu. 25, 4.
Thou shall not moosel the mouth of the ox that In that country they did
tread out their corn with oxen, as we do thresh it out.
treads out the corn. Why, has God care of oxen? ought to ear in hope:
and he that treads, in hope to receive fruit. Deu. 18, 1.
eat the things that are of the holy place: and they that serve (...),
the altar, The English bible (1562) here and in the next chapter, says thrice
for altar, temple: most falsely and heretically, against holy altars, which
about the time of that translation were dug down in England.
participat with the altar?

Not by fiction or simulation, but by compassion of the infirmities of al
sorts. Aug. ep. 9.
I became al things, that I might save al.

The Epistle upon the Sunday of Septuagesme.
al ru^ne in deed, but one receives the price? So run that you may obtain.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. IX.
1. My work.] The Heretics fond pretense of Gods honor.
As he called him self before Gods coadiutor, so here he boldly also chalengeth
the Corinthians conversion to be his handy work in our Lord: nothing
derogating thereby from Christ, as the Protestants rudely charge the Fathers
and Catholic men (under pretense of Gods honor) for using such phrases or
speeches in the Apostles sense, of the Saints or Sacraments.

5. A woman a sister.] Heretical translation.
The Heretics peruersely (as they do al other places for the advantage of
their Sect) expound this of the Apostles wives, new Test. 1580.
and for, woman, translate, wife, al belles founding wedding to them. Where
the Apostle means plainly the devout women that after the manner of Ievvrie
* did serve the preacher of necessaries, Mat. 27, 55.
of which sort many followed Christ, and sustained him and his of their
substance. So does S. Chrysostom, Theodorete, and all the Greeks (Oecu, in
collect super hunc lo.) take it. So does S. Augustine De op. Monach. c. 4. and
S. Hierom li. 1 adu: Iouinianum c. 14. both disputing and proving it by the
very words of the text. S. Ambrose also upon this place. And the thing is
most plain, for to what end should he talk of burdening the Corinthia^,
with finding his wife, when him self (c. 7, 7. 8.) clearly says that he
was single?

7. Who plaieth the soldier?] Pastors and preachers due.
He proves by the Scriptures and natural reasons that Preachers and Pastors
may challenge their finding of their flock, though him self for causes had not,
nor intended not to use his right and liberty therein.

16. If I Euangelize.] Work of supererogation.
If I should preach either of compulsion and seruil fear, or mere necessity,
not having otherwise to live and sustain my self in this world, I could not
look for revvard in heaven. but now doing it, not only as enjoined me, but
also as of love and charity, and freely without putting any man to cost, and
that voluntarely and of very desire to save my hearers, I shall have my revvard
of God, yea and a revvard of Supererogation, which is given to them that of
abundant charity do more in the service of God then they be commanded, as S.
Augustine expounds it. De op. Mon. c. 5.

23. That I may be partaker.] Doing well in respect of reward.
A singular place to convince the Protestants, that vvil not have men work
well in respect of revvard at Gods hand: the Apostle confessing expressly, that
all this that he does either of duty or of Supererogation above duty (as to
preach of freecost, and to work with his own hands to get his own meat
and his fellows, and to abstain from many lavvful things) al is, the rather
to attain the revvard of heaven.

24. So run.] Running for the game.
If such as run for a price, to make them selves more swift, and to win
the game, abstain from many meats and pleasures: what should not we do or
suffer to win the crown of glory, proposed and promised to none but such
as run, travel, and endeavor for it?

27. I chastise.] The goal of everlasting glory is not promised nor set forth
for onely-faith men, for such run at randon: Penance meritorious.
but it is the price of them that chastise and subdue their bodies and fleshly
desires by fasting, watching, voluntary poverty, and other afflictions. Lord,
how far is the carnal doctrine of the Sectaries and the mauers of these
days from the Apostles spirit. Wherein even, we that be Catholics, though
we do not condemn with the Protestants these voluntary afflictions as
superfluous (much less as superstitious or injurious to Christ's death,) but
much commend them, yet we use nothing the zeal and diligence of our first
Christian aunceters herein, and therefore are like to be more subject to Gods
temporal chastisments, at the least in the next life, then they were.

72. Lest perhaps.] Aug. apud Pet. Lomb. in hunc locum.
Here may we lambs tremble (says a holy father) when the ram, the guide
of the flock, S. Paul had not the Protestants security of salvation.
must so labor and punish him self (besides al his other miseries adjoined to
the preaching of the Gospel) lest perhaps he miss the mark. A man might
think S. Paul should be as sure and as confident of Gods grace and salvation
as we poor vvretched caitiues: but the Heretics unhappy security,
presumption, and faithles persuasion of their salvation is not fides
Apostolorum but fides daemoniorum, not the faith of the Apostles, but the faith
of Devils.

CHA. X.
See the argument of the 9 Chapter, which comprehends the contents of this
also.

Exo. 13, 21.
that our fathers were al * under the cloud, Nu. 8, 18*
and al * passed through the sea, Exo. 14, 22.
Exo. 16, 15.
Exo. 17, 6. Nu. 20, 10.
and the rock was Christ,) Nu. 26, 63.
The Epistle upon the 9 Sunday after Pentecost.
that we be not covering evil things, Nu. 11, 4*
as * they also coueted. Exo. 32, 6.
as certain of them: as is written: The people sat down to eat and
drink, and rose up to play. Nu. 25, 1*
and there fell in one day three and twenty thousand. Nu. 21, 5*
and * perished by the serpents. Nu. 11, 23. 14, 37.
as * certain of them murmured, and perished by the destroyer. It is
profitable to al, or in a manner to al, for to keep them in humility, not to
know what they shall be^ says S. Augustine. Which makes against the vain
security of the protestants.
lest he fall. Tentation has not apprthended*
Let not tentation apprehend' you, but humane, and God is faithful, who vvil
not suffer you to be tempted above that which you are able: but vvil make also
with tentation (...)
issue, that you may be able to sustain.

you can not be partakers of the table of our Lord, and of the table of devils.

Al things are lavvful for me, but al things are not expedient. Ps. 23, 1.
The earth is our Lords, and the fulness thereof.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. X.
1. The same.] The old figures of our Sacraments.
The red sea and the cloud, ^ figure of our Baptism: the Manna from heaven and
water miraculously drawn out of the rock, a figure of the holy Sacrament of
Christ's body and blood: our Sacraments containing the things and graces in
truth, which theirs only signified. We receive greater benefits by our
Sacraments the^ the Jews did by theirs.
And it is an impudent forgerie of the Caluinists, Calu. in hunc (...).
to write upon this place, that the Jews received no less the truth and
substance of Christ and his benefits in their figures or Sacraments, then we
do in ours: and that they and we al eat and drink of the self same meat and
drink: the Apostle saying only, that they among them selves did al feed of
one bread, and drink of one rock: which was a figure of Christ, therein
especially, that out of Christ's side pierced upon the Cross, gushed out blood
and water for the matter of our Sacraments.

13. As to wise men.] To cause them to leave the sacrifices and meats or
drinks offered to Idols, The Apostle and ancient fathers speak covertly of
the B. Sacrament.
he puts them in mind of the only true Sacrifice and meat and drink of
Christ's body and blood: of which and the sacrifice of Idols also, they might
not be in any case partakers. Using this term, vt prudentibus loquor, in the
same sense (as it is thought) as the Fathers of the primitive Church did give a
vvatch word of keeping secret from the Infidels and unbaptized, the mystery
of this divine Sacrifice, by these words, Norunt fidels, norunt qui initiati
sunt. August. in Ps. ^9. and 33. Conc. 1. 2. and Ps. 109. Ho. 42. c. 4. in lib.
50 hom. Orig. in Leuit. ho. 9. Chrysostom. ho. 2^ in Genesis in fine ho. 51 ad po.
Antioch. ho. 5. in 1 Timothy S. Paul says, I speak to you boldly of this
mystery as to the vviser and better instructed in the same.

16. Which we bless.] The Apostles blessed the Chalice, and so consecrated.
That is to say, Calix (...) benedicimus.
the Chalice of Consecration which we Apostles and Priests by Christ's
commission do consecrate, by which speech as well the Caluinists (that use no
consecration of the cup at al, (...).
blasphemously calling it magical murmuration, and peruersely referring the
benediction to thanks giving to God) as also the Lutherans be refuted, who
affirm Christ's body and blood to be made present by receiving and in the
receiving only. for the Apostle expressly refers the benediction to the
chalice, and not to God, making the holy blood and the communicating thereof
the effect of the benediction.

16. The participation of the body.] Our uniting to Christ by the B. Sacrament.
The holy Sacrament and Sacrifice of Christ's body and blood being received of
us, joins us in soul and body and engraffeth us into Christ him self, making
us partakers and at a piece of his body and blood. For not by love or spirit
only (says S. Chrysostom) but in very deed we are united in his flesh, made
one body with him, memebers of his flesh and boones. Chrysostom. ho. 45 in Io. sub
finem. And S. Cyril, Such is the force of mystical benediction that it makes
Christ corporally by communicating of his flesh to dwell in us. Cyril. li. 10.
in Io. c. 13.

17. One bread, one body.] As we be first made one with Christ by eating his
body and drinking his blood, Our union among our selves by the B. Sacrament.
so secondly are we conjoined by this one bread which is his body, and cup
which is his blood, in the perfect union and fellowship of al Catholic men,
in one Church which is his body Mystical. Which name of Body mystical is
specially attributed and appropriated to this one commonwealth and Society of
faithful men, by reason that all the true persons and true members of the same,
be maruelously knit together by Christ's own one body, and by the self same
blood in this divine Sacrament. See S. August. li. 21, c. 25 de ciu. Dei.
Hilar. li. 8 de Trin. circamed.

18. They that eat the hosts.] It is plain also by the example of the Jews
in their Sacrifices, that he that eats any of the host immolated, is partaker
of the Sacrifice, and joined by office and obligation to God, of whose
sacrifice he eats.

20. I vvil not have you.] Participation in Sacrament or sacrifice, shows of
what society we are.
I conclude then (says the Apostle) thus: that as the Christian which eats
and drinks of the sacrifice or Sacrament of the altar, by his eating is
participant of Christ's body, and is joined in fellowship to al Christian
people that eat and drink of the same, being the host of the new Law: and
as all that did eat of the hosts of the Sacrifices of Moses Law, were
belonging and associated to that state and to God to whom the Sacrifice was
done: even so whosoever eats of the meats offered to Idols, he shows and
profesteth him self to be of the Communion and Society of the same Idols.

21. You can not drink.] Upon the premises he vvarneth them plainly, that
they must either forsake the sacrifice and fellowship of the Idols and
Idolaters, or else refuse the Sacrifice of Christ's body and blood in the Church.
The sacrifice of the altar is proved, by the Apostles comparison with the
sacrifices of Jews and Gentiles.
In all which discourse we may observe that our bread and chalice, our table
and altar, the participation of our host and oblation, be compared or resembled
point by point, in all effects, conditions, and proprieties, to the altars,
hosts, sacrifices and immolations of the Jews and Gentiles. Which the
Apostle would not, nor could not have done in this Sacrament of the Altar,
rather then in other Sacraments or service of our religion, if it only had not
been a Sacrifice and the proper worship of God among the Christians, as the
other were among the Jews and Heathen. And so do all the Fathers
acknovvledge, calling it only, and continually almost, by such terms as they
do no other Sacrament or ceremony of Christ's religion: The lamb of God laid
upon the table: It is proved to be a sacrifice, out of the fathers.
Conc. Nic. the vnblouddy service of the Sacrifice, In Conc. Ephesians. ep. ad
Nestor. page 605. the Sacrifice of sacrifices: Dionys. Ec. Hier. c. 3. the
quickening holy sacrifice: the vnblouddy host and victime: Cyril. Alex. in
Conc. Ephesians. Anath. 11. the propitiatory sacrifice both for the living and the
dead: Tertul. de cor. Milit. Chrysostom. ho. 41 in 1 Cor. Ho. 3. ad Philip. Ho. 66
ad po. Antioch. Cypr. ep. 66. and de coen. Do. nu. 1. August. Ench. 109.
Quaest. 2. ad Dulcit. to. 4. Ser. 34. de verb. Apost. the Sacrifice of our
Mediator: the sacrifice of our price: the Sacrifice of the new Testament: the
sacrifice of the Church: August li. 9. c. 13. and li. 3 de bapt. c. 19. the one
only inconsumptible victime without which there is no religion: Cyprian. de
coen. Do. nu. 2. Chrysostom. ho. 17 ad Hebr. Cypr. Justin. Irenae. infra.
The pure oblation, the new offering of the new Law: the vital and
impolluted host: the honorable and dreadful Sacrifice: the Sacrifice of thanks
giving or Eucharistical: and the Sacrifice of Melchisedec. Which Melchisedec
by his oblation in bread and wine did properly and most singularly prefigurate
this office of Christ's eternal Priesthod and sacrificing him self under the
forms of bread and wine: which shall continue in the Church through out al
Christian Nations in steed of all the offerings of Aarons Priesthod, as the
Malac. 1, 11.
Prophet Malachie did foretell, as S. Cyprian, S. Iustine, S. Irenaeus and
others the most ancient Doctors and Martyrs do testify. Cypr. ep. 63. nu. 2.
Justin. Dial. cum Trypho. post med. Irenae. li. 4. c. 12. And S. Augustine li.
17 c. 20 de ciu. Dei. and li. 1 cont. adu. leg. and proph. c. 18. and li. ^ de
bapt. c. 19: S. Leo ser. 8 de Passione: and others do expressly avouch that this
one Sacrifice has succeeded al other and fulfilled al other differences of
sacrifices, that it has the force and virtue of al other, The fathers called
this sacrifice, the MASS.
to be offered for all persons and causes that the others, for the living and
the dead, for sins and for thanks giving, and for what other necessity so
ever of body or soul. Ambros. ep. (...).
Which holy action of Sacrifice they also call the MASS in plain words.
August. ser. 251. 91. Con. Carthag. 2, c. 3. 4. c. ^4. Mileuit. c. 12. Leo ep.
88. 81 c. 2. Grego. li. 2. ep. 9* 93. etc. This is the Apostles and Fathers
doctrine. God grant the Adversaries may find mercy to see so evident and
invincible a truth.

21. Partakers of the table.] The distinction of Christian Catholics from the
rest, is by not communicating with the^* specially in their sacrifices, and at
the Communion table.
Though the faithful people be many ways known to be Gods peculiar, and be
joined both to him and among them selves, and also severed and distinguished
from al others that pertain not to him, as well Jews and Pagans, as
Heretics and Schismatikes, by sundry other external signs of Sacraments,
doctrine, and government: yet the most proper and substantial union or
difference consists in the Sacrifice and Altar: by which God so specially
binds his Church unto him, and him self unto his Church, that he
acknowledges none to be his, that is not partaker of his one only Table and
Sacrifice in his Church: and acquitteth him self of al such as join in
fellowship with any of the Heathen at their Idolatry, or with the Jews at
their Sacrifices, or with Heretics and Schismatikes at their profane and
detestable table. Which because it is the proper badge of their separation
from Christ and his Church, and an altar purposely erected against Christ's
Altar, Priesthod, The heretics Communion is the very table and cup of Devils.
and Sacrifice, is in deed a very sacrifice, or (as the Apostle here speaks)
a table and cup of Devils, that is to say, wherein the Devil is properly
served, and Christ's honor (no less then * by the altars of Jeroboam or any
profane superstitious rites of Gentiliti^) defiled. 3. reg. 12.
And therefore al Catholic men, if they lock to have fellowship with Christ
and his members in his body and blood, must deem of it as of Idolatry or
sacrilegious superstition, and abstain from it and from al society of the
same, as good To bie did from Ieroboams calves and the altars in Dan and
Bethel: Tob. 1.
and as the good faithful did from the Excelses, 3. reg. (...).
and from the temple and sacrifices of Samaria. Now in the Christian times we
have no other Idols, but heresies, nor Idolothytes, but their false services
shifted into our Churches in steed of Gods true and only worship. Cypr. de
unit Ec. nu. 2 Hiero. in 11 Osee. and 8. Amos. and in 2. Habat. Aug. in ps. 80.
v. 10. De Ciu. Dei li. 18. c. 51.

23 Al things are lavvful.] Hitherto the Apostles arguments and examples
whereby he would auert them from the meats offered to Idols, How by
participatio^ with idolaters, idolatry is committed.
seem plainly to condemn their fact as Idololatrical, or as participant and
accessory to Idolatry, and not only as of sca^dal given to the weak
brethren: and so no doubt it was in that they went into the very temple of the
Idols; and did with the rest that served the Idols, eat and drink of the
flesh and libaments directly offered to the Idol, yea and feasted together in
the same bankets made to the honor of the same Idols: which could not but
defile them and entangle them with Idolatry: not for that the meat it self
was justly belonging to any other but to God, or could be defiled, made
noisome or unlawful to be eaten, but for and in respect of the abuse of the
same and detestable dedicating of that to the devil, which belonged not to
him, but to God alone. Of which sacrilegious act that ought not to be
partakers, as needs they must, How to avoid scandal in things indifferent.
entering and eating with them in their solemnities, to this end has S. Paul
hi^ her to admonished the Corinthians. Now he declares that otherwise in
profane feasts it is lavvful to eat without curious doubting or asking
whether this or that were offered meats, and in markettes to bye whatsoever
is theresold, without scruple and without taking knowledge whether it be of
the Idolothytes or no: with this exception, first, that if one should inuit
him to eat, or bye this or that as sacred and offered meats, that then he
should not eat it, lest he should seem to approve the offering of it to the
Idol, or to like it the better for the same. Secondly, when the vveake brother
may take offense by the same. For though it be lavvful in it self to eat any
of these meats without care of the Idol: yet al lavvful things be not in
every time and place expedient to be done.

CHAP. XI.
He commends them for keeping his Traditions generally. 3 and in particular
for this, that a man prayed and prophesied bareheaded, The. 5. part.
a woman veiled, he brings many reasons. 17 About another, he reprehendeth
the rich that at the Charitable supper supped uncharitably, Of his Traditions.
as telling them that they received therefore vnvvorthely the B. Sacrament, 23
telling them that they received therefore vnvvorthely the B. Sacrament, and
shevving them what an heinous sin that is seeing it is our Lords body and
the representation of his death, as he by tradition had taught them.

In the greek, Traditions, (...).
precepts.

Genesis 2, 21.
but the woman of the man. churches*
we have no such custom, nor the `CHVRCH' of God.

The Epistle upon Maundy Thursday.
but to worse.

The Epistle upon CORPUS Christi day.
For I received of our Lord that which also I have delivered unto you, Mat.
26, 26.
The Apostles drift in all that he says here of the Sacrament, is against
unworthy receiving (as S. Augustine also notes Ep. 11^. c. 3.) and not to set
out the whole order of ministratio^, as the heretics do ignora^tly imagine.
that our Lord JESUS in the night that he was betrayed, Mr. 14, 22.
took bread: Luc. 22, 19.
Take ye and eat, THIS IS MY BODY WHICH SHALL BE DELIVERED FOR YOU: this do
ye for the commemoration of me.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XI.
2. My precepts.] Our Pastors and Prelates have authority to command, and we
are bound to obey. And the Gouerners of the Church may take order and prescribe
that which is comely in every state, as time and place require, though the
things be not of the substance of our religion.

5. Every woman.] What gifts of God so ever women have, though supernatural,
as some had in the Primitive Church, yet they may not forget their vvomanly
shamefastnes, but show them selves subject and modest, and cover their heads
with a veil.

16. Custom.] If women or other, to defend their disorder and malipertnes,
dispute or allege Scriptures and reasons, The Custom of the Church, is a good
answer against al vvranglers.
or require causes of their preachers why and by what authority they should
be thus restrained in things indifferent, make them no other answer but this,
This is the custom of the Church, this is our custom. Which is a goodly rule
to repress the sauciness of contentious ^anglers, which being out of al
modesty and reason, never want words and replies against the Church. Which
Church if it could then by prescription of twenty or thirty years, and by the
authority of one or two of their first preachers, stop the mouths of the
seditious: what should not the custom of fiftene hundred years, and the
decrees of many hundred Pastors, gain of reasonable, modest, and humble men?

19. There must be heresies*] When the Apostle says, That heresies shall come,
and wherefore.
Heresies must be: He shows the event, and not that God has directly so
appointed it as necessary. for, that they be, it comes of man's malice and
free vvil: but that they be converted to the manifestation of the good and
constant in faith and the Churches unity, that is Gods special work of
providence that works good of evil. And for that there should fall Heresies
and Schisms, specially concerning the Article and use of the B Sacrament of
the Altar, What commodity we may make of heresies.
whereof he now begins to treat, it may make us marvel the less, to see
so great dissensions. Heresies, and Schisms of the wicked and vveake in faith
concerning the same. Such things then vvil be, but vvo to him by whom scandals
or Sects do come. Let us use Heretics, says S. Augustine, not to that end to
approve their errors, but that by defending the Catholic doctrine against
their deceices, we may be more vvatchful and wary: because it is most truly
written. There must be heresies that the tried and approved may be manifested
or discoured from the holovv hearts among you. Let us use this benefit of Gods
providence, for Heretics be made of such as would err or be naught, though
they were in the Church: but being out, they profit us excedingly, not by
teaching the truth which they know not, but by stirring up the carnal in the
Church to seek truth, and the spiritual Catholics, to dear the truth, for
there be innumerable holy approved men in the Church, but they be not discerned
from other among us, nor manifest, so long as we had rather sleep in darkness
of ignorance, then behold the light of truth. therefore many are raised out of
their sleep by Heretics to see the day of God, and are glad thereof. August.
c. 8. de vera relig.

20. Our Lords supper.] The Christians at or about the time of the Churches
only Sacrifice and their communicating thereof, kept great feasts: which
continued long, for that the relief of the poor upon the common charges of
the richer sort, Agapae or suppers of charity.
and the charity and unity of al sorts were much preserved thereby, Co^c.
Gang. can. 11.
for which cause they were called (...), that is, Charities, of the ancient
Fathers, and were kept commonly in Church houses or porches adjoining, or in
the body of the Church (whereof see Tertullian Apolog. c. 19. Conc Loadic.
can. 27. 28.
Clemens Alexand. S. Iustine, S. Augustine cont. Faiest. li. 20 c. 20.) after
the Sacrifice and Communion was ended, as S. Chrysostom ho. 27. in 1 Cor. in
initio judges. Those feasts S. Paul here calls Coenas Dominicas, because
they were made in the Churches which then were called Dominica, Whether the
Apostle mean by our Lords supper, the B. Sacrament.
that is, Our Lords houses. The disorder therefore kept among the Corinthians
in these Church-feastes of Charity, the Apostle seeks here to redress: from
the foul abuses expressed here in the text. And as S. Ambrose in hunc locum,
and most good authors now think, this which he calls Dominicam coenam, is
not meant of the B. Sacrament, as the circunstances also of the text do give,
namely, the rejecting of the poor, the rich men's private devouring of al, not
expecting one an other, glottony and drunkenness in the same, which can not
agree to the holy Sacrament. And therefore the Heretics have small reason, upon
this place, to name the said holy Sacrament, rather, the Supper of the Lord,
then after the manner of the primitive Church, the Eucharist, MASS, or
Liturgy. But by like they would bring it to the supper again or Evening
service, when men be not fasting, the rather to take away the old estimation
of the holiness thereof.

23. I have delivered.] Tradition without vvriting.
As al other parts of religion were first delivered by preaching and word of
mouth to every Nation converted, so this holy order and use of the B. Sacrament
was by S. Paul first given unto the Corinthians by tradition. Unto which as
received of our Lord he reuoketh them by this Epistle, not putting in vvriting
particularly al things pertaining to the order, use, and institution, Whether
the catholics or Protestants do more imitate Christ's institution of the B.
Sacrament.
as he afterward says: but repeating the sum and substance thereof, and
leaving the residue to his return. But his words and narration here written
we vvil particularly prosecute, because the Heretics make profession to
follow the same in their pretended reformation of the MASS.

23. Ia the night.] First the Adversaries may be here convinced that all the
circumstances of time, person, and place which in Christ's action are noted,
need not to be imitated. As, that the Sacrament should be ministered at night,
to men only, to only twelve, after or at supper, and such like: because (as
S. Cyprian ep. ^3. nu. ^. and S. Augustine ep. 118. c. 6. note) there were
causes of those accidents in Christ that are not now to be alleged for us. He
instituted then this holy act: we do not, he made his Apostles Priests, Al
circunsta^ces in our Saviors action about the B. Sacrament, need not be
imitated.
that is to say, gave them commission to do and minister the same: we do not
he would have this the last act of his life and within the bounds of his
Passion: it is not so with us. he would eat and make an end of the Paschal
to accomplish the old Law: that can not be in our action. therefore he must
needs do it after supper and at night: we may not do so. he excluded al
women, all the rest of his Disciples, al lay men: we inuit al faithful, men
and women. In many circunstances then, neither we may imitate Christ's first
action, nor the Heretics as yet do: though they seem to incline by abandoning
other names saving this (calling it Supper) to have it at night and after
meat. though (as is before noted) they have no just cause to call it so upon
Christ, fact, seeing the Evangelists do plainly show * that the Sacrament
was instituted after Supper, Io. 13, 2.
as the Apostle him self here records of the later part in express^ speech.
And most men think, a long sermon and the washing of the Apostles feet came
between, yea and that the supper was quite finished, and grace said. But in all these and such like things, the Catholic Church only, by Christ's Spirit
can tell, which things are imitable, which not, in all his actions.

^1. Took.] Christ took bread into his hands, applying this ceremony,
action, and benediction to it, Luc. 9, 16.
and did bless the very element, used power and active word upon it, * as he
did over the bread and fishes which he multiplied: The Protestants imitate not
Christ in blessing the bread and wine.
and so does the Church of God: and so do not the Protestants, if they follow
their own book and doctrine, but they let the bread and cup stand a loofe,
and occupy Christ's words by way of report and narration applying them not
at al to the matter proposed to be occupied: and therefore howsoever the simple
people be deluded by the rehearsal of the same words which Christ used, yet
consecration, benediction, or sanctification of bread and wine they profess
they make none at al. At the first alteration of religion, there was a figure
of the Cross at this word. He blessed: and at the word, He took, there
was a gloss or rubrike that appointed the Minister to imitate Christ's action,
and to take the bread into his hands: afterward that was reformed and
Christ's action abolished, and his blessing of bread turned to thanks giving
to God.

23. Bread.] They imitate him not in unleavened bread, and mingling water with
wine.
Christ made the holy Sacrament of unleavened bread, and all the Latin Church
imitateth him in the same, as a thing much more agreeable to the signification
both in it self and in our lives, then the leaven. Yet our Adversaries neither
follow Christ, S. Paul, nor the west Church, in the same: but rather purposely
make choice of that kind that is in it self more unseemly, and to the first
institution less agreeable. In the other part of the Sacrament they contemn
Christ and his Church much more impudently and damnably. For Christ and all the
Apostles and al Catholic Churches in the world have ever mixed their wine
with water, for great mystery and signification, specially for that water
gushed together with blood out of our Lords side. This our Lord did (says S.
Cyprian Ep. 63 ad Cecilium. nu. 4, 7.) and none rightly offers, that
follows not him therein. Thus Irenaeus (li. 5. c. 1.) Iustine (Apolog. 2. in
fine.) and all the Fathers testify the Primitive Church did, and in this sort
it is done in all the MASSES of the Greeks, S. James, S. Basils, S.
Chrisostoms: and yet our Protestant: pretending to reduce al to Christ, vvil
not do as he did, and all the Apostles and Churches that ever were.

24. This is.] These words being set down, not in the person of the
Evangelists or Apostles, The words of consecration, to be said over the
bread and wine. the which the Protestants do not.
but expressed as in Christ's own person, to be said over the bread, and the
like over the wine, are the forms of the Sacrament and words of
consecration: neither is it a Sacrament but (as S. Augustine says) when the
words come, tract, ^0 in Io.
that is to say, actiuely and presently be applied to the elements of the same.
Therefore the Protestants never applying these words more then the whole
narration of the institution, nor reciting the whole (as is said) otherwise
then in historical manner, (as if one would minister Baptism and never apply
the words of the Sacrament to the child, but only read Christ's speeches of
the same) make no Sacrament at al. And that these proper words be the only
form of this Sacrament, and so to be spoken over or upon the bread and wine,
S. Ambrose plainly and precisely vvriteth, recording how far the Evangelists
narratiue words do go, and where Christ's own peculiar mystical words
of consecration begin: and so the rest of the fathers. Ambro. li. 4. de Sacr.
e. 4. etc. 9. de init. Myster, Iusti. Apolog. 2. in fine. Cypr. de Can. Do. nu.
1. 2. Aug. Ser. 28. de verb. Do. sec. Mat. Tertul. li. 4. cont. Marc. Chrysostom.
ho. 2. in 2. ad Tim. in fine. and ho. de prodit. Judah to. 3. Grego. Nyss. in
orat. Catech. Damase. li. 4. c. 14.

24. My body.] When the words of Consecration be by tho said impiety of the
Protestants, thus removed from the elements: The Protestants have taken away
the B. Sacrament altogether.
no marvel if Christ's holy body and blood be not there, or that it is now no
more a Sacrament, but common bread and wine. So they that unjustly charge the
Cath. Church with defrauding the people of one piece of the Sacrament, have in
very deed left no part nor spice of Sacrament, neither following Christ, as
they pretend, nor S. Paul, nor any Evangelist, but their own detestable Sect,
having boldly defaced the whole institution, not in any accidental indifferent
circunstances, but in the very substance and al. The right name is gone, the
due elements both gone, no blessing or consecration, or other action over them,
the forms be gone: and consequently the body and blood, the Sacrament and the
Sacrifice.

24. This do.] The power to consecrate given to Priests only.
By these words, authority and power is given to the Apostles, and by the
like, in the Sacrament of Orders, to al lavvful Priests only. No marvel then
that the new heretical Ministers being lay men, give the people nothing but
bare bread and wine, profane, naked, and natural elements void of Sacrament
and al grace. See the Annotation upon S. Luke chap. 22, 19.

24. Take and eat.] This pertains to the receiving of those things which by
consecration are present and sacrificed before: as when the people or Priests
in the old Law did eat the hosts offered or part thereof, they were made
partakers of the sacrifice done to God before. The Sacrament consists not in
the receiving.
And this is not the substance, or being, or making of the Sacrament or
Sacrifice of Christ's body and blood: but it is the use and application to the
receiver, of the things which were made and offered to God before. There is a
difference betwixt the making of a medecin or the substance and ingredience
of it, and the taking of it. Now the receiving being but a consequence or one
of the ends why the Sacrament was made, and the mean to apply it unto us:
the Adversaries unlearnedly make it al and some, ad therefore improperly name
the whole Sacrament and ministration thereof, Why the Protestants call it the
Communion.
by calling it the Communion. Which name they give also rather then any other,
to make the ignorant believe that many must communicate together: as though it
were so called for that it is common to many. By which collusion they take
away the receiving of the Priest alone, of the sick alone, Communion, which
is a part of the MASSES, what it signifies.
of reserving the consecrated Host and the whole Sacrament. Against which
deceit, know that this part of the MASS is not called Communion, for that
many should concur together always in the external Sacrament: but for that
we do communicate or join in unity and perfect fellowship of one body, with
al Christian men in the world, with al (we say) that eat it through the
whole Church, and not with them only which eat with us at one time. And
this fellowship rises of that, that we be every time we receive either alone
or with company, partakers of that one body which is received through out all the world. It is called communion (says S. Damascent) and so in deed it is,
li. 4. c. 14. de orthod, fide.
for that by it we comunicate with Christ and be partakers of his flesh and
divinity, and by it do co^communicate and are united one with an other.
only let us take heeds that we do not participat with heretics. And when
the Apostle says, that al be one bread and one body that are partakers of one
Bread, he means not of them only that communicate at one time and place: but
that al be so, that communicate in unity through the whole Church. The^ the
name Communion is as ignorantly used of them, as the name of Supper.

26. You shall show.] Upon this word the Heretics fondly ground their false
supposition, that this Sacrament can not rightly be ministered or made without
a sermon of the death of Christ: How Christ's death is showed by the B.
Sacrament it self, without sermon or otherwise.
and that this and other Sacraments in the Church, be not profitable, when they
be ministered in a strange language. As though the grace, force, operation, and
actiuitie, together with the iustruction and representation of the things
which they signify, were not in the very substance, matter, form, use, and
work it self of every of the Sacraments: and as though preaching were not
one way to show Christ's Passion, and the Sacraments an other way: namely
this Sacrament, containing in the very kinds of the elements and the action, a
most lively representation of Christ's death. As vvisely might they say that
neither Abels sacrifice nor the Paschal lamb could signify Christ's death
without a Sermon.

27. Guilty of the body.] The wicked receive the body and blood. The real
presence is proved by the heinous offe^se of unworthy receiving.
First hereupon mark well, that il men receive the body and blood of Christ,
be they infidels or il livers. For in this case they could not be guilty of
that which they receive not. Secondly, that it could not be so heinous an
offense for any man to receive a piece of bread or a cup of wine, though
they were a true Sacrament. For it is a deadly sin to receive any Sacrament
with vvil and intention to co^tinevv in sin, or, without repentance of
former sins: but yet by the unworthy receiving of no other Sacrament is man
guilty of Christ's body and blood, but here, where the unworthy (as S.
Chrysostom says) does vilany to Christ's own person, as the Jews or
Gentiles did, that crucified it. Chrysostom. ho. de non contemn. Ec. etc. Ho. 60 and
61 ad po. Antioch. Which inuincibly proves against the Heretics that Christ
is really present.

28. Let him prove.] Confession before receiving the B. Sacrament.
A man must examine his life diligently whether he be in any mortal sin, and
must confess him self of every offense which he knovveth or fears to be
deadly, before he presume to come to the holy Sacrament. For so the Apostles
doctrine here, with the continual custom of the Cath. Church and the Fathers
example, bind him to do. Cypr. de laps. nu. 7. Aug. Eccl. dog. c. 53.

29. Not diseruing the body.] Adoration of the B. Sacrament.
That is, because he puts no difference nor distinction betwixt this high
meat and others* and therefore S. Augustine says ep. 118. c. 3. that it is he
that the Apostle says shall be damned, that does not by singular veneration or
adoration make a difference between this meat and al others. And again in
Psalm. 98. No man eats it before he adore it. And S. Ambrose li. 3, c. 12 de
Sp. San. We adore the flesh of Christ in the Mysteries. S. Chrysostom ho. 24
in 1 Cor. We adore him on the altar, as the Sages did in the manger. S.
Nazianzene in Epitaph. Gorgoniae. My sister called on him which is worshipped
upon the altar. Theodorete Dial. 2 Inconf. The Mystical tokens be adored. S.
Denis, this Apostles scholar, made solemn invocation of the Sacrament after
Consecration. Ecclesiast. Hier. c. 1 part. ^ in princip. and before the
receiving, the whole Church of God cries upon it, See the Annot.
Domine non sum digni^s, The manifold honor and discerning of Christ's body in
the Cath. Church.
Deus propitius este mihi peccators. Lamb of God that take away the sins
of the world, have mercy on us. And for better discerning of this divine
meat, we are called from common profane houses to Gods Churchs for this, Mat.
^, ^.
we are forbidden to make it in vulge. apparel, and are appointed sacred
solemn vestiments. Hiero. in Epitaph. N^pot. and li. 2 adu. Pelag. c. 9.
Paulinus ep. 12 ad Sever. Io. Diaco. in vit. D. Greg. li. 3, c. 59. For this,
is the halovving of Corporals and Chalices; Ambr. 2 Off. c. 28. Nazianz, Orat.
ad Arianos: Optatu^ li. 6 in initio. for this, profane tables are removed and
altars consecrated: August. Ser de temp. 255. for this, the very Priests them
selves are honorable, chaste, sacred, Hiero. ep. 1 ad Heliodorum c. ^ Li^ adu.
Iouin. c. 19 Ambros. in 1 Timothy 3. for this, the people is forbidden to touch it
with common hands. Nazianz. orat. ad A^^ano^ in initio. for this, great care
and solicitude is taken that no part of either kind fall to the ground, Cyril.
Hieros. mystag. 5 in fine. Orig. ho. 13 in c. 25 Exodus for this sacred
provision is made that if any hosts or parts of the Sacrament do remain
vnreceiued, they be most religiously reserved with al honor and diligence
possible, and for this, examination of consciences, confession, continency,
and (as S. Augustine says) receiving it fasting. ep. 118, c. 6.
Thus dovve Catholics and the Church of God discern the holy Body and blood
by S. Paul's rule, The Profane bread of the Protestants.
not only from your profane bread and v^ine (which not by any secret abuse
of your Curats or Clerks, but by the very order of your book, the Minister,
if any remain after your Communion, may take home with him to his own use
and therefore is no more holy by your own judgment then the rest of his
meats) but from al other either vulgar or sanctified meats, as Aug. de pec.
merit. li. 2. c. 24. Ep. Judah.
the Catechumens bread, and our usual holy bread. If all this be plain and
true, Holy bread.
and you have nothing agreeable to the Apostles nor Christ's institution, but al
clean^ contrary: then imporet vobis Deus and confound you for not discerning
his holy Body, and for conculcating the blood of the new Testament.

^0. Many sleep.] Unworthy receiving.
We see here by this, it is a fearful case and crime to defile by sin (as
much as in us lies) the body of Christin the Sacrament. seeing God struck
many to death for it in the Primitive Church, and punished others by grievous
sickness. No marvel that so many strange diseases and deaths fall upon us now
in the world.

31. Judge your selves.] Penance and satisfaction.
We may note here that it is not enough, only to sin no more, or to repent
lightly of that which is past: but that we should punish our selves according
to the weight of the faults past and forgiven: and also that God vvil punish
us by temporal scourges in this life or the next, if we do not make our selves
very clean before we come to receive his holy Sacrament. whose hea^y hands
we may escape by punishing our selves by fasting and other penance.

33. Expect one an other.] Returning now to their former fault and disorder
for the which he took this occasion to talk of the holy Sacrament, and how
great a fault it is to come vnvvorthely to it: he exhorts them to keep their
said suppers or feasts in unity, peace, and sobriety, the rich expecting
the poor etc.

34. I vvil dispose.] The Mass is agreeable to the Apostles use and tradition:
the Communion is not.
Man particular orders and decrees, more then be here or in any other book of
the new Testament expressly written, did the Apostles, as we see here, and
namely S. Paul to the Corinthians, set down by tradition, which our whole
ministration of the MASS is agreeable unto, as the substance of the Sacrifice
and Sacrament is by the premises proved to be most consonant: Caluins supper
and Communion in all points wholy repugnant to the same. And that it agrees
not to these other not vvritte^ traditions, Aug. ep. 118 c. 6.
they easily confess. The * Apostles delivered unto the Church to take it
only fasting: they care not for it. The Apostles taught the Church to
consecrate by the words and the sign of the Cross, without which (says
S. Augustine tract. in Io. 118. Ser. ^5, in append. Chrysostom. ho. (...) in 16
Mat.) no Sacrament is rightly perfited: Aug. tract 84 in Io. and Chrysostom. ho.
(...) in Act.
the Protestants have taken it away. The Apostles taught the Church to keep *
a Memory or invocation of Saints in this Sacrifice: the Caluinists have none.
The Apostles decreed that in this Sacrifice there should be special prayers for
the dead, Chrysostom. ho. in ep. ad Philip. Aug. de cur. pro mort. c. 1: they have
none. Likewise that water should be mixed with the win^, and so forth. See
Annot. in c. 11, (...). 23. Bread. Therefore if Calvin had made his new
administration according to all the Apostles written words, yet not knovving
how many things beside, the Apostle had to prescribe in these words, Catera
cum vener^ disponam (the rest I will dispose, when I come) he could not have
satisfied any wise man in his new change. But now seeing they are fallen to so
palpable blindness, that their doing is directly opposite to the very Scripture
also, which they pretend to follow only, and have quite destroyed both the
name, substance, and al good accidents of Christ's principal Sacrament, we
trust all the world will see their folly and impudency.

CHAP. XII.
They must not make their diuersitle of Gifts an occasion of Schism,
considering that al are of one Holy Ghost, and for the profit of the one body
of Christ which in the Church: 12 Which also could not be a body, without
such variety of members. The 6. part.
12 Therefore neither they that have the inferior gifts, must be discontent,
As couching the Gifts of the Holy Ghost.
seeing it is Gods distribution: nor they that have the greater, contemn the
other, considering they are no less necessary: 25 but al in all join
together, 2^. and every one know his own place.

The Epistle upon the 10 Sunday after Rentecost.
you went to dumme Idols according as you were led.

Al these Gifts be those which the lear n^ecall Gratias gratis datas: which
be bestovved often even upon il livers, which have not the other graces of God
whereby their persons should be grateful, just and holy in his sight.
the word of wisdoms: and to an other, the word of knowledge according to
the same Spirit:

To. 12, 4*
and has many members, and all the members of the body whereas they be many,
Ephesians. 4, 7.
yet are A marvelous vnio^ betwixt christ and his Church and a great comfort to
al Catholics being members thereof, that the church and he, the head and the
body, make and be called one Christ. Aug. de unit. Ec.
one body: so also Christ. one body,
one', whether Jews, or Gentiles, or bondmen, or free: and in one Spirit we
were al made to drink.

Ephesians. 4, 11.
thirdly doctors, next miracles, the^ the graces of doing cures, helps,
gouernements, kinds of tongues. S. Augustine ep. 137* gives the same reason,
why miracles and cures be done at the memories or bodies of some Saints more
then at others: and by the same Saints in one place of their memories rather
then at other places.
are al miracles?

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XII.
9. Faith in the same.] Zealous faith.
This faith is not an other in substance then the common faith in Christ, but
is of an other accidental quality only, that is, of more seruor, devotion,
zeal, and confident trust, specially for doing of miracles.

13. If the foot.] Unity.
The Church is of exceeding great distinction of members, gifts, orders, and
offices: yet of great concord, concurrence, mutual communion and participation
in all actions of her members among them selves, and with Christ the head of
the Body.

25. Schism in the body.] Schism.
As Charity and unity of spirit, is the proper bond and weal of the common
Body: so is division or Schism, which is the interruption of peace and mutual
Societie-betvvene the parts of the same, the special plague of the Church, and
as odious to God as rebellion to the temporal Sovereign.

CHAP. XIII.
That above al other Gifts they should seek after Charity: as that without
which nothing profits, 4 and which does al as (...) to be done, and
remains also in heaven.

The Epistle upon the Sunday of Quinquagesme, called Shrouesunday.
and have not charity: I am become as sounding brass, or a tinkling cymbal.
This proves that faith is nothing vvorth to salvation without works, and
that there may be true faith without Charity.
have al faith so that I could remove mountains, and have not charity, I am
nothing.

with the truth: By this text S. Augustine li. ^2. Ciu. c. 29 proves that the
Saints in heaven have more perfect knowledge of our affairs here, then they
had when they lived here.
when that shall come that is perfect, that shall be made void that is in part.
Charity is of all the three the greatest. How then does only says, being
inferior to it, save and justify, and not Charity?
greater of these is charity.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XIII.
1. Not Charity.] Charity.
Without Charity, both tovvard every particular person, and specially tovvard
the common body of the Church, none of all the gifts and graces of God he
profitable.

1. Deliver my body.] Believe (says S. Augustine) assuredly and hold for
certain, that no Heretic and Schismatike that unites not him self to the
Catholic Church again, False Mattyrs.
how great alms so ever he give, yea or shede his blood for Christ's name,
can possibly be saved. For, many Heretics by the cloak of Christ's cause,
deceiving the simple, suffer much. But where true faith is not, there is no
justice, because the just lives by faith. So it is also of Schismatikes,
because where charity is not, justice can there be none: which if they had,
they would never pluck in peetes the body of Christ which is the Church.
Aug. seu Pulg. de sid. ad Pet. c. 39. So says S. Augustine in diverse places,
not only of Heretics that died directly for defense of their heresy, as the
Anabaptists and Caluinists now a days do (for that is more damnable:) but of
some Heretics and Schismatikes that may die among the Heathen or Turks for
defense of truth or some Article of Christ's religion. Aug. de verb. D^. ser.
50* c. 2. and in Ps. 34 conc. 2 prope finem. Cypr. de unit. Ec. nu. ^.

13. These three.] The 3 virtues theological. Charity is lost by mort^l sin,
not faith.
These are the three virtues Theological, each one by nature and definition
distinct from an other* and faith is by nature the first, and may be and often
is before, and without Charity: and truly remains in diverse after they
have by deadly sin lost Charity. Bevvare therefore of the Heretics opinion,
which is that by every mortal sin faith is lost no less then charity.

CHAP. XIIII.
Against their vain childishnes, that thought it a goodly matter to be able to
speak (by miracle) strange languages in the Church, Much like to some fond
Linguists of our time, who think them selves better then a doctor of Divinity
that is not a Linguist.
preferring their languages before prophesying, that as, opening of Mysteries:
he declares that this Gift of languages is inferior to the Gift of prophecy.
26 Giving order also how both gifts are to be used, to wit, the Prophet to
submit him self to other Prophets: and the Speaker of languages not to publish
his inspiration, unless there be an interpreter, (...) Provided alvvaies, that
women speak not at al in the Church.



By this word are meant al rude unlearned men, but specially the simple which
were yet vncharistened, as the Catechumens, which came in to those spiritual
exercises, as also infidels did at their pleasures.
idiotae*
of the vulgar how shall he say, Amen, upon thy blessing? because he knovveth
not what thou say. with tongues more the^ you all.
with the tongue of you al'. others also: rather then ten thousand words in
a tongue. Es. 28, 11*
That in other tongues and other lips I vvil speak to this people: and
neither so vvil they hear me, says our Lord.



2. Tim. 2, 12.
for it is not permitted them to speak, Genesis 3, 16.
but to be subject, as also * the Law says.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XIIII.
1. Rather prophecy.] A paraphrastical exposition of this Chapter concerning
unknown tongues.
The gift of prophesying, that is, of expounding the hard points of our
religion, is better then the gift of strange tongues, though both be good.

2. Not to men.] To talk in a strange language, unknown also to him self,
profits not the hearers, though in respect of God who understands al
tongues and things, and for the mysteries which he utters in his spirit, and
for his own edification in spirit and affection, there be no difference: but
the Prophet or Expositor treating of the same matters to the understanding of
the whole assembly, edifieth not him self alone but al his hearers.

6. If I come.] That is, If I your Apostle and Doctor should preach to you in
an unknown tongue, and never use any kind of exposition, interpretation, or
explication of my strange words, what profit could you take thereby?

8. If the trumpet.] As the Trumpeter can not give warning to or from the
fight, unless he use a distinct and intelligible sound or stroke known to the
souldiars: even so the preacher that exhorts to good life, or dehorteth from
sin, except he do it in a speech which his hearers understand, can not
attain to his purpose, nor do the people any good.

13. Let him pray that.] He that has only the gift of strange tongues, let him
pray to God for the gift of interpretation: that the one may be more profitable
by the other* for, to exhort or preach in a strange, tongue was not unlawful
nor unprofitable, but glorious to God, so that the speech had been either by
him self, or by an other, afterward expounded.

14. My spirit prays.] Also when a man prays in a strange tongue which
him self understands not, it is not so fruitful for instruction to him, as if
he knevv particularly what he prayed. Nevertheless the Apostle forbids nor
such praying neither, confessing that his spirit, heart, and affection prays
well toward God, though his mind and understanding be not profited to
instruction, as otherwise it might have been if he understood the words.
Neither yet does he appoint such an one to get his strange prayer translated
into his vulgar tongue, to obtain thereby the foresaid instruction. See the
Declaration following of this Chapter.

22. A sign.] The extraordinary gift of tongues was a miraculous sign in the
primitine Church, to be used specially in the Nations of the Heathen for their
conversion.

23. Infidels.] In the primitive Church, when Infidels dwelled near or among
Christians, and often times came unto their public preaching and exercises of
exhortation and exposition of Scriptures and the like: it was both
unprofitable and ridiculous to hear a number talking, teaching, singing
Psalms and the like, one in this language, and an other in that, al at once
like a black saunts, and one often not understood of an other, sometime not to
them selves, and to strangers or the simple stand^r^s by, not at al. Where
otherwise if they had spoken either in known tongues, or had done it in
order, having an expositor or interpreter vvithal, the Infidels might have been
convinced.

26. A Psalm.] Of what spiritual exercise the Apostle speaks.
We see here that those spiritual exercises consisted specially, first, in
singing or giving forth new Psalms or prayers and lauds: secondly, in
Doctrine, teaching, or reading lectures: thirdly, in Revelation of secret
things either present or to come: fourthly, in speaking Tongues of strange
Nations: lastly, in translating or Interpreting that which was said, into
some common known language, as into Greek, Latin, etc. Al which gifts they
had among them by miracle from the holy Ghost.

27. In course.] Al these things they did without order, of pride and
contention they preached, they prophesied, The disorders in the same.
they prayed, they blessed, without any seemly respect one of an other, or
observing of turns and intercourse of uttering their Gifts. Yea women
without cover or veil, and without regard of their sex or the Angels or
Priests or their own husbands, malepartly spoke tongues, taught, or prophesied
with the rest. This was then the disorder among the Corinthians, which the
Apostle in this whole chapter reprehendeth and sought to redress, by
forbidding women utterly that public exercise, and teaching men, in what
order and course as well for speaking in tongues, as interpreting and
prophesying, it should be kept.

A MORE AMPLE DECLARATION OF THE sense of this 14 Chapter.
This then being the scope and direct drift of the Apostle, That S. Paul's place
makes nothing against the service in the says tongue.
as is most clear by his whole discourse, and by the record of al antiquity:
let the godly, grave, and discrete Reader take a taste in this one point, of the
Protestants deceitful dealing, abusing the simplicity of the popular, by
perverse application of Gods holy word, upon some small similitude and
equivocation of certain terms, against the approved godly use and truth of
the universal Church, for the service in the Latin or Greek tongue: which they
ignorantly, or rather vvilfully, pretend to be against this discourse of S.
Paul touching strange tongues. Know therefore, first, that here is no word
written or meant of any other tongues but such as men spoke in the Primitive
Church by miracle, and that nothing is meant of those tongues which were the
common languages of the world or of the Faithful, By strange tongues the
Apostle means not the latin, Greek, or Hebrew.
understood of the learned and civil people in every great city, and in which
the Scriptures of the Old or new Testament were written, as, the Hebrew,
Greek, and Latin. for though these also, might be given by miracle and without
study, yet being known to the Jews, Romans, or Greeks in every place, they
be not counted among the differences of barbarous and strange tongues here
spoken of, which could not be interpreted commonly, but by the miraculous gift
also of interpretation. And therefore this Apostle (as the Evangelists also and
others did their books) vvrote his Epistles in Greek to the Romans and to al
other Churches. Which when he vvrote, though he penned them not in the vulgar
language peculiar to every people, yet he vvrote them not in Tongue, that is,
in any strange tongue not intelligible without the gift of interpretation,
where of he speaks here: S. Augustine our Apostle brought in the Service in
the latin tongue.
but in a notable known and learned speech interpretable of thousands in
every country. No more did S. Augustine our Apostle, speaking in Latin, and
bringing in the Scriptures and Service in Latin, preach and pray in Tongues
according to the Apostles meaning here, for the Latin was not, nor is not, in
any part of the West, either miraculous or strange, though it be not the
National tongue of any one country this day. And therefore S. Bid says, (li.
1 hist. Angl. c. 1) that being then four diverse vulgar languages in our
country, the Latin was made common to them al. The latin service one and the
same in all countries and strange to none.
And in deed of the two (though in truth neither sort be forbidden by this
passage of S. Paul) the barbarous languages of every several province in
respect of the whole Church of Christ, are rather the strange Tongues here
spoken of, then the common Latin tongue, which is universally of all the West
Church more or less learned, and pertains much more to unity and orderly
conjunction of al Nations in one faith, Service, and worship of God, then if
it were in the sundry barbarous speeches of every Province. Wherein al
Christians that travel about this part of the world or the Iudes either, The
service in vulgar tongue strange and barbarous to every stranger.
where so ever they come, shall find the self same Mass, Mattins, and
Service, as they had at home. Where now, if we go to Germany, or the
Germans or Geneuians come to us, each others Service shall be thought strange
and barbarous. Yea and the Service of our own language within a fevv
hundredth years (or rather every age) shall wholy become barbarous and unknown
to our selves, our tongue (as al vulgar) does so often change.

And for edification, that is, for increase of faith, true knowledge, and good
life, the experience of a fevv years has given all the world a full
demonstration whether our forefathers were not as wise, Whether the service
in vulgar tongues do more edify.
as faithful, as devout, as fearful to break Gods laws, and as likely to be
saved, as we are in all our tongues, translations, and English prayers. Much
vanity, curiosity contempt of Superiors, disputes, emulations, contentions,
Schisms, horrible errors, profenation and diuulgation of the secret Mysteries
of the dreadful Sacraments, See Annot* 1. Cor. 10. 13.
* which of purpose were hidden from the vulgar (as S. Denis Eccl. Hier. c.
1. and S. Basil de Sp. Sanct. c. 27. testify) are fallen by the same, but
virtue or sound knowledge none at al.

Wherein this also is a gross illusion and untruth, The virtue of the
Sacraments and Service consists not in the peoples understanding.
that the force and efficacy of the Sacraments, Sacrifice, and common prayer,
depends upon the peoples understanding, hearing, or knowledge: the principal
efficacy of such things and of the whole ministry of the Church,
consisting specially of the very virtue of the work, and the public office
of the Priests, who be appointed in Christ's behalf to dispose these Mysteries
to our most good: the infant, innocent, idiote and unlearned, taking no less
fruit of Baptism and al other divine offices, meet for every ones condition,
then the learned Clerk in the Realm: and more, if they be more humble,
charitable, devour, and obedient, then the other, having less of these
qualities and more learning.

Which we say not, The people is to be taught the meaning of Sacraments and
ceremonies, and are taught in all Catholic countries.
as though it were inconvenient for the people to be well instructed in the
meaning of the Sacraments and holy ceremonies and Service of the Church (for,
that to their comfort and necessary knowledge, both by preaching,
Catechizing, and reading of good Catholic books, Christian people do learn
in all Nations much more in those countries where the Service is in Latin, then
in our Nation, God knovveth:) But we say that there be other wales to instruct
them, and the same less subject to danger and disorder, then to turn it into
vulgar tongues. We say, the simple people and many one that think them selves
some body, understand as little of the sense of diverse Psalms, Lessons, and
Oraisons in the vulgar tongue, as if they were in Latin: yea and often take
them in a vvrong, perverse, and pernicious sense, which lightly they could not
have done in Latin. We say, that such as would learn in devotion and
humility, may and must rather with diligence learn the tongue that such
Divine things be written in, or use other diligence in hearing sermons and
instructions: then for a fevv men's not necessary knowledge, the holy
universal order of Gods Church should be altered. For if in the kingdom of
England only, it be not convenient, necessary, nor almost possible, to
accommodate their Service book to every province and people of diverse tongues:
how much less should the whole Church so do, consisting of so many
differences? Neither does the Apostle in all this Chapter appoint any such thing
to be done, but admonishes them to pray and labor for the grace of
understanding and interpretation, or to get others to interpret or expound
unto them. And that much more may we do concerning the Service in Latin,
which is no strange nor miraculously gotten or understood tongue, but common
to the most and chief churches of the world, and has been, since the
Apostles time, daily with al diligence through out al these parts of
Christendom, expounded in every house, schole, church, and pulpit: and is so
well known for every necessary part of the divine Service, Catholic people
in every country understands every ceremony, and can behave them selves
accordingly.
that by the diligence of parents, Masters, and Curates, every Catholic of
age almost, can tell the sense of every ceremony of the Mass, what to
answer, when to say Amen at the Priests benediction, when to confess,
when to adore, when to stand, when to kneel, when to receive, what to
receive, when to come, when to depart, and al other duties of praying and
serving, sufficient to salvation. And thus is it evident that S. Paul speaks
not of the common tongues of the Churches Service.

Secondly, it is as certain, that he means not nor vvriteth any word in
this place of the Churches public Service, prayer, or ministration of the holy
Sacrament, wherein the Office of the Church specially consists: but only of
a certain exercise of mutual conference, wherein one did open to an other and
to the assembly, miraculous gifts and graces of the Holy Ghost, and such
Canticles, Psalms, secret Mysteries, sorts of Languages, and other
Revelations, as it pleased God to give unto certain both men and women in
that first beginning of his Church. In doing of this, the Corinthians committed
many disorders, turning Gods gifts to pride and vanity, and namely that gift
of tongues: which being in deed the least of al gifts, Aug. doct. Chr. li. 2.
c. 13.
yet most puffed up the hauers, and now also does commonly puff up the
professors of such knowledge, according as S. Augustine vvriteth thereof. That
he speaks not of the Churches service, is proved by invincible in arguments.
This exercise and the disorder thereof was not in the Church (for any thing
we can read in antiquity) these fourtene hundredth years: and therefore neither
the use nor abuse, nor S. Paul's reprehe^sion or redressing thereof, can
concern any whit the Service of the Church. Furthermore this is evident, that
the Corinthians had their Service in Greek at this same time, and it was not
done in these miraculous tongues. Nothing is meant then of the Church Service.
Again the public Service had but one language: in this exercise they spoke in
many tongues. In the public Service every man had not his own special tongue,
his special Interpretation, special Revelation, proper Psalms but in this they
had. Again, the public Service had in it the ministration of the holy
Sacrament principally: which was not done in this time of conference. For
into this exercise were admitted Catechumens and Infidels and whosoever
would: in this women, before S. Paul's order, did speak and prophecy: so
did they never in the Ministration of the Sacrament. with many other plain
differences, that by no means the Apostles words can be rightly and truly
applied to the Corinthians Service then, or ours now. Therefore it is either
great ignorance of the Protestants, or great guilfulnes, so untruly and
peruersly to apply them.

Neither is here any thing meant of the private prayers which devout persons
of al sorts and sexes have ever used, The Apostle speaks not of the peoples
private prayers in latin, as upon primmars, beads, or otherwise.
specially in Latin, as well upon their Primars as Beads. For, the private
prayers here spoken of, were psalms or hymns and sonnets newly inspired to
them by God, and in this conference or prophesying, uttered to one an others
comfort, or to them selves and God only. But the prayers, psalms, and holy
words of the Christian people used privately, are not composed by them, nor
diuersely inspired to them selves, nor now to be approved or examined in the
assemblies: but they are such as were given and written by the Holy Ghost,
and prescribed by Christ and his Church for the faithful to use, namely the
Pater noster, the Au^ Marie, and the Creed, our Ladies Mattins, the Litanies,
and the like. Therefore the Apostle prescribes nothing here thereof, condemns
nothing therein, touches the same nothing at al. But the devout people in
their ancient right may and ought still use their Latin primars, beads, and
prayers, as ever before. Which the wisdom of the Church for great causes
has better liked and allowed of, Latin prayers translated, or the people
taught the co^tents thereof.
then that they should be in vulgar tongues, though she wholly forbids not,
but sometimes grants to have them translated, and would gladly have al
faithful people in order and humility learn, as they may, the contents of
their prayers: and has commanded also in some Councels, that such as can not
learn distinctly in Latin (specially the Pater noster and the Creed) should
be taught them in the vulgar tongue. And therefore as we doubt not but it is
acceptable to God, and auailable in all necessities. and more agreeable to the
use of al Christian people ever since their conversion, to pray in Latin, then
in the vulgar, The peoples devotion nothing the less, for praying in Latin.
though every one in particular understand not what he says: so it is plain
that such pray with as great consolation of spirit, with as little tediousues,
with as great devotion and affection, and oftentimes more, then the other: and
alvvaies morethen any Schismatike or Heretic in his known language. Such
holy Oraisons be in manner consecrated and sanctified in and by the Holy Ghost
that first inspired them and there is a reverence and Majesty in the Churches
tongue dedicated in our Saviors Cross, and gives more force and valor to
them said in the Churches obedience, Mat. 24.
then to others. The children cried Greg. li. 27. Moral. c. 6.
Hosanna to our Savior, The service alvvaies in Latin through out the west
Church.
and were allowed, though they knevv not what they said. It is well near a
thousand years that * our people which could nothing else but barbarum
frendere, did sing Alleluia, and not, Praiseye the Lord. and longer ago since
the poor husband men sang the same at the plough in other Countries. Hiero. to
1 ep. 58. And Sursum corda, and Kyrie eleison, and the Psalms of David sung in
Latin in the Service of the Primitive Church, have the ancient and flat
testimonies of S. Cyptian, S. Augustine, S. Hierom and other Fathers. Grego.
li. 7 ep. 6^. Cypr. exp. orat. Do. nu 13. August. c. 13 de dono persevere, and
de bono vid. c. 16. and ep. 178. Hiero. prafat. in Psalm. ad Sephron. Aug. de
Catechiz, rud. c. 9. de Doct. Chr. li. 2 c. 13. See ep. 10. August. of S.
Hieroms latin translation readde in the Churches of Africa. Prayers are not
made to teach, make learned, or increase knowledge, though by occasion they
sometimes instruct us. but their special use is, to offer our hearts, desires,
and wants to God, and to show that we hang of him in all things: and this
every Catholic does for his condition, It is not necessary to understand our
prayers.
whether he understand the words of his prayer or not. The simple sort can
not understand al Psalms, nor scarce the learned, no though they be translated
or read in known tongues: men must not cease to use them for all that, when
they are known to contain Gods holy praises. The simple people when they
desire any thing specially at Gods hand, are not bound to know, neither can
they tell, to what petition or part of the Paternoster their demand
pertains, though it be in English never so much, they can not tell no more
what is, Thy kingdom come, then Adueniat regnum tuum. not whether their
petition for their sick children or any other necessity, pertain to this
part, or to Fiat voluntas tua, or N^nos inducas, or to what other part else. It
is enough that they can tell, How far is sufficient for the people to
understand.
this holy Oraison to be appointed to us, to call upon God in all our desires.
more then this, is not necessary. And the translation of such holy things
often breeds manifold danger and irreuerence in the vulgar (as to think God
is author of sin, when they read, Lead us not into tentation) and seldom
any edification at al. For, though when the prayers be turned and read in
English, the people knovveth the words, yet they are not edified to the
instruction of their mind and understanding, How the mind or understanding is
edified.
except they knevv the sense of the words also and meaning of the holy Ghost.
For if any man think that S. Paul speaking of edification of man's mind or
understanding, means the understanding of the words only, he is foully
deceived, for, what is a child of five or six years old edified or increased
in knowledge by his Pater noster in English? It is the sense therefore, which
every man can not have, neither in English nor Latin, the knowledge whereof
properly and rightly edifieth to instruction. and the knowledge of the words
only, often edifieth never a whit, and some times builds to error and
destruction: as it is plain in all Heretics and many curious persons besides.
finally both the one and the other without charity and humility makes the
Heretics and Schismatikes with al their English and what other tongues and
intelligence so ever, 1 Cor. 13.
to be as sonans and cymbalum tinniens, sounding brass and a tinkling cymbal.

To conclude, for praying either publikly or privately in Latin which is the
common sacred tongue of the greatest part of the Christian world, this is
thought by the vvisest and godliest to be most expedient, and is certainly
seen to be nothing repugnant to S. Paul. If any yet vvil be contentious in the
matter, 1 Cor. 11, 16.
we must answer them with this same Apostle, A notable rule of S. Augustine.
The Church of God has no such custom. and with this notable saying of S.
Augustine, ep. 118. c. 5. Any thing that the whole Church does practice and
observe through out the world, to dispute thereof as though it were not to be
done, is most insolent madness

14. Let women hold their peace.] There be, or were, certain Heretics in
our Country (for such ever take the Scriptures diuersely for the advantage of
time) that denied women to hold lavvfully any kingdom or temporal Souerainty:
Women may have any temporal Soueraintie, but no Ecclesiastical function.
but that is false and against both reason and the Scriptures. This only in
that sex is true, that it is not capable of holy orders, spiritual. Regiment
or Cure of souls: and therefore can not do any function proper to Priests and
Bishopes: not speak in the Church, and so not preach, nor dispute, nor have or
give voice either deliberatiue or definitive in Councels and public
Assemblies, concerning matters of Religion, nor make Ecclesiastical laws
concerning the same, nor bind, nor loose, nor excommunicate, nor suspend, nor
degrade, nor absolve, nor minister Sacraments, other then Baptism in the case
of mere necessity, when neither Priest nor other man can be had much less
prescribe any thing to the Clergy, how to minister them, or give any man right
to rule, preach, or execute any spiritual function as under her and by her
authority: no creature being able to impart that whereof it self is incapable
both by nature and Scriptures. This Regiment is expressly given to the Apostles,
Bishopes, and Prelates: they only have authority to bind and loose, Mat. 18:
they only are set by the Holy Ghost to govern the Church, Act. 20,: they
only have cure of our souls directly, and must make account to God for the
same, Hebr. 13.

CHAP. XV.
He proves the Resurrection of the dead by the Resurrection of Christ, The 7
part.
and with many other arguments: Of the resurrection of the dead.
and 3^ answers also objections made against it. 49 And then exhorts in
respect of it, unto good life.

The Epistle upon the 11 Su^day after Pentecost.
brethren, the Gospel which I preached to you, which also you received, in the
which also you stand, This delivery in the latin and greek imports
tradition. so by Tradition did the Apostles plant the Church in all truth,
before they vvrote any thing.
I delivered unto you first of al which I also received: Es. 53, 8.
that Christ died for our sins * according to the Scriptures: Dan. 9, 26.
Ps. 15, 10
* according to the scriptures: Ion. 2, 2.
and after that of the eleven. Lu. 24.
of which many remain until this present, and some are a sleep. Act. 9, 3*
Con^ borne: out of time*
tradidi (...)
an abortiue * he was seen also of me. In him Gods grace is not void, that
works by his free vvil according to the motion and direction of the ^^me
grace.
void, but I have labored more abundantly then al they: yet not I, but the
grace of God with me.

So may we say, If the Cath. faith in all points be not true, then our first
Apostles were false vvitnesses then has our Country believed in vain all this while, then are al our forefathers dead in their sins and perished.
Which (presupposing Christ to be God) were the greatest absurdity in the
world.
false witnesses of God: because we have given testimony against God, that he
has raised up Christ, whom he has not raised up, if the dead rise not
again.

Col. 1, 18
the * first fruits of them that sleep: Ap. 1, 5.
To. 5, 12.
1. These. 4, 15.
so also in Christ al shall be made alive. Ps. 109. 1.
Until he put al his enemies under his feet. Ps. 8, 8.
For he has subdued al things under his feet. And whereas he says, Al
things are subdued to him: Undoubtedly, except him that subdued al things unto
him.

Let us eat and drink, Esa. 22, 13.
for to morovv we shall die. Evil communications corrupt good manners. Menander.


The glory of the bodies of Saints shall not be al alike, but different in
heaven according to men's merits.
star differs from star in glory: sown in infirmity, it shall rise in
power. As to become spiritual does not take away the substance of the body
glorified: no more when Christ's body is said to be in spiritual sort in the
Sacrament, does is import the absence of his true body and substance.
spiritual body. If there be a natural body, Genesis 2, 7
there is also a spiritual, The first man Adam was made into a living soul:
the last Adam into a quickening spirit. Flesh and blood signify not here the
substance of those things, but the corrupt quality incident to them in this
life by the fall of Adam.
flesh and blood can not possess the kingdom of God: neither shall corruption
possess incorruption.

The Epistle upon Al-soules day.
Behold I tell you a mystery. We shall al in deed rise again: but we shall
not al be changed. Ap. 8, 2. 11, 15.
at the * last trompet (for * the trompet shall sound) and the dead shall rise
again incorruptible: and we shall be changed. Os. 13, 14.
Death is svvallovved up in victory.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XV.
^^ With me.) Free vvil with grace.
God uses not man as a brute beast or a block: but so works in him and by
him that free will may concur in every action with his grace, which is
alvvaies, the principal. The heretics to avoid this concurrence in vvorking
and laboring, translate, which is with me: Heret. translation.
where the Apostle rather says, which labors with me.

^^ Let us eat and drink.] S. Ambrose applies these words to our Christian
Epicurians that taks away fasting, Fasting is meritorious.
and deny the merit thereof: How can we be saved (says he) if we vvash not
away our sins by fasting, seeing the scriptures say, fasting and alms
deliver from sin* What are these new masters then that exclude al merit
of fasting? is not this the very voice of the heathen saying. Let us eat and
drink, to morovv we shall die? li. 10. epist. ep. 82.

CHAP. XVI.
He prescribes an order for their contributing to the Christians at
Jerusalem, The 8 part.
3 promising to come unto them. Of the contributions.
10 Of Timothe^* and of Apollos coming thither, 13 and so with exhortation,
and diverse commendations, he ends.

That is Su^day. Hiero. q. 4. Hedibiae. So quickly did the Christians keep
Sunday, holiday, and assembled to Divine Service on the same.
the first of the Sabbath let every one of you put a part with him self,
laying up what shall well like him: that not when I come, then collections be
made.

The Heretics and other new fangled strive among them selves, whether
Pentecost signify here the term of fifty days, or else the Jews holy day
so called. But it comes not to their minds that it is most like to be the
feast of whitsontide kept and instituted eue^ the^ by the Apostles, as
appears by the Fathers Se^ S. Aug. ep. 119 c. 15 and 16. Ambr. in c. 17. Luca.
Pentecost.



(...)
at all it was not his mind to come now. but he vvil come when he shall have
leisure.

(...)
that which you vvanted, they have supplied.

See To. 16, 16.
holy kiss. anathema. That is, our Lord is come. Hiero. ep. 173. Therefore
anathema to all that love him not, or believe not. Th^^phyla, upon this place.
(...)
Maranatha.

THE ARGUMENT OF THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS.
FOR the time when this Epistle was written, look the Argument of the
epistle to the Romans: to wit, about the eightenth year after his conversion,
and our Lords passion because in the 11 chapter he makes mention of 14 years,
2. Cor. 11. 2.
not only after his Conversion, as to the Galatians, but also after his rapte,
Gal. 2. 1.
which seems to have been when he was at Jerusalem Act. 9, 26. four years
after his Conversion (Gal. 1, 18) in a trance or excess of mind, as he
calls it, Act. 22, 17. Is was written at Troas (it is thought) and sent by
Titus, as we read chap. 8.

It is for the most part against those false Apostles whom in the first part
of the first to the Corinthians, be noted, or rather spared, but now is
constrained to deal openly against them, and to defend both his own person
which they sought to bring into contempt, making way thereby to the
correption of the Corinthians, and vvithall to maintain the excellency of the
Ministry and Ministers of the new Testament, above which they did magnify
the Ministry of the old Testament: bearing themselves very high because they
were Jews.

Against these therefore S. Paul avouches the preeminent power of his
Ministry, by which power also he gives a pardon to the incestuous
fornicator whom he excommunicated in the last Epistle, seeing now his
penance, and again threateneth to come and excommunicate those that had
grievously sinned and remained impenitent. Two chapters also he interposeth of
the cou^tributions to the church of Jerusalem, mentioned in his last,
exhorting them to do liberally, and also to have all in areadines against his
coming.

THE SECOND EPISTLE OF PAVL TO THE CORINTHIANS.
CHAP. I.
By his troubles in Asia he comfort them. and (against his Adversaries the
false apostles of the jews) alleges to them the testimony of his own and
also of their conscience, 17 answering them that objected lightness against
him, for not coming to Corinth according to his promis.



The Epistle for a Martyr that is a Bishop.
the father of mercies, and God of al comfort, (...)
by the exhortation vvherevvith we also are exhorted of God.

God who raises up the dead,

It is and It is not? It is, and, It is not. It is, and, It is not, but, It is,
was in him. It is: therefore also by him, Amen to God, unto our glory.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. I.
5. Passions of Christ.] Al our afflictions, be Christ's afflictions, for the
conjunction between the head and body.
All the afflictions of the faithful be called Christ's own passions, not
only because they be suffered for him, but for that there is so strait
conjunction and communion betwixt him being the head, and every of the living
members of his body, which is the Church, that whatsoever is suffered by any
one of the same, is counted as a piece of his own Passion. As likewise
whatsoever good works be done to any of them or by any of them, be accepted
as done to or by Christ him self. Which thing if the Protestants well
weighed, they would not marvel that the Catholic Church attributes such
force of merit and satisfaction to the work of holy men. Merit and
satisfaction.


5. The comfort abound.] Vvorldly men feel not the comfort of afflicted
Catholics.
Vvorldly men that see only the exterior miseries and afflictions that
Catholics do suffer being persecuted by the Heathen or Heretics, deem them
exceeding miserable. but if they felt or could conceive the abundance of
consolation which Christ ever gives according to the measure of their
afflictions, they would never vvonder at the voluntary toleration of what
torments so ever for Christ's sake, but would vvish rather them selves to be
in any dungeon in England with the comfort that such have from God, then to
live out of the Church in all the wealth of the world.

^1. You helping in prayer.] Intercession of Saints or holy men for us, no
derogation to Christ.
S. Paul knevv that the help of other men's prayers was nothing derogatorie to
the office of Christ's mediation or intercession for him, nor to the hope that
he had in God: and therefore he craves the Corinthians aid herein as a support
and succors for him self in the sight of God. With what reason or Scripture
then, can the Protestants say that the prayers of Saints be injurious to
Christ, or not to stand with the confidence we have in him? As though it
were more dishonor to God that we should use the aid of Saints in heaven,
then of sinners in earth: Hiero. co^t. Vigil.
or * that the intercession of these our fellows beneath, were more
auailable then the prayers of those that be in the glorious sight of God above.

11. By many men's.] Public prayers and fastes.
He means, that as the prayers of many joined together for him, shall be
rather heard, then of any alone: so their common thanks giving to God for
granting their request, shall be more acceptable and glorious to God, then any
one man's thanks alone. Which thing does much commend the holy Churches
public prayers, processions, stations, and pilgrimages, where so many meet
and uniformly join their prayers and lauds together unto God.

14. Your glory.] Their glory in heaven that convert other.
The Apostles, teachers, and preachers, that convert countries or particular
persons to Christ, and the peoples or parties by them converted, shall in the
day of judgment have much mutual joy and glory of and for each other, one
giving to the other great matter of merit in this life, and of revvard in the
next. See 1 Thessalonians. 2. v. 19.

18. It is, it is not.] The Protestants inconstancy in cha^ging their
writings, translations, service books, etc.
As he discharges him self of al other leuitie touching his promis or purpose
of coming to them, so much more of al inconstancy in preaching Christ's
doctrine and faith. Wherein, one day to affirm, an other day to deny, to
dissent from his fellows or from him self, to change every year or in every
epistle to form of his former teaching, to come daily with new devises
repugnant to his own rules, were not agreeable to an Apostle and true teacher
of Christ, but proper to false prophets and Heretics. Whereof we have
notorious examples in the Protestants: who being destitute of the spirit of
peace, concord, constancy, unity, and verity, as they vary from their own
vvritings which they retract, reform or deforme continually, so both in their
preachings, and form of Service, they are so restles, changeable, and
repugnant to them selves, that if they were not kept in awe with much a do,
by temporal laws or by the shame and rebuke of the world, they would coin
us every year or every Parliament, new Communions, new faithes, and new
Christ's, as you see by the manifold endeavors of the Puritans. And this to be
the proper note of false Apostles and Heretics, see in S. Iren^us li. ^ c. 18.
and Tertul. de praescript. S. Basil. ep. 82.

22. Has sealed.] The learned Divines prove by this place and by the like in
the fourth to the Ephesians, Ephesians. 4, 3^.
that the Sacrament of Baptism does not only give grace, The indeleble
character of Baptism, Co^firmatio^, Holy Orders.
but imprinteth and seals the soul of the baptized, with a spiritual sign,
mark, badge, or token, which can never be blotted out, neither by sin,
heresy, apostasy, nor other ways, but remains for ever in man for the
cognizance of his Christendom, and for distinction from others which were
never of Christ's fold. by which also he is as it were consecrated and deputed
to God, made capable and partaker of the rightes of the Church, and subject to
her laws and discipline. See S. Hierom in 4. Ephesians. S. Ambrose li. 1 de Sp.
sancto cap. 6. S. Cyril Hierosol. Catechesi ^7 at the end, and S. Dionysius
Areopag. c. 2. Eccl. Hierarch. The which fathers express that spiritual sign
by diverse agreeable names, which the Church and most Divines, after S.
Augustine, call the character of Baptism. by the truth and force of which
spiritual note or mark of the soul, he specially conuinceth the Donatistes,
that the said Sacrament though given and ministered by Heretics or Schismatikes
or who else so ever, can never be reiterated. See ep. ^7. and li. 6 cont.
Donatist. cap. 1. and li. 2 cont. Parmenianum 6. 1^. As the like indeleble
characters given also by the Sacraments of Confirmation and Orders, do make
those also irreiterable and never to be received but once. Whereas al other
Sacraments saving these three, may be often received of the self same person.
And that holy Orders can not be iterated, see S. Augustine li. 2 cont. Parmen.
c. 13. li. de bono coniug. c. 24. and S. Gregory li. 2 Rggist. ep. 32. See
Conc. Tarraco. to. ^. Council.
The like of Confirmation is decreed in the most ancient Council Tarracon.
cap. 6. Finally that this character is given only by these said three
Sacraments, and is the cause that none of them can be in any man repeated or
reiterated, see the decrees of the Councels Florentine and Trent. Which yet is
no new devise of them, as the Heretics falsely affirm, but agreeable (as you
see) both to the Scriptures and also to the ancient fathers and Councels.

^4. Not because we ouerrule.] Calvin and his seditious Sectaries with other
like which despise dominion, The Caluinistes vvil be subject to no tribunal in
earth, for trial of their religion.
as S. Jude describes such, would by this place deliver them selves from al
yoke of spiritual Magistrates and Rulers: namely that they be subject to no man
touching their faith, or for the examination and trial of their doctrine, but
to God and his word only. And no marvel that the male factors and rebels of
the Church would come to no tribunal but Gods, that so they may remain
unpunished at least during this life. for though the Scriptures plainly
condemn their heresies, yet they could vvrithe them selves out by false
gloses, constructions, corruptions, and denials of the books to be Canonical,
if there were no laws or judicial sentence of men to rule and repress them.

Notvvithstanding then these words of S. Paul, Tyrannical dominion is forbid
in Prelates, not Ecclesiastical Soueraintie for examination of faith or manners.
whereby only tyrannical, insolent, and proud behavior and indiscrete rigor
of Prelates or Apostles toward their flocks is noted, as also in the first
of S. Peter cap. 5. (the Greek word in these places, (...).
and in the Gospel Mt. 20, 25. Mr. 10, 42. signifying lordly and insolent
dominion:) yet he had and exercised just ru^e, preeminence, and prelacie over
them, not only for their life, but also and principally touching their faith.
for he might and did call them to account for the same, and excommunicated
heretics for foresaking their faith. 1 Cor. 4, 5. 2 Cor. 10, 4. 13, 10. 1 Timothy
1, 20. Tit. ^, 11. And al Christian men are bound to obey their lavvful
Prelates in matters of faith and doctrine specially, and must not under that
ridiculous pretense of obeying Gods word only (which is the shifte of al
other Heretics, as Anabaptists, Arians, and the like, as well as the
Protestants) disobey Gods Church, Councels, and their own Pastors and
Bishops, who by the Scriptures have the regiment of their souls, and may
examine and punish as well John Calvin as Simon Magus, (...)
for falling from the Catholic faith, for though God alone be the Lord, 1 Cor.
3, 9.
author and giver of faith, yet they are his * cooperators and coadiutors by
whom the faithful do believe and be preserved in the true faith, and be
defended from wolves, which be Heretics seeking to corrupt them in the same.
1 Cor. 4, 15.
And this same Apostle * chalengeth to be their father as he that begat and
formed them by his preaching in Christ.

CHAP. II.
Prosecuting the true cause which in the last chapter he gave of his not
coming, 6 he pardons now after some part of penance, him that for incest he
excommunicated in the last epistle, requiring them obediently to consent
thereunto. 12 Then, of his going from Tro^^ into Macedonia, God every where
giving him the triumph.

charity tovvard him. (...). Though he did great Penance (says Theodorete)
yet he calls this pardoning. (...), a grace, because his sin was greater
then his penance.
I pardoned, if I pardoned any thing, for you in the person of Christ,



ANNOTATIONS CHAP. II.
^. This rebuke suffices.] The Apostle excommunicateth, enioyneth penance: and
afterward pardons and absolueth.
This Corinthian for incest was excommunicated and put to penance by the
Apostle, as appears in the former Epistle c. 5. And here order is given for
his absolution and pardoning. Wherein first we have a plain example and
proof of the Apostolic power, there of binding, and here of loosing: there
of punishing, here of pardoning: there of retaining sins, here of remission.
Secondly we may hereby prove that not only amendment, ceasing to sin, or
repentance in heart and before God alone, is alvvaies enough to obtain full
reconcilement, whereas we see here his separation also from the faithful, and
the Sacraments, and from al company or dealing with other Christian men, 1.
Cor. ^, 5. (...).
besides other bodily affliction: al which called of the Apostle before
interitus carnis, the destruction of the flesh, and named here, Rebuke, or (as
the * Greek word also imports) mulct, penalty, correction, chastisment,
were enjoined him by the Apostles commandment in the face of the Church, and
by the offender patiently sustained so long. Pardon or remission of penance
enjoined.
Thirdly we see that it lies in he hands of the Apostles, Bishops, and
spiritual Magistrates, to measure the time of such penance or discipline, not
only according to the weight of the offense committed, but also according to
the weakness of the persons punished, and other respects of time and place, as
to their wisdom shall be thought most agreeable to the parties good, and the
Churches edification. Lastly by this whole hardling of the offenders case, we
may refute the wicked heresy of the Protestants, that would make ^he simple
believe, Penance and satisfaction evidently proved against the Protestants.
no punishment of a man's own person for sins committed, nor penance
enjoined by the Church, nor any pains temporal or satisfaction for our life
past, to be necessary, but al such things to be superfluous, because Christ
has satisfied enough for all. Joel. 2, 12.
Which Epicurian doctrine is refelled, not only hereby, but also by the
Prophets, Mt. 3. et 4
John the Baptistes, Christ's, and the Apostles preaching of penance and
condign works or fruits of repentance, Act. 2, et 26.
to every man in his own person, and not in Christ's person only: and by the
whole life and most plain speeches and penitential canons of the holy doctors
and Councels prescribing times of penance, commending penance, enioyning
penance, and continually using the word satisfaction in this case through out
al their works, as our Adversaries them selves can not but confess.

8. I beseech you.] They which at the beginning did bear to much with the
offender, and seemed Io^h to have him excommunicated in so austere manner: Zeal
against the excommunicate.
yet through their obedience to the Apostle became on the other side so
rigorous, and so far detested the malefactor after he was excommunicated,
that the Apostle now meaning to absolve him, was glad to entreat and
command them also to accept him to their company and grace again.

9. Obedient.] The Apostle chalengeth their obedience to his Ecclesiastical
authority.
Though in the last chapter he discharged him self of tyrannical dominion over
them, yet he chalengeth their obedience in all things as their Pastor and
Superior, and consequently in this point of receiving to mercy the penitent
Corinthian. Whereby we see, that as the power and authority of
excommunicating, so of absoluing also was in S. Paul's person, though both
were to be done in the face of the Church: else he would not have commanded
or required their obedience.

10. I also.] The Heretics and others not well founded in the Scriptures and
antiquity, marvel at the Popes pardons, counting them either fruitles or
unlawful or no elder then S. Gregory. The authority of Indulgences vvhervpo^
it is grounded.
But in deed the authority, power, and right of them is of Christ's own
word and commission, principally given to Peter, and so afterward to all the
Apostles, and in their persons to all the chief Pastors of the Church, when it
was said, Whatsoever you loose in earth, Mat. 18, 18.
shall be loosed in heaven. By which commission the holy Bishops of old did cut
of large pieces of penance enjoined to offenders, and gave peace, grace, or
indulgence, Cypria. ep. 13. 14. 15.
* before they had accomplished the measure of their appointed or deserved
punishment* and that is to give pardon. And so S. Paul here did toward the
Corinthian, (...). See Theodoret in hu^e loc.
whom he assoiled of mere grace and mercy, as the word donare or ^endonare
does signify, when he might longer have kept him in penance and temporal
affliction for his offense. Vvherof though he had already before God inwardly
repented, yet was he justly holden under this correction for some satisfaction
of his fault past, during the Apostles pleasure. What is a pardon or
indulgence.
To remit then the temporal punishment or chastisment due to sinners after the
offense it self and the guilt thereof be forgiven of God, is an Indulgence or
pardon, which the principal Magistrates of Gods Church by Christ's vvarrant
and the Apostles example, have ever done, being no less authorized to pardon
then to punish, and by imitation of our Master (who forgave * the aduouteresse
and diverse other offenders, Io. 8, 11.
not only their sins, but also often the temporal punishments due for the
same) are as much given to mercy as to justice.

10. For you.] Theodorete upon this place says that the Apostle gave this
pardon to the Corinthian at the intercession of the blessed men. Cypr. locis
citatu.
Timotheus and Titus. And we may read in sundry places, Indulgences or pardons
in the primitive Church.
of S. Cyprian namely, that Indulgences or remissions were given in the
primitive Church by the mediation of holy Confessors or Martyrs, and by
communicating the satisfactorie works of one to another, to which end they
gave their letters to Bishops in the behalf of diverse their Christian
brethren, a thing most agreeable to the mutual intercourse that is between the
members of Christ's mystical body, and very answerable to Gods justice, 2 Cor.
8.
* which by supply of the one sort that abounds, stands entire in respect
of the other sort also that wants. In which kind the Apostle confesses
that him self by his suffering and tribulations, Col. 1, 24.
supplieth the wants of such passions as Christ has to suffer, not in his
own person, but in his body, which is his Church. Whereupon we infer
most assuredly, that the satisfactorie and penal works of holy Saints
suffered in this life, be communicable and applicable to the use of other
faithful men their fellovv-members in our Lord, and to be dispensed according
to every ones necessity and deserving, by them whom Christ has constituted
over his family, and has made the dispensers of his treasures.

10. In the person of Christ.] Al pardon and remission is in the virtue and
name of Christ.
For that many might of ignorance or pride reprove the practice of Gods Church
and her Officers, or deny the Apostles authority to be so great over men's
souls as to punish and pardon in this sort, S. Paul does purposely and
precisely tell them that he does give pardon as Christ's Vicar, or as bearing
his person in this case: and therefore that no man may marvel of his power
herein, except he think that Christ's power, authority, and commission is
not sufficient to release temporal punishment due to sinners. Heretical
translation.
And this to be the proper meaning of these words, (...).
In the person of Christ, and not as the Protestants would have it (the better
to avoid the former conclusion of the Apostles giving indulgence) In the face
or sight of Christ, you may easily understand by the Apostles like insinuation
of Christ's power, when he committed this offender to Satan, 1 Cor. 5, 4.
affirming that he gave that sentence in the name and with the virtue or
power of our Lord JESUS CHRIST. In all which cases the Protestants blindness is
exceeding great, who can not see that this is not the way to extol Christ's
power, to deny it to his Priests, seeing the Apostle chalengeth it by that that
Christ has such power, and that him self does it in his name, virtue, and
person. So now in this, and in no other name, give Popes and Bishops their
pardons. Which pertaining proprely to releasing only of temporal punishment
due after the sin and the eternal punishment be forgiven, is not so great a
matter as the remission of the sin it self: which yet the Priests * by
express commission do also remitte. Io. 20, 2^.


11. Circumuented of Satan.] Al binding and loosing must be used to the parties
salvation.
We may see hereby, that the dispensation of such discipline, and the
releasing of the same, be put into the power and hands of Gods ministers, to
deal more or less rigorously, to pardon sooner or later, punish longer or
shorter while, as shall be thought best to their wisdoms* for the end of al
such correction or pardoning must be the salvation of the parties soul, as the
Apostle noted 1 Cor. 5, 5. Which to some, and some certain times, may be
better procured by rigor of discipline then by indulgence, to some others, by
leuitie and humane dealing (so pardoning of penance is called in old Councels)
rather then by overmuch chastiseme^^. Conc. Nic. can. 12.
for consideration whereof, The great penance of the primitive Church.
in some ages of the Church, much discipline, great penance and satisfaction
was both enjoined and also willingly sustained, Ancyran. can. 2 and 5.
and then was the less pardoning and fewer indulgences, because in that
voluntary use and acceptance of punishment, and great zeal and feruor of
spirit, every man fulfilled his penanc^e, and fevv asked pardon. Now in the
fall of devotion and lothsomnes that men commonly have to do great penance,
though the sins be far greater then ever before, Why more pardons and
Indulgences now then in old time.
yet our holy mother the Church knovving with the Apostle the cogitations of
Satan, how he would in this delicate time, drive men either to desperation,
or to forsake Christ and his Church and al hope of salvation, rather then they
would enter into the course of canonical discipline, enioyneth small penance,
and seldom uses extremity with offenders as the holy Bishops of the
primitive Church did, but condescending to the weakness of her children,
pardons exceeding often and much, not only al enjoined penance, but also al
or great parts of what punishment temporal so ever due or deserved, either in
this world or in the next. As for the Heretics which neither like the
Churches lenity and pardoning in these days, nor the old rigor of the
primitive Church, Mat. 11, 18.
they be like to the Jews ^ that condemned John the Baptist of austeritie,
and Christ of to much freedom and liberty: not knovving nor liking in deed
either Christ's ordinance and commission in binding or loosing, or his
providence in the government of the Church.

17. Adulterating.] (...).
The Greek word signifies to make commodity of the word of God, The
Heretics corrupting of the Scripture.
as vulgar Vinteners do of their wine. Whereby is expressed the peculiar
trade of al Heretics, and exceeding proper to the Protestants, that so corrupt
Scriptures by mixture of their own fantasies, by false tra^slations,
glosses, colorable and pleasant commentaries, to deceive the taste of the
simple, as tauerners and tapsters do, to make their vvines salable by manifold
artificial deceites. The Apostles contrarievvise, as all Catholics, deliver
the Scriptures and utter the word of God sincerely and entirely, in the same
sense and sort as the fathers left them to the Church, interpreting them by the
same Spirit by which they were written or spoken.

CHAP. III.
Lest the Iudaical false Apostles should object again that he praises him
self, he says that the Corinthians are his commendation: and they in their
hearts being justified by his ministry, he thereof infers that the
ministers of the new Testament are far more glorious them they of the old,
12 and our people more lightened then theirs.

of the living God: not in tables of stone, but in the tables carnal of the
heart. The Epistle upon the 12 Sunday after Pe^tecost.


Exo. 34, 33.
that the children of Israel might not behold his face, which is made void,
10. 4, 24*


ANNOTATIONS CHAP. III.
1. The Epistle of Christ.] The Apostles vvrote the Gospel in men's hearts much
more then in paper.
S. Paul and other holy vvriters of Scriptures did set down many things in
vvriting, by pen, ink, and paper, al which be of the Holy Ghost: but the
special and proper book of Christ's truth and Gospel, is not the external
vvriting in those dead creatures, but in the hearts of the faithful, being the
proper subject of these truths and graces preached in the new Testament, and
the habitacle of the Holy Ghost. In the which book of faithful men's hearts S.
Paul vvrote diverse things not uttered in any Epistle: as sundry of the
Apostles vvrote the Christian religion in the hearts of their hearers only,
Scripture written, and Tradition unwritten.
and in other material books not at all. Whereof S. Irenaeus li. 3. ^. 4.
says, What and if the Apostles also had left no Scriptures, ought we not to
follow the order of the tradition, which they delivered unto them to whom
they committed the Churches^ to the which ordinance many nations of those
barbarous people that have believed in Christ, do consent, without letter or
ink, having salvation written in their hearts, and keeping diligently the
tradition of the elders. And S. Hierom, ((...). (...). Hiero^. c. 9. ad Pa^.)
In the Greede of our faith and hope, which being delivered by tradition from
the Apostles, is not written in paper and ink* but in the tables camal of the
heart. And this is the Churches book also, whereby and wherein she keeps
faithfully al truth written in the hearts of those to whom the Apostles did
preach, with the like diligence as she keeps and preserves the other book
which is of holy Scriptures, from al corruption of Heretics and other
injuries.

5. Of our selves.] God grace and free will both must co^curre.
This makes first against the Heretics called Pelagians, that hold our
meritorious actions or cogitations to be of free vvil only, and not of Gods
special grace. Secondly against the Protestants, who on the contrary side
refer al to God, and take, away man's freedom and proper motion in his
thoughts and doings: the Apostle confessing our good cogitations to be our
own, but not as coming of our selves, but of God.

6. The letter kills.] The letter kills both Jew and Heretic.
As the letter of the old Law not truly understood, nor referred the Christ,
commanding and not giving grace and spirit to fulfill that which was
commanded, did by occasion kill the carnal Jew: so the letter of the new
Testament not truly taken nor expounded by the Spirit of Christ (which is
only in his Church) kills the Heretic: who also being carnal and void of
spirit, gains nothing by the external precepts or good lessons of the
Scriptures, but rather takes hurt by the same. See S. Augustine to. (...).
Ser. 70 and 1000 de tempore. and li. de Sp. and lit. c. 5. 6. and seq.

9. Much more.] The preeminence of the new Testament, Sacraments, etc.
The preeminence of the new Testament and of the priesthod or Ministry
thereof before the old is, that the new, by all her Sacraments and Priests as
ministers immediate of grace and remission of sins, does so ex opere operato
give the spirit of life and charity into the hearts of the faithful, as the
old did give the letter or external act of the Law.

14. The self same vele.] The heretics more blind in not seeing the Church,
then the Jews in not seeing Christ.
As the Jews reading the old Testament, by reason of their blindness (which
God for the punishment of their incredulity suffers to remain as a cover
upon their eyes and hearts) can not see Christ in the Scriptures which they
daily hear read in their Synagogs, but shall, when they believe in him and
have the cover removed, perceive al to be most plainly done and spoken of him
in their law and Scriptures: even so Heretics having (as S. Augustine notes)
a far greater cover of blindness and incredulity over their hearts in respect
of the Catholic Church which they impugn, Aug. in Psalm. 10. Con^. ^.
then the Jews have concerning Christ, can not see, though they read or hear
the Scriptures read never so much, the marvelous evidence of the Catholic
Church and truth in all points: but when they shall return again to the
obedience of the same Church, they shall find the Scriptures most clear for
her and her doctrine, and shall vvonder at their former blindness.

17. Liberty.] True Christian liberty.
The Spirit and grace of God in the new Testament discharges us of the
bondage of the Law and sin, ^. Pet. 2, 1^.
but is not a vvarrant to us of fleshly license, as S. Peter vvriteth: nor
discharges Christians of their obedience to order, law, and power of
Magistrates spiritual or temporal, as some Heretics of these days do
seditiously teach.

CHAP. IIII.
That according as so glorious a ministry requires, he lives and preaches
sincerely. (...) the which glory his Adversaries can not count vain,
considering his persecutions, because persecution is to Gods glory, and to our
humility and hope, and meritorious of increase of grace in this life, and of
most glorious bodies and souls afterward.

before God. The Epistle for S. Athanasius. May. Io.
might not shine to them. aporiamur. See S. Ambr. Theoph.
we want, but are not destitute: Ps. 115, 10.
as it is written, I believed, for the which cause I have spoken, we also
believe, for the which cause we speak also: corrumpitur.
corrupt: yet that which is within, is renewed from day to day. The English
Bible 1577, does falsely translate, prepares.
(...)
works above measure excedingly an eternal weight of glory in us,

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. IIII.
^. Adulterating.] Heretics corrupters of Gods word: Catholic Doctors, right
handlers thereof.
He gives often warning of false teachers, See Ir^^. li. 1. c. 1.
whose special and proper study is to falsify and adulterate by deceitful
constructions, interpretations, and applications, the word of God: having no
other end but to make their advantage of the Scriptures, and to gain glory
and estimation among the sinful and simple, by new devised expositions.
Wherein the Protestants do excel the ancient Heretics, none ever more
impu^ely handeling the word of God then they do. in 2 ad Romans
Origin calls such Scripturarum fures and adulteros, thieves and adulterers
of the Scriptures. S. Cyprian (de unit. Ec. nu. 7.) calls them, corrupters of
the Gospel, false interpreters, artificers and craftesmasters in corrupting the
truth. On the other side, for special reverence and sincerity of dealing in
those matters, the fathers and al Catholic preachers or Expositors were of
old called according to S. Paul's words to Timothee, ^. Tim. 2.
Recte tractantes verbum Dei, right handlers of the word of God.

17. Works.] Tribulations meritorious of glory.
The temporal and short tribulations which we patiently and willingly suffer
for Christ, do win us everlasting joy and glory. And it is here to be noted
against the Heretics, that tribulations do work or cause the said salvation,
which they deny to be given for such things, Aug. in ps. 93. prope finem.
but for or by faith only. S. Augustine makes such tribulations for Christ so
much the meritorious cause of everlasting life and rest, that he says it is
salable and bought thereby. And it is written. Sap. 10, God renders or
repaieth to just men the hire of their labors.

CHAP. V.
That after death of the body the soul may to heaven: therefore, although
naturally we abhor death, by grace he desires it rather: 9 in consideration
of Christ's just judgment, living as in the sight of God, yea and of their
consciences. 12 Which he speaks not to praise him self, but because of his
Adversaries who did glory in carnal respects: but he and the other Apostles
regard nothing but their reconciliation unto God by Christ, and to reconcile
others also, as being his legates for that purpose.

This place proves that the Saints departed now since Christ, sleep not til
the day of judgment, and that they be not holden in any several place of rest
from the fruition of God til the resurrection of their bodies, but that they be
present with God in their souls.
to be present with our Lord. To. 14, 10.


not ourselves again to you, but give you occasion to glory for us: that you
may have against them that glory in face, and not in heart.

Esa. 43. 19. Apoc 21, 5.
behold * al things are made new. That is to say, a sacrifice and an host for
sin. See the last annot. of this chapter.
sin: that we might be made the justice of God in him

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. V.
10. The proper things of his body.] S. Augustine (Enchirid. ^. no.) obiecteth
this speech of the Apostle, The objection against prayers for the dead,
ansvvered by S. Augustine.
as in the person of such as deny the prayers, alms, and sacrifices of the
living to be auailable for the dead, and he answers as follows. This
practice (says he) of Gods Church in the commendation of the dead, in nothing
repugnant to the sentence of the Apostle, where he says, that we shall al
stand before the judgment seat of Christ, that every one may receive
according to his deserts in the body, either good or evil. For, in his life and
before death he deserved this, that these works after his death might be
profitable unto him. for in deed they be not profitable for all men. and why
so? but because of the difference and diversity of men's lives vvhiles they
were in flesh. The like he has in diverse other places. August. li. de Praed.
Sanct. c. 12. and ad Dulcit. q. 2. And so has S. Denis c. 7. Ec. Hierarch.

10. Either good or evil.] Heaven is as well the revvard of good works, as
Hell is the stipend of il works. Works meritorious and demeritorious.
Neither is faith alone sufficient to procure salvation, nor lack of says the
only cause of damnation: by good deeds men merit the one, and by il deeds
they deserne the other. This is the Apostles doctrine here and in other place,
how so ever the Adversaries of good life and works teach otherwise.

18. The ministry of reconciliation.] Bishops and Priests under Christ
ministers of our reconciliatio^.
Christ is the chief Minister, according to his manhod, of al our
reconcilement to God: and for him, as his ministers, the Apostles and their
successors the Bishops and Priests of his Church, in whom the word of
reconcilement, as well by ministering of the Sacrifice and Sacraments for
remission of sins, as by preaching and government of the world to
salvation, is placed. And therefore their preaching must be to us, as if Christ
him self did preach: their absolution and remission of sins, as Christ's
own pardon: their whole office being nothing else (as we see by this
passage) but the Vicarship of Christ.

21. The justice of God.] Even as (says S. Augstine) when we read,
Salvation is our Lords, it is not meant that salvation Whereby our Lord is
saved, but whereby they are saved vvho^ he saves (so when it is said, Gods
justice, wherewith he makes us just.
Gods justice, that is not to be understood vvherevvith God is just, but that
vvherevvith men are just. whom by his grace he justifies. See S. Augustine de
Sp. and lit. c. 1^. and ep. 120 ad Honoratum, and abhor Caluins wicked and
unlearned gloss on this place, that teaches Justice no otherwise to be in
man, c. Io. 3, 7.
then sin in Christ. Whereas the Scriptures call man just, because * he does
justice: but not so call they Christ sin, because he does sin, but because
he takes away sin, and is a sacrifice for sin, as the Heretics know
very well, that know the use and signification of the Hebrew word in all the
old Testament, (...)
namely Psalm. 19, 8. and in the book of Leuiticus very often, c. 5. ^. 9. 12.
14. 16. and Numer. c. 29.

CHAP. VI.
That he helps with his exhortations, and in all things behaueth him self as
becomes a minister of God. 11 which he speaks so openly, because his heart
is open unto them: exhorting them to be likewise open-harted toward him, 14
and to avoid those infidels.

The Epistle upon the first Sunday of Lent.
that you receive not the grace of God in vain. ( Es. 49, 8*
In time accepted have I heard thee: and in the day of salvation have I helped
thee. Behold, now is the time acceptable: behold now the day of salvation.)
The Epistle for many Martyrs.
S. Augustine (in ps. 113) gathers hereby, that the Apostles did vovv
poverty.
having nothing, and possessing al things.

It is not lawful for Catholics to marie with Heretics or Infidels. See S.
Hierom. cont. I^uinian. li. 1. Conc. Laod. ^. 10 and 31.
Bear not the yoke with infidels. For what participation has justice with
iniquity? or what society is there between light and darkness? you are the
temple of the living God. Leu. 26, 11.
as God says, That I vvil dwell, and walk in them, and vvil be their God:
and they shall be my people. Es. 52, 11*
Go out of the mids of them, and separate your selves. says our Lord, and
touch not the unclean: and I vvil receive you. Hier. 31, 1.
and you shall be my son and daughters, says our Lord omnipotent.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. VI.
1. Helping.] Gods Ministers are his coadiutors.
For that he declared before the Ministers of the new Testament to be Christ's
deputies, and that when they preach or do any function, God as it were
speaks or does it by them, he boldly now says, Helping therefore: that is
to say, joining or vvorking together with God, we do exhort. (...)


1. Grace in vain.] Gods grace forces no man against his vvil.
The grace of God works not in man against his will, nor forces any thing
without his acceptance and consent; and therefore it lies in man's will to
frustrate or to follow the motion of God, as this text plainly proves.

5. In Watchings.] When in the mids of many miseries and persecutions, the
Apostles yet of their own accord added and required voluntary vigils,
Voluntary penance.
fastings, and chastity, we may well perceive these works to be wonderful
grateful to God, and specially needful in the Clergy.

14. What society.] Generally here is forbidden conversation and dealing with
al Infidels, and consequently with Heretics, but specially in prayers, or
meetings at their Schismatical Service, preaching, Not to communicate with
Heretics in any act of religion.
or other divine office whatsoever. Which the Apostle here utters in more
particular and different terms, that Christian folk may take the better heed
of it. No society (says he) nor fellowship, no participation nor agreement,
no consent between light and darkness, Christ and Baal, the temple of God and
the temple of Idols: al Service, as pretended worship of God set up by
Heretics or Schismatikes, being nothing else but Service of Baal and plain
Idolatry, and their conuenticles nothing but conspirations against Christ.
from such therefore specially we must sever our selves alvvaies in heart and
mind, Number, 16, 26.
and touching any act of religion in body also, according as the children of
Israel were commanded by God to separate them selves from the Schismatikes
Core, Dathan, and Abiron, and their tabernacles, by these words: Depart from
the tabernacles of the impious men, and touch ye not those things which
pertain to them, lest you be envvrapped in their sins.

CHAP. VII.
He proceeds to exhort them to purity, and to receive him into their
charity. 3 Which lest they should think he speaks to accuse them, he
commends them highly, both for their behavior tovvard Titus, and for their
penance which they had done upon his other epistle.

consolation: I do excedingly abound in joy in all our tribulation. Contrition
or sorovvful lamenting of our oftenses, is the cause of salvation. Not only
faith: then saves, as the Heretics affirm.
the sorrow that is according to God, works penance unto salvation that is
stable: but the sorrow of the world works death.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. VII.
9. Sorry to penance.] Contr^tion for a man's sin works salvation.
The sorrow which a man takes for vvorldly losses or any temporal adversity,
is not here commended, but that which is and ought to be in all men for their
sins past, which is called here, Sorrow toward God and for penance,
otherwise called Contrition, and is a thing excedingly requisite and much
praised, the fruits whereof are these that the Apostle reckeneth, vvorking
salvation. Which doctrine is far distant from To. 2. in assert. art. 6. ^
Leone d^nuiat.
Luthers, and Caluins, and such wicked Libertines, that teach contrition to be
al together a means to make sins either hypocrites, or to put them in
despair.

CHAP. VIII.
By the example of the poor Macedonians he exhorts them to contribute
largely unto the Church of Jerusalem, 7 and by praising of them, 9 and by the
example of Christ. 14 and by their own spiritual profit in being partakers
of that Churches merits, 16 and by commending the collectors that he sends.

The principal respect next after God, is to be had of our masters in
religion, in all temporal and spiritual duties.
then to us by the vvil of God: The Epistle for S. Paulinus, Iun. 2^.
Exo. 16, 28.
that there be an equality, He that had much, abounded not: and he that had
little, vvanted not.

The Epistle upon S. Lukes day, October. 18.
that has given the self same carefulnes for you in the heart of Titus, vvil he
went unto you. To. 12, 17.


ANNOTATIONS CHAP. VIII.
14. Abundance supply.] Temporal benefits upon spiritual persons.
He means that such as abound in vvorldly riches, should communicate for
supply of other their brethrens necessities, whatsoever they may: that on the
other side they whom they help in temporals, may impart to them again some
of their spiritual riches, as prayers, and other holy works and graces,
which is a happy change and intercourse for the vvelthy men, One may satisfy
and supererogate for an other.
if they could see it. And this place proves plainly that the fastings and
satisfactorie deeds of one man, be auailable to others, yea and that holy
Saints or other virtuous persons may in measure and proportion of other men's
necessities and deseruings, allotte unto them, as well the supererogation of
their spiritual works, as these that abound in vvorldly goods, may give alms
of their superfluities, to them which are in necessity. Which enterchange
and proportion of things the Apostle does evidently set down.

CHAP. IX.
He proceeds exhorting them to the foresaid contribution, 3 to verify his
commending of them. 6 and to do it liberally, that so they may merit the more,
and God be the more praised.

have said) you may be ready: That is, in this matter of alms. Chrysostom. Theophyl.
in this substance. The Epistle for S. Laurence, Aug. 10
to be ready so, as a blessing, not as avarice. Eccles 35, 11.
for God loves a cheereful giver. Ps. 111, 9
He distributed, he gave to the poor: The fruit of alms is the increase of
grace in all justice and good works to life everlasting: God giving these
things for revvard and recompense of charitable works, which therefore be
called the seed or meritorious cause of these spiritual fruits.
his justice remains for ever.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. IX.
7. Tovvard the Saints.] Procters for Catholic prisoners.
By the Apostles earnest and often calling upon the Corinthians to give alms
for relieuing the faithful in distress, the Pastors of Gods Church may learn,
that is specially pertains to their office to be procters for holy men in
prison, poverty, and al other necessity, specially when their want comes
for confession of their faith.

5. Not at avarice.] Cheereful giving.
The covetous man that parts with his penny painefully and with sorrow as
though he lost a limme of his body, is noted, and cheereful, ready, voluntary,
and large contribution is commended.

6. Sows sparingly.] The greater alms, the greater merit and revvard.
Alms is compared to seed. for as the seed thrown into the ground, though
it seem to be cast away, yet is not lost, but is laid up in certain hope of
great increase: so that which men give in alms, though it seem to be cast
away and to perish in respect of the giver, yet in deed it is most fruitful,
the benefit thereof manifoldly returning to him again. Whereupon the
Apostles conclusion is clear, that according to the measure of the alms or
seeding (which is more or less in respect of the vvil and ability of the
giver) the increase and abundance of harvest, that is, of grace and glory
shall ensue, See S. Augustine in Psalm. 49 circamed. and q. 4. ad Dulcitium.

1^. Does not only supply.] Alms redou^d to Gods honor.
When alms are given, specially to holy men, not only the giuers obtain
great benefit thereby, and the wants of others be supplied, but God also by
the receivers continual prayers and thanks giving therefore, is excedingly
honored: so that charity bestovved in this sort, is an act of Gods worship
and of religion.

CHAP. X.
Against the false Apostles, granting the infirmity of his person, he does
notvvithstanding set out the power of his Apostleship, (...) reprehending them
also for chalenging to them selves the praise of other men's labors.

(...),
hope of your faith increasing, to be magnified in you according to our rule
abou^dantly, Ier. 9, 23


ANNOTATIONS CHAP. X.
4. Weapons.] Punishing of Heretics.
He means the ample spiritual and Apostolical power given by Christ for the
punishment of false Apostles, Heretics, and rebels to Gods Church, who are
here noted specially by pride and insolence (which is the proper mark of such
fellows) to extol themselves above the measure of the science of God, Their
pride.
which consists in humble obedience to the faith and the preachers of the
same.

6. To revenge.] The spiritual power of Bishops against Heretics.
You may see hereby, that the spiritual power of Bishops is not only in
preaching the Gospel, and so by persuasion and exhortation only (as some
Heretics hold) to remitte or retain sins, Calvin. upon this place.
but that it has authority to punish judge, and condemn Heretics and other
like rebels: which power * one of the principal rebels of this time being
convinced by the evidence of the place, acknowledges to be grounded upon
Christ's word, Whatsoever you bind in earth, shall be bound in heaven: Mat.
18, 1^. applying also the words spoken to Hieremie (c. 1, 10.) Behold I
appoint thee over Nations and kingdoms, that thou plant, pluck up, build and
destroy: to confirm and explicate the power Apostolic here alleged by S.
Paul. Mary they would gladly dravv this power from the lavvful successors of
the Apostles, Heretical Co^sistories.
to them selves, their ministers and consistories, which are nothing else but
the shoppes and Councels of sedition and all the conspiracies of this time,
against the lavvful Princes of the world.

8. Unto edification.] Ecclesiastical censures (namely Excommunication) when
and where to be executed.
This great power of the Churches censures, specially of Excommunication, as
it was given for the good and salvation of the people, so it must not be used
against the innocent: no nor yet upon Heretics or other offenders, but where
and when it may by likelihod benefit either the parties, or the people, or
may be executed without the hurt or perturbation of the whole Church, as
often times it can not be, by reason of the multitude of offenders. Which
caused the Apostle here to signify that he would not use his uttermost
authority against the false Apostles which disturbed them, till them selves
were in perfect obedience unto him, lest by punishing the principal offenders,
a greater disturbance and revolt might fall among the people, if they were not
before in perfect obedience.

CHAP. XI.
He reasons the matter with the Corinthians, why they should prefer the
false Apostles before him. 16 And because they give them leave to brag and
commend themselves, and to abuse them so miserably, he trusts they vvil also
give him the hearing: 21 and so he begins, and first sh^vving himself in all
Iudaical respects (wherein only stood al their boasting) to be as they are,
he adds afterward such a long roll of his sufferings for Christ, as is
incomparable.

The Apostles and their successors did despouse the people whom they
converted, to Christ, in all purity and Chastity of truth, and wholy
undefiled and void of error and heresy.
despoused you to one man, to present you a chaste virgin unto Christ. Genesis 3, 4
so your senses may be corrupted, and fall from the simplicity that is in
Christ. The note of a false teacher, to come: that is, without lavvful calling
or sending to thrust and intrude him self into an other man's charge.
comes, preach an other Christ vvho^ we have not preached, or you receive an
other-spirit whom you have not received: or an other Gospel which you have
not received: you might well suffer it. A proper term for Heretics that shape
the^ selves into the habit of true teachers, specially by often allegation and
commentatio^ of the Scriptures. Read the notable admonition of the ancient
writer Vincentius Livinensis in his golden book Against the Profane
neuelties of al heresies.
crafty works, tra^sfiguring them selves into Apostles of Christ.

The Epistle upon the Sunday of Se^agesme.
whereas your selves are wise. to dishonor, as though we had been vveake in
this part. Wherein any man dare (I speak folishly) I dare also. Phil. 3, 5.
and I. They are Israelites: and I. They are the seed of Abraham: and I. Dou.
25, 3.
in deaths often. Act. 16, 23. 14, 18. 27, 15.
* once I was stoned, thrice I suffered * shipwreck, night and day have I
been in the depth of the sea, (...). S. Chrysostom and Theophylacte interpret
it of daily conspiracy against him. others, of multitude of cares instant and
vrge^t upon him.
instance, the carefulnes of al churches. non vror? (...)? Act. 9, 24.
am not burnt?

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XI.
^. From the simplicity.] People fall from their first faith, virginity, and
simplicity in Christ, not by sode^ revolt, As Eve by the Serpent, so the
people are seduced by Heretics.
but by little and little, in giving ear to the subtle persuasio^ of the
Serpent, speaking to the^ by the svveete mouths and illurementes of Heretics
of which kind of seductio^ he gives Eve for an example, who was by her
greedy desire of knowledge and the Devils promis of the same, drawn from the
native simplicity and obedience to God. as at this day, promis and pretense of
knowledge drives many a poor soul from the sure, true, sincere, and only
belief of Gods Church.

6. Rude in speech.] Heretics sometime eloquent.
Hereby we see that the seditious and false teachers have often the gift of
eloquence whereby the simple he easily beguiled. Such were Core and Dathan,
as Josephus vvriteth Antiq. li. 4 c. ^. for the same, S. Augustine (li. 5
Confess. c. (...).) calls the Heretic Faustus Manichaeus, magnum laqueum
Diaboli, a great snare of the Devil, saying that he passed the glorious Doctor
S. Ambrose in show of words, Knowledge better then gay words.
but far inferior to him (without al comparison) in substance and matter. In
which sort the Apostle here is glad to compare him self with the false
Apostles, whom the Corinthians did follow and extol far above him by reason
of their eloquence, Young orators among heretics preferred before the ancient
Doctors.
granting to them that gift, but chalenging to him self superiority in
knowledge, which al wise men prefer before vain words. And it is the
bane of our poor country, that the people now a days give credit rather to
new orators and folish yonkers, for their svveete speeches: then to the
glorious Doctors of Christ's Church, for their singular knowledge and more
grave eloquence.

CHAP. XII.
(...) of his incomparable visions, ^ but for humility likes better to talk
of his infirmities: 11 putting the fau^s in the Corinthians for that he is
feign thus to rehearse his own commendation. (...) Where again he reasons
the matter with them like (...) father, why they should prefer those false
Apostles before him. 20 And fears left at his coming he shall be compelled to
excommunicate many of them.

By this we may prove that it is neither impossible, incredible, nor indecent,
that is reported by the ancient fathers of some that have been ravished or
rapt (whether in body or out of body God knovveth) and brought to see the state
of the next life, as well of the saved as damned.
rapt even to the third heaven.

yours: but you. For neither ought the children lay up treasures for the
parents, but the parents for the children.



Again
Before God, in Christ we speak: but al things ((...)) for your edifying.
(...). Which S. Augustine says (ep. 108) is spoken here of doing great
penance for heinous sins, as P^ni^^ntes did in the primitive Church. So that
it is not only to repent or to amend their lives, as the Protestants translate
it.
have not done penance for the uncleanness and fornication and incontinencie
that they have committed.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XII.
1. Visions.] Visio^s have no credit with heretics.
S. Cyprian (ep. 69. nu. 4.) complains that the Adversaries of Gods Church
and Priests, give no credit to visions: but their incredulity is much more in
our days, that condemn al such revelations, though they be reported and
recorded for most certain, of holy. S. Gregory, S. Bid, or who else so ever.
Yea they are so wicked in this case, that the vision which the holy author of
the book of Mathabees * calls fide dignum, ^. Mach^. 15, 11.
vv^rthy of credit, is one cause why they deny the whole book to be
Canonical: and as well might they for this vision deny al S. Paul's Epistles,
and for the like, the Acts of the Apostles, Act. 9. 10. 11. 12. 27: and the
Gospel it self, Mat. 1, 20. 2, 13, 19.

11. Above measure Apostles.] The Apostles some greater then other.
Though al were in that they were Apostles, of one and the same order, yet ye
may see that some had marvelous great preeminence and privilege above others in
the same office: specially S. Peter and S. John, whom S. Paul often calls
great Apostles, above measue or passing Apostles, ^l epille^s, etc. 2 Cor. 11,
5. 12, 11. Gal. 2, 9.

12. In signs.] we must stick to the faith first (...) ^anted by miracles.
Miracles be necessary, and be great signs of truth, when it is first newly
taught. And therefore let al Catholic men hol^ fast that faith which was
first preached and confirmed by miracles. as in England by S Augustine, and in
other nations by other holy Apostolic men. And let the Heretics that preach
extraordinarily, newly, and otherwise then we received at our first
conversion, show their calling and doctrine by miracles, or else let them be
taken for false Apostles as they be.

CHAP. XIII.
He drives into them the fear of excommunication: to the end that they doing
penance beforehand, he may not be compelled to use his authority when he
comes, and as he has threatened. 11 And so with a general exhortation he
ends.

Deu. 19, 15.
* In the mouth of two or three vvitnesses shall every word stand. shall know
knovv' that we are not reprobates. Ecclesistical power to punish offenders by
the ce^sures of the Church.
power which our Lord has given me unto edification and not unto destruction.

The Epistle in a ^oti^e Mass of the B. Trinity.
rejoice, be perfect, (...),
take exhortation, be of one mind, have peace, and the God of peace and of
love shall be with you. To. 16, 16. 1. Co. 16, 20.


ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XIII.
5. Try your selves.] The Heretics argue herevpo^, We may know that we have
faith, but not that we are in grace.
that every man may know him self certainly to be in grace: where the
Apostle speaks expressly and only of faith. the act whereof a man may know
and feel to be in him self, because it is an act of understanding, though he
can not be assured that he has his sins remitted, and that he is in all
points in state of grace and salvation: because every man that is of the
Catholic faith, is not alvvaies of good life agreeable thereunto, nor the acts
of our vvil so subject to understanding, that we can know certainly whether
we be good or evil. See S. Augustine ^^. 7 de perfect. iustitia c. 15. Li. de
Cor. et great. c. 13. and S. Thomas 1. 2, q. 112. art. 5.

THE ARGUMENT OF THE EPISTLE OF S. PAVL TO THE GALATIANS.
THAT this Epistle may seem to be the first that S. Paul vvrote, was declared
in the Argument of the Epistle to the Romans, notvvithstanding that in the
second chapter it is euide^s to have been written 14 years at the least after
his Conversion, and (as it is said) from Ephesus belike at that time of his
being there, which is mentioned Act. 18.

The occasion of it were such False apostles, as we read of, Act. 15. Et
quidam descendentes, etc. And certain coming down from Ievvrie, taught the
brethren (that is the Christian Gentiles at Antioche) that unless you be
circumcised according to the manner of Moses, you can not be saved. Such
comers also to the Galatians (whom S. Paul had converted Act. 16, as him self
mentions Gal. 1. and 4.) did seduce them, saying, that all the other Apostles
to whom they should rather harken then to Paul (who came they knevv not from
whence) did use Circumcision: yea and that Paul himself, when he came among
them, durst do none other. And to win them more easily, they did not lay on
them the burden of the whole Law, but of Circumcision only.

Against these deceivers, S. Paul declares, that he received his Apostleship
and learned the Gospel that he preaches, of Christ him self after hi^
Resurrection: and that the other Apostles (although he learned nothing of them)
received him into their society, and allowed well of his preaching to the
Gentiles though themselves being Jews, and living among the Jews, had not
yet left the ceremonies of the Law: howbeit they did not put in them any hope
of justification, but in Christ alone without them. He declares moreover,
that the said False apostles belyed him, in saying that he also preached
Circumcision sometimes. Again, that they themselves in preaching no more but
Circumcision, did against the nature of Circumcision, because it is a
profession to observe the whole Law: finally, whatsoever they pretended,
that in deed they did it only to please the Jews, of whom otherwise they
should be persecuted.

So that in this Epistle he handles the same matter, which in the Epistle to
the Romans: but here less exactly and more briefly, because the Galatians
were very rude, and the Romans contrariwise, repleti, omni scientia (Romans
15.) replenished with al knowledge.

THE EPISTLE OF PAVL TO THE GALATIANS.
CHAP. I.
After the foundation laid in the salutation, ^ 6 he exclaimeth against the
Galatians, and their false apostles, 1^ considering that the Gospel which he
preached to the^, he had it immediately of Christ him self. 13 Which to show
he begins to tell the story of his conversion and preaching since then, that
as he learned nothing of the other Apostles; so yet he had their approbation.



New Gospellers that pervert, corrupt, or alter the one only true and first
delivered Gospel, are to be avoided. See S. Augustine Cont. Faustum li. 32. c.
27.
inuert the Gospel of Christ.

The Epistle upon the Commemoration of S. Paul, Iun. 30.
For I do you to understand, brethren, the Gospel that was euangelized of me,
that it is not according to man.

Act. 9, 1.
and expugned it, S. James was called our Lords brother after the hebrew
phrase of the Jews, by which near kinsmen are called brethren. for they were
not brethren in deed, but rather susters children.
the brother of our Lord.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. I.
1. Neither by man.] S. Paul sent to preach by ordinary impositio^ of hands.
Though he were not first by man's election, nomination, or assignement, but by
Gods own special appointment, chosen to be an Apostle: yet by the like
express ordinance of God he took orders or imposition of hands of men, as is
plain Act. 18. Let us bevvare then of such false Apostles, as now a days
intrude them selves to the office of Ministry and preaching, neither called
of God, nor rightly ordered of men.

^. Or an Angel.] No show of learning or virtue must move us from the faith.
Many vvorthie observations are made in the fathers vvritings, of the earnest
admonition of the Apostle, and much may we gather of the text it self, first,
that the credit of any man or Angel for what learning, eloquence, show of
grace or virtue so ever, though he wrought miracles, should not move a
Christian man from that truth which he has once received in the Catholic
Church: of which point Vincentius Li^inensis excellently treats. li. cont.
profan. hares. Nouitates. Whereby we may see that it is great pity and
shame, that so many follow Luther and Calvin and such other Ieude fellows,
into a new Gospel, which are so far from Apostles and Angels, that they are
not any whit comparable with the old Heretics in gifts of learning or
eloquence, Preaching contrary to the says, received is forbidden, not other
preaching.
much less in good life.

Secondly S. Augustine notes upon the word, Tra^t. 98 in Joan.
Beside, that not al other teaching, or more preaching then the first, is
forbidden* but such as is contrary and disagreing to the rule of faith. The
Apostle did not say, says he, If any man euangelize to you more then you have
received, but, beside that you received. for if he should say that, he should
be preiudi^ial to him self, who coueted to come to the Thessalonians, that he
might supply that which was vvanting to their faith. Now he that supplieth,
adds that which was lacking, takes not away that which was, etc. By
which we see how friuolously and calumniously the Heretics charge the
Church with addition to the Scripture.

Thirdly, The Gospel is not only in the written word of scripture, but in
unwritten tradition also.
as well by the word euangelizamus (we euangelize) as the word accepistis
(you have received) we may note that the first truth, against which no second
Gospelling or doctrine may be admitted, is not that only which he vvrote to
the Galatians, or which is contained either in his or any other of the
Apostles or Eua^gelistes vvritings, but that which was by word of mouth also
preached, taught, or delivered them first, before he wrote to them. Therefore
the Adversaries of the Church that measure the word of God or Gospel by the
Scriptures only, thinking them selves not to incur S. Paul's curse, except
they teach directly against the written word, are foully beguiled. As therein
also they any shamefully err, when they charge the Catholics with addint to
the Gospel, when they teach any thing that is not in express words written by
the Apostles or Evangelists. not marking that the Apostle in this Chapter, and
else where, commonly calls his and his fellows whole preaching, the Gospel,
be it written or unwritten.

Fourthly, After-preaching and ouersowing of novelties, ^rgueth false doctrine.
by the same words we see condemned al after-preachings, later doctrines, new
sects and authors of the same: that only being true, which was first by the
Apostles and Apostolic men as the lavvful husbandmen of Christ's filled, sowed
and planted in the Church: and that false, which was laten and as it were
ouersovven by the enemy. By which rule not only Tertullian (de praescript.
nu. 6 and 9.) but all other ancient Doctors, and specially S. Irenaeus (li. 3.
c. 2. 3. 4.) tried truth from falsehod, and condemned old Heretics, proving
Marcion, Valentine, Cerdon, Menander, and such like, false Apostles, because
they came in with their novelties long after the Church was settled in former
truth.

Sixthly, The Apostles curse upon all that teach new doctrine, and dravv men
from the Cath. Church.
This curse or execration pronounced by the Apostle, touches not only the
Galatians, or those of the Apostles time, that preached otherwise then they
did, but it pertains to al times, preachers, and teachers, unto the worlds
end, and it concerns then. (as Vincentius Lirinensis says) that preach a new
faith, or change that old faith which they received in the unity of of the
Catholic Church. Li. cont. proph. haer. nouit.
To preach any thing to Christian Catholic men (says he) besides that which
they have received, never was it lavvful, never is it, nor never shall it be
lavvful, to say anathema to such. it has been, and is, and shall be alvvaies
behooful. So S. Augustine by this place holds al accursed, that draw a
Christian man from the society of the whole Church, to make the several part
of any one sect: that call to the hidden conuenticles of Heretics, from the
open and known Church of Christ: that allure to the private, from the common:
finally all that draw with chatting curiosity the children of the Catholic
Church, by teaching any thing besides that they found in the church. ep. 48.
Psalm. 103. Con. 2. Aug. ep. 165.
mentioning also that a Donatist feined an Angel to have admonished him to call
his friend out of the Communion of the Catholic Church into his sect. and he
says, that if it had been an Angel in deed, yet should he not have heard him.
Lastly S. Hierom uses this place, wherein the Apostle gives the curse or
anathema to al false teachers not once but twice, to prove that the zeal of
Catholic men ought to be so great tovvard al Heretics and their doctrines,
Zeal against heretics.
that they should give them the anathema, though they were never so dear unto
them. In which case, says this holy Doctor, I would not spare mine own
parents. Ad Pammach. c. 3. cont. Io. Hieros.

18. To see Peter.] B. Paul does visit S. Peter of honor and reverence
tovvard him.
In what estimation S. Peter was with this Apostle, it appears: seeing for
respect and honor of his person, and of duty as Tertullian de praescript.
says (notvvithstanding his great affairs Ecclesiastical) he went so far
to see him. (...)
not in vulgar manner, but (as S. Chrysostom notes the Greek word to import)
to behold him as men behold a thing or person of name, excellency, and
majesty. for which cause, and to fill him self with the perfect view of his
behavior, he abode with him fiftene days. See S. Hierom ep. 10^ ad Paulinum.
to. ^. who makes also a mystery of the number of days that he tarried with S.
Peter. See S. Ambrose in Comment. huius loci. and S. Chrysostom upon this
place, and ho. 87 in Joan.

CHAP. II.
He tells forth the story begone in the last chapter, and how he
reprehended Peter, 15 and then specially urges the ensample of the Christian
Jews, who sought unto Christ for justification, and that by vvarrant also of
their Law it self, as also because otherwise Christ's death had been needles.

Deu. 10, 17.
it is nothing to me. * God accepts not the person of man) for to me, they
that seemed to be something, added nothing. See the marginal Annotation Romans 2.
v. 25.
prepuce, as to Peter of the circumcision (

That is, in presence, before them al, as ^eza him self expounds it. Yet the
English Bezites to the more disgracing of S. Peter, translate, to his face, No.
Test. an. 1580.
in face, (...)
because he was reprehensible.

To. 3, 19. 20.*
works By this and by the discourse of this whole epistle, you may perceive,
that when justification is attributed to faith, the works of Charity, be not
excluded, but the works of Moses law: that is, the ceremonies, sacrifices
and sacraments thereof principally, and consequently al works done merely by
nature and free will, without the faith, grace, spirit, and aid of Christ.
of the Law, but by the faith of JESUS Christ: we also believe in Christ
JESUS, that we may be justified by the faith of Christ, and not by the works
of the Law: for the which cause, by the works of the Law no flesh shall be
justified.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. II.
^. Conferred with them.] S. Paul conferreth with S. Peter and the rest, for
trial of his doctrine.
Though S. Paul were taught his Gospel of God and not of man, and had an
extraordinary calling by Christ him self, yet by revelation he was sent to
Jerusalem to confer the said Gospel which he preached, with his elders the
ordinary Apostles and Rulers of the Church, to put both his vocation and
doctrine to their trial and approbation, and to join in office, teaching, and
society or communion with them. For there is no extraordinary or miraculous
vocation, that can sever or separate the person so called, in doctrine or
fellowship of Christian life and religion, from the ordinary known society
of Gods people and Priests. The heretics submit their doctrine to no trial of
Bishops or Counsel.
Therefore whosoever he be (upon what pretense so ever) that vvil not have his
calling and doctrine tried by the ordinary Gouerners of Gods Church, or
disdaineth to go up to the principal place of our religion, to confer with
Peter and other pillars of the Church, it is evident that he is a false
teacher, a Schismatike, and an Heretic. By which rule you may try al your
new teachers of Luthers or Caluins school: who never did nor ever durst put
their preaching to such conference or trial of holy Council or Bishops, as they
ought to do, and would do, if it were of God, as S. Paul's was.

2. In vain.] The approbation of S. Paul's doctrine by Peter and the rest,
was very requisite.
Though S. Paul doubted not of the truth of the Gospel which he preached,
knovving it to be of the holy Ghost: yet because other men could not, nor
would not acknovvledge so much, til it were allowed by such as were
without al exception known to be Apostles and to have the spirit of truth,
to discern whether the vocation, spirit, and Gospel of Paul were of God, he
knevv he should otherwise without conference with them, have lost his
labor, both for the time past and to come. He had not had (says S. Hierom)
security of preaching the Gospel, if it had not been approved by Peter's
sentence and the rest that were with him. Hiero. ep. 29. c. 2. See Tertul.
li. 4 Cont. Marc. nu. 3. Therefore by revelation he went to confer with the
Apostles at Jerusalem, that by them having his Apostleship and Gospel liked
and approved, he might preach with more fruit. Wherein we see, this holy
Apostle did not as the seditious proud Heretics do now a days, which
refusing al man's attestation or approbation, No absurdity that the Scriptures
be approved by the Churches testimony.
vvil be tried by Scriptures only. As also we may learn that it is not such
absurdity as the Adversaries would make it, to have the Scriptures approved
by the Churches testimony. Seeing the Gospel which S. Paul preached (being of
as much certainty and of the same Holy Ghost that the Scriptures be) was to
be put in conference and examination of the Apostles, without al derogation to
the truth, dignity, or certainty of the same. And the cauilling of Heretics,
that we make subject Gods Oracles to man's censure, and the Scriptures to have
no more force then the Church is content to grant unto them, The Church makes
not Canonical Scripture, but declares that it is so*
is vain and false. I or, to bear witness or to give evidence or attestation
that the preaching or vvriting of such, is true and of the Holy Ghost, is not
to make it true: no more then the Goldsmith or touchstone that try and
discern which is true gold, make it good gold, but they give evidence to man
that so it is. And therefore that disputation also, whether the Scripture or
the Church be of greater authority, is superfluous: either giving testimony
to the other, and both assured by the Holy Ghost from al error: The Scripture
and Church compared together for antiquity, authority, etc.
the Church yet being before the Scriptures, the spouse of Christ, and proper
dwelling, temple, or subject of God and his graces: for the which Church the
Scriptures were, and not the Church for the Scriptures. In which Church there
is judicial authority by office and jurisdiction to determine of doubtful
questions touching the sense of the Scriptures and other controversies in
religion, and to punish disobedient persons. Of which judicial power the
Scriptures be not capable, as neither the truths and determinations of the
same can be so evident to men', nor so agreeable and fit for every particular
resolution, as diversity of times and persons requires. Certain is the
truth, and great is the authority of both: but in such diverse kinds, as they
can not be well compared together. The controversy is much like as if a man
touching the ruling a case in law or giving sentence in a matter of question,
should ask, whether the judge, or the evidence of the parties, be of more
authority or credit, which were as frivolous a dispute, as it were a
disordered part for any man to say, he would be tried by no other judge but by
his own vvritings or evidences. With such tristers and seditious persons have
we to do now a days in divinity, as were intolerable in any profane
science or faculty in the world.

6. Added nothing.] The Gospel and preaching of S. Paul was wholly of God, The
Scriptures alvvaies true in them selves, are so known to be by the Church.
and therefore though it were put to the Churches probation, as gold is to the
touch stone: yet being found in all points pure, nothing could be altered or
amended therein by the Apostles. Even so the Scriptures which are in deed
wholy of the Holy Ghosts enditing, being put to the Churches trial, are found,
proved, and testified unto the world to be such, and not made true, altered,
or amended by the same. Without which attestation of the Church, the holy
Scriptures in them selves were alvvaies true before: but not so known to be,
to al Christians, nor they so bound to take them. And that is the meaning of
the famous sentence of S. Augustine Cont. ep. fund. c. 5. which troubles the
Heretics so much. I would not believe the Gospel (says he) unless the
authority of the Church moved me.

7. To Peter of the circumcision.] We may not think, as the Heretics
deceitfuly teach, The Apostles commission general through the world, and yet
peculiar to certain provinces.
that the charge of the Apostles was so distincted, that none could preach or
exercise jurisdiction but in those several places or toward those peoples or
provinces only, whereunto by Gods appointment or their own lot or election,
they were specially designed. For, every Apostle might by Christ's commission
(Mat. 28. Go, and teach al nations) use al spiritual function through the
whole world yet for the more particualr regard and care of provinces, and for
peace and order sake, some were appointed to one country, and some to an
other: as, of the other Apostles, we see in the Ecclesiastical histories, and
for S. Peter and S. Paul, Jews and Gentiles specially committed to the two
principal Apostles.
it is plain by this place and other, that to them as to the two chief and
most renowned Apostles, the Church of al Nations was given, as divided into
two parts, that is, Jews and Gentiles: the first and principal being S.
Peter's lot, that herein also he might resemble our Savior, Mat. 15.
who was sent namely * to the lost sheep of Israel. and was properly * the
Minister of the Circumcision: To. 15.
the second being S. Paul's, whom Christ chose specially to preach to the
Gentiles: Not so for all that, that either he was limited to the Gentiles only,
(vvho^ the Acts of the Apostles report, Neither Peter only of the Jews, nor
Paul Apostle of the Gentiles only.
in every place, first to have entered into the Synagogs and preached Christ to
the Jews, as he vvrote also to the Hebrews and ever had special regard and
honor to the^:) or Peter so bound to the Jews only, Act. 10. and 15. v. 7.
Calu. li. 4. v. 6. nu. 15. Iustit.
that he could not meddle with the Gentiles: seeing he was * the man chosen of
God, by whom the Gentiles should first believe, who first baptized them, and
first gave order concerning them. Therefore the treachery of Calvin is
intolerable, that upon this distinction of the Apostles charge, would have the
simple suppose, Caluins folish reason that Peter was not B. of Rome, and his
derogacio^ from Peter's Apostleship.
that S. Peter could not be Bishop of Rome (so might he bar ^. John from
Ephesus* also) nor deal among the Gentiles, as a thing against Gods ordinance
and the appointment between him and S. Paul: as though thereby the one had
bound him self to the other, not to preach or meddle within his fellows
compass. And which is further most seditious, he exhorts al men to keep
fast the foresaid compact, and rather to have respect to S. Paul's Apostleship,
then to S. Peter's: as though the preaching, authority, and Apostleship of both
were not a like true, and al of one holy Spirit, whether they preached to
Jews or Gentiles, as both did preach unto both peoples, The Church founded at
Rome by S. Peter and S. ^aul.
as is already proved, and at length, partly by the daily decay of the Jewish
state and their incredulity, and partly for that in Christianity the
distinction of Jew and Gentil ceased after a season: both went to the chief
city of the Gentiles, and there founded the Church common to the Hebrews and
al nations, Peter first, and Paul afterward. And therefore Tertullian says, de
pr^script nu. 14. O happy Church, to which the Apostles povvred out al
doctrine with their blood. Where Peter suffers like to our Lords passion,
where Paul is ^rovvned with John (Baptists) death.

9. Gave the right hands of society.] There is and always ought to be, a
common fellowship and fraternity of al Pastores and preachers of the Church.
Al Catholic preachers and Pastors must communicate with Peter and his
successors.
Into which society who so ever enters not, but sandeth in Schism and
separation from Peter and the chief Apostolic Pastors, what pretense so ever
he has, or whence so ever he chalengeth authority, he is a wolf, and no
true Pastor. Which union and communion together was so necessary even in S.
Paul's case, that, notvvithstanding his special calling of God, yet the Holy
Ghost caused him to go up to his elder Apostles, to be received into their
fellowship or brotherhod. for it is to be noted, that SS. Peter, James, and
John were not sent to S. Paul, to join with him or to be tried for their
doctrine and calling, by him: but contrariewise he was sent to them as to the
chief and known ordinary Apostles. They therefore gave Paul their hands,
that is to say, took him into their society, and not he them. And S. Hieroms
rule concerning this, shall be found true to the worlds end, speaking of S.
Peter's successor: He that gathers not with thee, scatters. Ep. 17. And in
an other place for the same cause he calls Rome, tutissimum Communionis
portum, the most safe and sure haven of communion or Society. The heretics
ridiculous argument against Peter's preeminence.
Ep. 16. 6. ^. And whereas the Heretics by this also would prove that Peter
had no preemine^ce above Paul being his fellovv Apostle, it is ridiculous. As
though al of one fellowship or brotherhod he alvvaies equal, or as though there
were not order and government, superiority and inferioritie, in every
society well appointed. And they might perceive by this whole passage, that
Peter was the special and in more singular sort, the Apostle of the Jews,
though James and John were also: as S. Paul is also called in more singular
sort the Apostle and doctor of the Gentiles then S. Barnabas, and yet they
were both alike taken here into this society, as they were both at once and
alike segregated into this ministry, and ordered together Act. 13. It is a
poor reason then to say or think, S. Peter not to be above S. Barnabas
neither, because of this society and fellowship unto which he was received
together with S. Paul.

11. I resisted him.] The heretics maliciously derogate from S. Peter.
Wicked Porphyrie (as S. Hierom vvriteth) charge S. Paul of envy and
mal^part boldness, and S. Peter of error. Pro^m. Comment. in Galat. Even so the
like impious sons of Cham, for this, and for other things, gladly charge S.
Peter, as though he had committed the greatest crimes in the world. for, it is
the property of Heretics and il men, to be glad to see the Saints
reprehended and their faults discovered, as we may learn in the vvritings of
S. Augustine against Faustus the Manichee, Paul's reprehension of Peter,
teaches us the zeal of the one, and humility of the other.
who gathered out all the acts of the holy Patriarchs, that might seem to
the people to be worthy blame. Whom the said holy Doctor defends at large
against him* as both he, and before him S. Cyprian, find here upon this
Apostles reprehension, much matter of praising both their virtues: S. Paul's
great zeal, and S. Peter's wonderful humility: that the one in the cause of
God would not spare his Superior, and that the other, in that excellent
dignity, would not take it in il part, nor by allegation of his Suprema^i^
disdain or refuse to be controvvled by his junior, which of the two they
count the greater grace and more to be imitated. For neither Peter (says S.
Cyprian) Whom our Lord chose the first and upon whom he built the Church,
when Paul disputed with him of circumcision, chal^vged insolently or
arrogantly took any thing to him self, saying that he had the Primacie, and
therefore the later Disciples ought rather to obey him. ep. 71 ad Quintum. nu.
2. And S. Augustine ep. 19. c* 2 in fine. That (says he) which was done of
Paul profitably by the liberty of charity, the same Peter took in good part
by holy and benign godliness of humility, and so he gave unto posterity a
more rare and holy example, if at any time perhaps they did amiss, to be content
to be corrected of their iuniors, then Paul, for to be bold and confident: yea
the inferiors to resist their betters for defending the truth of the Gospel, It
proves nothing against Peter's superiority, that he was reprehended.
brotherly charity alvvaies preserved. By which notable speeches of the
Doctors we may also see, how friuolously the Heretics argue hereupon, that S.
Peter could not be Superior to S. Paul, being so reprehended of him: whereas
the Fathers make it an example to the Superiors, to bear with humility the
correption or controulement even of their inferiors. Namely by this example S.
Augustine (li. 2 de bapt. 6. 1. excellently declares, that the B. Martyr S.
Cyprian, who vvalked avvry touching the rebaptizing of them that were
christened of Heretics, could not, nor would not have been offended to be
admonished and reformed in that point by his fellows or inferiors, much less
by a whole Council. We have learned, says he, that Peter the Apostle, in
whom the Primacie of the Apostles by excellent grace is so preeminent, when
he did otherwise concerning circumcision then the truth required, was
corrected of Paul the later Apostle. I think (without any reproach unto him)
Cyprian the Bishop may be compared to Peter the Apostle. howbeit I ought
rather to fear lest I be injurious to Peter. for who knovveth not that the
principality of Apostleship it to be preferred before any dignity of Bishop
whatsoever? but if the grace of the Chaires or Sees differ, The superior may
be reprehende or admonished of the inferior.
yet the glory of the Martyrs is one. And who is so dull that can not see,
that the inferior, though not by office and jurisdiction, yet by the law of
brotherly love and fraternal correption, may reprehend his superior? Did ever
any man wonders that a good Priest or any virtuous person should tell the
Pope, or any other great Prelate, or greatest Prince in earth, their faults?
Popes may be reprehended, and are justly admonished of their faults, and ought
to take it in good part, and so they do and ever have done, Heretics
reprehension of Catholic Bishops in rather railing.
when it comes of zeal and love, as of S. Paul, Irenaeus, Cyprian, Hierom,
Augustine, Bernard: but of Simon Magus, Nouatus, Julian, Wicleffe, Luther,
Calvin, Beza, that do it of malice, and ra^le no less at their virtues then
their vices, of such (I say) Gods Prelates must not be taught nor corrected,
though they must patiently take it, as our Savior did the like reproaches of
the malicious Jews, and as David did the malediction of Semel. 2 Reg. 16.

11. Reprehensible.] The Heretics hereof again infer, that Peter then did
err in faith, and therefore the Popes may fail therein also. To which we
answer, that howsoever other Popes may err in their private teachings or
vvritings, S. Peter's error was not in faith, but in conversation or behavior*
whereof we have treated before in the Annotation upon these words, Luc.
22, 32.
That thy faith fail not: it is certain that S. Peter did not here fail in
faith, nor err in doctrine or knowledge. for it was conversation is non
pr^dicationis vitium, as Tertullian says. de praescript. nu. 7. It was a
default in conversation, life, or regiment, which may be committed of any man,
be he never so holy, and not in doctrine. S. Augustine and whosoever make most
of it, think no otherwise of it. But S. Hierom and See S. Chrysostom. Theophyl.
etc.
many other holy fathers de^r^e it to have been no fault at all, nor any other
thing then S. Paul him self did upon the like occasion: and that this whole
combat was a set thing agreed upon between them. It is a school point much
debated betwixt S. Hierom and S. Augustine ep. 9. 11. 19. apud August.

CHAP. III.
By their own conversion at the first, 6 and by the example of Abraham, and
promise made to him, he shows that the way to obtain the benediction, is
to seek unto God by faith in Christ. 10 Seeing also that the Law curses every
one that has not evermore kept the Law. 15 And, that the Law was not given
to alter Gods testament, 19 but to convince the Iovves of sin, 2^ and so to
be their padagogue or leader unto Christ, 25 and then to cease.

For any people or person to forsake the faith of their first Apostles and
Conversion, at the voice of a few nouellaries, seems to wise men a very
bewitching and sensles brutishnes, Such is the case of our poor country,
Germany, and others.
bewitched you, not to obey the truth, before whose eyes JESUS Christ was
proscribed, being crucified among you? Genesis 15, 6. To. 4. 3.
Abraham believed God, and it was reputed to him unto justice.

This faith whereby Abraham was justified, and his children the Genesis i^s
believing in Christ, implies al Christian virtues, of which the first is
faith, the ground and foundation of all the rest, and therefore here and else
where often named of the Apostle.
of faith, the same are the children of Abraham. Genesis ^^, 3.
That in thee shall al nations be blessed. Deu. 27, 26.
For it is written: Cursed be every one that abides not in all things that be
written in the book of the Law, to do them. The just lives by faith. Abac.
2.
He that does those things shall live in them. To. 1.
Leu. 18.
being made a curse for us (because it is written, Deu. 21.
Cursed is every one that hangs on a tree)

The Epistle upon the 13 Su^day after Pentecost.
or further disposes. Genesis 22, 18.
And to seeds, as in many: but as in one, And to thy seed, which is Christ.
To. 3, 9. 11, 32.
that the promise by the faith of JESUS Christ might be given to them that
believe.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. III.
1^. Cursed be.] Notwithstanding venial sins, men are truly just, and may
keep the commandments.
By this place the Heretics would prove that no man is just truly before
God, al being guilty of damnation and Gods curse, because they keep not every
jot of the Law. Where in deed the Apostle means not such as offend
venially (as it is plain by the place of Deuteronomie whence he recites this
text) but only such as commit great and damnable crimes, and so by grievous and
mortal transgressions wholy break Gods precepts, and thereby incur the
curse of the Law, from which the said Law could not deliver them of it self,
nor by any other means, but by the faith and grace of CHRIST JESUS.

11. Lives by faith.] It is neither the Heretics special presumption and
confidence, Iac. 2.
nor the faith of Devils, Not only faith.
nor faith without works which is dead in it self as S. James says, that
can give life to the just. for that which is dead, can not be the cause of
life. but it is the Catholic faith, as S. Augustine vvriteth, which works
by charity (according to the Apostles own explication of this whole
passage) by which the just lives. Li. 3 c. 5. cont. duas ep. Pelag. See the
Annotation upon the same words. Romans 1.

27. Have put on Christ.] Baptism gives grace and justification, not faith
only.
Here the Adversaries might have seen, if they were not blinded by contentious
striving against Gods Church, that when Justification is attributed to faith
without mention of good works or other Christian virtues and Sacraments, it
is not meant to exclude any of the same from the vvorking of justice or
salvation. for here we learn that by the Sacrament of Baptism also we put
on Christ, which is to put on faith, hope, charity, and al Christian justice.
By the same we prove also that the Sacraments of the new iavv give grace, for
that the receivers thereof put on Christ. And the Adversaries evasion, that it
is faith which works in the Sacrament, and not the Sacrament it self, is
plainly false: Baptism giving grace and faith it self to the infant that had
none before.

CHAP. IIII.
That the Law was fit for the time of nonnage: but being now come to full
age, to desire such servitude is absurd, specially for Gentiles. 12 And that he
vvriteth this not of any displeasure, but to tell them the truth, remembering
how passingly they honored him whom he was present, and exhorting them
therefore not to harken to the false Apostles in his absence. 21 By the
allegory also of Abraham's two sons, shevving. that the children of the
Jews Synagogue shall not inherit, but we who are the children of the free
woman: that is, of the Cath. Church of Christ.

The Epistle upon Twelfth eve.
as long as the heir is a little one, he differs nothing from a servant,
although he be lord of al, That is, the rudiments of religion, wherein the
carnal Jews were trained up: or the corporal creatures, wherein their
manifold sacrifices, sacraments, and rites did consist.
eleme^tes of the world. To. 8, 15.
lest perhaps I have labored in vain among you. So ought al Catholic people
receive their teachers in religion, with al duty, love, and reverence.
as an Angel of God you received me, as Christ JESUS.

The Epistle upon the 4 Su^day in Lent.
have you not read the Law? Genesis 16, 15. 21, 2.
one of the bond-vvoman, and one of the free-vvoman. (...)
which has affinity to that which now is Jerusalem) and serves with her
children. Es. 54, 1.
Rejoice thou barren, that bear not: break forth and cry, that trauailest
not: because many are the children of the desolate, more then of her that has
a husband. To. 9, 8.
This mutual persecution is a figure also of the Church justly persecuting
Heretics, and contrariwise of Heretics (which be the children of the
bondvvoman) unjustly persecuting the Catholic Church. Aug. ep. 48.
as then he that was borne according to the flesh, persecuted him that was
after the spirit: so now also. Genesis 21, 10.
Cast out the bond-vvoman and her son. for the son of the bond-vvoman shall
not be heir with the son of the free-vvoman.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. IIII.
^. Serving.] External worship of God by use of creatures, necessary: and
how the Heathen, Jews, and Christians differ in the same.
There can be no external worship of God nor association of men in religion,
either true or false, without the use of corporal things or elements. The
Heathen so used the creatures of elements that they served them as their
gods. The Jews, of whom the Apostle here speaks, served not the
creatures them selves which they occupied in their ceremonies; but they served
the only true God under the elements: that is to say, being serullely clogged,
yoked, kept occupied and in awe, with innumerable fleshly, gross, and
combersom offices about creatures. The Christians neither serve elements, as
the one, nor be kep^ in servile thraldom thereby, as the other: but occupy
only a fevv exceeding easy, svvete, seemly, and significant for an agreeable
exercise both of body and mind. The use of external elements in the Sacraments.
Whereof S. Augustine says thus, li. 3. c. 9* de doct. Christ. Some fevv for
many, most easy to be done, most honorable for signification, and most clear
and pure for to be observed and kept, has our Lord, him self and the
Apostolical discipline delivered. And li. de ver. relig. c. 17. Of the wisdoms
of God it self mani nature being taken, whereby we were called into
liberty, a fevv Sacraments most holsom were appointed and instituted, which
might contain the society of Christian people, that is, of the free multitude
under one God. And again, cont. Faust. li. 19. c. 13. The Sacraments are
changed, they are made caesier, fewer, holsommer, happier, the same he has in
the 118 epistle c. 1. and many other places besides. By which you may see, it
is not al one to use elements, visible Sacraments or ceremonies, and to serve
them as the Pagans do, or to serve under them as the Jews did, vvherevvith
the Heretics calumniously charge the Christians. Our Sacraments fevv and easy
in respect of the Jews.
And as touching the small number, facility, efficacy, and signification,
wherein the said holy father puts the special difference: who sees not
that for so many busy sacrifices, we have but one: for Sacraments well nere
infinite, but seven: al so easy, so full of grace, so significant, as can be
possible, as of every one in their several places is proved?

Here, S. Augustine falsely alleged of the Heretics for two Sacraments only.
let the good Readers take heed of a double deceit used by the Adversaries
about S. Augustines places alleged. first, in that they say he made but two
Sacraments, which is untrue, for, although treating of the difference between
the Jewish Sacraments and ours, he namely gives example in Baptism and the
Eucharist (as sometimes also for example he names but one) yet he has no
word nor sign at all that there should be no more. but contrarievvise in the
foresaid epistle 118 he insinuates, ep. 118. c. 1. and in ps. 103. co^c. 1
that besides those two, there be other of the same sort in the Scriptures.
Yea, with water and bread, which be the elements of the two foresaid
Sacraments, he expressly names oil also (li. 2. cont. lit. Petil. c. 104.) the
element or matter of the Sacrament of Confirmation: The other Sacraments proved
out of S. Augustine.
which in the same place he makes to be a Sacrament as Baptism is. So does he
affirm of the Sacrament of Orders li. 1 de bapt. c. 1. and also of Matrimony
li. de bono coniug. c. 24. of Penance likewise, he speaks as of Baptism,
which he calls Reconciliation, li. 1. de adult. conjug. c. 28. Lastly, by the
book de visitatione infirmorum in S. Augustine, li. 2 c. 4. by Prosper de
pradictionibus p. 2. c. 29. S. Innocentius ad Eugubinum Io. 1. Cont. ep. ad
Eugub. c. 8. S. Cyril li. 2. in Leuiticum, and S. Chrysostom li. 3 de
Saterdotio, Aug. ser. 215 de ^e^p. and de rectitud. Cath. conuersat.
Extreme unction is proved to be a Sacrament. It is false then that the
Heretics affirm of S. Augustine, by whose doctrine it is plain, that though
the elements or Sacraments of the new law be but few and very fevv in
comparison of those in the old law, yet there be no fewer then seven
specified by him. Which number of seven the holy Councels of Florence and
Trent do expressly define to have been instituted by Christ, against these late
Heretics. See more of these Sacraments in their places. Act. 8. 1 Timothy 4. Io.
20. Ia. 5. Ephesians. 5.

The other forgerie of the Aduersaires concerning the elements or ceremonies,
is, that S. Augustine (ep. 119. c. 19.) should affirm, that the Church and
Christian people in his days (whereupon they infer that it is so much more
now) were so laden with observation of unprofitable ceremonies, S. Augustine
falsely alleged against the ceremonies of the Church.
that they were in as great seruilitie and subjection to such things as the
Jews. He says so in deed of some particular presumptions, inventions, and
vsages of certain persons, as that some made it a heinous matter to touch the
ground with their bare feet within their own octaues, and such like
vanities, whereby some simple folks might be infected, which this holy Doctor
specially misliked, and wishes such things (as they may, without scandal) to
be taken away. But that he vvrote or meant so of any ceremony that the Church
uses, either appointed by Scripture, or Council, or custom of the Catholic
Church, him self denies it in express terms in the same place, and in
sundry other: where he allows all the holy ceremonies done in the
ministration of the Sacraments and else where. Whereby it is clear, that the
Churches most comely orders and significant (...) pertain not to the yoke of
the old law, much less to the superstition of Gentilitie, as Heretics
affirm: but to the svveete yoke of Christ and light burden of his law, to
order, decency, and instruction of the faithful, in all liberty, love, faith,
grace, and spirit.

9. Vveake and poor.] Whether he mean of the creatures which the Gentiles
served (as it may seem by the words before of serving strange gods) so the
elements were most base and beggarly: or of the Iuaical ceremonies and
sacraments (as most expound it) even so also their elements were vveake and
poor in them selves, not giving life, salvation, and remission of sins, nor
being instruments or vessels of grace, as the 7 Sacraments of the new law be.

10. You observe days.] The Heathenish and Iudaical observation of days
heretically compared with the Christian observation of festiuities and holy
days etc.
That which S. Paul speaks against the Idolotrical observation of days,
mo^eths, and times, dedicated by the Heathen to their false gods, and to
wicked men or spirits, as to Jupiter, Mercury, Ianus, Juno, Diana, and such
like, or against the superstitious differences of days, fatal, fortunate, or
dis^nol, and other observations of times for good luck or il luck in man's
actions, gathered, either by particular fancy, or popular observation, or
curious and unlawful arts, or (lastly) of the Iudaical festiuities that were
then ended and abrogated, unto which notvvithstanding certain Christian
Jews would have reduced the Galatians against the Apostles doctrine: all that
(I say) do the Heretics of our time falsely and deceitfully interpret against
the Christian holidaies, and the sanctification and necessary keeping of the
same. Which is not only contrary to the Fathers exposition, but against the
very Scriptures, and the practice of the Apostles and the whole Church. Aug.
cont. Adim^^s. c. 16. Ep. 118. c. 7. Hiero. in hunc locum. In the Apocalypse c.
1. there is plain mention of the Sunday, Su^day, Easter, vvhitsontide.
that is, our Lords day (Dominicus dies) unto which the Jews Sabbath was
altered, their Pasche into our Easter, their Pe^tecost into our Vvhitsontide:
which were ordained and observed of the Apostles them selves. And the
antiquity of the feasts of Christ's Nativity, The festiuities of Christ.
Epiphanle, and Asce^sion is such, that they ca^ be referred to no other
origin but the Apostles institution: Orig. ho. 3. in diverse.
who (as S. Clement testifies li. ^. constable. Apost. c. ^9.) gave order for
celebrating their follovv Apostles, S. Steuens, and other Martyrs days after
their death: and much more no doubt did they give order for Christ's
festiuities. Aug. ep. 28. et. Ser. de Sa^ctis.
According to which, Other holidaies of Saints.
the Church has kept not only his, but S. Steuens and the B. Innocents, even
on the same dales they be now solemnly kept, and his B. mothers, and other
Saints, (as the Adversaries them selves confess) above 1300 years, Fulgent.
as appears in the barbarous combattes between Vvestphalus the Lutheran, and
Calvin, and by the vvritings betwixt, the Puritans and Protestants. Leo.


For which purpose, see also how old the holiday of S. Polycarpe is in
Eusebius li. 4. c. 14: of the Sea the Annotation, Act. 1. v, 14.
Assumptio^ of our Lady or her dormition in S. Athanasius, Festiuities of our
B. Lady.
S. Augustine, S. Hierom. S. Damase. and both of that feast and of her
Nativity in S. Bernard, who professes he received them of the Church, and
that they ought to be most solemnel; kept. ep. 174. Wherein we can not but
vvonder at the new Church of England, that (though against the pure
Caluinistes vvil and doctrine) keep other Saints and Apostles days of their
death, and yet have abolished this special feast of our Ladies departure,
which they might keep, ep. ad Timotheu^.
though they believed not her Assumption in body (whereof yet S. Denis gives
so great testimony) being assured she is departed at the least: except they
either ^are her, or think her worthy of less remembrance then any other
Saint, her self prophesying the contrary of al Catholic generations, Luc. 1.
v. 48.
that they should bless her. And in deed the Assumption is her proper day, as
also the feast of her Natiuitle: See. S. Grego. li. 7. ep. 29. of Martyrs
feasts all the year, and Masses in the same.
the other of the Purification and the Annune^ation, which they keep in
England, being not so peculiar to her, but belonging rather to Christ's
Presentation in the Temple, and his Conception. To conclude, we may see in S.
Cyprian ep. 34. Origin ho. 3. in diverse. Co^c. Ga^gr. c. 20
Tertulliau de cor. ^il. S. Gregory Nazianzene de amore pauperum. the Council
of Gangres, yea and in the council of Nice it self giving order for Easter and
the certain celebrating thereof, that Christian Festiuities be holy, ancient,
and to be observed on prescript days and times, and that this is not Iudaical
observation of days, Epiphan.
as Aerius taught, for which he was condemned of Heresy, Har. 75.
as S. Epi^phanius witnesses. But of holidaies S. Augustine shows both the
reason and his liking, S. Augustines words of Festiuities and holy days.
in these memorable words, (...) for the feasts belonging to our Lord, Aug.
de Ciuit. Dei li. 10. c. 16.
thus: We dedicate and consecrate the memory of Gods benefits with
solemnities, feasts, and certain appointed days, left by tract of times
there might creept in ungrateful and unkind oblivion. Of the festiuities of
Martyrs thus: Christian people celebrate the memories of Martyrs with
religious solemnity, both to move them selves to imitation of them, and that
they may be partakers of their merits, and be helped with their prayers.
Cont. Faust. li. 20. c. 21. And of al Saints days, thus Keep ye and
celibrate with sobriety the Natiuities of Saints, that we may imitate them
which have gone before Us, and they may rejoice of us which pray for us. In
ps. 88. Conc. 2. in fine.

And as is said of prescript days of feasts, Prescript fasting days.
so the like is to be said Hilar. prolog. in psalm. explan. Epip. haer. 75. and
in fine. li. 3. cont. har.
of fastes, which else where we have showed to be of the Apostles ordinance.
And so also of the Ecclesiastical division of the year into Aduent, Canonical
hours.
Septuagesme, etc. the week into so many I eries, the day into Hours of
prayers, as the Prime, the Third, the Sixth, the None etc. Whereof see Cypri.
de erat. Do. nu. 15.
S. Cyprian, who deriueth these things by the Scriptures from the Apostles
also, and counts these things which the wicked Heretics reprove, to be full
of mystery. Like unto this also is it, Reading of the Scriptures according to
the time of the year.
that the holy Scriptures were so disposed of, and divided, that certain
pieces (as is alvvaies observed and practiced until this day) should be read at
one time, and others at other times and seasons, through out the year,
according to the diversity of our Lords actions and benefits, or the Saints
stories then recorded. Which the Puritan Caluinists also condemn of
superstition, desiring to bring in hellish horror and al disorder. See conc.
Carthag. 3. c. 47. and page 288 of this book.

24. By an allegory.] The Scriptures have an allegorical sense beside the
litteral.
Here we learn that the holy Scriptures have beside the litteral sense, a
deeper spiritual and more principal meaning: which is not only to be taken of
the holy words, but of the very factes and persons reported: both the
speeches and the actions being significatiue over and above the letter. Which
pregnancie of manifold senses if S. Paul had not signified him self in certain
places, the Heretics had been less wicked and presumptuous in condemning the
holy fathers allegorical expositions almost wholy: who now show them selves to
be mere brutish and carnal men, having no sense nor feeling of the profunditie
of the Scriptures, which our holy fathers the Doctors of Gods Church savv.

^1. Freedom.] True Christian liberty.
He means the liberty and discharge from the old ceremonies, sacraments, and
the whole bondage of the Law, and from the servitude of sin, and the Devil,
to such as obey him: but not liberty to do what every man list, or to be
under no obedience of spiritual or temporal laws and gonerners: not a license
never to pray, fast, keep holyday, or vvorkday, but when and how it seems
best to every man's fantasy. Such a dissolute licentious state is far from
the true liberty which Christ purchased for us.

CHAP. V.
Against the lie of the false Apostles, he protests his mind of Circumcision.
13 and testifies, that they are called to liberty. But yet left any
misconster Christian liberty, he tells them that they shall not inherit the
kingdom, unless they abstain from the works of the flesh, which are al
mortal sins: and do the fruitful works of the Spirit, fulfilling all the
commandments of the Law by Charity.

Gal. 6, 15:
expect the hope of justice. 1 Cor. 5, 6.
*

one an other. The Epistle upon the 14 Su^day after Pentecost.
Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self. Leu. 19, 18.
Here men think (says S. Augustine) the Apostle denies that we have free
liberty of vvil: not understanding that this is said to them, if they vvil not
hold fast the grace of faith conceived, by which only they ca^ walk in the
spirit, and not accomplish the concupiscences of the flesh. in c. 5. Gal.
that not what things soever you vvil, these you do.

S. Augustine shows hereby that not only insidelitie is a damnable sin.
such things, shall not obtain the kingdom of God. The Epistle upon the 15
Su^day after Pentecost.
If we live in the spirit, in the spirit also let us walk.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. V.
6. Faith.] This is the faith vvorking by charity, which S. Paul means else
where, when he faith that faith does justify. And note well that by these
terms circumcision and prepuce not auailable to justification, Justification
by faith only, disproued by conference of Scriptures.
it is plain that in the other places he means the works of Circumcision
and Prepuce (that is, of the Jews and the Gentiles) without faith, which
avail not, but faith vvorking by charity: as who should say, faith and good
works, not works without faith.

Again note here, that if the Protestants who pretend conference of places to
be the best or only way to explicate hard speeches of the holy Scriptures, had
followed but their own rule, this one text would have interpreted and
cleated unto them al other whereby justice and salvation might seem to be
attributed to faith alone: the Apostle here so expressly setting down, the
faith which he commends so much before, not to be alone, but with charity:
not to be idle, but to be vvorking by Charity: How the Protestants admit
charity and good works to justification.
as S. Augustine notes. defid. and ep. c. 14. Further the good Reader must
observe, that whereas the Protestants some of them confess, that Charity and
good works be joined and requisite also, and that they exclude them not, but
commend them highly, yet so that the said Charity or good works are no part
of our justice or any cause of justification, but as fruits and effects of
faith only, which they say does all, yea though the other be present: this
false gloss also is reproved evidently by this place, Charity is more
principal then faith in justification.
which teaches us clean contrary: to vvitte, that faith has her whole
actiuitie and operation tovvard justice and salvation, of charity, and not
contrarievvise: without which it can not have any act meritorious or agreeable
to God for our salvation, for which cause S. Augustine says, li. (...) de
Trin. c. 18. Fidem non facit vtilem nisi charitas. nothing makes faith
profitable but charity. But the Heretics answer, that where the Apostle
says, faith works by charity, he makes charity to be the instrument only
of faith in well vvorking, and therefore the inferior cause at the least, but
this also is easily refuted by the Apostles plain testimony, affirming that
charity is * the greater virtue, and that if a man had al faith and lacked
charity, Cor. 13.
he were vvorth nothing. And again, * that Charity is the perfection and
acco^plishment of of the Iavv (as faith i^ not) which can not agree to the
instrumental or inferior cause. How faith works by charity.
And therefore when it is said that faith works by charity, Romans 13.
it is not as by an instrument, 1 Timothy 1^
but as the body works by the soul, the matter by the form, without which
they have no actiuitie, Whereupon the the Schools call Charity, the form or
life of faith, that is to say, the force, actiuitie, and operative quality
thereof, in respect of merit and justice. Which S. James does plainly
insinuate, when he makes faith without Charity, to be as a dead corpse
without soul or life, and therefore without profitable operation. c. 2. v. 26.

^^. Liberty an occasion.] True liberty, not carnal and fleshly.
They abuse the liberty of the Gospel to the advantage of their flesh, that
under pretense thereof, shake of their obedience to the laws of man, to the
decrees of the Church and Councels, that vvil live and believe as they list;
and not be taught by their Superiors, but fornicate with every Sect master
that teaches pleasant and licentious things: and all this under pretense of
spirit, liberty, and freedom of the Gospel. Such must learn that al heresies,
schisms, and rebellions against the Church and their lavvful Prelates, be
counted here among the works of the flesh. S^^ S. Augustine de fid. and op.
c. 24. 25.

If any do sin, therest that do the works of the Holy Ghost, must not
therefore take pride in them selves, but rather make humility of it, partly by
fearing their own fall, partly by looking straightly to their own works. 6
He exhorts earnestly to good works, assuring them that they shall reaps none
other then here they sovv. 11 With his own hand he vvriteth, telling them,
the true cause why those false Apostles preach circumcision, to be only to
please the Jews: 17 and a plain argument that he preaches it not, to be
this, that he is persecuted of the Jews.
1. Cor. 9, 7.
2. These. 3, 13.
For in due time we shall The works of mercy be the seed of life
everlasting, and the proper cause thereof, and not faith only.
reap not failing.

The Epistle for S. Francis, October. 4.
But Christ (says S. Augustine) chose a kind of death, to hang on the Cross
and to six or fasten the same cross in the foreheads of the faithful, that
the Christian may say, God forbid that I should glory saving in the cross of
our Lord JESUS CHRIST. Expos. in Euang. Io. tract. 43.
God forbid that I should glory, saving in the cross of our Lord JESUS
Christ: by whom the world is crucified to me, and I to the world.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. VI.
6. Communicate] The great duty and respect that we ought to have to such as
preach or teach us the Cath. Duty to our spiritual teachers.
faith* and not in regard only of their pains taken with us, and
vvel-deseruing of us by their doctrine: but that we may be partakers of their
merits, we ought specially to do good to such, or (as the Apostle speaks)
communicate with them in all our temporal goods, that we may be partakers of
their spiritual. See S. Augustine li. 2. Euang. quaest. q. 8.

10. Especially.] In alms whom to prefer.
In giving alms, though we may do well in helping all that are in necessity,
as far as we can, yet we are more bound to succor Christians, then Jews
or Infidels: and Catholics, then Heretics. See S. Hierom q. 1. ad Hedibiam.

15. A new creature.] Justice an inherent quality in us.
Note well that the Apostle calls that here a new creature, which in the
last chapter he termed, faith vvorking by charity, and (1 Cor. 7, 19) the
observation of the co^maundeme^ts of God. Whereby we may learn that under
the name of faith is contained the whole reformation of our souls and our
new creation in good works, and also that Christian justice is a very
quality, Faith with the other virtues is the formal cause of justification.
condition and state of virtue and grace resident in us, and not a fantastical
apprehension of Christ's justice only imputed to us. Lastly, that the faith
which justifies, joined with the other virtues, is properly the formal
cause, and not the efficient or instrumental cause of justification, that is to
say, these virtues put together, being the effect of Gods grace, be our new
creature and our justice in Christ.

THE ARGUMENT OF THE EPISTLE OF S. PAVL TO THE EPHESIANS.
OF S. Paul's first coming to Ephesus, and short abode there, we read Act.
18. And immediately Act. 19. of his returning thither according to his promise.
what time he abode there three months, speaking to the Jews in the
Synagogue. Act. 19. v. 8. and afterward apart from them (because they were
obstinate) two years in a certain school, so that all that dwelled in Asia,
heard the word of our Lord, Jews and Gentiles. Act. 19. v. 10. The whole
time himself calls three years, in his exhortation at Miletum to the Clergy
of Ephesus. Act. 20. v. 31.

After all this he vvriteth this Epistle unto them from Rome (as it is said)
being then prisoner and in chains. Ephesians. 3. v. 1. and 4. v. 1. Ephesians. 6. v. 20.
and that as it seems, not the first time of his being in bonds there,
whereof we read Act. 28: but the second time, whereof we read in the
Ecclesiastical Stories afterward: because he says in this Epistle c. 6. v.
21. Tychicus vvil certify you of al things, whom I have sent to you. Of whom
again in the 2. to Tim. c. 4. v. 12. he says: Tychicus I have sent to
Ephesus, And the said, 2. Epistle to Timothee (no doubt) was written very
little before his death: for in it thus he says: I am even now to be
sacrificed, and the time of my resolution is at hand. 2. Tim. 4, 6.

In the three first chapters, he commends unto them the grace of God, in
caling of the Gentiles no less then the Jews, and making one blessed Church
of both. Wherein his intention is to move them to persevere (for otherwise
they should be passing ungrateful) and specially not to be moved with his
trouble, who was their Apostle: knovving (belike) that See Act. 20. v. 25. 32.
it would be a great tentation unto them, if they should hear soon after,
that he were executed: therefore also arming them in the end of the Epistle, as
it were in complete harness.

In the other three chapters he exhorts them to good life, in all points,
and all states, as it becomes Christians: and before all other things, that
they be most studious to continue in the unity of the Church, and obedience of
the pastors thereof, whom Christ has given to continue and to be our stay
against all Heretics, from his Ascension, even to the full building up of his
Church in the end of the world.

THE EPISTLE OF PAVL TO THE EPHESIANS.
CHAP. I.
He magnifieth the grace of Gods eternal predestination and temporal vecation,
11 both of the Jews, 13 and also of the Ephesians being Gentiles, 13 for
whose excellent faith and charity he rejoices, and continually prays for
their increase, that they may see more clearly the greatness both of the
inheritance in heaven, and also of Gods might which helps them thereunto: 20
an example of which might they may behold in the supereminent exalting of
Christ.



We learn here that by Gods grace men be holy and immaculate, not only in
the sight of men, nor by imputation, but truly and before God: contrary to
the Doctrine of the Caluinistes.
in his sight in charity. (...)
gratified us in his beloved son. (...)
perfect al things in Christ, that are in heaven and in earth, in him. according
to the purpose of him that works al things, according to the counsel of his
vvil: Some refer this to the grace of Baptism: but to many learned it
seems that the Apostle alludeth to the giving of the Holy Ghost in the
Sacrament of Confirmation, by signing the baptized with the sign of the Cross
and holy Chrisme. For that was the use in the Apostles time, as else where we
have proved. Annot. Act. 8.
signed with the holy Spirit of promis,

Ps. 8, 8.
but also in that to come. Christ is not full, whole, and perfect without the
church no more then the head without the body,
fulness of him which is filled al in all.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. I.
21. Al Principality.] The Fathers upon this, and other places of the old and
new Testament, where they find the orders of holy Angels or spirits named,
agree that there be nine orders of them. Of which some be here counted and
called, as we see: in the Epistle to the Colossians, the order of Thrones is
specified, which makes five: to which if we add these four, Nine orders
of Angels.
Cherubim, Seraphim, Angels, and Archangels, which are commonly named in holy
write, in all there be nine. S. Denis coel. Hier. c. 7. 8. 9. and Ec. Hier. c.
1. S. Athanas. li de Communi essent. in fine. Gregor, Moral. li. 32. c. 18.
Therefore, good Reader, make no accoumpt of * Caluins and others infidelity,
Call. upon this place.
which blasphemously blame and condemn the holy doctors diligence in this
point of curiousitie and impiety. The whole endeavor of these heretics is,
to bring al into doubt, and to corrupt every Article of our Religion.

22. Head.] As Christ is king, and yet men are kings also: so Christ is head of
the Church, and yet man may be head thereof also.
It makes a high proof among the Protestants, that no man can be head of the
Church, because it is a calling and dignity proper to Christ. But in truth by
as good reason there should be no king nor lord, Apoc. 19.
because, He is king and lord. neither should there be Bishop or Pastor, 1 Pet.
2, 25.
because he is the Bishop and Pastor of our souls: nor Pontifex nor Apostle,
for by those titles S. Paul terms him Hebr. 3: none should be pillar,
foundation, rock, light, or master of the Church or truth, because Christ is
properly al these. And yet our new doctors (though they be exceeding seditious
and would for the advantage of their sect be gladly rid of kings and al
other Superiors temporal, if they feared not the sword more then God, and
would find as good Scriptures to be delivered of them, as they now find to
discharge them selves of obedience to Popes:) yet (I say) they vvil not deny,
Christ is head of his Church in a far more excellent sort, then any man can be.
all the former titles and dignities (notvvithstanding Christ's sovereign right
in the same) to be given and communicated to the Princes and Magistrates of the
earth both spiritual and temporal, though Christ in a more divine, ample,
absolute, excellent, and transcendent sort, have al these things attributed or
appropriated to him self. So then, though he be the head of the Church, and the
only head in such sovereign and principal manner, as no earthly man or mere
creature ever is or can be, and it joined to the Church in a more excellent
sort of conjunction, then any king is to his subjects or Country, or any Pope
or Prelate to the Church whereof he is governor, even so, far that it is
called his body Mystical: life, motion, spirit, grace issuing down from him
to it and the members of the same, as from the head of the natural body* though
in this sort (we say) no man can be head but Christ, nor the Church be body to
any but to Christ: yet the Pope may be the ministerial head, that is to say,
the chief Governor, Pastor, and Prelate of the same, and may be his Vicar or
Vicegerent in the regiment of that part which is in earth* Hiero. ep. 123.
as S. Hierom calls Damasus the Pope, Summum Sacerdotem, the chief and
highest Priest: and the Apostle says of this ministerial head, The head can
not say to the feet, you are not necessary for me. 1. Cor. 12, 21.
For therein also is a great difference between Christ and every mortal I
relate, that (as the Apostle here says) he is head of the whole Church,
meaning of the triumpha^t (and of al Angels also though in an other sort) no
less the^ of the Church milita^t. So Peter was not, nor any Pope, nor any man
can be. Where you must observe, that for this sovereign preeminence of Christ
in this case, the Church is not called the body mystical of any Governor,
Peter, Paul, or what Prelate or Pope so ever.

CHAP. II.
He puts them in mind of their vnvvorthines before they were Christians:
that all the praise may be given to the grace of God: 11 and of the enmity that
was th^^ between the Jew and the Gentil: (...) until new that Christ by his
Cross has made both one, taking away the cerem^nies of the Law, and making
one body, and building one holy Temple, of al, in his Catholic Church.

Ephesians. 6, 12.
according to the * prince of the power of this air, of the spirit that now
works on the children of diffidence, for it is the gift of God) It is said,
not of works as thine, of thy self being unto thee, but as those in which God
has made, formed, and created thee. Aug. de gr. and lib. arbit. c. 8. and seq.
not of works, that no man glory

1. reg. 17, 26. Ezec 44, 7.
who were * called prepuce, of that which is called circumcision in the
flesh, made with hand: To. 9, 4.
(...).
in decrees: that he may create the two in him self into one new man, making
peace,

To. 5, 2.
and peace to them that were nigh. The Epistle for S. Thomas the Apostle.
December. 21.
(...)
citizens of the saints, and the domesticals of God,

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. II.
^. By grace you are saved through faith.] Our first justification of mere
grace, and faith the foundation thereof.
Our first justification is of Gods grace, and not of our deseruings: because
none of al our actions that were before our justification, could merit or
justly procure the grace of justification. Again, he says, through faith: for
that faith is the beginning, foundation, and root of al justification, and the
first of al other virtues, without which it is impossible to please God.

20. Built upon the foundation.] The Church builded upon Christ, and yet upon
the Apostles also.
Note against the Heretics that think it dishonorable to Christ, to attribute
his titles or callings to mortal men, that the faithful (though builded first,
principally, and properly upon Christ) yet are said here to be built also upon
the Apostles and Prophets. Why may not the Church then be builded upon Peter?

CHAP. III.
For witnessing the vocation of the Gentiles, as being the Apostle of the
Gentiles, he is (...) prison: 1^, Wherein the Gentiles therefore have cause to
rejoice, rather then to shrink. So he says, 14 and also prays to God (who
is almighty) to confirmed their inward man though the outvvard be infirmed by
persecutions.

1. Cor. 15, 9.
(...)
That is, for ever before.
from worlds in God, who created al things: that is, the eternal prafinitio^
prefinitio^ of worlds, which he made in Christ JESUS our Lord. The Epistle
upon the 16 Sunday after Pentecost.
For the which cause I desire that you faint not in my tribulations for you,
which is your glory.

Christ dwells in us by his gifts, and we be just by those his gifts
remaining and resident in us, and not by Christ's proper instice only, as the
Heretics affirm.
to dwell by faith in your hearts, rooted and founded Not faith only must be in
us, but charity which acco^plisheth al virtues.
in charity, Christ, surpassing knowledge, that you may be filled unto all the
fulness of God. To. 16, 2^.


CHAP. IIII.
He exhorts them to keep the unity of the Church most (...) with al
humilities bringing them many motives thereunto: 7 and (...) that (...) the
diversity it self of offices is not for division, as being the gift of Christ
him self, (...) to build up the Church, and to held al in the unity thereof
against the (...) of Heretics: that under Christ the head, in the Church being
the body, every member may prosper. 17 Neither (as touching life) most we
(...) like the Heathen, but as it becomes Christians, laying of al our old
corrupt manners, and increasing daily in all goodness.

The Epistle upon the 17 Sunday after Pentecost. And in a Votiue Mass against
Schism.
beseech you, that you walk worthy of the vocation in which you are
called, Malat. 2, 10.
one faith, one baptism. The Epistle upon Ascension eve. And upon SS. Simon
and Iudes day.
which is ever al, To. 12, 4 1. Cor. 12, 4.
and by all, and in all us. Asce^ding on high, Ps. 67, 19.
he led captivity captive: he gave gifts to men. ( He m^aneth specially of
his descending to Hell.
inferior parts of the earth? 1. Cor. 12, 28.
* some Apostles, and some Prophets, and othersome Evangelists, and othersome
pastors and doctors, Christ:

1 Pet. 4, 3. To. 1, 21.
To. 1, 24.
* have given up them selves to impudicitie, unto the operation of al
uncleanness, unto avarice. Colos. 3, 8
(as the truth is in JESUS.) Heb. 12, 1.
according to the old conversation the old man, which is corrupted according
to the desires of error. The Apostle teaches us not to apprehe^d Christ's
justice by faith only, but to be renewed in our selves truly, and to put on us
the new man formed and created in justice and holiness of truth. By the which,
free vvil also is proved to be in us, to work with God, or to consent unto him
in our sanctification.
be renewed in the spirit of your mind: Zach. 8, 16.
because we are members one of an other.

Ps. 4, 5.
let not the son go down upon your anger.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. IIII.
5. One faith.] As rebellion is the bane of civil Commonvvealths and kingdoms,
Unity of the Cath. Church.
and peace and concord, the preservation of the same: so is Schism, division,
and diversity of faiths or felovvships in the service of God, the calamity of
the Church: and peace, unity, uniformity, the special blessing of God
therein, and in the Church above al Commonvvealths, because it is in all points
a Monarchy tending every way to unity. but one God, but one Christ, but one
Church, but one hope, one faith, one baptism, one head, one body. Whereof S.
Cyprian li. de unit. E^nu. 3. says thus* One Church the Holy Ghost in the
person of our Lord designeth and faith. One is my do^e. This unity of the
Church he that holdith not, does he think he holds the faith? He that
vvithstandeth and resists the Church, he that forsakes Peter's chair upon
which the Church was built, does he trust that he is in the Church? When the
blessed Apostle S. Paul also shows this Sacrament of unity, saying, One
body and one spirit etc. Which unity we Bishops specially that rule in the
Church, ought to hold fast and maintain, that we may prove the Bishoply
function also it self to be one and undivided, Ep. 40.
etc. And again, There is one God, Schism detestable.
and one Christ, and one Church, and one Chair, by our Lords voice founded
upon Peter. An other altar to be set up, or a now Priesthod to be made,
besides one altar, and one Priesthod, is impossible. Whosoever gathers else
where, scatters, it is adulterous, it is impious, it is sacriligious,
whatsoever is instituted by man's fury to the breach of Gods divine
disposition. Get ye far from the contagion of such men, and fle^ from their
speeches at a canker and pestilen^^, our Lord having praemonished and warned
before hand, They are blind, leaders of the blind, etc. Whereby we learn
that this unity of the Church commended so much unto us, consists in the
mutual fellowship of al Bishops with the Sea of the Peter. S. Hilarie also
(li. ad Constantium Augustum) thus applies this same place of the Apostle
against the Arians, as we may do against the Caluinists. Among heretics as
many faithes as wills.
Perilous and miserable it is, says he, that there are now so many faithes as
vvilles, and so many doctrines as (...), vvhiles either faithes are so written
ad we will, or as we vvil, so are understood: and whereas according to one
God, and one Lord, and one Baptism, there is also one faith, we fall away
from that which is the only faith, and vvhiles me faithes be made, they
begin to come to that, that there is none at al.

11. Some Apostles.] The heretics folish negative argument against the Pope,
ansvvered.
Many functions that were even in the Apostles time, are not here named:
which must be noted against the Adversaries that call here for Popes, as
though the names of Bishops, Priests, or Deacons were not as well leaft out as
Popes: whom yet they can not deny to have been in use in S. Paul's days. And
therefore they have no more reason, out of this place to dispute against the
Pope, then against the rest of the Ecclesiastical functions. Neither is it
necessary to reduce such as be no: specified here, to these here named: though
in deed both other Bishops and Prelates and specially Popes may be contained
under the names of Apostles, The Popes office is called an Apostleship.
Doctors, and Pastors. Certes the room and dignity of the Pope is a very
continual Apostleship, and S. Bernard calls it Apostolatum. Bernard. ad
Eugen. li. 14. c. 4 etc. 6 in fine.

13. Until we meet.] The Church of God shall never lack these spiritual
functions, or such as be answerable to them, Continual succession of Bishops,
an evident argument of the true visible Church.
according to the time and state of the Church, til the worlds end. Whereby
you may prove, the Catholic Church, that is to say, that visible company of
Christians which has ever had, and by good records can prove they have had, a
continual ordinary succession of Bishops, Pastors, and Doctors, to be the
only true Church: and these other good fellows that for many worlds or
ages together can not show that they had any one Bishop, or ordinary yea or
extraordina^^e officer for them and their sect, to be an adulterous Heretical
generation. The father's refuted heretics by the succession of the Bishops of
Rome.
And this place of the Apostle assuring to the true Church a perpetual visible
continuance of Pastors and Apostles or their successors, warranted the holy
fathers to try al Heretics by the most famous succession of the Popes of
Rome. So did S. Irenaeus, li. 3. c. 3. Tertullian, in prascript. Optatus, li. 2
cont. Parm. S. Augustine, in ps. cont. part. Donat. et cont. ep. Manich. c. 4.
et ep. 165. Epiph. har. 27. and others.

14. With every vvinde.] The special use of the spiritual Governors is, to
keep us in unity and constancy of the Catholic faith, Heretical blastes
carry away the inconstant only.
that we be not carried away with the blast or vvind of every heresy.
Which is a very proper note of sects and new doctrines that trouble the
infirm vveaklings of the Church, by certain seasons of diverse ages: as
sometime the Arians, then the Manichees, an other time the Nestorians, then the
Lutherans, Caluinists, and such like: who at diverse times in diverse places,
have blovven diverse blastes of flase doctrine.

CHAP. V.
He continues his exhortation to good life, 5 assuring them against al
deceivers, that no committer of mortal sin shall be saved: considering that
for such sins it is that the Heathen shall be damned: ^ and that Christians
must rather be the light of al others. 22 Them he comes in particular and
exhorts husbands and vviues to do their duty one toward the other, by the
example of Christ and his obedient and beloved spouse the Church.

The epistle upon the 3 Su^day in Lent.
as most dear children: Io. 13, 34
Col. 3, 5.
or avarice, let it not so much as be named among you, as it becomes
saints: See the heretical corruption of this place in the Annotation Col. 3.
v. 5.
the service of Idols) has inheritance in the kingdom of Christ and of God.

Es. 9, 60
Rise thou that sleep, The Epistle upon the 20 Sunday after Pentecost.
and arise from the dead: and Christ vvil illuminate thee. Col. 4, 5.
not as unwise, but * as wise: To. 12, 2.
Col. 3, 18.


The Epistle in a votiue mass for marriage.
as to our Lord: Tit. 2, 5.
1 Pe^. 3, 1.
as Christ is the head of the It is much to be noted, that in the first English
Bibles, there is not once the name of CHVRCH in all the Bible, but in steed
thereof, Congregation. which is so notorious a corruption that the^ selves in
the later bibles correct it for shame, but yet suffer the other to be read and
used still. See the Bible printed in the year 1562.
CHVRCH. Him self, Ge. 3, 16.
the savior of his body. 1 Cor. 11, 3.
Christ, so also the women to their husbands in all things. Genesis 2, 24.
Mat. 19, 5.
and they shall be two in one flesh.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. V.
21. Savior of his body.] None has salvation or benefit by Christ, that is
not of his body the Church. No ^aluation out of the oath CHVRCH.
And what Church that is, S. Augustine expresses in these words. The
Catholic Church only is the body of Christ, vvhereto she is ^ead. out of this
body the Holy Ghost quickens no man. And a little after, He that vvil have the
Spirit, let him bevvare he remains not out of the CHVRCH, let him bevvare he
enter not into it f^inedly. August. ep. 50 ad Bonifacium comitem in fine.

24. Subject to Christ.) The CHVRCH is alvvaies subject to Christ, that is, not
only under him, The CHVRCH never erreth.
but ever obedient to his words and commandment. Which an evident and
invincible demonstration that she never rebelleth against Christ, never falls
from him by error, Idolatry, or false worship, as the Heretics now, and the
Donatistes of old did teach.

25. Loved the Church.] Christ's love tovvard his Church.
Lo Christ's singular love of the CHVRCH, for which only and the members
thereof he effectually suffered his Passion, and for whose continual cleansing
and purifying in this life, he instituted holy Baptism and other Sacraments:
that at length in the next life it may become without al spot, The Church
triumphant without spot and vvrinkle.
vvrinkle, or blemish. for, in this world by reason of the manifold
infirmities of diverse her members, she can not be wholy without sin, but
must say alvvaies, Dimitte no^is debita nostra, Forgive us our detes. August.
li. 2. Retract. c. 18.

29. At Christ the Church.] It is an unspeakable dignity of the CHVRCH, which
the Apostle expresses often else where, The manifold dignity of the Church
but specially in this whole passage, to be that creature only for which
Christ effectually suffered, to be vvashed and embrued with water and blood
issuing out of his holy side, to be nourished with his own body (for so does
S. Irenaeus expound li, 5. in principio) to be his members, Aug. li. 8 de Symb.
ad Catech. c. 9.
to be so joined unto him as the body and members of the same flesh, bone, and
substance to the head, to be loved and cherished of him as wife of husband,
yea to be his wife and most dear spouse, taken and formed (as S. Augustine
often says) out of his own side upon the Cross, as Eve our first father
Adams spouse was made of his tibbe. In Psalm. 126. and in Psalm. 127. and tract.
9 in Joan. and tract. 120. In respect of which great dignity and excellency,
the same holy father affirms the CHVRCH to be the principal creature, and
therefore named in the Creed next after the Holy Ghost, The Church is the
principal creature.
and he proves against the Macedonians, the Holy Ghost to be God, because he
is named before the Church in the confession of our faith. Of which
Incomparable excellency of the Church, so beloved of Christ and so inseparatly
joined in marriage with him, if the Heretics of our time had any sense or
consideration, they would neither think their co^temptible company or
congregation to be the glorious spouse of our Lord, The Church can not err.
nor teach that the Church may err, that is to say, may be divorced from her
spouse for Idolatry, superstition, Heresy, or other abominations: Whereupon
one of these absurdities would ensue, that either Christ may sometimes be
without a Church and spouse in earth (as he was all the while there were no
Caluinists, Absurdities that follow, if the Church may err.
if their Church be the spouse of Christ) or else if the Catholic Church only
is and has been his wife, and the same have such errors as the Heretics
falsely pretend, that his wife so dear and so praised here, is
notvvithstanding a very vvhoore. Which horrible absurdities prove and convince
to any man of common sense, both that the Catholic Church alvvaies is, and
that it teaches truth alvvaies, and to honor God truly and sincerely
alvvaies: whatsoever the adulterous generation of Heretics think or
blaspheme.

^^. This is a great Sacrament.] Marriage a great Sacrament of Christ and his
Church prefigured in the first parents. Adam (says S. Augustine tract. 15 in
Io.) who was a form or figure of him that was to come, yea rather God in
him gave us a great token of a Sacrament. For both he deserved sleeping to take
a wise, and of his ribbs his wife was made unto him: because of Christ
sleeping on the Cross the Church was to be made out of his side. In an other
place he makes Matrimony a Sacrament of Christ and his Church: in that, that
as the married man must forsake father and mother and cleave unto his wife, so
Christ as it were left his father, MATRIMONIA a Sacrament.
exi^an^^ing him self by his incarnation, and left the Synagogue his mother,
and joined him self to the Church. Li. 12 c. 8. cont. Faustum. In diverse other
places he makes it also a Sacrament, specially in that it is an inseparable
bond betwixt two, and that can never be dissolved but by death: signifying
Christ's perpetual and indissoluble conjunction with the Church his one only
spouse. de Genesis ad lit. li. 9 c. 7. Cont Pelag. de pec. orig. li. 2. c. 34. De
fid. et ep. c. 7. De bono coniug. c. 7. and 18. And in an other place. The good
of Marriage (says he) among the people of God is in the holiness of a Sacrament.
De bono co^iugali c. 24.

Who would have thought such mysteries and Sacraments to be in Marriage that
the joining of man and wife together should represent so great a myserie, if
the Apostle him self and after him this holy father and others, had not noted
it? or who can marvel that the holy Church takes this to be a Sacrament, The
grace given by this Sacrament.
and to give grace of sanctification to the parties married, that they may live
together in mutual fidelity, bring up their children in faith and fear of
God, and possess their vessel (as the Apostle speaks) in sanctification and
honor, 1 These. 4.
and not in passion of lust and ignominy, as the Heathen do which know not
God, and as our brutish new Masters seem to do that commend marriage above al
things so far as it feeds their concupiscences, The protestants fleshly
estimation of marriage.
but for grace, Sacrament, mystery, or sanctification thereby, they care no
more then the Heathen or brute beasts do? And thus we gather that matrimony
is a Sacrament, and not of the Greek word Mystery only, (...) Sacramentum.
as Calvin falsely says, not of the Latin word Sacrament, both which we
know have of their nature a more general signification, and that in the
Scriptures also: but whereas these names are here given to Matrimony by the
Apostle, and are not given in the Scriptures to Baptism and the Eucharist, let
them tell us why they also apply these words from their general signification
to signify specially and peculiarly those two Sacraments never so named
expressly in Scripture. and do not likewise follow the Catholic Church in
calling matrimony by the same name, which is here so called of the Apostle,
specially whereas the signification in it, is as great as in any other of the
Sacraments, and rather greater.

CHAP. VI.
Likewise children and parents he exhorts. ^ item servants and masters.
(...) Then, that al take courage in the might of God, but so, that vvithal they
arm^ them selue (considering what mighty enemies they have) with al pieces
of spiritual armour^ (...) praying alvvaies fervently, and for him also.

Col. 3, 20
obey your parents in our Lord. for this is just. Exo. 20, 12, Deu. 5, 16.
Honor thy father and thy mother (which is the first commandment in the
promis,) Col. 3, 22 Tit. 2, 9.


1 Pet. 2, 8.
be obedient to your lords according to the flesh, with fear and trembling,
in the simplicity of your heart, as to Christ: God leaves no good work
unrewarded.
receive of our Lord, whether he be bond, or free. (...)
remitting threatenings: knovving that both their Lord and yours, Deu. 10, 17.
is in heaven: and * acception of persons is not with him.

The Epistle upon the 21 Sunday after Pentecost.
be strengthened in our Lord, and in the might of his power. (...)
armor of God, that you may stand against the deceites of the Devil. Ephesians. 2, 2
against the * rectors of the world of this darkness, against the spirituals
of wickedness in the celestials. If man could not be truly just or have
justice in him self, how could he be clothed with justice?
clothed with the breast plate of justice, Es. 59, 17. 1.
and the svvord of the spirit (which is the word of God) These. 5, 8
and in the same watching in all instance and supplication for all the saints:

S. Augustine notes in sundry places upon this same text, that faith without
charity serves not to salvation. li. 50. ho. 7.
charity with faith from God the Father, and our Lord JESUS Christ.

THE ARGUMENT OF THE EPISTLE OF S. PAVL TO THE PHILIPPIANS.
HOW S. Paul was called by a vision into Macedonia, we read Act. 16. and
how he came to Philippi being the first city thereof, and of his preaching,
miracles, and suffering there. And again Act. 19. Paul purposed in the Spirit,
when he had passed through Macedonia and Achaia, to go to Jerusalem, saying:
After I have been there, I must see Rome also. Which purpose he executed Act.
20. taking his leave at Ephesus. And being afterward come into Achaia, he had
counsel to return through Macedonia, and so at length from Philippi he began
his navigations tovvard Jerusalem, and from Jerusalem being carried prisoner to
Rome (Act. 28.) he vvrote from thence this Epistle to the Philippians: or
rather in his second apprehension, about 10 years after the first.

In it he confirms them (as he did * the Ephesians also about the same time)
against the tentatio^ that they might have in hearing that he were executed.
Ephesians. 3.
therefore he first says: Phil. 1. v. 12. 23. 26.
And I vvil have you know brethren, that the things about me, are come to the
more furtherance of the Gospel: so that my bands were made manifest in Christ
in all the Court etc. Secondly he signifies that his desire is, to he dissolved
and to be with Christ. but yet (lest they should be discomforted) that he
hops to come again to them. Whereof notvvithstanding, Phil. 2. v. 23. 24.
17.
that he has yet no certainty, he signifies in saying: I hope to send
Timothee unto you, immediately as I shall see the things that concern me.
Thirdly therefore he prepares them against the vvorst, saying: I hope to come
again to you: but and if I be immolated, upon the sacrifice and service of
your faith, I rejoice and congratulate with you al, and the self same thing do
you also rejoice and congratulate with me.

Moreover he partly vvarneth them (as he had done before) of those Iudaical
False-apostles who preached circumcision and Moses law to the Christian
Gentiles: partly he exhorts them to suffer persecution, to live well, and
specially to humble them selves one to an other, rather then by any pride to
break the peace and unity of the Church.

THE EPISTLE OF PAVL TO THE PHILIPPIANS.
CHAP. I.
Having signified that he uses to thank God for their virtue, 9 and also to
pray for their increase: 12 he certifieth them (for their confirmation and
comfort) what good was come through his trouble at Rome, 24 and that he
doubts not (though he rather desire martyrdom) but to come again unto them,
27 exhorting them to live as they ought to do, 28 and namely not to shrink for
persecution.



The Epistle upon the 22 Sunday after Pentecost.


more necessary
necessarie' for you.

Ephesians. 4, 1
that whether when I come and see you, or else be absent, I may hear of you
that you stand in one Spirit, of one mind laboring together to the faith of
the Gospel. (...), A manifest proof and evidence.
cause of perdition: but to you of salvation, and this of God: (...)
it is given for Christ, not only that you believe in him, but also that you
suffer for him, having the same combat like as you have seen in me, and now
do hear
have heard' of me.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. I.
2. Bishops and deacons.] Bishops and Priests alwais distinct functions.
Vviclesse and other Heretics would prove by this that Priests are not here
named, and for that there could not be many Bishops of this one town, that
there is no difference betwixt a Bishop and a Priest, which was the old
heresy of Aerius, of which matter, See Annot. Tit. 1. v. 5.
in other places: for this present it is enough to know that in the Apostles
time there were not observed alvvaies proper distinct names of either
function, as they were quickly afterward, though they were alvvaies diverse
degrees and distinct functions. See S. Chrysostom, Occup^enius, Theophylactus,
and the rest of the Gracians upon this place.

CHAP. II.
He exhorieth them must instantly to keep the unity of the Church, and to
humble them selves for that purpose one to an other, ^ by the example of the
marvelous humility of Christ, ^ specially seeing how maruelously he is now
exalted for it. 13 Item to obedience, fear, and perseverance. 17 Insinuating
(left is should afterward trouble them) that be may be martyred at this
time. 19 Timothee he hops to send, whom he highly commends* 25 as also
Epaphroditus, whom he presently sends.

To. 12, 10.
* each cou^ting other better then them selves: The Epistle upon Palm Sunday.
And upon Holy Roode day, May. 3.
1 Cor. 10, 24.
which also in Christ JESUS, The Epistle upon Holy Roode day September. 14. And
in a Votiue Mass of the Holy Cross.
Heb. 2, 9
even the death of the cross. Es. 45, 14. To. 14, 11.


without reprehension in the mids of a crooked and perverse generation.
among whom you shine as lights in the world: Such as have by their preaching
gained any to Christ, shall joy and glory therein excedingly at the day of our
Lord.
to my glory in the day of Christ, because I have not run in vain, nor in
vain labored. Pastors ought to be so zealous of the salvation of their flock,
that with S. Paul they should offer them selves to death for the same.
immolated, upon the sacrifice and service of your faith, I rejoice and
congratulate with you al.

Many forsake their teachers when they see them in bands and prison for their
faith, because most me^ prefer the world before Christ's glory.
al seek the things that are their own: not the things that are JESUS
Christ's.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. II.
9. For the which.] Caluins blasphemy against Christ's own merits.
Calvin does so abhor the name of merit in Christian men tovvard their own
salvation, that he wickedly and unlearnedly denies Christ him self to have
deserved or merited any thing for him self: though these words (which he
shamefully vvritheth from the proper and plain sense, to signify a sequel
and not a cause of his exaltation) and diverse other in holy write, prove that
he merited for him self according to al learned men's judgment. As Apoc 5. The
lamb that was slain, is vvorthie to receive power and Divinity. And Heb.
2. We see JESUS for the passion of death, crowned with glory and honor. See
S. Augustine upon these words of the Psalm 109. propterea exaltabit caput.

10. Name of JESUS.] The Protestants will have no reverence done at the name
of JESUS.
By the like wickedness they charge the faithful people for capping or kneeling
when they hear the name of JESUS. as though they worshipped not our Lord God
therein, but the syllables or letters or other material elements whereof the
word written or spoken consists, and all this, by sophistications to dravv
the people from due honor and devotion tovvard CHRIST JESUS, which is Satan's
drift by putting scruples into poor simple men's minds about his Sacraments,
his Saints, his Cross, his name, his image, and such like, to abolish al true
religion out of the world, and to make them plain Atheists. But the Church
knovveth Satan's cogitations, and therefore by the Scriptures and reason,
vvarranteth and teaches al her children to do reverence when so ever JESUS is
named. because Catholics do not honor these things nor count them holy, How
Catholics honor the name of JESUS, and other things pertaining to him.
for their matter, color, sound, and syllables, but for the respect and
relation they have to ou^ Savior, bringing us to the remembrance and
apprehension of Christ, by sight, hearing, or use of the same signs. else why
make we not reverence at the name of Jesus the son of ^irach, as well as of
JESUS CHRIST? And it is a pitiful case to see these profane subtelties of
Heretics to take place in religion, which were ridiculous in all other trade
of life. When we hear our Prince or Sovereign named, we may without these
scruples do obeisance, but toward Christ it must be superstitious.

12. With fear and trembling.] Vain security of salvation.
Against the vain presumption of Heretics that make men secure of their
predestination and salvation, he wills the Philippians to work their
salvation with fear and trembling, according to that other Scripture, Blessed
is the man that alvvaies i^ fearful, Proverb. 28, v. 14.

13. Works in you.] S. Augustine answers the objection against free vvil.
Of this thus says S. Augustine. Not because the Apostle says, it is God that
works in you both to vvil and work, must we think he takes away our
free will. For if it were so, then would he not a little before have willed
them to work their own salvation with fear and trembling. For when they
be commanded to work, their free vvil is called upon: but, with trembling
and fear, is added, l^st by attributing their well vvorking to them selves,
they might be proud of their good deeds as though they were of them selves.
August de gratia and lib. arbit. c. 9.

17. The sacrifice.] Martyrdom.
The obedience of faith and matryrdom be so acceptable acts to God, when they
be voluntarily referred to his honor, that by a metaphore they be called
sacrifice and pleasant hosts to God.

CHAP. III.
He vvarn^th them of the False-apostles, * shevving that him self had much more
to brag of in Iudaisme then they: but that he makes price of nothing but
only of Christ, and of Christian justice, and of suffering with him (12
wherein yet he acknowledges his imperfection) 17 exhorting them to bear
Christ's Cross with him, and not to imitate those bellygods.

By allusio^ of words, he calls the carnal Christian Jews that yet boasted
in the circumcision of the flesh, concisio^: and him self and the rest that
circu^cided their heart and senses spiritually, the true circumcision. S. Chrysostom.
Theophylact.
concisio^. (...)
circumcision, which in spirit serve God: and we glory in Christ JESUS, and
not having confidence in the flesh, 2. Cor. 11, 22.
I more, Act. 23, 6.
* according to the Law, a Pharisee: the things that were gains to me, The
Epistle for a Confessor that is not a Bishop.
those have I esteemed for Christ, detriments. If S. Paul ceased not to labor
still, as though he were not sure to come to the mark without continual
endeavor: what security may we poor sinners have of Heretics persuasions
and promises of security and salvation by only faith?
if by any means I may come to the resurrection which is from the dead. ad
brauium
to the price of the supernal vocation of God in Christ JESUS. vvil reveal
has reuealed' to you.

The Epistle upon the 23 Sunday after Pentecost. And for S. Clement, Nouemb. 23.
Be folovvers It is a goodly thing when the Pastor may so say to his flock.
Neither is it any derogatio^ to Christ, that the people should imitate their
Apostles life and doctrine, and other holy men, S. Augustine, S. Benedict. S.
Dominike, S. Francis.
of me brethren: and observe them that walk so as you have our form. To. 16,
17.


ANNOTATIONS CHAP. III.
9. My justice.] The objection against inherent justice, ansvvered.
Diverse Lutherans in their translations do shamfully mangle this sentence by
transposing the words, Magdeburg. cent. 1. li, 2 c. 4. page 222.
and false poluting of the parts: hereof, to make it have this sense, that the
Apostle would have no justice of his own, but only that justice which is
in Christ. Which is a false and heretical sense of the words, and not meant
by S. Paul: who calls that a man's own Justice, which he chalengeth by the
works of the Law or nature without the grace of Christ: and that Gods
justice (as S. Augustine expounds this place) not which is in God, or by
which God is just, but that which is in men from God and by his gift. li. 3
cont. ^ ep. Pelag. c. 7. de Sp. and lit. c. 9.

12. Not that now.] Double perfection: here, and in the life to come.
No man in this life can attain the absolute perfectnes either of justice or
of that knowledge which shall be in heaven: but yet there is also an other
perfectnes, such as according to this state a man may reach unto, which in
respect of the perfection in glory, is small, but in respect of other lesser
degrees of man's justice and knowledge in this life, may be called perfectnes.
And in this sense the Apostle in the next sentence calls him self and others
perfect, though in respect of the absolute perfectnes in heaven, he says here,
he is not yet perfect nor has yet attained thereunto.

15. Otherwise minded.] The heretics folish defense of their dissensions and
divisions among them selves.
When Catholic men now a days charge Heretics with their horrible
divisions, dissensions, combattes, contentions, and diversities among them
selves, as the Catholics of al other ages did challenge their Adversaries most
truly and justly for the same, (both because where the Spirit of God is not,
nor any order or obedience to Superiors, there can be no peace nor unity, and
specially for that it is, as S. Augustine says (li. de agen^ Christ. c. 29)
the just judgment of God that they which seek nothing else but to divide the
Church of Christ, should them selves be miserably divided among them selves)
therefore (I say) when men charge the Protestants with these things, they flee
for their defense to this, that the old Fathers were not al of one judgment
in every point of religion: that S. Cyprian stood against others, that S.
Augustine and S. Hierom vvrote earnestly in a certain matter one against an
other, that our Dominicans and Franciscans, our Thomists and Scotists be not al
of one opinion in diverse matters, and therefore divisions and contentions should
not be so prejudicial to the Zuinglians and Lutherans, The difference between
the disagreing of ancient fathers or other Catholics, and the Heretics
dissensions among them selves.
as men make it. Thus they defend them selves: but ridiculously and against the
rule of S. Paul here, acknovvledging that in this imperfection of men's science
in this life, every one can not be free from al error, or think the same that
an other thinks: whereupon may rise differences of understanding, opinion,
and judgment, in certain hard matters which God has not revealed or the
Church determined, and therefore that such diversity is tolerable and agreeable
to our humane condition and the state of the way that we be in: alvvaies
provided, that the controversy be such and in such things, as be not against
the set known rule of faith, as he here speaks, and such as break not
mutual society, fellowship, and communion in prayer, service, Sacraments, and
other offices of life and religion. for such divisions and differences come
never but of Schism or Heresy, and such are among the Heretics, not only in
respect of us Catholics, but among them selves: at they know that be
acquainted with the vvritings of Luther against Zuinglius, The spiteful
vvritings of Heretics, one Sect, against an other.
or Vvestphalus against Calvin, or the Puritans against the Protestants, not
only charging one an other with Heresy, Idolatry, Superstition, and
Atheism, but also condemning each others ceremonies or manner of
administrations, til it come to excommunication, and banishment, yea sometimes
burning one of an other. Thus did not S. Cyprian, S. Augustine, S. Hierom, the
Dominicans, Franciscans, Thomists, Scotists, who al agree in one rule of
faith, al of one communion, al most dear one to an other in the same, al
(thanks be to God) come to one holy Mass, and receive the same Sacraments,
and obey one head through out all the world. A notable place of S. Augustine.
S. Augustine li. 2 de bapt. c. 5. shall make up this matter with this notable
sentence: We are men (says he) and therefore to think somevvhat otherwise
them the thing it, is an humane tentation: but by loving our own sentence to
much, or by envying our betters, to proceed unto the sacrilege of dividing the
mutual society and of making schism or heresy, it devilish prosumption: in
nothing to have other opinion then the truth is, that is Angelical perfection.
And a little after, If you be any other wise minded, this God vvil reveal: but
to them only (says he) that walk in the way of peace, and that stroy a side
into no division or separation. Which saying would God al our dear country
men would mark, and come into the Church, where only, God reuealeth truth.

CHAP. IIII.
He exhorts them to perseu^rant^, 2 and certain by name to unity, ^ to
modesty, ^ to peace without solicitude or careful anxietie, 8 to all that good
is, 9 to such things as they see in him self. 10 that be rejoiced in their
contribution, not for his own need, but for their merit.

Euodia
'Euchodia' I desire and Syntyche I beseech to be of one mind in our Lord.
This Clement was afterward the 4 Pope of Rome from S. Peter, as S. Hierom
vvriteth according to the common supputation.
Clement, and the rest my coadiutors, whose names are in the book of life.
The Epistle upon the 3 Sunday in Aduent.
Rejoice in our Lord alvvaies: again I say rejoice. (...)
in every thing by prayer and supplication with tha^kesgiuing let your
petitions be known with God.

This reflorishing is the reviving of their old liberality, which for a time
had been slack and dead. S. Chrysostom.
reflorished to care for me, as you did also care: but you were occupied.

He counts it not mere alms or a free gift that the people bestows on
their Pastors or preachers, but a certain mutual traffike as it were, and
enterchange: the one giving spiritual, the other re^dering temporal things for
the same.
receite, but your only: al your (...)
lack according to his riches in glory, in Christ JESUS.



ANNOTATIONS CHAP. IIII.
1. My joy.] The revvard of preachers.
He calls them his joy and crown, for that he expected the crown of
everlasting life as a revvard of his labors toward them. Whereby we may
learn also, that besides the essential glory which shall be in the vision and
fruition of God, there is other manifold fellcitie incident in respect of
creatures.

^. Sincere companion.] The English Bibles with one consent interprets the
Greek words, faithful yokefellovv, Suspicious translation.
perhaps to signify (as some would have it) that the Apostle here speaks to
his wife: but they must understand that their Masters Calvin and Beza mislike
that exposition, S. Chrysostom. Theodore. Occum. Theophyl.
and * all the Greek fathers almost much more reject it, and it is against S.
Paul's own words speaking to the unmarried* S. Paul had no wife.
That it is good for them to remain so, even as him self did. 1 Cor. 7, 8.
Whereby it is evident he had no wife, and therefore means here some other
his coadiutor and fellovv-labourer in the Gospel.

1^. Acceptable.] How acceptable alms are before God, Alms given religiously.
we see here: namely when it is given for religion to devout persons for a
recompense of spiritual benefits* for so it puts on the condition of an
oblation or sacrifice offered to God, and is most acceptable and svvete in his
sight.

THE ARGUMENT OF THE EPISTLE OF S. PAVL TO THE COLOSSIANS.
THE Epistle to the Colossians is not only in sense, but almost in words
also, all one with the Epistle to the Ephesians, and was sent also by the
same messenger Tychicus. c. 4* ^. 7. And in it he makes like mention of his
bands and sufferings. c. 1. v. 24. and c. 4. v. 3, 18. And therefore no doubt
is was written at Rome at the same time, to vvitte, in his last apprehension,
yet before he knevv of his martyrdom.

This difference there is, that he had himself preached to the Ephesians, but
with the Colossians he had never been, as he signifies c. 2. v. 1. Therefore
although in matters of exhortation he be here briefer then to the Ephesians,
yet in matters of doctrine be is longer. And generally he assures them, that
to be the truth, which their Apostle Epaphras had taught them, but namely he
gives them warning both of the Iudaical False-apostles, who sought to
corrupt them with some ceremonies of Moses law: and also of the Platonike
Philosophers, who rejected Christ (who is in deed the head of the Church and
Mediator to bring us to God) and in steed of him, brought in certain Angels as
more excellent then be, whom they termed, Minores dij, teaching the people to
sacrifice unto them (calling that, humility) that they might bring them to the
great God. With which falsehood the heresy of Simon Mague a long time
deceived many, as we read in Epiph. har. 21.

Against such therefore S. Paul tells the Colossians, that Christ is the
Creator of all the Angels, God in person, the head of the Church, the
principal in all respects: that he is the Redeemer, Mediator, and pacifier
between God and men, and therefore by him we must go to God, so that
whether we pray our selves, or desire any other in earth or in heaven to pray
for us, al must be done (as the Cath. Church in every Collect does) Per
Christum dominum nostrum, that is, through Christ our Lord. or, per Do. nostrum
Iesum Christum filium tuum, qui tecum viuit and regnat, etc. Whereby the
Church professes continually against such seductions, both the Mediator ship,
and the Godhead of Christ.

THE EPISTLE OF PAVL TO THE COLOSSIANS.
CHAP. I.
Saying, that he thanketh God for their excellent faith and charity, and
continually prays for their increase, he does vvithal give witness to the
preaching of their Apostle Epaphr^s* and extelleth the grace of God in bringing
them to Christ, who is chief above al, and peacemaker by his blood. This is
the Gospel not of Epaphras alone, but of the universal Church, and of Paul him
self, who also suffers for it.



We give thanks to God and the Father of our Lord JESUS Christ alvvaies for
you, praying: He shows that the Church and Christ's Gospel should daily
grow and be spread at length through the whole world. which can not stand with
the heretics opinion of the decay thereof so quickly after Christ's time, nor
^gree by any means to their obscure Conuenticles. See S. Augustine ep. 80. in
fine.
in the whole world it is, and fructifieth, and grows, even as in you,
since that day that you heard and knevv the grace of God in truth, The Epistle
upon the 24 Sunday after Pentecost.
we also from the day that we heard it, cease not praying for you and
desiring, that you may be filled with the knowledge of his vvil, in all
wisdoms, and spiritual understanding: So S. Ambr. and the Gr. Doctors. or
thus: vvorthily, pleasing God etc.
(...)
vvorthie of God, in all things pleasing: Fructifying in Many things requisite,
and diverse things acceptable to God beside faith.
al good work, and increasing in the knowledge of God: We are not only by
acceptance or imputation partakers of Christ's benefits, but are by his grace
made worthy thereof, and deserve our salvation condignely.
worthy unto the part of the lot of the saints in the light: Hebr. 1, 3
the firstborn of al creature: Io. 1, 3.




ANNOTATIONS CHAP. I.
24. D^ ^^^^plish that ^^^^teth.] There is no want in Christ's passions which
he suffered in him self as head: but there is want in those passions of Christ
which he daily suffers in his body the Church, and the members thereof.
As Christ the head and his body make one person mystical and one full Christ,
the Church being therefore his plenitude, ful^es, or complement Ephesians. 1: so the
passions of his head and the afflictions of the body and members make one
complete mass of passions. With such difference for all that, between the one
sort and the other, as the preeminence of the head (and special^y such a head)
above the body, requires and gives. And not only these passions which he
suffered in him self, which were fully ended in his death, and vverein them
selves fully sufficient for the redemption of the world and remission of al
sins, but al those which his body and members suffer, are his also, and of
him they receive the condition, quality, and force to be meritorious and
satisfactorie For though there be no insufficiency in the actions or passions
of Christ the head, To. 8, (...). (...) s^r. 19. de pas^^.
yet his wisdoms vvil* and justice requires and ordains, * that his body
and members should be f^llovves of his passions, as they look to be fellows
of his glory: that so suffering with him and by his example, they may appl^e
to them selves and others the general medicine of Christ's merits and
satisfactions, as it is effectually and applied to us by Sacraments, sacrifice,
and other ways also (...) sor being no more injurious to Christian* death then
the other, notvvithstanding the vain clamours of the Protestants, that would
under pretense of Christ's Passion, How Christ's merits are applied to us,
without any injury to his death.
take away the valor of al good deeds. Hereupon it is plain now, that this
accomplishment of the wants of Christ's Passions, which the Apostle and other
Saints make up in their flesh, is not mean^ but of the penal and
satisfactorie* works of Christ in his members, every good man adding
continually (and specially Martyrs) somevvhat to accomplish the full measure
thereof: and these be the plenitude of his passions and satisfactions, as the
Church is the plenitude of his person: and therefore these also through the
communion of Saints and the society that is not only between the head and
the body, but also between one members and an other, are not only
satisfactorie and many ways profitable for the sufferers them selves, The
works of one may satisfy for an other.
but also for other their fellovv-members in Christ. for though one member can
not merit for an other properly, yet may one bear the burden and discharge
the debt of an other, both by the law of God and nature* and it was
ridiculous Heresy of Vvicleffe to deny the same. Yea (as we see here) the
passions of Saints are alvvaies suffered for the common good of the whole
body, and sometimes vvithal by the sufferers special intention they are
applicable to special persons one or many: as here the Apostle ioyeth in his
passions for the Collossians, 2. Cor. 1, ^.
in an other place his afflictions be for the salvation of the Corinthians, To.
9, 3.
sometimes he wishes to be Anathe^^a, that is according to Origens exposition
(i^ li. (...). ho. 10. and 24.) a sacrifice for the Jews, Phil. 2.
and he often speaks of his death as of a libation, 2 Timothy 4.
host, or offering* as the fathers do of al Martyrs passions. Al which
dedicated and sanctified in Christ's blood and sacrifice, make the plenitude of
his Passion, and have a forcible cry, intercession, and satisfaction for the
Church and the particular necessities thereof. In which, as some do abound in
good works and satisfactions (as S. Paul, who reckeneth up his afflictions
and glories in them 2 Cor. 11: and Job, Job ^.
who avouches that his penalties far surmounted his sins: and our Lady
much more, who never sinned, and yet suffered so great dolours) so others some
do want, and are to be helped by the abundance of their fellovv-members.

Which intercourse of spiritual offices and the recompense of the wants of
one part by the store of the other, The ground of Indulge^ces or pardons.
is the ground of the old libels of Indulgence whereof is treated before our
of S. Cyprian (See the Annotations 2 Cor. 2. v. 10) and of al indulgences or
pardons, which the Church daily dispenses with great justice and mercy, by
their hands in whom Christ has put the word of our reconcilement, to whom
he has committed the keys to keep and use, his sheep^ to seed, his
mysteries and al his goods to dispense, his power to bind and loose, his
commission to remine and retain, and the stevvardship of his family to give
every one their meat and sust^nance in due season.

CHAP. II.
He is careful for them, though he were never with them: that they rest in
the wonderful wisdoms which is in Christian religion, and be not carried
away either with Philosophy, to (...) Christ and to sacrifice to Angel^ ^ or
with Iudaisme, to receive any (...) of Moses law.

Heretics do most commonly deceive the people with eloquence namely such as
have it by the gift of nature, as the Heretics of al ages had, and lightly al
seditious persons, which dravv the vulgar sort to sedition by the allurement
of their tongue. Nothing (says S. Hierom. ep. 2. ad Nepotian*) is so easy as
with volubilitie of tongue to deceive the unlearned multitude, which
whatsoever it understands not, does the more admire and wonder at the same.
The Apostle here calls it, (...), persuasible speech.
that no man deceive you in loftines of words. in it
in him' in thanksgiving.

Ephesians. 2, 1.
by decrees
of decree' that was against us, which was contrary to us, and the same he
has taken out of the way, fastening it to the cross: (...),
has led them confidently in open show, triumphing them in him self.

That is, wilful or selfwilled in voluntary religion. for that is, (...),
whereof comes the word following (...), Superstition. v. 23. See Annot. v. 2^.
vvilling in the humility and ^ religion of Angels, vvalking in the things
which he has not seen, in vain puffed up by the sense of his flesh, ^ not
holding the head, whereof the whole body by joints and bands being (...).
That is, taking subministration of spiritual life and nourishment by grace from
Christ the head.
served and compacted, grows to the increase of God. (...).
decree as living in the world?

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. II.
8. By Philosophy.] Philosophy and other humane sciences how profitable or
hurtful to the Church of God.
Philosophy and al humane science, so long as they be subject and obedient to
Christ (as they be in the Schools of Christian Catholic men) be not
forbidden, but are greatly commended and be very profitable in the Church of
God. Otherwise where secular learning is made the rule of religion and
commands ^aith, there it is pernicious and the cause of al heresi^ and
infidelity* for the which* S. Hierom and before him Tertullan call
Philosophers, the Patriarchs of Heretics. and declare that all the old heresies
rose only by to much admiring of profane Philosophy. Hier^. ad C^esiph.
cont. (...). c. 1. Tertul. de praser. and cont. Hermeg. and cont. Marcio. li.
5. And so do these new sects no doubt in many things. for, other arguments
have they none against the presence of Christ in the B. Sacrament but such as
they borovv of Aristotle and his like, The Protestants abuse Philosophy
against the B. Sacrament.
concerning quantity, accidents, place, position, dimensions, senses, sight,
taste, and other straites of reason, to which they bring Christ's mysteries. Al
Philosophical arguments therefore against any article of our faith be here
condemned as deceitful, and are called also here, the tradition of men, and the
elements of the world. The better to resist which fallacies and traditions of
Heathen men, the School learning is necessary, which keeps Philosophy in
awe and order of faith, and uses the same to vvithstand the Philosophical and
sophistical deceites of the Heretics and Heathen. School learning.
So the great Philosophers S. Denis, S. Augustine, Clemens Alexandrinus*
Iustine, Lactantius and the rest* used the same to the great honor of God and
benefit of the Church. So came S. Cyprian, S. Ambrose, S. Hierom, and the
Greek fathers, furnished with al secular learning unto the study of
Divinity, vvherof see S. Hierom ep. 84 ad Magnum Oraetorem.

16. In meat.] The Protestants vvilfully or ignorantly apply al these kinds
of forbearing meats, Aug. ep. 59. ad Paulinum in solut. 7. quast.
to the Christian fastes: but it is by the circunstance of the text plain (at
S Augustine also teaches) that the Iudaical observation and distinction of
certain clean and unclean meats is forbidden to the Colossians, Scriptures
abused by the Protestants against Christian fasting and holydaies.
who were in danger to be seduced by certain Jews, under pretense of
holiness to keep the Law touching meats and festiuities and other like,
which the Apostle shows were only shadows of things to come: which
things are come, and therefore the said shadows to cease. Where he names the
Sabboths and feasts of the new moon, that no man need to doubt but that he
speaks only of the Jewish days and kinds of fastes and feasts, and not
of Christian holidaies or fasting days at all.

18. Religion of Angels.] By the like false application of this text as of the
other before, the Heretics abuse it against the inuncation or honor of Angels
used in the Catholic Church, where the Apostle notes the wicked doctrine of
Simon Magus and others (See S. Chrysostom. ho. 7 in hun^ locum. and Epiph. har. 21.)
who taught. Angels to be our mediators and not Christ, non tenens caput. not
holding the head, as the Apostle here speaks, and prescribed sacrifices to be
offered unto them, meaning indifferently as well the il Angels as the good.
Which doctrine the said Heretic had of Plato, who taught, that spirits
(which he calls damones) were to be honored as mediators next to God.
Against which S. Augustine disputes li. 8. 9. and 10 de ciuit. as the
condemns also the same undue worship li. 10 Confess. cap. 42. S. Hierom (q.
10 ad Algasiam) expounds this also of il spirits or devils, S. Paul's place
concerning religion of Angels, explicated: and that the Protestants wickedly
abuse it against the due honor and invocation of Angels.
whom he proves (out of S. Steuens sermon Act. 7) that the Jews did
worship, auouching that they serve them still, so many of them and so often as
they observe the Law. Of which idolatry also to Angels Theodorete speaks
upon this place, declaring that the Jews defended their superstition
toward Angels by that, that the Law was given by them, deceitfully at once
inducing the Colossia^s, both to keep the law, and to honoring of the Angels
as the giuers of the same. Whereby diverse of the faithful were so seduced,
that they forsook Christ and his Church and service, and committed idolatry
to the said Angels. Against which abominations the Council of Laodicia Cap. 35
took order, accursing all that forsook our Savior and committed idolatry to
Angels, and contemning Christ, kept conuenticles in the name of spirits and
Idols. of which kind of worship of Angels and Devils see Clemens Alexand.
Strom. 3. Tertullia^ (li. 5. cont. Marcion.) expounds this place of the false
teachers that feined them selves to have revelation of Angels, that the Law
should be kept touching difference of clean and unclean meats. Which is
very agreeable to that * in the Epistle to Timothee, where S. Paul calls
abstaining from meats after the Jewish or heretical manner, (...). 4, 1.
the doctrine of Devils: whereof see more in the annotation upon that place.
Haimo a godly ancient writer, upon this place, says further, that some
Philosophers of the Gentiles and some of the Jews also taught, that there
were four Angels Presidents of the four elements of man's body, and that in
feined hypocrisy (which the Apostle here calls humility) they pretended to
worship by sacrifice the said Angels. Theophylacte expounds this feined
humility, of certain Heretics, that pretending the mediatorship to be a
derogation to Christ's majesty, worshipped Angels as the only mediators, Al
which we set down with more diligence, that the Heretics may be ashamed
to abuse this place against the du^ reverence and respect or prayers made to
the holy Angels. Whom the Scriptures record so often to offer our prayers up
to God, and to have been lavvfully reverenced of the Patriarchs, never as gods*
but as Gods ministers and messengers, Iosu. 5, 14. Tob. 12, 12. Genesis 48, 16.
Angelus qui ^ruit m^. 1 Timothy 5, 21. And that they may be prayed unto, and can
help and hear us, see S. Hierom in cap. 10 Dani^lis. S. Ambrose in Psalm. 118.
ser 1. S. Augustine li. 10 de ciuit. Dei c. 12. Bid li. 4 in Cantica c. 24.

19. Not holding the head.] Because he has much a do with such false
preachers as taught the people to prefer the Angels which gave the Law, or
other whatsoever, before Christ: in this Epistle, and to the Ephesians, he
often affirms Christ to be our head, yea and to be exalted far above al
creatures, Angels, Potestats, Principalities, or whatsoever.

20. Why do you.) A marvelous impudent translation of these words in the
English Bibles thus, Heretical translation.
Why are you burdened with traditions? Where as the Greek has not that
signification: (...)
but to make the name of Tradition odious, here they put it of purpose, not
being in the Greek: and in other place where Traditions are commended (1 Cor.
11. and 2 These. 2.) and where the Greek is so most flatly ((...)) there they
translate it, Instructions, ordinances^punc; etc.

21. Touch not.] Scripture abused against the Churches fastes.
The Heretics (as before and alvvaies) very vainly allege this against the
Catholic fastings: when it is most clear that the Apostle reprehendeth the
foresaid false teachers that though to make the Christians subject to the
observation of the ceremonies of the old Law, of not eating hogs, conies,
hares flesh^punc; and such like, not to touch a dead corpse nor any place where
a vvoma^ in her flowers had sitte^, and other infinite doctrines of touching,
tasting, washing, eating, and the rest, either commanded to the old people by
God, or (as many things were) voluntarily taken up by them selves, sometime
clean against Gods ordinance, and often frivolous and superstitious. Which
sort as Christ in the Gospel, so here S. Paul calls the precepts and
doctrines of men, and superstition, and (as the Greek word signifies) (...)
voluntary worship, that is invented by Heretics of their own head
without the vvarrant of Christ in the Scriptures, or the Holy Ghost in the
Church, or any lavvful authority of such whom Christ commands us to obey.
Against such Sect-Maisters therefore as would have yoked the faithful again
with the Jewish or Heretical fastes of Simon Magus and the like, S. Paul
speaks, and not of the Churches fastes or doctrines.

23. Having a show.] Again the Heretics of our time object, that these
foresaid false teachers pretended holiness, The hypocr^^^cal abstine^ce of old
Heretics, makes nothing against true and sincere fasting, but commends it.
wisdoms, and chastisement of their bodies (for so S. Paul says) by
forbidding certain meats according to the Jews observation, even as the
Catholics do. It is true they did so, and so do most vices imitate virtues*
for if chastising of men's bodies and repressing their concupiscences and lusts
were not godly, and if abstinence from some meats were not laudably and
profitably used in the Church for the same purpose, no Heretics (to induce the
^bolished observations and differences of meats of the Jews, or the
condemnation of certain meats and creatures as abominable according to
others) would have falsely pretented the chastisement of their flesh, or made
other show of wisdoms and piety, to found their unlawful Heretical or
Iudaical superstition concerning the same. The Catholic Church and her
children, by the example of Christ, S. John Baptist, the Apostles and other
blessed men, do that lavvfully, godly, religiously, and sincerly in deed to
the end aforesaid, 1 Cor. 9, 27. 2 Cor. 11, 27.
which these false Apostles only pretended to do. So * S. Paul did chastise
his body in deed, by watching, ^asting, and many other afflictions, and that
was lavvful and was true wisdoms and piety in deed. The foresaid Heretics
not so, but to induce the Colossians to Iudaisme and other abominable errors,
did but pretend these things in hypocrisy.

CHAP. III.
He exhorts to mortify and put of al corrupt manners of the old man, and to
put on such virtues as are for the new man. 18 In particular also, vviues and
husbands, children and parents; servants and masters, each sort to do their
duty.

The Epistle upon Easter ^ue.
seek the things that are above: where Christ is sitting on the right hand of
God.

Ephesians. 5, 3.
fornication, uncleanness, lust, evil concupiscence, and ^ avarice, which is
(...).
the service of Idols. Ephesians. 4, 22.
* spoiling your selves of the old man with his acts, Genesis 1, 26.
* according to the image of him that created him.

The Epistle upon the 5 Sunday after the Epiphanie.
holy, and beloved, Ephesians. 4, 32.
* the bowels of mercy, benignity, humility, modesty, patience, (...),
triumph and have the victory
exult in your hearts, wherein also you are called in one body: and be
thankeful.

Ephesians. 5, 22.
as it behooves in our Lord. 1. Pet. 3, 7.
Ephesians. 6, 1.
that they become not discouraged. Ephesians. 6, 5
Tit. 2. 9.
not serving to the eye, as pleasing men, but in simplicity of heart, 1. Pet.
2, 18.
fearing God. Retribution or revvard for good works: (...), which signifies
rendering one for an other.
retribution of inheritance. Serve our Lord Christ. Deu. 10, 17. To. 2, 11.
shall receive that which he has done unjustly: and * there is not acceptio^
of persons with God. Gal. 2, 6.


ANNOTATIONS CHAP. III.
5. Avarice, Heretical and foolish translation.
which is the service of idols.] Here is a marvelous impudent and folish
corruption in the vulgar English Bible printed the year 1577 and (as it
seems) most authorized. Where for their error against the Images of Christ
and his Saints, and to make image and idol, al one: the translator, for that
which the Apostle says in Greek, Covetousness is idolatry, makes him to say
in English, Covetousness is worshipping of images: as also Ephesians. 5, ^ he
translateth thus, The covetous person is a worshipper of images: for that
which the Apostle says, The covetous man is an idolater, meaning spiritual
idolatry, because he makes money his God. In which sense to call this
spiritual idolatry, worshipping of images, is to ridiculous, and must needs
proceed of blind heresy.

9. Doing on the new.] By this and the whole discourse of this chapter
containing an exhortation to good life, Justice an inherent quality in us.
and to put on the habit of the new man with al virtues: we may see, our
justice in Christ to be a very quality and form inherent in our soul,
adorning the same, and not an imputation only of Christ's righteousness, or a
hiding only of our sins and wickedness, which the Heretics falsely affirm
to remain in us after baptism and alvvaies during life. See S. Augustine de
pec. mer. and remis. li. 2 c. 7. and cont. Julian. li. 6 c. 7.

CHAP. IIII.
He exhorts to instance in prayer, 5 and to wisdoms in behavior. 7 He
sends Tychicus. 10 He does commendations, 15 and inioyneth to be done.

Luc. 18, 1
Ephesians. 6, 18. 2.
S. Paul ever much desires the prayers of the faithful: whereby we learn the
great efficacy of them.
for us also, These. 3, 1*
that God may open unto us the door of speech to speak the mystery of
Christ (for the which also I am bound) Ephesians. 5, 15.
redeeming the time.

Phile. 10.
and may comfort your hearts,

He did not only pray, but took other great pains to procure Gods grace for
the Colossians: perhaps by watching, fasting, and doing other penance of body:
that God would not suffer them to fall from their received faith to the sect
of Simon Magus or the Iudaizing Christians.
labor for you, and for them that be at Laodicia, and that are at Hierapolis.
2 Timothy 4, 10. 11


THE ARGUMENT OF THE FIRST EPISTLE OF S. PAVL TO THE THESSALONIANS.
HOW S. Paul with Silas (or Siluanus) and Timothee according to a vision
calling him out of Asia into Macedonia, came to Philippi being the first city
thereof, we read Act. 16. And how again from Philippi, after scourging and
imprisoning there, he came to Thessalonica being the head city of that
country, we read Act. 17. where after 3 weeks preaching, the Jews
stirred the city against them, and pursued them also to Beraea: so that Paul.
was conucied from thence to Athens, where he expected the coming of Silas
and Timothee from the foresaid Beraea in Macedonia, but received them (as we
have Act. 18.) at Corinth in Achaia.

Having therefore left the Thessalonians in such persecution, and being careful
to know how they did in it, he was desirous to return unto them, as he
signifies in the 2 chapter of this Epistle v. 17. But (as he there adds)
Satan hindered us. therefore tarying himself at Athens, he sends Timothee
unto them, at whose return understanding their constancy, he is much
comforted, as he declares c. 3. So then they are all three together at the
vvriting of this Epistle, as also we have in the title of it: Paul and
Siluanus and Timothee to the Church of the Thessalonians. And therefore it
seems to have been written at Corinth, not at Athens: because after the
sending of Timothee to Thessadonica, they met not at Athens again, but at
Corinth.

The first three chapters of it are, to confirm and comfort them against the
tentations of those persecutions. The other two are of exhortation, to live
according to his precepts, namely in sanctification of their bodies, and not
in fornication: to love one an other: to comfort one an other about their
friends departed, with the doctrine of the Resurrection, and with continual
preparation to die: the laietie to obey, and the Clergy to be diligent in
every point of their office.

THE FIRST EPISTLE OF PAVL TO THE THESSALONIANS.
CHAP. I.
He thanketh G^^ for them, ^ and gathers that they are elect, because his
preaching at their first conversion was with divine power, and they on the
other side received it with al joy, notvvithstanding the great persecution
that was raised against them.



The Epistle upon the 6 Sunday after the Epiphanie.
making a memory of you in our prayers without intermissio^, In this and the
like places the Heretics maliciously and most falsely translate, construe, and
apply al things mea^t of the Heathen idols, to the memories and images of
Christ and his saints, namely the English Bibles of the year 1562. 1577. See
the Annotatio^ 1 Io. 5, 21.
from Idols, to serve the living and true God, he raised up from the dead)
JESUS, who has delivered us from the wrath to come.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. I.
6. Folovvere of us.] Religious persons imitation of diverse holy men is the
imitatio^ of Christ him self.
S. Paul is hold to commend them for imitation of him, yea and to join him
self in that point with Christ, to be their pattern to walk after. Where
without curiosity he names him self first, and our Lord afterward, because
he was a more near and ready object then Christ, who was not nor could not
be followed but through the preaching and conversation of the Apostle, who
was in their sight or hearing. And this imitation of some holy man or other,
has made so many Religious men of diverse orders and rules, al tending to the
better imitation of Christ our Lord. See the like words of the Apostle, 1
Cor. 11. ^. and Philip. 3, 17.

CHAP. II.
No calls even them selves to witness, that his preaching unto them was as
he said, in most commendable manner. (...) And again on the other side he
thanketh God for their manner of receiving it: that is, with al joy,
notvvithstanding the persecution of their own citizens.

A notable example for Catholic preachers, and passing comfortable, when in
the mids of persecutions and reproaches they preach sincerely, to please God
and not men.
having suffered before and * been abused with contumelies (as you know) at
Philippi, Act. 16, 12. 23.
we had confidence in our God, to speak unto you the Gospel of God in much
carefulnes. mild
children' in the mids of you, as if a nource I should cherish her children:
Act. 20, 34. 1. Cor. 4, 12.
2. These. 3,
of * our labor and toil. day and night vvorking, lest we should charge any
of you, we preached among you the Gospel of God. are vvitnesses and God, how
holily and justly and without blame, we have been to you that did believe.

(...)
deprived of you for a short time, in sight, not in heart: have hastened the
more abundantly to see your face with much desire. If the Apostle without
injury to god, in right good sense call his scholars the Thessalonia^s, his
hope, joy, glory: why blaspheme the Protestants the Cath. Church and her
children for terming our B. Lady or other Saints, their hope, for the
special conside^ce they have in their prayers?
Are not you before our Lord JESUS Christ in his coming?

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. II.
12. The word of God.] Not only the vvritte^ word is the word of God.
The Adversaries vvil have no word of God but that which is written and
contained in the Scripture: but here they might learn that al Paul's preaching
before he vvrote to them, was the very word of God. They might also learn
that what so ever the lavvful Apostles, Pastors, and Priests of Gods Church
preach in the unity of the same Church, is to be taken for Gods own word,
and ought not to be reputed of them for doctrines of men or ^^arisaical
traditions, as they falsely call canons, precepts, and decrees of holy Church.

CHAP. III.
Because he could not come himself, as he desired, he sent Timothes, 6 At
whose return now understanding it as they stand still steadfast,
notvvithsta^ding al those persecutions, he rejoices excedingly: to praying
that he may see them against, 12 and for their increase in (...).

Act. 18, 5.
Though letters or epistles in abse^ce give great comfort and confirmation in
faith, yet it is preaching in presence by which the faith of Christ and true
religion is alvvais both begun and accomplished.
see your face, and may accomplish those things that want of your faith.



CHAP. IIII.
He exhorts them to live as he taught them: and namely to abstain from al
fornication, 9 to love one an other. 11 to meddle only with their own
matters, 12 to behave them selves well tovvard the Infidels. 13 Touching their
friends departed, he comfort them, shevving that they shall meat again as
the Resurrection, and be with Christ for ever.

The Epistle upon the 2 Sunday in Lent.
brethren, we desire and beseech you in our Lord JESUS, that as you have
received of us how you ought to walk, and to please God, as also you do
walk, that you abound more. to you by our Lord JESUS.

Al Catholic Christians make one fraternity or brotherhod.
fraternity, we have no need to write to you: Io. 13, 34 15, 17.
for * your selves have learned of God to love one an other. Heb 13, 1
Christian men ought to proceed and profit continually in good works and
justification.
abou^d more:

The Epistle in a Mass for the dead upon the day of the burial or deposition.
brethren, concerning them that sleep, that you be not sorovvful, as also
others that have no hope. 1. Cor. 15, 23.
He speaks in the person of those that shall be alive when our Savior
returns to judgment.
we which live, which are remaining in the aduent of our Lord, shall not
prevent them that have slept. Mt. 24, 31. 1. Cor. 13, 52.
and the dead that are in Christ, shall rise again first.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. IIII.
8. Not man but God.] The precepts of the Church.
He that despises the Churches or her lavvful Pastors precept^, offends no
less then if he contemned Gods express commandments. For they be of the
holy Ghost, and are not to be counted among the commandments of men only.

13. Sleep.] Some Heretics peruersly inferred of this that the fowls did
sleep til the day of judgment: where it is meant of the bodies only.

CHAP. V.
To talk of the time of the Resurrection it not necessary, but to prepare our
selves against that time so sedaine and so terrible to the unprepared. 12 He
beseeches the ^aietie to be obedient, 14 and the Clergia to be vigilant, with
many short precepts me.

Mt. 24, 44. 2 Pet. 3, 10
as * a thief in the night. Apoc. 3, 3 16, 15.
as the pains to her that is with child, and they shall not escape.

Esa. 59, 17. Ephesians. 6, 17.
are sober, * having on the breast plate of faith and A christian man's whole
armor is not faith only, but all the three virtues here named.
charity, and a helmet, the hope of salvation.

The Epistle upon the Imber Saturday in Lent.
And we beseech you brethren, Pro. 17, 13. To. 12 1. Pet. 3, 9.
admonish the unquiet, comfort the vveake-minded, bear up the vveake, be
patient to al. Luc. 18, 1.
and toward al. To desire eternal life of him that only can give it, is to
pray without intermission: but because that desire is often by worldly cares
cooled, certai^e hours and times of vocal prayer were appointed. See S. Aug.
ep. 121 ad Probam.
Pray * without intermission.

that your whole spirit, and soul and body without blame may be preserved in
the coming of our Lord JESUS Christ.

ANNOTAT. CHAP. V.
10 But proous.] Not rashly to credit every spirit.
Though we may not extinguish the spirit, nor co^te^mne the prophets, yet we
must bevvare we be not deceived by giving to light credit to every one that
vau^teth him self of the spirit, as Arch-heretikes ever did. we must try th^^
by the doctrine of the Apostles and the Spirit of the Catholic Church, which
can not be guile ^

THE ARGUMENT OF THE SECOND EPISTLE OF S. PAVL TO THE THESSALONIANS.
THE second to the Thessalonians has in the title as the first: Paul and
Siluanus and Timothee, etc. And therefore it seems to have been written in
the same place, to vvitte, at Corinth, where they remained Act. 1^. v. 11.
a year and six months, and straight upon their answer to the first epistle.

First he thanketh God for their increase, and perseverance (comforting them
again in those persecutions) and prays for their accomplisment. Secondly he
assures them tht the day of Judgment is not at hand, putting them in
remembera^ce what he told them thereof by word of mouth* when he was
present (as therefore he bids them afterward c. 2. v. 15.
to hold his Traditions unwritten, no less then the written,) to vvitte,
that all those persecutions and heresies, raised then, and afterward against
the Catholic Church, were but the mystery of Antichrist, and not Antichrist
himself. but that there should come at length a plain Apostasy, and the^ (the
whole fore running mystery being once perfitly wrought) should follow the
revelation of Antichrist himself in person (as after all the mysteries of the
old Testament, Christ JESUS our Lord came him self in the fulness of time.) And
then at length after all this the day of Judgment and second coming of Christ
shall be as hand, and not before, whatsoever pretense of vision, or of some
speech of mine (says S. Paul) any make to seduce you vvithal, or of my former
epistle, or any other. For which cause also in the end of this epistle, he
bids them to know his hand, which is a sign in every epistle.

Lastly he requesteth their prayers, and requires them to keep his
commandments and Traditions, namely that the poor which are able get their
own living with vvorking, as he also gave them example, though he were not
bound thereto.

THE SECOND EPISTLE OF PAVL TO THE THESSALONIANS.
CHAP. I.
He thanketh God for their increase in faith and charity, and constancy in
persecution (assuring them that they merit thereby the kingdom of God, as
their persecutors do damnation:) 11 and also prays for their accomplishment.



Note that by constant and patient suffering of afflictions for christ men are
made vvorthie (so the Greek signifies, as the Adversaries them selves
translate v. 11.) of the crown or kingdom of heaven, and so do merit and
deserve the same. See Anno. Luc. 20, 35. And the Apostle here says that it is
Gods justice no less to repay glory to the afflicted, then to render
punishment to them that afflict, because of their contrary deserts or merits.
you may be (...)
counted vvorthie of the kingdom of God, for the which also you suffer. 1.
These. 4, 16.
Christ shall be glorified in his Saints, that is, by the great and unspeakable
honor and exaltatio^ of them he shall be honored, as now he is: the honor
which the Church does to them, not diminishing Christ's glory (as the
Adversaries folishly pretend) but excedingly augmenting the same.
glorified in his saints, and to be made marvelous in all them that have
believed, because our testimony concerning you was credited in that day. (...)
make you vvorthie of his vocation, and accomplish all the good pleasure of his
goodness and the work of faith in power,

CHAP. II.
He requires them, in no case to think that Domesday is at hand, ^ repeating
unto them, that there must before come first a revolt, secondly the revelation
also of Antichrist him self in person, and that Antichrist shall not permit any
God to be worshipped but only him self: that also with his lying wonders he
shall win to him the incredulous Jews. But Christ shall come then immediately
in majesty, and destroy him and his. 13 Therefore he thanketh God for the faith
of the Thessalonians, 15 and bids them stick to hi^ Traditions both
written and unwritten, and prays God to confirm them.

The Epistle in the Imber Saturday of Aduent.
brethren, by the coming of our Lord JESUS Christ, and of our congregation
into him: (...)
a revolt first, and the man of sin be revealed, the son of perdition, How
then can the Pope be Antichrist, as the Heretics fondly blaspheme, who is so
far from being exalted above God, that he prays most humbly not only to
christ, but also to his B. mother and al his Saints.
above all that is called God, or that is worshipped, so that he sits in the
temple of God, shevving him self as though he were God. Es. 11, 4.
and shall destroy with the manifestation of his aduent, him, Deus mi^^et
(says S. Aug. li. 20. de Ci. c. 19.) quia Deus Diabosum sacere ista permittet.
God will send, because God will (...) the Devil to do these things. Whereby we
may take a general rule that Gods action or working in such things is his
permissio^. See Annot. To. 1, 24.
God vvil send them the operation of error, to believe lying:

(...)
the traditions which you have learned, whether it be by word, or by our
epistle. (...)
This word of exhorting implies in it comfort and consolation: as 2. Cor. 1.
v. 4. and 6.
exhort your hearts, and confirm you in every good work and word.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. II.
^. A^ though the day.] The day of judgment uncertain, and to be left to Gods
secrets.
The curiosity of man fed by Satan's deceites, has sought to know and to give
out to the world, such things as God vvil not impart to him, nor be necessary
or profitable for him to know: so far, that both in the Apostles days and
often afterward, some have feined revelations, some falsely gathered out of
the Scriptures, some presumed to calculate and coniecte by the stars, and
given forth to the world a certain time of Christ's coming to judgment. Al
which seducers be here noted in the person of some that were about to deceive
the Thessalonians therein. And S. Augustine (in his 80 Epistle ad Hesychium)
proves that no man can be assured by the Scriptures of the day, year, or age,
that the end of the world or the second Aduent shall be.

^. Unless there come a revolt first.] Though we can not be assured of the
moment, hour, or any certain time of our Lords coming, Two special signs
before the later day: a general apostasy, and the coming of Antichrist.
yet he vvarranteth us that it vvil not be before certain things be fulfilled,
which must come to pass by the course of Gods providence and permission
before, which are diverse, whereof in other places of Scriptures we be
forevvarned. Here he vvarneth us of two specially, of a revolt, defection or
an apostasy, and of the coming or revelation of Antichrist. Which two
pertain in effect both to one, either depending of the other, and shall fall
(as it may be thought) near together, and therefore S Augustine makes them but
one thing.

This apostasy or revolt, by the judgment in manner of al ancient vvriters,
is the general forsaking and fall of the Roman empire. So Tertullian li. de
resur, carnis. S. Hierom q 11 ad Algasiam. S. Chrysostom ho. 4. and S. Ambrose
upon this place, S. Augustine De Ciuit. Dei li. 20 c. 19. Al which fathers and
the rest * Calvin presump^kously condemns of error and folly herein,
Calvin. in hunc locu^.
for that their exposition agrees not with his and his fellows blasphemous
fiction that the Pope should be Antichrist. The heretics interpretation of
this apostasy, and their co^de^ning of the fathers.
To establish which false impiety, they interpret this revolt or apostasy
to be a general revolt of the visible Church from God, whose house or building
(they say) was suddenly destroyed, and lay many years ruined, and ruled only
by Satan and Antichrist. So faith the foresaid Arch-heretike here, though for
the advantage of his defense and as the matter else where requires, he seems
(as al their fashion is) to speak in other places quite contrary: but with
such color and collusion of words, that neither other men nor him self can
tell what he would have or say. And his fathers Vvicleffe and Luther, his
fellows and folovvers Illyricus, Beza, and the rest, are (for the time of the
Churches falling from Christ) so various among them selves, and so contrary to
him, that it is horrible to see their confusion, and a pitiful case that any
reasonable man vvil follow such companions to evident perdition.

But concerning ^his error and falshod of the Churches defection or revolt,
There can be no apostasy of the visible Church from God.
it is refuted suffi^iently by S. Augustine against the Donatistes in many
places. Where he proves that the Church shall not fail to the worlds end,
no not in the time of Antichrist: affirming them to deny Christ, and to rob
him of his glory and inheritance bought with his blood, which teach that the
Church may fail or perish. Li. de unit. Ec. c. 12. 13. De Ciuit. li. 20. c. 8.
In Psalm. 85 ad illud, Tu so^u Deus magnus. ps. 70 Conc. 2. and Psalm. 60. De
vtil. cred. c. 8. S. Hierom refuteth the same wicked Heresy in the Dialog.
adu. Lucifer. c. 6.
Luciferians, proving against them, that they make God subject to the Devil,
and a poor miserable Christ, that imagine the Church his body may either
perish or be driven to any corner of the world. both of them answer to the
Heretics arguments grounded on Scriptures falsely understood, which were to
long here to rehearse. It is enough for the Christian reader to know, that it
is an old deceit and excuse of al Heretics and Schismatikes, for defense of
their forsaking Gods Church, that the Church is perished, or remains hidden,
or in them selves only and in those places where they and their folovvers
dwell: to know also, that this is reproved by the holy Doctors of the
primitive Church, and that it is against Christ's honor, power, providence,
and promis.

If the Adversaries had said that this revolt which the Apostle foretells
shall come before the worlds end, 1 Io. 2, v. 18.
is meant of great numbers of Heretics and Apostataes reuolting from the
Church, they had said truth of them selves and such others, It is very like,
the Apostle speaks of a great apostasy from the Sea of Rome, and from most
articles of the Catho. faith.
whom S. John calls Antichrists. And it is very like (be it spoken under
the correction of Gods Church and al learned Catholics) that this great
defection or revolt shall not be only from the Roman empire, but specially
from the Roman Church, and vvithal from most points of Christian religion. not
that the Catholic Christians, either in the time of Antichrist or before, shall
refuse to obey the same, but for that near to the time of Antichrist and the
consummation of the world, there is like to be a great revolt of kingdoms,
peoples, and Provinces from the open external obedience and communion thereof.
Which revolt having been begun and continued by Heretics of diverse ages,
resisting and hating the Seat of Peter (which they called cathedram
pestilentia, li. 2. cont. lit. Petil. c. 51.
the chair of pestilence, * in S. Augustines days) because it is Christ's
fort erected against Hell gates and al Heretics, and being now wonderfully
increased by these of our days the next precursors of Antichrist as it may
seem, shall be fully achieved a little before the end of the world by
Antichrist him self, though even then also, when for the fevv days of
Antichrists reign the external state of the Roman Church and public
intercourse of the faithful with the same may cease, yet the due honor and
obedience of the Christians tovvard it, and communion in heart with it, and
practice thereof in secret, and open confessing thereof if occasion require,
shall not cease, no more then it does now in the Christians of Cypres and other
places where open intercourse is forbidden.

This is certain and wonderful in all wise men's eyes, The wonderful
providence of God in preserving the Sea of Rome more then al other states,
notwithstanding manifold dangers and scandals.
and must needs be of Gods providence, and a singular prerogative, that this
Seat of Peter stands, when al other Apostolic Sees be gone: that it stood
there for certain ages together with the secular seat of the Empire: that
the Popes stood without wealth, power, or humane defense, the Emperors
knovving, vvitting, and seeking to destroy them, and putting to the svvord
above thirty of them one after an other, yea and being as much afraid of them
as if they had been amuli imperij, Competitors of their Empire, as S. Cyprian
notes (epist. 52 ad Antonianum. number. 3) of S. Cornelius Pope in his days, and
Decius then Emperor: again, that the Emperors afterward yielded up the city
unto them, continuing for all that in the Emperial dignity still: that the
successors of those that persecuted them, laid down their crowns before
their Seat and sepulcres, honoring the very memories and Relikes of the poor
men whom their predecessors killed: that now well near these 1600 years this
Seat stands, as at the beginning in continual misery, so now of long time
for the most part in prosperity, without al mutation in effect, as no other
kingdom or State in the world has done, every one of them in the said space
being manifoldly altered. It stands (we say) all this while (to use S.
Augustines words de vtil. cred. c. 17.) Frustra circumlatrantibus haereticis,
the Heretics in vain barking about it, not the first Heathen Emperors, not
the Goths and Vandals, not the Turk, not any sackes or massakers by Alaricus,
Gensericus, Attila, Borbon, and others, not the emulation of secular Princes,
were they kings or Emperors, not the Popes own divisions among them selves
and manifold difficulties and dangers in their elections, not the great vices
which have been noted in some of their persons, no^ al these nor any other
endeavor or sca^dal could yet prevail against the Sea of Rome, nor is ever
like to prevail til the end of the world dravv near, at which time this
revolt (here spoken of by the Apostle) may be in such sort as is said before,
and more shall be said in the Annotations next following.

^. The man of sin.] Many Antichrists, as fore runners of the great
Antichrist.
There were many even in the Apostles time (as we see by the 4 Chapter of S.
John's first epistle and in the vvritings of the ancient fathers) that were
forerunners of Antichrist, and for impugning Christ's truth and Church were
called antichrists, whether they did it by force and open persecution, as
Nero and others either Heathen or Heretical Emperors did, or by false teaching
and other deceites, as the Heretics of al ages, in which common and vulgar
acception S. Hierom says, al belonged to Antichrist that were not of the
communion of Damasus then Pope of Rome. The great Antichrist shall be one
special and notorious man.
Hiero. ep. 57 ad Damas. and in an other place, all that have new names after
the peculiar calling of Heretics, as Arians, Donatistes (and as we say now,
Caluinistes, Zuinglians, etc.) al such (says he) be Antichrists. Dial. cont.
Lucifer. c. 9. Yea these later of our time much more then any of the former,
for diverse causes which shall afterward be set down. Nevertheless they nor
none of them are that great Adversary, enemy, and impugner of Christ, which
is by a peculiar distinction and special signification named, the Antichrist, 1
Io. 2. and the man of sin. the son of perdition, (...).
the Adversary, described here and else where, to oppose him self directly
against God and our Lord JESUS CHRIST. (...).
The Heathen Emperors were many, Turks be many, Heretics have been and now
are many, therefore they can not be that one great Antichrist which here is
spoken of, and which by the article alvvaies added in the Greek, is signified
to be one special and singular man: (...).
as his peculiar and direct opposition to Christ's person in the 5 chapter of S.
John's Gospel v. 43: the insinuation of the particular stock and tribe whereof
he should be borne, to wit, of the Jews (for of them he shall be received as
their Massias Io. 5. v. 43.) and of the tribe of Dan. Genesis 49, 17.
Ire^. li. 5. Hieron. com. in c. 11 Dan. August. q. in Ios. q. 22: (...).
the note of his proper name Apoc. 13: the time of his appearing so near the
worlds end: his short reign, his singular vvast and destruction of Gods
honor and al religion, his feined miracles, the figures of him in the Prophets
and Scriptures of the new and old Testament: al these and many other arguments
prove him to be but one special notorious Adversary in the highest degree,
unto whom al other persecutors, Heretics, Atheistes, and wicked enemies of
Christ and his Church, are but members and servants.

And this is the most common sentence also of al ancient fathers. Only
Heretics make no doubt but Antichrist is a whole order or succession of men.
which they hold against the former evident Scriptures and reasons, only to
establish their folish and wicked paradoxe, that Christ's chief Minister is
Antichrist, Beza in hoc cap.
yea the whole order. Wherein Beza specially pricketh so high, that he makes
Antichrist (even this great Antichrist) to have been in S. Paul's days, The
Caluinistes place Antichrist in the Sea of Rome, in S. Paul's days.
though he was not open to the world. Who it should be (except he mean S.
Peter, because he was the first of the order of Popes) God knovveth. And sure
it is, except he were Antichrist, neither the whole order, nor any of the
order can be Antichrist, being al his lavvful successors both in dignity and
also in truth of Christ's religion. Neither can all the Heretics alive prove
that they or any of them used any other regiment or jurisdiction Ecclesiastical
in the Church, or forced the people to any other faith or worship of God, then
Peter him self did preach and plant. Therefore if the rest be Antichrist, let
Beza boldly say that S. Peter was so also, and that diverse of the ancient
Catholic fathers did serve and work (though vnvvares) toward the setting
up of the great Antichrist, for so does that blasphemous pen boldly write in
his Annotations upon this place: They make S. Leo and S. Gregory, great
furtherers of Antichrists pride.
and an English printed book of late coming forth out of the same school,
Against D. Sanders rock page 248. and page 278.
has these words: As for Leo and Gregory Bishops of Rome, although they
were not come to the full pride of Antichrist, yet the mystery of iniquity
having wrought in that Seat near five or six hundred years before them, and
then greatly increased, they were deceived with the long continuance of
error. Thus vvriteth a malapert scholar of that impudent schole, placing the
mystery of Antichrist as vvorking in the Sea of Rome even in S. Peter's time,
and making these two holy fathers great workers and furtherers of the same.
whereas an other English Rabbine doubted not at Paul's cross to speak of the
self same fathers as great Doctors and Patrones of their new Gospel, Iuel.
thus: O Gregory, o Leo, if we be deceived, you have deceived us. Whereof
we give the good Christian Reader warning more diligently, to bevvare of such
damnable books and Masters, Antichrist shall suffer no worship or adoration,
but of him self only. therefore the Pope can not be Antichrist.
carrying many unadvised people to perdition.

4. Extolled.] The great Antichrist which must come near the worlds end,
shall abolish the public exercise of al other religions true and false, and
pull down both the B. Sacrament of the altar, wherein consists specially
the worship of the true God, and also al Idols of the Gentiles, and sacrifices
of the Jews, generally al kind of religious worship, saving that which
must be done to him self alone* which was partly prefigured in such kings as
published that no God nor man but them selves should be prayed unto for
certain days, Dan. ^. 6.
as * Darius and such like. How can the Protestants then for shame and
without evident co^tradiction, avouch the Pope to be Antichrist, who (as we
say) honors Christ the true God vvithal his power, or (as they say)
honors Idols, and chalengeth no divine honor to him self, much less to him
self only, as Antichrist shall do? He humbly prays to God, and lowly
knee^eth down in every Church at diverse altars erected to God in the memories
of his Saints, and prays to them. He says or hears Mass daily with al
devotion, he confesses his sins to a Priest as other poor men do, he
adoreth the holy Eucharist which Christ affirmed to be his own body, the
Heretics call it an Idol (no marvel if they make the Pope his Vicar
Antichrist, when they make Christ him self an Idol:) These religious duties
does the Pope, whereas Antichrist shall worship none, nor pray to any, at the
least openly.

4. In the temple.] In what temple Antichrist shall sit.
Most ancient vvriters expound this of the Temple in Jerusalem, which they
think Antichrist shall build up again, as being of the Jews stock, and to
be acknowledged of that obstinate people (according to our Saviors prophecy
Io. 5) for their expected and promised Messiah. Iren. li. 5 in fine. Hyppolyt.
de consum. mundi. Cyril. Hieros. Cacech. 15. Author op. imp. ho. 49. in Mat.
See S. Hierom in 11 Dan. Grego. li. 31. Moral. c. 11. Not that he shall suffer
them to worship God by their old manner of sacrifices, (al which he vvil
either abolish, or convert to the only adoration of him self: though at the
first to apply him self to the Jews, he may perhaps be circumcised and keep
some part of the law) for it is here said that he shall sit in the Temple as
God, Dan. 9.
that is, he shall be adored there by sacrifice and divine honor, the name and
worship of the true God wholly defaced. Mat. 24.
And this they think to be the abominatio^ of desolation foretold by Daniel,
mentioned by our Savior, 1 Match. 1.
prefigured and resembled by Antiochus and others, that defaced the worship of
the true God by profanation of that Temple, The abomination of desolation
consists cheefely in abolishing the sacrifice of the altar.
specially by abrogating the daily sacrifice, which was a figure of the only
sacrifice and continual oblation of Christ's holy body and blood in the Church,
as the abolishing of that, was a figure of the abolishing of this, which shall
be done principally and most universally by Antichrist him self (as now in
part by his forerunners) through out al Nations and Churches of the world
(though then also Mass may be had in secret, as it is now in nations where
the secular force of some Princes prohibiteth it to be said openly.) For
although he may have his principal seat and honor in the Temple and city of
Jerusalem, yet he shall rule over the whole world, and specially prohibit
that principal worship instituted by Christ in his Sacraments, as being the
proper Adversary of Christ's person, name, law, and Church, the profanation
and desolation of which Church by taking away the sacrifice of the altar, is
the proper abomination of desolation, and the work of Antichrist only.

S. Augustine therefore li. 20 de ciuit. c. 19. and S. Hierom q. 11 ad Algasiam.
do think, that this sitting of Antichrist in the temple, does signify his
sitting in the Church of Christ, rather then in Salomons temple. How
Antichrist shall sit in the Church.
Not as though he should be a chief member of the Church of Christ, or a
special part of his body mystical, and be Antichrist and yet vvithal continuing
within the Church of Christ, as the Heretics feine, to make the Pope
Antichrist (whereby they plainly confess and agnise that the Pope is a
member of the Church, Beza^.
etc. in ipso sinu Ecclesiae, and in the very bosom of the Church, Neither
Antichrist nor his precursors, are members of the Church.
say they;) for that is ridiculous, that al Heretics whom S. John calls
Antichrists as his precursors, should go out of the Church, and the great
Antichrist him self should be of the Church, and in the Church, and co^tinevv
in the same, and yet to them that make the whole Church to revolt from God,
this is no absurdity. But the truth is, that this Antichristian revolt here
spoken of, is from the Catholic Church: and Antichrist, if he ever were of or
in the Church, shall be an Apostata and a renegate out of the Church, and shall
usurp upon it by tyranny, and by chalenging worship, religion, and
government thereof, so that him self shall be adored in all the Churches of the
world which he list to leave standing for his honor. And this is to sit in
the temple o^ (...)
against the Temple of God, as some interpret. If any Pope did ever this, or
shall do, then let the Adversaries call him Antichrist.

And let the good Reader observe, Antichrist (by interpretation, One against
Christ) why so called.
that there be two special causes why this great man of sin is called
Antichrist. The one is, for impugning Christ's kingdom in earth, that is to
say, his spiritual regiment which he constituted and appointed in his Church,
and the form of government ordained therein, applying al to him self by
singular tyranny and usurpation, in which kind S. Athanasius (ep. at Solit.
vit. degentes.) is bold to call the Emperor Constantius being an Arian
Heretic, Antichrist, for making him self Principem Episcoporum, Prince over
the Bishops and President of Ecclesiastical judgments etc. The other cause is,
for impugning Christ's Priesthod, which is only or most properly exercised in
earth by the sacrifice of the holy Mass, instituted for the commemoration of
his death, and for the external exhibition of godly honor to the B. Trinity,
which kind of external worship by sacrifice no lavvful people of God ever
lacked. Protestants and Caluinists the near foreru^ners of Antichrist.
And by these two things you may easily perceive, that the Heretics of these
days do more properly and nearly prepare the way to Antichrist and to
extreme desolation, then ever any before, their special heresy being against
the spiritual Primacie of Popes and Bishops, and against the sacrifice of the
altar, in which two the soueraintie of Christ in earth consists.

6. What lets.] S. Augustins humility in interpreting the scriptures
S. Augustine (li. 20 c. 19 de ciuit del.) professes plainly that he
understands not these words, not that that follows of the mystery of
iniquity, and least of all that which the Apostle adds, Only that he which
holds now, do hold etc. Which may humble us al and stay the confident
rashness of this time, namely of Heretics, that boldly feine hereof whatsoever
is agreeable to their heresy and fantasy. The Apostle had told the
Thessalonians before by word of mouth a secret point which he would not
utter in vvritting, and therefore refers them to his former talk. The
mystery of iniquity is the covert working of heretics toward the manifest
revelation of Antichrist himself.
The mystery of iniquity is commonly referred to Heretics, who work to
the same, and do that that Antichrist shall do, but yet not openly, but in
covert and under the cloak of Christ's name, the Scriptures, the word of the
Lord, show of holiness, etc. Whereas Antichrist him self shall openly attempt
and atchieue the foresaid desolation, and Satan now serving his turn by
Heretics underhand, shall tovvard the last end utter, reveal, and bring him
forth openly* and that is here, to be revealed, that is, to appear in his
own person.

These other words, Only that he which now holds, hold: Some expound of
the Emperor, during whose continuance in his state, God shall not permit
Antichrist to come, meaning that the very Empire shall be wholy desolate,
destroyed, and taken away before or by his coming: which is more then a
defection from the same, whereof was spoken before: for there shall be a
revolt from the Church also, but it shall not be utterly destroyed. Others say,
that it is an admonition to al faithful, to hold fast their faith and not to be
beguiled by such as under the name of Christ or Scriptures seek to deceive
them, til they that now pretend religion and the Gospel, end in a plain
breach, revolt, and open apostasy by the appearance of Antichrist, whom al
Heretics serve in mystery, that is, covertly and in the Devils meaning,
though the world sees it not, nor them selves at the beginning thought it, as
now every day more and more al men perceive they tend to plain Atheism and
Antichristianisme.

9. In all power.] What kind of men shall follow Antichrist.
Satan whose power to him is abridged by Christ, shall then ^e let loose, and
shall assist Antichrist in all manner of signs, wonders, and false miracles,
whereby many shall be seduced, not only Jews: But al such as be deceived and
carried away by vulgar speech only, of Heretics that can work no miracles,
much more shall follow this man of sin doing so great wonders. And such both
now do solovv Heretics, and then shall receive Antichrist, that deserve so to
be forsaken of God, by their forsaking of the unity and happy fellowship of
Saints in the Catholic Church, where only is the Charity of truth, as the
Apostle here speaks.

15. Traditions.] Not only the things written and set down in the holy
Scriptures, but al other truths and points of religion uttered by word of
mouth and delivered or given by the Apostles See S. D^ny^ Arcopag. Ec. Hier. c.
1. (...)
to their scholars by tradition, be so here approved and else where in the
Scripture it self, that the Heretics purposely guilfully, Heretical
translation.
and of il conscience (that belike reprehendeth them) refrain in their
translations, from the Ecclesiastical and most usual word, Tradition,
euer-more when it is taken in good part, though it express most exactly the
signification of the Greek word: but when it sounds in their fond
fantasy against the traditions of the Church (as in deed in true sense it
never does) there they use it most gladly. Traditions unwritten.
Here therefore and ^. Cor. 11 2. These. 3.
in the like places, that the reader might not so easily like of Traditions
unwritten, here commended by the Apostle, they translate it, Instructions,
Constitutions, Ordinances, and what they can invent else, to hide the truth
from the simple or vnvvarie Reader, whose translations have no other end but
to beguile such by art and conueiance.

But S. Chrysostom (ho. 4 in 1 These 2.) Their authority and estimation, and
examples of some peculiar traditions out of the fathers.
and the other greek scholies or commentaries say hereupon, both written and
unwritten precepts the Apostles gave by tradition, and both be worthy of
observation. S. Basil (De Sp. Sancto c. 29 in principio.) thus, I account it
Apostolic to continue famely even in unwritten traditions. and to prove
this, he alleges this place of S. Paul. In the same book c. 17 he says, If
we once go about to reject unwritten customs as things of no importance, we
shall, are we be aware, do damage to the principal parts of the faith, and
bring the preaching of the Gospel to a naked name. And for example of these
necessary traditions, S. Chrysostom
he names the sign of the Cross, praying toward the east, the words
spoken at the eleuatio^ of sheavving of the holy Eucharist, with diverse
ceremonies used before and after the consecration, the halovving of the sont,
the blessing of the oil, the anointing of the baptized with the same, S.
Basil.
the three immersions into the font, the words of abrenuntiatio^ and
exorcismes of the party that is to be baptized etc. What scripture (says he)
taught these and such like? none truly, al coming of secret and silent
tradition, vvherevvith our fathers thought it meet to cover such mysteries.

S. Hierom (Dialog. cont. Lucif. c. 4. et. ep. 28 ad Li^iniu^.) S. Hierom.
reckeneth up diverse the like traditions, S. Augustine.
vvilling men to attribute to the Apostles such customs as the Church has
received in diverse christian countries. S. Augustine esteems the Apostolic
traditions so much, that he plainly affirms in sundry places, not only the
observation of certain festiuities, fastes, ceremonies, and whatsoever other
solemnities used in the Catholic Church, to be holy, profitable, and
Apostolic, though they be notvvritten at al in the scriptures: but he often
also vvriteth, that many of the articles of our religion and points of highest
importance, are not so much to be proved by scriptures, as by tradition* namely
auouching that in no wise we could believe that children in their infancy
should be baptized, if it were not an Apostolical tradition. De Genesis ad lit.
li. 10 c. 23. Tradition caused him to believe that the baptized of heretics
should not be rebaptized, notvvithstanding S. Cyprians authority and the
manifold scriptures alleged by him, though they seemed never so pregnant. De
bap. li. 2. c. 7. By tradition only, he and others condemned Heluidius the
heretic for denying the perpetual virginity of our Lady. And without this,
be the Scriptures never so plain, S. Epiphanius.
no Arian, no Macedonian, no Eutychian, no Pelagian, no Zuinglian vvil yield. We
must use tradition, (says S. Epiphanius ^har. 61 Apostolicorum.) For the
Scripture has not al things: and therefore the Apostles delivered certain
things in vvriting, certain by tradition. and for that he alleges this place
also of S. Paul. And again haer. 55. Melchised There be bounds set down for
the foundation and building up of our faith, the tradition of the Apostles, and
holy Scriptures, and succession of doctrine, so that truth is every way ^insed.

S. Irenaeus (li. 3. c. 4.) S. Irenaeus.
has one notable chapter, that in all questions we must have recourse to the
traditions of the Apostles: teaching us vvithal, that the way to try an
Apostolical tradition and to bring it to the fountain, is by the Apostolic
succession of Bishops, but specially of the Apostolic See of Rome: declaring
in the same place that there be many barbarous people, simple for learning, but
for constancy in their faith most wise, Tertullian.
which never had Scriptures, but learned only by tradition. Tertullian. (li.
de corona militis. nu. ^.) reckeneth up a great number of Christian
observations or customs (as S. Cyprian in many places does in manner the same)
whereof in fine he concludes, S. Cyprian.
Of such and such if thou require the rule of Scriptures, thou shall find
none. Tradition shall be alleged the author, custom the confirmer, and faith
the obseruer. Origin.
Origin also of this matter vvriteth in plain terms, that there be many
things done in the Church (which he there names) whereof there is no easier
reason to be given then tradition from Christ and the Apostles. ho. 5. in
Numer. S. Dionysius Areopagita refers the praying and oblation for the dead
in the Liturgy or Mass, to an Apostolical tradition. in fine E^. Hierarch. c.
7. part 3. So does Tertullian De coron. militit. S. Augustine De ^ura pro
mortuis c. 1. S. Chrysostom ho. 3. in ep. ad Philip. in Moral. S. Damascene
S^r. de defunctis in initio.

We might add to all this, The Scriptures given us by tradition, and the sense
thereof.
that the Scriptures them selves, even all the books and parts of the holy
Bible, be given us by tradition: else we should not nor could not take them (as
they be in deed) for the infallible word of God, no more then the works of
S. Ignatius, S. Clement, S. Denis, and the like. The true sense also of the
Scriptures (which Catholics have and heretics have not) remains still in
the Church by tradition. The Creed is an Apostolic tradition. The Creed an
Apostolical tradition.
Ruffin. in expo. Symb. in principio. Hiero. ep. 61. c. 9. Ambros. Ser. 38.
Aug. de Symb. ad Catechum. li. 3. c. 1. And what Scriptures have they to prove
that we must accept nothing not expressly written in Scriptures? We have to
the contrary, plain Scriptures, all the fathers, most evident reasons, that
we must either believe traditions or nothing at al. And they must be asked
whether, if they were assured that such and such things (which be not
expressed in Scriptures) were taught and delivered by word of mouth from the
Apostles, An invincible argument for the credit of Traditions.
they would believe them or no? If they say no, then they be impious that vvil
not trust the Apostles preaching: if they say they would, if they were
assured that the Apostles taught it: then to prove unto them this point, we
bring them such as lived in the Apostles days, and the testimonies of so many
fathers before named near to those days, and the whole Churches practice and
asseueratio^ descending down from man to man to our time* which is a
sufficient proof (at least for a matter of fact) in all reasonable men's
judgment. specially when it is known that S. Ignatius the Apostles equal in
time, vvrote a book of the Apostles traditions, as Eusebius witnesses li. 3.
Ec. hist. c. 30. And Tertullians book of prescriptio^ against Heretics, is to
no other effect but to prove that the Church has this vantage above Heretics,
that she can prove her truth by plain Apostolic tradition, as none of them
can ever do.

CHAP. III.
He desires their prayers, 4 and inculcateth his precepts and traditions,
namely of vvorking quietly for their own living, commanding to excommunicate
the disobedient.

^ Here also (...) as is noted before 2 Thessalonians. 2. 15.) the adversaries in their
translatio^s avoid the word, Tradition, being plain in the Greek, lest them
selves might seem to be noted as men vvalking inordinately, and not according
to Apostolical Tradition, as al Schismatikes, Heretics, and rebels to Gods
Church do.
as also with you: Ep. 6, 18.
Col. 4, 3.
for all men have not faith.

(...)
tradition which they have received of us. unquiet among you: Act. 20.
1. Cor. 4.
but in labor and in toil night and day vvorking, 1. Th. 2.
lest we should burden any of you. 1. Cor. 9, 6.
but that we might give our selves a pattern unto you for to imitate us.

Gal. 6, 9.


ANNOTATIONS CHAP. III.
10. Neither let them eat.] It is not a general precept or rule, that every
man should live by this handvvorke, The heretics cauillation against Religious
me^ that work not, ansvvered.
as the Anabaptists argue falsely against Gentlemen, and the Caluinistes
apply it peruersely against the vacant life of the Clergy, specially of
Monks and other Religious men. But it is a natural admonition only, given to
such as had not vvherevvith to live of their own, or any right or good cause
why to challenge their finding of others, and to such as under the color of
Christian liberty did pass their time idly, curiously, unprofitably, and
scandalously, refusing to do such works as were agreeable to their former
calling and bringing up. Such as these, were not tolerable, specially there
and then, when the Apostle and others (that might lavvfully have lived of the
altar and their preaching) yet to disburden their hearers, and for the better
advancement of the Gospel, 1 Cor. 9.
wrought for their living: * protesting nevertheless continually, that they
might have done otherwise, as well as S. Peter and the rest did, who wrought
not, but were found otherwise justly and lavvfully, as al sorts of the
Clergy preaching or serving the Church and the alter, be and ought to be, The
spiritual travails of the Clergy.
See S. Cypr. ep. 66.
by the law of God and nature. Whose spiritual labors far pass al bodily
travails, where the duties and functions of that vocation be done
accordingly: as S. Augustine affirms of his own extraordinary pains
incident to the Ecclesiastical affairs and regiment: in steed of which, if
the use of the Church and his infirmity would have permitted it, Religious
me^ working with their hands.
he wishes he might have labored with his hands some hours of the day. as
some of the Clergy did ever voluntarily occupy them selves in teaching,
vvriting, grauing, painting, planting, sovving, embrodering, or such like
seemly and innocent labors. See S. Hierom ep. 114 seu praef. in Job. and in
vit. Hilario.

And Monks for the most part in the primitive Church (fevv of them being
Priests, and many taken from servile works and handicraftes, yea often times
professed of bondmen, made free by their masters to enter into religion) were
appointed by their Superiors to work certain hours of the day, to supply
the lackes of their Monasteries: as yet the Religious do (women specially) in
many places, which stands well with their profession. And S. Augustine
vvriteth a whole book (de opera Monachorum to. 3.) against the error of
certain disordered Monks that abused these words, (Nolite esse soliciti, he
not careful etc. and Respicite v^latilia cali, behold the fowls of the air
etc.) to prove that they should not labor at al, but pray only and commit
their finding to God: not only so excusing their idleness, but preferring them
selves in holiness above other their fellows that did work, Monks were shaven
in the primitive Church, and Nonnes clipped of their hear.
and erroneously expounding the said Scriptures for their defense: as they did
other Scriptures, to prove they should not be shaven after the manner of Monks.
Which letting their heads to grow he much blames also in them, See li. 2.
Retract. c. 21. and ^ op. Monach. c. 31. and S. Hieromes. ep. 48. c. 3. of
Nonnes cutting their hear.

Where by the way you see that the Religious were shaven even in S.
Augustines time, who reprocheth them for their hear, calling them Crinitos,
Hearelings, as the Heretics now contrarievvise deride them by the word
Rasos, Shauelings. So that there is a great difference between the ancient
Fathers and the new Protestant. And as for hand labors, as S. Augustine in
the book alleged, would not have Religious folk to refuse them, where
necessity, bodily strength, and the order of the Church or Monastery permit
or require them: S. Augustines opinion concerning Religious men's working or not
working.
so he expressly vvriteth, that al can not nor are not bound to work, and that
who so ever preaches or ministers the Sacraments to the people or serves
the altar (as al Religious men commonly now do) may challenge their living of
them whom they serve, li. de ^p Monach. c. 21.
and are not bound to work, * no nor such neither as have been brought up
before in state of Gentlemen, and have given away their lands or goods, and
made them selves poor for Christ's sake. Which is to be noted, because the
Heretics affirm the said Scripture and S. Augustine to condemn al such for
idle persons.

14. Obey not.] Ecclesiastical censures against the disobedient.
Our Pastors must be obied, and not only secular Princes, and such as will
not be obedient to their spiritual governors, the Apostle (as S. Augustine
says) gives order and commandment that they be corrected by correption or
admonition, By degradation, excommunication, and other lavvful kinds of
punishments. Cont. Donatist. post collat. c. 4. 20. Read also this holy fathers
answer to such as said, Let our Prelates command us only what we ought to
do, and pray for us that we may do it: but let them not correct us. Where he
proves that Prelates must not only command and pray, but punish also if that
be not done which is commanded. Li. de correp. and great. c. 3.

14. Note him.] Not to communicate with excommunicate persons but in certain
cases.
Disobedient person to be excommunicated, and the excommunicated to be
separated from the company of other Christians, and the faithful not to keep
any company or have conversation with excommunicated person, neither to be
partaker with them in the fault for which they are excommunicated, nor in any
other act of religion or office of life, except cases or mere necessity and
other prescribed and permitted by the law: all this is here insinuated, and that
all the Churches censures be grounded in Scriptures and the examples of the
Apostles.

THE ARGUMENT OF THE FIRST EPISTLE OF S. PAVL TO TIMOTHEE.
AFTER the Epistles to the Churches, now follow his Epistles to particular
person, as to Timothee, to Titus, who were Bishops: and to Philemon.

Of Timothee we read Act. 16. how S. Paul in his visitation took him in his
train at Lystra, circumciding him before, because of the Jews. he was then
a Disciple, that is to say, a Christian man. Afterward the Apostle gave him
holy Orders, and consecrated him Bishop, as he testifies in both these
Epistles unto him. 1. Tim. 4. v. 14. and 2. Tim. 1. v. 6.

He vvriteth therefore unto him as to a Bishop, and him self expresses the
scope of his first Epistle, 1 Timoth. 3.
saying: These things I write to thee, that thou may know how thou
ought to converse in the House of God, which is the Church. And so he
instructs him (and in him, al Bishops) how to govern both himself, and
others. and touching himself, to be an example and a spectacle to al sorts, in all virtue, as touching others, to prohibit al such as go about to preach
otherwise then the Catholic Church has received, and to inculcate to the
people the Catholic faith: to preach unto young and old, men and women: to
servants, to the rich, to every sort conveniently. With what circumspection
to give orders, and to what persons: for whom to pray: whom to admit to the
vovv of vvidovvhod etc.

This Epistle was written, as it seems, after his first emprisonme^t in
Rome, when he was dismissed and set at liberty and thereupon it is, that he
might say here, 1 Timoth. 3.
I hope to come to thee quickly. to wit unto Ephesus, where 1 Timothy 1. Act.
20. v. 25. 38.
he had desired him to remain. although in his voyage to Jerusalem, before
his being at Rome, he said at Miletum to the Clergy of Ephesus, upon probable
fear: And now behold I know, that you shall no more see my ^ace.

Where it was written, it is uncertain: though it be commonly said, at
Laodicia. Col. 2. v. 1.
Which seems not, because it is like he was never there, as may be gathered
by the Epistle to the Colossians, written at Rome in his last trouble, when
he was put to death.

THE FIRST EPISTLE OF PAVL TO TIMOTHEE.
CHAP. I.
He recommendeth unto him, to inhibite certain Jews who iangled of the Law
as though it were contrary to his preaching. 11 Against whom he avouches
his ministry, though he acknovvledge his vnvvorthines.



S. Augustine says, He that list to have the hope of heaven let him look that
he have a good conscience. to have a good conscience, let him believe and
work vvel*for that he believes she has of faith: that he works, he has
of charity. Praefat. in Psa. 31.
a good conscience, and a faith not feined. (...).
vain talk, To. 7, 13*
if a man use it lavvfully: is according to the Gospel of the glory of the
blessed God, which is committed to me.

Mt. 9, 13.
that Christ JESUS came into this world * to save sinners, Mr. 2, 17.
of whom I am the chief. (...)
to the information of them that shall believe on him unto life everlasting.

(...)*
on thee, that thou war in them a good warfare, Evil life and no good
conscience is often the cause that men fall to Heresy from the faith of the
Catholic Church. Again, this plainly reproves the heretics false doctrine,
saying, that no man can fall from the faith that he once truly had.
which certain repelling, have made shipwreck about the faith.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. I.
3. Not to teach otherwise.] Teaching otherwise then the doctrine received,
is a special mark of Heretics.
The proper mark of Heretics and false preachers, is, to teach otherwise or
contrary to that which they found taught and believed generally in the unity
of the Catholic Church before their time: al doctrine that is odd, singular,
new, differing from that which was f^rst planted by the Apostles, and
descended down from them to al nations and ages following without
contradiction, being assuredly erroneous. (...)*
The Greek word which the Apostle here uses, expresses this point so
effectually, that in one compound term he gives us to wit, that an Heretic
is nothing else but an after-teacher, or teacher-otherwise. which even it self
alone is the easiest rule even for the simple to discern a false Prophet or
preacher by, specially when an heresy first begins. Luthers teaching
otherwise.
Luther found al Nations Christian at rest and peace in one uniform faith, and
al preachers of one voice and doctrine touching the B. Sacrament and other
Articles: so that what so ever he taught against that which he found preached
and believed, must needs be an other doctrine, a later doctrine, an
after-teaching or teaching -otherwise, and therefore consequently must needs
be false. And by this admonition of S. Paul, al Bishops are warned to take
heed of such, and specially to provide that no such odd teachers arise in
their dioceses.

4. To fables.] He speaks specially of the Jews after-doctrines and humane
constitutions repugnant to the laws of God, whereof Christ gives warning Mt.
23 and in other places, which are contained in their Cabala and Talmud: Al
heretical doctrine is fables.
generally of al heretical doctrines, which in deed, how so ever the simple
people be beguiled by the^, are nothing but fabulous inventions, as we may see
in the Valentinians, Manichees, and others of old: by the brethren of love,
Puritans, Anabaptists, and Caluinistes of our time. For which cause Theodorete
entitleth his book against Heretics, Hereticarum fabularum, Of Heretical
fables.

4. Questions.] Curious questioning in religion.
Let our loving brethren consider whether these contentious and curious
questionings and disputes in religion, which these unhappy heresies have in
gendered, have brought forth any increase of good life, any devotion, or
edification of faith and religion in our days* and then shall they easily judge
of the truth of these new opinions, and the end that will follow of these
innouations. In truth all the world now sees they edify to Atheism and no
otherwise.

5. The end Charity.] Here again it appears, that Charity is the cheese of
al virtues, and the end, Charity the very formal cause of our justification.
consummation, and perfection of all the law and precepts* and yet the
Adversaries are so fond as to prefer faith before it, yea to exclude it from
our justification. Such obstinacy there is in them that have once in pride and
stubbernes forsaken the evident truth. Charity doubtless which is here
commended, is justice it self, and the very formal cause of our justification,
as the works proceeding thereof, be the works of justice. Charitas incheata
(says S. Augustine) inchoata iustitia: Charitas prouecta, prouecta iustitia:
Charitas magna, magna iustitia: Charitas perfecta, perfecta iustitia est.
Charity now beginning, is justice beginning: Charity grown or increased,
is justice grown or increased: great Charitis, is great justice: perfect
Charity, is perfect justice. Li. de not. and great. c. 70.

7. Desirous to be Doctors.] It is the proper vice both of Iudaical and of
Heretical false teachers, Heretics great boasters, but unlearned.
to profess knowledge and great skill in the Law and Scriptures, being in
deed in the sight of the learned most ignorant of the word of God, not
knowing the very principles of divinity, even to the admiration truly of the
learned that read their books or hear them preach.

9. The law not made to the just.] By this place and the like, the Libertines
of our days would discharge them selves (whom they count just) from the
obedience of laws. Libertines allege scripture.
But the Apostles meaning is that the just man does well, not as compelled by
law or for fear of punishment due to the transgressors thereof, but of grace
and mere love tovvard God and al goodness, most willingly, though there were no
law to command him.

21. Delivered to Satan.] Excommunication of Heretics, and the effect thereof.
Hymenaeus and Alexander are here excommunicated for falling from their faith
and teaching heresy: an example unto Bishops to use their spiritual power upon
such. In the primitive Church, corporal affliction through the ministry of
Satan was joined to excommunication. Where we see also the devils readiness to
invade them that are cast out by excommunication, from the fellowship of the
faithful, and the supereminent power of Bishops in that case. Whereof S.
Hierom (ep. 1. ad Heliod. c. 7) has these memorable words: God forbid (says
he) I should speak sinistreusly of them, who succeding the Apostles in
degree, make Christ's body with their holy mouth, by whom we are made
Christians: who having the k^^is of heaven, The Priests high authority of
Excommunication.
do after a sort judge before the day of judgment: who in s^brietie and
Chastity have the keeping of the spouse of Christ. And a little after, They may
deliver me up to Satan, to the destruction of my flesh, that the spirit may be
saved in the day of our Lord Jesus. And in the old Law whosoever was
disobedient to the Priests, was either cast out of the camp and so stoned of
the people, or laying down his neck to the svvord, expiated his offense by
his blood: but now the disobedient is cut of with the spiritual svvord, The
terrible effect thereof.
or being cast out of the Church, is torn by the furious mouth of Devils. So
says he. Which words would God every Christian man would weigh.

CHAP. II.
By his Apostolic authority he appoints public prayers to be made for all
me^ without exception. 8 also men to pray in at places: 9 and women also in
semely attire, 11 to learn of men, and not to be teachers in any wise, but to
seek salvation by that which to them belongs.

Even for heathen kings and Emperors by whom the Church suffers
persecution: much more for all faithful Princes and powers and people both
spiritual and temporal, for whom as members of Christ's body, and therefore
joining in prayer and oblation with the ministers of the Church, the Priests
more properly and particularly offer the holy Sacrifice. See S. Augustine de
orig. anima li. 1. c. p.
for kings and all that are in preeminence: that we may lead a quiet and a
peaceable life in all piety and chastity. 2. Tim. 1, 11.


1. Pet. 3, 3.
with demureness and sobriety adorning them selves, not in plaited hear, or
gold, or precious stones, or gorgeous apparel, 1. Cor. 14, 34.
with al subjection. Genesis 1, 27. 3, 6.
but to be in silence. she
they' continue in faith and love and sanctification with sobriety.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. II.
1. Obsecrations.] The prayers and petitions in the Mass, deduced out of the
Apostles words by S. Augustine, and other fathers.
This order of the Apostle S. Augustine (ep. 59) finds to be fulfilled
specially in the holy celebration of the Mass, which has al these kinds,
expressed here in four diverse words pertaining to four sorts of prayers*
the difference whereof he exactly seeks out of the proper signification and
difference of the Greek words. And he teaches us that the first kind of
prayers which here be called, (...).
obsecrations, are those that the Priest says before the consecration: that
the second called, Prayers, be al those which are said in and after the
Consecration, and about the Receiving, (...).
including specially the Pater noster, wherewith the whole Church (says he)
in manner ends that part, as S. Hierom also affirms, that Christ taught his
Apostles to use the Pater noster in the Mass. Sic docuit, etc. So taught he
hit Apostles, that daily in the Sacrifice of his body the faithful should be
bold to say, Pater noster etc. Li. 3 cont. Pelag. cap. 5. PATER NOSTER in the
Mass.
where he alludeth to the very words now used in the preface to the said
Pater noster in the said Sacrifice, audemus dicere, Pater noster. (...).
The third sort called here in the text, Postulatio^s, be those which are used
after the Communion, (...).
as it were for dimissing of the people with benediction, that is, with the
Bishops or Priests blessing. Finally the last kind, which is Thankes-giuings,
concludes al, Theoph. in hunc loc.
when the Priest and people give thanks to God for so great a mystery then
offered and received. Thus the said holy father handles this text ep. 59 to
Paulinus.

S. Epiphanius also insinuates these words of the Apostle to pertain to the
Liturgy or Mass, when he thus vvriteth to John Bishop of Jerusalem. When
we accomplish our prayers after the rite of the holy Mysteries, Prayer in the
Mass for kings and other.
we pray both for all others, and for thee also. ^p. 60 c. 2 ad Io. Hierosolym.
apud Hieronymum. And most of the other fathers expound the foresaid words, of
public prayers made by the Priest, which are said in all Liturgies or Masses
both Greek and Latin, for the good estate of all that be in high degnitie, as
kings and others. See S. Chrysostom. ho. 6. in 1 Timothy and S. Ambr. in hunc lo^
Prosper de vocat. li. 1. c. 4. So exactly does the practice of the Church agree
with the Precepts of the Apostle and the Scriptures, and so profou^dly do the
holy fathers seek out the proper sense of the Scriptures, which our
Protestants do so profanely, popularely, and lightly skimme over, that they
can neither see nor endure the truth.

4* Who vvil al men] The perishing or damnation of men must not be imputed to
God, who delights not in any man's perdition, but has provided a general
medicine and redemption to save al from perishing that vvil accept it, God vvil
no man's perdition but the salvation of al.
or that have it applied unto them by his Sacraments and other means by him
ordained, and so would have al saved by his conditional vvil and ordinance:
that is, if men vvil them selves, by accepting, doing, or having done unto them
al things requisite by Gods law. for God uses not his absolute vvil or power
toward al^^^ this case. But he that list see the manifold senses (al good
and true) that these words may bear, let him see S. Augustine, Ad articul.
sibi false impos. resp. ^. to. 7. E^ch. c. 103. Ep. 107. De cor. and great. c.
15. and S. (...) li. 2. de orthod. fide ^. 29.

5 One mediator.] The Protestants are to peuish and pitifully blind, that
charge the Catholic Church and Catholics, with making more Mediators then
one, which is Christ our Savior, in that they desire the Saints to pray for
them, or to be their patrones and intercessors before God. We tell them
therefore that they understand not what it is to be a Mediator, in this sense
that S. Paul takes the word, How there is but one Mediator, Christ: and
what it is to be such a Mediator.
and in which it is properly and only attributed to Christ. For, to be thus a
Mediator, is, Aug. li. 9. de Ciu. cap. 15. De fid. ad Pet. c. 2.
by nature to be truly both God and man, to be that one eternal Priest and
Redeemer, which by his sacrifice and death upon the Cross has reconciled us
to God, and paid his blood as a full and sufficient raunsom for all our sins,
him self without need of any redemption, never subject to possibility of
sinning: again, to be the singular Aduocar and Patron of mankind, that by him
self alone and by his own merits procures al grace and mercy to mankind in
the sight of his ^ather, none making any intercession for him, nor giving any
grace or force to his prayers, but he to al: none asking or obtaining either
grace in this life, or glory in the next, but by him. In this sort then (as S.
Augustine truly says, Cont. ep. Parm. li. 2. c. 8.) neither Peter nor Paul,
no nor our B. Lady, nor any creature whatsoever, can be our Mediator. The
adversaries think to basely of Christ's mediation, if they imagine this to be
his only prerogative, to pray for us, or that we make the saints our
Mediators in that sort as Christis, when we desire them to pray for us.
which is so far inferior to the singular mediation of him, that no Catholic
ever can or dare think or speak so basely unto him, as to desire him to pray
for us: but we say, The different manner of praying to Christ, and to Saints.
Lord have mercy upon us, Kyrie eleison.
Christ have mercy upon us: and not, Christ pray for us, as we say to our
Lady and the rest. Therefore to invoke Saints in that sort as the Catholic
Church does, can not make them our Mediators as Christ is, Christ eleison.
whom we must not invoke in that sort. And as well make we the faithful
yet living, our Mediators (by the Adversaries arguments) when we desire their
prayers, as the departed Saints.

But now touching the word Mediator, How there be many mediators, as there
be many saviors, and redeemers, eue^ in the Scriptures.
though in that singular sense proper to our Savior, it agrees to no mere
creature in heaven or earth, yet taken in more large and common sort by the use
of Scriptures, doctors, and vulgar speech, not only the Saints, but good men
living* that pray for us and help us in the way of salvation, may and are
rightly called Mediators. As S. Cyril li. 22 Thesaur. c. 10 proves, that
Moses according to the Scriptures and Jeremy and the Apostles and others be
Mediators. Read his own words, for they plainly refute all the Adversaries
cauillations in this case. Iud. 3, 9.
And if the name of * fauiour and redeemer be in the Scriptures given to men, 2
Esd. 9, 27. Act. 7, 35.
without derogation to him that is in a more excellent and incomparable manner
the only Savior of the world: what can they say, why there may not be many
Mediators, in an inferior degree to the only and singular Mediator? S. Bernard
says, Opus est mediatore ad Mediatorem Christum, nec alter nobis vtilior quam
Maria. that is, We have need of a mediator to Christ the Mediator, and there
is none more for our profit then our Lady. Bernard. Ser. qui incipit, Signum
magnum apparuit etc. post Ser. 5 de Assumpt. S. Basil also in the same sense,
vvriting to Julian the Apostata, desires the mediation of our Lady, of the
Apostles, Prophets, and Martyrs, for procuring of Gods mercy and remission of
his sins. His words are cited in Conc. Nic. 2. act. 4. page 110 and 111.
Thus did and thus believed all the holy fathers, most agreably to the
Scriptures, and thus must all the children of the Church do, be the Adversaries
never so importunate and vvilfully blind in these matters.

12. I permit not.] Women great talkers of Scripture, and promoters of heresy.
In times of licentiousnes, liberty, and heresy, women are much given to
reading, disputing, chatting, and langling of the holy Scriptures, yea and to
teach also if they might be permitted. but S. Paul utterly forbideeth it, and
the S. Chrysostom. Ho. 9. in 1. Tim.
Greek Doctors upon this place note that the woman taught but once, that was
when after her reasoning with Satan, she persuaded her husband to
transgression, and so she undid al mankind. And in the Ecclesiastical vvriters
we find that women have been great promoters of every sort of heresy
(whereof see a notable discourse in S. Hierom ep. ad Ct^siph. cont. Pelag. c.
2.) which they would not have done, if they had according to the Apostles
rule, followed piety and good works, and lived in silence and subjection to
their husbands.

CHAP. III.
Of what quality they must be, whom he ordains Bishops, ^ and Deacons, 14
and the cause of his vvriting to be, the excellency of the Catholic Church,
and of Christ, who is the object of our religion.

Tit. 1, 6.
He says, having children, not, getting children. S. Ambr. Ep. 82.
having his children subject with al chastity. Neophytus is he that was
lately christened or nevvely planted in the mystical body of Christ.
(...)
a neophyte: lest puffed into pride, he fall into the judgment of the Devil.

(...)
chaste, not double tonged, not given to much wine, not folovvers of filthy
lucre:



ANNOTATIONS CHAP. III.
1. A good work.] The great charge, and great merit, of Ecclesiastical
functions.
Nothing (says S. Augustine) in this life, and specially in this time, is
easier, pleasanter, or more acceptable to man, then the office of a Bishop,
Priest, or Deacon, if the thing be done only for fashion sake and ^^^^^ringly
but nothing before God more miserable, more lamentable, more damnable. Again,
There is nothing in this life, and specially at this time, harder, more
laborious, or more dangerous, then the office of a Bishop, Priest, or Deacon*
but before God nothing more blessed, if they war in such sort as our
Captain commands. August. ep. 148.

2. A Bishop.] The Apostle under the name of Bishop instructs Priests also.
That which is here spoken of a Bishop (because the words Bishop and Priest
in the new Testament be often taken indifferently for both or either of the
tvvaine, as is noted in an other place) the same is meant of every Priest also:
though the qualities here required, ought to be more singular in the Bishop*
then in the Priest, according to the difference of their degrees, dignities,
and callings.

^. Of one wife.] Certain Bishops of Vigilantius sect (whether upon false
construction of this text, or through the filthiness of their fleshly lust)
would take none to the Clergy, except they would be married first, The
heretics opinion concerning Priests marriage.
not believing (says S. Hierom aduers. Vigilant. c. 1.) that any single man
lives chastely, shevving how holily they live them selves, that suspect il of
every man, and vvil not give the Sacrament (of Order) to the Clergy, vnl^s
they see their vviues have great bellies, and children vvalling at their
mothers breasts. Our Protestants though they be of Vigilantius sect, yet they
are scarce come so far, to command every Priest to be married. Nevertheless
they mislike them that will not marry, so much the worse, and they suspect
il of every single person in the Church, thinking the gift of chastitle to be
very rare among them, and they do not only make the state of marriage equal to
chaste single life, with the Heretic Iouinian, but they are bold to say
sometimes, that the Bishop or Priest may do his duty and charge better married,
1 Cor. 7.
then single: expressly against S. Paul, who affirms that the unmarried think
of the things that belong to God, and that the married be diuersely distracted
and entangled with the world.

The Apostle then, by this place we now treat of, neither commands, nor
counseleth, S. Paul's place, of one wife, excludes bigamos from holy Orders.
nor wishes, nor would have Bishops or Priests to marry, or such only to
be received as have been married: but, that such an one as has been married (so
it were but once, and that to a virgin) may be made Bishop or Priest. Which is
no more then an inhibition that none having been twice married or being
bigamus, should be admitted to that holy Order. And this exposition only is
agreeable to the practice of the whole Church, the definition of ancient
Councels, the doctrine of all the fathers without exception, and the Apostles
tradition. Which sense S. Chrysostom wholy follows upon the Epistle to
Titus (though here he follow not wholy the same sense.) Ho. 2 in ep. ad Tit.
S. Ambrose also upon this place, and most plainly and largely in his 82
Epistle post med. giving the cause why bigamus can not be made Bishop or
Priest, in fine affirms, not only the Apostle but the holy Council of Nice
to have taken order that none should be received into the Clergy, that were
twice married. S. Hierom Ep. 83. ad Oceanum c. 2. and ep. ^. c. 18. ep. 11. ^.
2 expressly vvriteth that the Clergy is made of such as have had but one
wife, at least after Baptism: for he thought that if one were often married
when he was yet no Christian, he might notvvithstanding be ordered Bishop or
Priest. But S. Ambrose ep. 82. S. Augustine de bono Coniug. c. 18. S.
Innocentius the first ep. 2. c. 5. ^. to. 1. Council. S. Leo, ep. 87^ li. 2* ep.
25.
S. Gregory, and after them the whole Church, exclude those also which have
been twice married when so ever. whereof S. Augustine gives goodly reason
and example in the place alleged. S. Leo ep. 87 adds further, and proves
that the man is counted bigamus, Who are counted bigami.
and not the husband of one wife, in respect of holy Orders, not only if he
has had two vviues, but if his one wife were not a virgin. which being
observed in the high Priests of the old law, Leuit. 21.
must needs be much rather kept now. See also the book de Ecclesiasticis
dogmatibus c. 72, in S. Augustines works.

And by these fevv you may see how shamefully the state of the new heretical
Clergy of our time is fallen from the Apostolic and all the fathers practice
and doctrine herein. The Heretical clergy nothing regards the Apostles
prescription of one wife.
Who do not only take men once or twice married before, but (which was never
heard of before in any person or part of the Catholic Church) they marie after
they be Bishops or Priests, once, twice, and as often as their lusts require.
Whereas it was never lawful in Gods Church to marry after Holy Orders.
Neither is there one authentical example thereof in the world. None ever married
after holy Orders.
For those of whom Nice Council speaks, were married before, and were but
tolerated only to use their wives: the fathers in the same Council providing
expressly at the same time, Socrat. li. 1 c. 8.
that none from thence forth should marry after they came to holy Orders, and
that according to the ancient tradition of the Church, as Socrates and
Sozomenus declare in most plain words. They that were made Priests of
married men, absteined from their vviues.
See Suidas in the word Paphnutius. Sozom. li. 1 c. ^2.
And in what country so ever they have been permitted to have carnal dealing
even with their vviues whom they had before, it was not according to the exact
rule of the Apostles and Churches tradition, by which all that be in holy
Orders, should wholly abstain, not only from marying, but even from their
wives before married. Whereof thus vvriteth S. Epiphanius hares. 59 c^nt.
Cathares. S. Epiphanius.
The holy preaching of God receives not, after Christ, them that marry again
after their vviues departure, by reason of the great dignity and honor of
Priesthod. And this the holy Church of God observes with al sincerity. Yea
she does not receive the once married person that yet uses his wife and
begets children: but only such an one she takes to be Deacon, Marriage of
Priests is contrary to the ancient canons.
Priest, Bishop, or Subdeaco^, as abstaineth from his one wife, or is a
vvidovver, specially where the holy cano^^ be sincerely kept. But thou vvilt
say unto me, that in certain places Priests, Deacons, and Subdeacons do yet
beget children (belike this holy father never heard of any Bishop that did so,
and therefore he leaves out that order, which he named with the other in the
former part of the sentence) but that is not done according to order and rule,
but according to man's mind, which by time slacketh, and for the great
multitude (of Christian people) when there were not found sufficient for the
ministry, etc. the test of his words be goodly for that purpose. Eusebius.


Eusebius also Euang. demonst. li. 1. c. 9* says, that such as be consecrated
to the holy ministry, S. Hierom.
should abstain wholy from their vviues which they had before. S. Hierom
Apolog. ad Pammach. c. 8* proves, that such of the Apostles as were married,
did so, and that the Clergy ought to do the same by their example. Yea in his
time he testifies (Cont. Vigil. c. 1.) that they did live single in manner
through the world, eue^ in the East Church also. What, says he, shall the
Churches of the East do, what they of Egypt, of the Sea Apostolic: which
take to the Clergy, either virgins, or the continent and unmarried, or such as
if they have vviues, cease to be husbands? And again he says in Apolog. ad
Pa^mach c. 3. (See also c. 8.) If married men like not well of this, let them
not be angry with me, but with the holy Scriptures, with al Bishops,
Priests, Deacons, and the whole company of Priests and Levites, S. Augustine.
that know they can not offer sacrifices if they use the act of marriage. S.
Augustine de adult. Coniug. li. 2. c. 20. makes it so plain a matter that al
Priests should live chaste, that he writes, that even such as were forced (as
many were in the primitive Church) to be of the Clergy, See S. Leo ep. 92. c.
^.
were bound to live chaste, yea and did it with great joy and felicity, never
complaining of these necessities and intolerable burdens, or impossibilities of
living chaste, as our fleshly company of new Ministers and Superintendents do
now, that think it no life vvhithout women. much like to S. Augustine before
his conversion, when he was yet a Manichee, who (as him self reports
Confess. li. 6. c. 3) admiring in S. Ambrose al other his incomparable
excellencies, S. Ambrose.
yet counted al his felicities less, because he lacked a woman, without
which he thought (in time of his infidelity) no man could live. But after his
conversion thus he said to God of S. Ambrose: What hope he had, and against the
tentations of his excellency what a ^ight he fel^, or rather what a comfort
and solace in tribulation, and his secret mouth which was within in his
heart, what sauourie and svveete joys it tasted of thy bread, neither could I
conjecture, neither h^d I tried.

See Tertullian li. 1 ad vxorem. Tertullian.
S. Cyprian de singul^ (...)* the first Council of N^ce can. 3. Conc. Tolet. 2
can. 3. Conc. Aurelian. 3 can. 2. of Carthage the second cap. 2. of Neocaesarea
cap. 1, of Ancyra cap. 10. and you shall find that this was generally the
Churches order even from the Apostles time, S. Cyprian.
though in some places by the licentiousnes of many, Councels.
it was sometime not so religiously looked unto. Whereby you may easily
refute the impudent clamors of Heretics against Siricius, Gregory 7, and
others, whom they falsely make the authors of the Cleargies single life.

^. Not a Neophyte.] None rashly to be admitted to the Clergy*
That which is spoken here properly and principally of the newly baptized
(for so the word Neophyte does signify) the fathers extend also to al such as
be but newly ^etired from profane occupations, civil government, warfare,
or secular studies, of whom good trial must be taken before they ought to be
preferred to the high dignity of Bishop or Priest. though for some special
prerogative and excellency, it has in certain persons been otherwise, as in
S. Ambrose and some other notable men. Tertullian (li. de praescript.) notes
Heretics for their lightness in admitting every one without discretion to the
Clergy. Heretics admit al sorts without exception.
Their Orders (says he) are rash, light, inco^stant: now they place
Neophytes, then secular men, then our Apostataes, that they may tie them by
glory and preferment, Wh^m with the truth they can not. No where may a man
sooner prosper and come forvvard, then in the cam^e of rebels, where to be
only, is to deserve much* therefore or^ to day a Bishop, to morovv somevvhat
else: to day a Deacon, to morovv Lector, that is, a Reader: to day ^ Priest, to
morovv a lay man* for to lay men also they enjoin the functions of Priests.
And S. Hierom ep. 83 ad Oceanum c. 4. says of such, Yesterday a Ca^echumene or
newly converted, to day a Bishop: yesterday in the theater, to day in the
Church: at night in the place of games and maisteries, in the morning at the
altar: a while ago a great patron of stageplaiers, now a consecrator of holy
virgins. And in an other place, Out of the bosom of Plato and Aristophan^s
they are chosen to a Bishoprike, whose care is, not how to suck out the
marovv of the Scriptures, but how to soothe the peoples cares with flourishing
declamations. Dialog. cont. Lucifer. c. 5.

8. Deacons.] Under the name of Deacons are here contained Subdeacons, as
before under the name of Bishop, The three holy orders, only bound to chastity.
Priest also were comprehended* Leo ep. 92. c. 3.
for to these four pertains the Apostles precept and order touching one
wise, and touching contine^cie and chastity, as by the alleged Councels and
fathers (namely by the words of S. Epiphanius) does appear. Greg. li. 1, ep.
42.
for they only be in holy Orders, as serving by their proper function about
the Altar and the B. Sacrament: in respect whereof, The 4 inferior orders not
bound to chastity.
the law of chastity pertains to them, and not to the four inferior Orders
of Acolyti, Exorcista, Lectores, and O^tiarij. Who neither by precept nor vovv
be bound to perpetual chastity, as the others of the holy and high Orders be
bound, both by precept and promis or solemn assent made when they took
Subdeaconship.

Al these degrees and orders to have been ever since Christ's time in the
Church of God, All the seven orders ancient, eue^ from Christ and the Apostles
time.
it might be proved by all antiquity. but for as much as the Apostles purpose
is not here to reckon up all the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, it need not be
treated of in this place. But we vvish the learned to read the 3. 4. 5. 6. 7.
8. 9* chapters of the 4 Council of Carthage, vvhereat S. Augustine was
present: where they shall see the express callings, offices, and manner of
ordering or creating all the said sorts, and shall well perceive these things to
be most ancient and venerable. Let them read also Eusebius history, the 35
Chapter of the 6 book, where for all these orders he recites Cornelius
epistle to Fabius, concerning Nouatus. Likewise S. Cyprian in many places,
namely ep. 55. nu. 1. where see the notes upon the same. S. Hiero. ep. 2. c. 6.
Of Subdeacon there is mention in S. Augustine. ep. 74 and ep. 20 de epistolis
22 in edit. Paris. S. Epiph. har^ 59. S. Cyprian ep. 24. S. Ignatius ep. 9* ad
Antioch^nos, and in the 43 canon of the Apostles. Conc. Tolet. 2. can. 1 and 3.
Conc. Laodicen. can. 21. Epist. Epiph. apud Hiero. 60. c. 1.

1^. In the house of God.] S. Ambrose calls the B. of Rome Rector of the
whole Church.
All the world being Gods, yet the Church only is his house, the Rector or
Ruler whereof at this day. (says S. Ambrose upon this place) is damasus.
where let our loving brethren note well, how clear a case it was then, that
the Pope of Rome was not the Governor only of one particular See, but of
Christ's whole house, which is the Universal Church, whose Rector this day
is Gregory the thirtenth.

15. The pillar of truth.] This place pincheth al Heretics wonderfully, and
so it ever did, The heretics say directly contrary to the Apostle, that the
Church is not the pillar of truth.
and therefore they oppose them selves directly against the very letter and
confessed sense of the same, that is, clean contrary to the Apostle. some
saying, the Church to be lost or hidden: some, to be fallen away from Christ
these many ages: some, to be driven to a corner only of the world: some, that
it is become a stews and the seat of Antichrist: lastly the Protestants most
plainly and directly, that it may and does err, and has shamefully erred for
many hundred years together. And they say herein like them selves, and for the
credit of their own doctrine, which can not be true in very deed, except
the Church err, even the Church of Christ, which is here called the house of
the living God.

But the Church which is the house of God, That the Church is the pillar of
truth and can not err, is proved by many reasons.
whose Rector (says S. Ambrose) in his time was Damasus, and now Gregory the
thirtenth, and in the Apostles time S. Peter, is the pillar of truth, Io. 14,
16.
the establishement of al verity: therefore it can not err. It has the Spirit
of God to lead it into al truth till the worlds end: Mat. 16.
therefore it can not err. It is builded upon a rock, Mat. 28.
hell gates shall not prevail against it: therefore it can not err. Christ is in
it til the end of the world, Ephesians. 4.
he has placed in it Apostles, Doctors, Pastors, and Rulers, Io. 17.
to the consummation and full perfection of the whole body, that in the mean
time we be not carried about with every blast of doctrine: therefore it can not
err. Luc. 22.
He has prayed for it, Psalm. 2.
that it be sanctified in verity, that the faith of the chief Governor
thereof fail not: Ephesians. 5.
it is his house, his spouse, his body, his lotte, kingdom and inheritance,
given him in this world: he loves it as his own flesh, and it can not be
divorced or separated from him: therefore it can not err. the new Testament,
Scriptures, Sacraments, and sacrifice can not be changed, being the everlasting
dourie of the Church, continued and never rightly occupied in any other Church
but in this our Catholic Church: therefore it can not err. And therefore al
those points of doctrine, faith, and worship, which the Arians, Manichees,
Protestants, Anabaptists, other old or new Heretics, untruly think to be
errors in the Church, be no errors in deed, but them selves most shamfully are
deceived, and so shall be still, til they enter again into this house of God,
which is the pillar and ground of al truth: that is to say, not only it self
free from al error in faith and religion, but the pillar and stay to lean unto
in all doubts of doctrine, and to stand upon against al heresies and errors
that il times yield, without which there can be no certainty nor security.
And therefore the holy Apostles, The meaning of this article, I believe the
Cath. Church.
and Councels of Nice and Constantinople, made it an article of our Creeds, to
believe the CATHOLIC and APOSTOLIC CHVRCH. Which is, not only to
acknowledge that there is such a Church, as heretics falsely say: but that
that which is called the Catholic Church, and known so to be, and
co^municateth with the Sea Apostolic, is the Church: and that we must
believe, hear, and obey the same, as the touch stone, pillar, and firmament of
truth. For, all this is comprised in that principle, (...)
I believe the Catholic Church. And therefore the Counsel of Nice said, I
believe in the Church, that is, I believe and trust the same in all things.

Neither can the Heretics escape by fleing from the known visible Church, to
the hid congregation or company of the Predestinate. For that is but a false
fantastical apprehension of Vvicleffe and his folowers. It is the visible
Church that is the pillar or truth and can not err.
The company of the Predestinate makes not any one Society among them
selves, many of them being yet unborn, and many yet Infidels and heretics,
and therefore be not of the one house of God which is here called, the pillar
of truth. And those of the Predestinate that be already of the Church, make not
a several company from the known Catholic Church, but are baptized,
houseled, taught, they live and die in the common Catholic visible Church, or
else they can neither receive Sacraments, nor salvation. S. Paul instructs not
Timothee how to teach, preach, correct, and converse in the invisible society
of the Predestinate, but in the visible house of God. So that it must needs be
the visible Church which can not err.

If any make further question, Whence the Church has this privilege never to
err.
how it can be that any company or society of men (as the Church is) can be
void of error in faith, seeing al men may err: he must know that it is not by
nature, but by privilege of Christ's presence, of the Holy Ghosts assistance,
of our Lords promis and prayer. See S. Augustine upon these words of the 118
Psalm Cone. 13. S. Augustine.
Ne auferas de ore meo verbum veritatis vsqucquaque. Where he has goodly
speeches of this matter. For the same purpose also these words of Lactantius
are very notable. It is the Catholic Church only, Lactantius.
that keeps the true worship of God, this is the fountain of truth, this
the house of faith, this the Temple of God: vvhither if any man enter not, or
from which if any man go out, he is an aliene and stranger from the hope of
everlasting life and salvation. No man must by obstinate contention flatter him
self, S. Cyprian.
for it stands upon life and salvation. etc. S. Cyprian says, The Church
never departs from that which she once has known. Ep. 55 ad Cornel. nu.
3. S. Ireneus says, That the Apostles have laid up in the Church as in a rich
treasury, al truth. S. Irenaeus.
And, that she keeps wish most sincere diligence, the Apostles faith and
preaching. li. 3 c. 4. and 40. and li. 1. c. 3. It were an infinite thing to
recite all that the fathers say of this matter, al counting it a most pernicious
absurdity to affirm, that the Church of Christ may err in religion.

CHAP. IIII.
He prophecieth that certain should depart from the Catholic faith, vvilling
Timothee therefore to inculcate to the people those articles of the said faith.
7 Item to exercise him self in spiritual exercise, 12 to get authority by
example of good life, 13 to study, to teach, to increase in the grace given
him by holy orders.

2 Timothy 3*
and doctrines of devils, 3 Pet. 3.
Jude v. 18.
and having their conscience seared, We see plainly by these words such
abstinence only to be disalovved as condemns the creatures of God to be
naught by nature and creation.
every creature of God is good, and nothing to be rejected that is received ^
with thanksgiving.

exercise thy self to piety. 1. Tim. 1, 4. Tit. 3, 9.
Some (says S. Chrysostom.) expound this of fasting, but they are deceiued-for
fasting is a spiritual exercise. See a goodly commentary of these words in
S. August. li. de mor. Eccl. Cath. c. 33.
corporal exercise is profitable to little: but piety is profitable to al
things: having promise of the life that now is, and of that to come.



ANNOTATIONS CHAP. IIII.
1. Shall depart.] Al Heretics are apostataes from the faith.
It is the proper description of Heretics, (...)
to forsake their former faith, and to be Apostataes, as the Greek word
imports: to give care to particular spirits of error and deception, rather
then to the Spirit of Christ in his Church, to follow in hypocrisy and show
of virtue the pernicious doctrine of Devils, who are the suggesters and
prompters of al Sects, and are lying spirits in the mouths of al Heretics
and false preachers: men that have put their conscience to silence and made it
senses to the holy (hurches admonition: cap. 1. 19.
the Apostle noting * once before also in this same Epistle, that Heretics
have no conscience, which is the cause both of their fall and of their
obduration in heresy.

^. Forbidding to marry.] The old Heresies against matrimony.
He speaks (says S. Chrysostom) of the Manichees, Encratites, and
Marcionistes. h^. 12 in 1 Timothy S. Ambrose upon this place, adds to these the
Patritians also. S. Irenaeus li. 1 c. 30. S. Epiphanius har. 45. 26. 61. 30. S.
Hierom 1 cont. louin. c. 1. and ep. 50 c. 1 and 3. S. Augustine har. 25. 40.
and generally al antiquity affirm the same both of them, and also of the
Heretics called Apostolici, Ebionitae, and the like. Their heresy about
marriage was, that to marry or to use the act of matrimony, is of Satan, as
S. Irenaeus witnesses li. 1 c. 22: and that the distinction of male and femal
and the creation of man and woman for generation, came of an il God. They
taught their hearers, Aug. har. 46.
says S. Augustine, that if they did use women, they should in any wise
provide that they might not conceive or bear children, Clemens Alexandrinus
(li. 3. Strom, in principie) vvriteth, that such admit no marriage nor
procreation of children, lest they should bring into the world creatures to
suffer misery and mortality. And this is the damnable opinion concerning
marriage, noted here by the Apostle.

For the second point consisting in the prohibition of meats or use of
certain creatures made to be eaten, The old Heresies about abstin^^e from
meats.
the said Heretics or diverse of them (for they were not al of one sect
touching these points) taught, that men might not eat certain sorts of
meats, specially of beasts and living creatures, for that they were not made
(say they) of the good God, but of the evil. And wine they called the gall of
the Prince of darkness, and not to be drunk at al, and the Vine whereof it
came, to be of the Devils creation. And diverse other creatures they condemned
as things by nature and creation polluted and abominable. August. har. Manich.
46. and har. 25 Tatian. and toto libro de m^r. Manich. to. 1. Lo these were
the Heretics and their heresies which S. Paul here prophecieth of, The
Catholics impudently charged with the said old heresies.
that forbid marriage and meats as you have heard, for which they and their
folovvers were condemned in diverse Councels.

Is it not now an intolerable impudency of the Protestants, who for a small
similitude of words in the ears of the simple, apply this text to the fastes
of the Church, and the chastity of Priests and Religious? Abstinence from
certain meats is no condemnation of the meats.
As though either by appointing or using some days of abstinence from certain
meats, the Church or any Catholic man condemned the said meats, unless the
Rechabites Hierom. 35. or the Nazarites Number. 6. or the Ninevites Ion. 3. or
Moses Exodus 34. or Elias 3 Reg. 19. or holy. Anna the vvidow Luc. 2 or John
Baptist Mat. 3 and 9. or Christ him. self M^. 4. commending, using, and
following a prescript number of fasting days, or God him self that in the very
beginning, in Paradise, prescribed abstinence from the fruit of one certain
tree, and after appointed so many fastes in the Law, unless he therefore,
condemned his own creatures, and the rest, those creatures from which they
abstained. Diverse good causes of abstinence.
No, there be many good and lavvful causes to forbid some or to abstain from
some meats: as, for obedience, as in Paradise: for signification, as the
Jews: for that they have been offered to Idols, as in the Epistle to the
Corinthians: for chastening the body and penance, for health also: and only
those causes are unlawful for which the Manichees and other Heretics
abstained.

Concerning marriage likewise, Forbidding certain persons to marry is no
condemnation of matrimony.
they may as well charge God or the Church for forbidding the father to marry
the daughter, or the brother the sister, or other prohibited persons in the
Law: as well might they charge Christ and the Apostle for prohibiting the man
to marry, during his vviues life: and appointing widows that serve the
Church, to live unmarried, and not admitting a married woman as well as widow,
nor her that has had more husbands, as well as her that has bee^ married but
once: as they charge the Church for not admitting married persons to the altar,
Catholics esteem matrimony more then the Protestants do.
and for forcing them and Religious persons to keep their promis of chastity.
No, the holy Church is so far from condemning wedlock, that she honors it
much more then the Protestants, accounting it an holy Sacrament, which they do
not, who only use it to just as the Heathen do, and not to religion.

But it is an old deceitful practice of Heretics to charge Catholic men with
old condemned heresies. The Eutychians slaundered the Council of Chalcedon and
S. Leo to be Nestorians, and to make two persons in Christ, because they said
there were two natures. Vigilius li. 5. cont. Eu^ychen. Arius charged
Alexander his Bishop of Sabellianisme, for auouching the unity of substance in
Trinity. Socrat. li. 1. c. 3. Iulianus accused S. Augustine of the heresy of
Apollinaris. li. 5. con^. Julian. c. 15. Other Pelagians challenged him for
condemning marriage. The Protestants obiecto^s answered long ago by S. Hierom
and S. Augustine.
Retrait. li. 2. c. 53. And that our Protestants brag not to much of their
goodly invention, louinian the old Heretic, their Master in this point,
accused Aug. li. 2 c. 5 de nupt. and c^ncupise.
the holy doctors and Catholics upon this same place, to be Manichees, and to
condemn meats and marriage, as both S. Hierom and S. Augustine do testify.
And they both answer to the Heretic, that the Church in deed and Catholics
do abstain from some for ever, and some for certain days, and every
Christian man lightly all the 40 days of Lent fast: not for that they think
the meats unclean, abominable, or of an il creation, as the Manichees do: but
for punishment of their bodies and taming their concupiscences. Hiero. li. 2.
cont. Iouin. c. 11. Aug. cont. Adimantum c. 14. Li. de mor. Cath. Eo. Hiero. in
c. 4. ad Galat. And as for marriage, the said doctors answer, that no Catholic
man condemns it for unlawful, as the old Heretics did, but only prefers
virginity and continency before it, as a state in it self more agreeable to
God and more meet for the Clergy. See S. Augustine against Faustus the
Manichee li. 30 c. 5. 6. and har. 25 in the name, Apostolici. S. Hierom ep. 50.
c. 1. and 3. All this the Catholics continually tell the Adversaries, and they
can not but see it. Yet by accustomed audacitie and impudency they bear it
out still.

4. With thanks giving.] By the most ancient custom of the faithful both
before Christ and sithence, Blessing of the table or of meats, specially by a
Priest.
men use to bless their table and meats, by the hand and word of a Priest, if
any be present, otherwise by such as can conveniently do it. And in
husbandmens houses where they have no other means, they should at least
bless Gods gifts and them selves with a Pater noster or the sign of the
Cross: not only to acknowledge from whom they have their concinual
sustenauce, but also to bless their meat and sanctify it. For the Greek
word used of S. Paul, (...).
by Ecclesiastical use, when it concerns meats, signifies not only
thanks giving, but blessing or sanctifying the creatures to be received, as
being al one with (...), and in English we call it grace, not only that
after meat, which is only thanks to God, but that before meat, which is
alvvaies a benediction of the creatures, as it is plain in the prescript and
usual forms of grace. For which cause a Priest should ever do it rather then
a lay man or any of inferior order in the Clergy. In so much that S. Hierom
(ep. 85) reprehendeth certain Deacons whom he savv say grace or bless the
meat and the company, To bless is a preeminence of the better person.
in the presence of a Priest. Who also records (in the life of S. Paul the
holy Eremite) the great courtesy and humility of him and S. Antonie, yelding
one to the other the preeminence of blessing their poor dinner. For to bless
is a great thing, Hebr. 7.
and a Priestly prerogative, as the Apostle witnesses, declaring the
preeminence of Melchise dec in that he blessed Abraham. Read the note following.

5. Sanctified.] No creature il by nature, yea one more sanctified then an
other.
Al creatures be of Gods creation, none of the Devil, or of any other cause and
beginning, as the Manichees blasphemed: and therefore none are il, abominable,
or unclean by creation, nature, and condition, but al good and made for man's
use, though al be not alike holy nor equally sanctified. God made seven days,
but he sanctified only one of them, he made al places, but he sanctified none
but the Temple and such like deputed to his service, as the Arc, the altar,
and the rest which were by sacred use both holy them selves, and gave also
holiness and sanctification to things that touched them or were applied unto
them. Holy times and places, and every thing deputed to the service of God,
holy.
So our Savior says, Mat. 23.
that the Temple sanctified the gold, and the altar the gift, and generally al
creatures secured from common and profane use, to religion and worship of God,
are made sacred thereby. So the places and days of Gods apparition or vvorking
some special wonders or benefits tovvard the people, were holy, as Bethel, 2
Pet. 1.
Sinai, and others. And much more those times and places of Christ's Nativity,
Passion, burial, Resurrection, Ascension: which is so plain a case, that the
h^l where he was transfigured only, is called therefore by S. Peter, the holy
mount.

These therefore be holy memories and monuments of al sorts sanctified, besides
that creatures (as we see here) be sanctified also by the word of God and
prayer, that is to say, by benediction and invocation of our Lords holy name
upon them, Creatures hallowed by the sign of the Cross.
specially by the sign of the Cross, as S. Chrysostom notes on this place,
ho. 12 in 2 ad Tim. by the which the adversary power of Satan usurping
unjustly upon Gods creatures through man's sin, and seeking deceitfully in or
by the same to annoy man's body or soul, is expelled, and the meats purged
from him and made holesom. S. Gregory (li. 1 Dialog. c. 4.) records that the
Devil entered into a certain religious woman by eating the herb letti^e
unblessed. The blessing of our meat what a virtue it has.
And S. Augustine li. 18. de ciu. Dei ^. 18. shows at large, what ways he
has by meats and drinks and other usual creatures of God, to annoy men:
though is power be much less then it was before Christ but still much desire
he has on al sides to molest the faithful by abusing the things most near and
necessary unto them, to their hurt both bodily and Ghostly* for remedy
whereof, this sanctification which the Apostle speaks of, (...)*
is very sovereign, pertaining not only to this common and more vulgar
benediction of our meats and drinks, but much more (as the propriety of the
Greek word used by the Apostle for sanctification, does import) to other more
exact sanctifying and higher applying of some creatures, and blessing them to
Christ's honor in the Church of God, and to man's spiritual and corporal
benefits.

For as S. Augustine vvriteth li. 2 de pe^. merit. c. 26. besides this usual
blessing of our daily food, the Cathecumens (that is, such as were taught
tovvard Baptism) are sanctified by the sign of the Cross, Holy bread.
and the bread (says he) which they receive, thought it be not the body of
Christ, yet is holy, and more holy then the usual bread of the table. He
means a kind of bread then halovved, specially for such as were not yet
admitted to the B. Sacrament: either the same, or the like to our holy bread,
used in the Church of England and France on Sundaies. And it was a common use
in the primitive Church to bless loaves, and send them for sacred tokens from
one Christian man to an other* August. ep. 31. 34* 35. 36.
and that not among the simple and superstitious (as the Adversaries may
imagine) but among the holiest, learned, and vvisest. Such halovved breads
did S. Paulinus send to S. Augustine and Alipius, and they to him again,
calling them blessings. Read S. Hierom in the life of Hila^ion (post medium:)
how Princes and learned Bishops and other of al sorts came to that holy man
for holy bread, panem benedictum. In the primitive Church the people commonly
brought bread to the Priests to be halovved. Author op. imp. ho. 14 in Mt. The
3 Counsel of Carthage cap. 24. makes mention of the blessing of milk, honey,
grapes, and corn. See the 4 Canon of the Apostles. And not only diverse other
creatures used at certain times in holy Churches service, as wax, fire,
palms, ashes, but also the holy oil, Chrisme, and the water of Baptism,
that also which is the chief of al Priestly blessing of creatures, The sign
of the cross used in blessing.
the bread and wine in the high Sacrifice, be sanctified, for without
sanctification, yea (as S. Augustine affirms tract. 118. in Joan.) without
the sign of the Cross, none of these things can rightly be done.

Can any man now marvel that the Church of God by this vvarra^t of S. Paul's
word expounded by so long practice and tradition of the first fathers of our
religion, does use diverse elements and bless them for man's use and the service
of God, The Churches exorcismes.
expelling by the invocation of Christ's name, the adversary power from them,
Luc. ^.
according to the authority given by Christ, Super omnia d^monia, over al
Devils: and by prayer, which imports as the Apostle here speaks, desire of
help, as it were by the virtue of Christ to combat with the Devil, and so to
expel him out of Gods creatures, which is done by holy exorcisme, and ever
begins, Adiutorium nostrum in nomine Domini, as we see in the blessing of
holy water and the like sanctification of elements. Holy water.
Which exorcismes, namely of children before they come to Baptism, see in S.
Augustine li. 6 cont. Julian, c. 5. and de E^. dogmat. 6. 31. Denupt. and
concupis. li. 1 6. 20. and of holy water, that has been used these 1400 years
in the Church by the institution of Alexander the first, in all Christian
countries, and of the force thereof against Devils, see a famous history in
Eusebius li. 5* c. 21. and in Epiphanius her. 30 Ebionitarum. See S. Gregory
to S. Augustine our Apostle, of the use thereof in halovving the Idolatrous
temples to be made the Churches of Christ. apud Bedam li, 1 c. 30 hist. Angl.
Remember how the Prophet Eliseus applied salt to the healing and purifying of
waters, 4 Reg. 2: how the Angel Raphael used the liver of the fish to drive
away the Devil, The force of sanctified creatures.
Tob. 6. 8: how David's harp and Psalmodie kept the evil spirit from Saul, 1
Reg. 16: how a piece of the holy earth saved such a man's chamber from
infestatio^ of Devils, August. de Ciuit. dei li. 22* c. 8: The holy land.
how Christ him self, both in Sacraments, and out of them, occupied diverse
sanctified elements, some for the health of the body, some for grace and
remission of sins, Relikes.
and some to work miracles by. See in S. Hierom against Vigilantius c. 2.
how holy Relikes torment them. theodoret. li. 36. 3.
In the history of Iulianus the Apostata, The cross.
how the sign of the Cross: The name of JESUS.
in the Acts (cap. 19) how the name of JESUS yea and of Paul puts them to
flight.

Furnish your selves with such examples and grounds of Scriptures and
antiquity, and you shall contemn the Adversaries cauillations and blasphemies
against the Churches practice in such things, and further also find, these
sacred actions and creatures, not only by increase of faith, feruor, and
devotion, to purge the impuritie of our souls, and procure remission of our
daily infirmities, but that the chief Ministers of Christ's Church, by their
sovereign authority granted of our Lord, Remission of venial sins annexed
to halovved creatures.
may join unto the same, their blessing and remission of our venial sins or
spiritual dettes: Ia. c. 5.
as we see in S. James, remission of al sins to be annexed to the unction
with holy oil, which to the Catholics is a Sacrament, but to the
Protestants was but a temporal ceremony, and to some of them not of Christ's
institution, but of the Apostles only. In their own sense therefore they
should not marvel that such spiritual effects should proceed of the use of
sanctified creatures, whereas venial trespasses be remitted many ways,
though mortal ordinarily by the Sacraments only. S. Gregory.
S. Gregory did commonly send his benediction and remission of sins, in and
with such holy tokens as were sanctified by his blessing and touching of the
Apostles bodies and Martyrs Relikes, as now his successors do in the like
halovved remembrances of religion. See his 7 book, epistle 126: and 9 book,
epistle 60. Thus therefore and to the effects aforesaid the creatures of God be
sanctified.

If any man object that this use of creatures is like coniuration in
Necromancie, The difference between the Churches exorcismes and other
coniurations.
he must know the difference is, that in the Churches sanctifications and
exorcismes, the Devils be commanded, forced, and tormented by Christ's word
and by prayers: but in the other wicked practices, they be pleased, honored,
and couenanted vvithal: and therefore the first is godly and according to the
Scriptures, but Necromancie abominable and against the Scriptures.

14. The grace.] Grace given in the Sacrament of Orders.
S. Augustine declares this grace to be the gift of the holy Ghost given unto
him by receiving this holy Order, whereby he was made fit to execute the
office to his own salvation and other men's. And note vvithal, that grace is
not only given in or with the Sacraments, by the receivers faith or devotion,
but by the Sacrament, per impositionem, by imposition of hands. for so he
speaks 2 Timothy 1. which is here said, cum impositione, with imposition.

14. With imposition.] Consecration of Priests by imposition of hands.
S. Ambrose upon this place, implies in the word Imposition of ^ands, all the
holy action and sacred words done and spoken over him when he was made
Priest. Whereby (says he) he was designed to the work, and received
authority, that he durst offer sacrifice in our Lords steed unto God. So
does the holy Doctor allude unto the words that are said now also in the
Catholic Church to him that is made Priest: Accipe potestatem offerendi pro
viuis and mortuis in nomine Domini, that is, Take or receive thou authority to
offer for the living and the dead in the name of our Lord. In Esa. c. 58.
for the which S. Hierom also (as is noted before) says, that the ordering of
Priests is, by imposition of hands and imprecation of voice.

14. Of Priesthod.] Holy Orders a Sacrament.
The practice of the Church gives us the sense of this place, which the
ancient Council of Carthage does thus set down. Conc. Carth. 4 c. 3.
When a Priest takes orders, the Bishop blessing him and holding his hand upon
his head, let all the Priests present lay also their hands on his head by the
Bishops hands etc. Who sees not now, that holy Orders giving grace by an
external ceremony and work, is a Sacrament? So all the old Church counts
it. And S. Augustine (cont. ep. Parmen. li. 2 c. 13.) plainly says that no
man doubts but it is a Sacrament, and lest any man think that he uses not
the word Sacrament proprely and precisely, he joins it is nature and name
with Baptism. Again who sees not by this use of imposition of hands in
giving Orders and other Sacraments, Beza in cap. 6. Act.
that Christ, the Apostles, and the Church may borovv of the Jewish rites,
certain convenient ceremonies and Sacramental actions, seeing this same (as *
the Heretics can not deny) was received of the manner of Ordering Aaron and
the Priests of the old law or other heads of the people? See Exodus 39. Number.
27, 23.

16. Save both thy self.] Men also are called saviors without derogatio^ to
Christ.
Though Christ be our only Savior, yet the Scriptures forbear not to speak
freely and vulgarly and in a true sense, that man also may save him self and
others. But the Protestants notvvithstanding follow such a captious kind of
Divinity that if a man speak any such thing of our Lady or any Saint in
heaven, or other mean of procuring salvation, they make it a derogation to
Christ's honor. With such hypocrites have we now a days to do.

CHAP. V.
How to behave himself toward young and old. 3 to bestovv the Churches
oblations upon the needy widow, 9 and not to admit the said Churches
widow under threescore years old. 17 In distribution to respect well the
Priests that are painful. 19 and how in his Consistory to hear accusations
against Priests. 22 to be strait in examining before he give Orders, to be
chaste, and to remitte somevvhat of his drinking water.



The Epistle for holy widow.
which are widow in deed. Because of this continual prayer which
stands not with co^iugal and carnal acts of matrimony (as the Apostle
signifies 1 Cor. 7, 5) therefore were these widow to live in the state of
perpetual continency.
prayers night and day.

Double honor and liuelihod due to good Priests.
vvorthie of double honor: especially they that labor in the word and
doctrine. Deu. 25.
Thou shall not moosel the mouth to the ox that treads out the corn and, 1.
Cor. 9.
The work man is vvorthie of his h^re. Mat. 10, 10.
Here the Apostle vvil not have every light fellow to be heard against a
priest. so S. Augustine for the like reverence of priesthod, admonishes
P^^carius that in no wise he admit any testimonies or accusations of
Heretics against a Catholic priest. ep. 212.
Against a priest receive not accusation: but under two or three vvitnesses.

doing nothing by declining to the one part. Bishops must have great care that
they give not orders to any that is not well tried for his faith; learning, and
good behavior.
lightly, neither do thou communicate with other men's sins. Keep thy self
chaste.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. V.
3. Widovves in deed.] Ambr. in hunc loc.
S. Ambrose calls them widow and desolate in deed, that might marie, but
to make them selves better and more worthy of God, refuse marriage, which they
know to be but once blessed, Luc. c. 2, 37.
imitating * holy Anne, widowhod.
who in fasting and prayers served God night and day, never knovving but one
husband. Such professed widow then are to be honored and succored.
Neither does he speak only of the Churches widow (of whom specially
afterward) but of all that by profession kept their vvidovvhod, exhorting them
to pass their time in prayer and fasting, v. 5. Which was an honorable and
holy state much written of, and commended in the primitive Church, namely by
S. Ambrose and by S. Augustine, who vvrote books entitled thereof, and make
it next to virginity. Ambr. de viduis. August. de bono viduitatis.

8. He has denied.] Not that by this or by any other deadly sin (except
incredulity or doubtfulnes in belief) they lose their faith: but that their
factes be not answerable to their faith and to Christian religion, which
prescribes al such duties.

9. Let a widow be chosen.] Now he speaks more particularly and specially
of such widow as were nourished and found by the oblations of the faithful
and the alms of the Church, widows called Diaconissa, and their office.
and did vvithal some necessary services about women that were to be
professed or baptized, for their instruction and addressing to that and other
Sacraments, and also about the sick and impotent: and vvithal sometimes they
had charge of the Church goods or the disposition of them under the Deacons: in
respect whereof they also and the like are called Diaconissae, Eusebius li 6 c
35 recites out of Cornelius Epistle, that in the Church of Rome there is one
Bishop, 40 Priests, six Deacons, seven Subdeacons, Acoluthi 42, Exorcistes,
Lectors, and Ostiarij 52, widow together with the poor 150, al which God
nourishes in his Church. See Act. Apost. c. 6. S. Chrysostom li. 3 de
Sacerd^^ip propius finem. S. Epiphanius in haresi 79 Collyridianorum. Now
then, what manner of women should be taken into the fellowship of such as
were found of the Church, he further declares. These widows must have had
but one husband: whereof many Catholic co^clusio^s are deduced.


9. The wife of one husband.] If you would have a plain pattern of Heretical
fraud, corruption, and adulteration of the native sense of Gods word, and an
invincible demonstration that these new Glosers have their consciences feared
and hearts obdurated, willingly peruering the Scriptures against that which
they know is the meaning thereof, to the maintenance of their sects: mark
well their handling of this place about these widow of the Church. S. Paul
prescribes such only to be admitted as have been the vviues of one husband,
that is to say, once only married, not admitting any that has been twice
married. By which words the Catholics prove first, C. 3, 2.
that the like phrase * used before of Bishops and Deacons, that they should be
the husbands

Apostle in the last chapter treating of the holy functions of Bishops,
Priests, Deacons, and of the Churches refusing generally bigamos or twice
married persons, must needs much more mean that no man twice married should be
received to holy Orders: and further, that as none were admitted to be
widow of the Church, that ever intended to marie again, so none should
ever be received to minister the Sacraments (which is a thing infinitely more,
and requires more purity, and continency, then the office or state of the
said widow,) that intended to marie again. To receive the body of Christ
(says S. Hierom in Apolog. pro lib. cont. Iouin. ep. 50. c. 6.) is a greater
and holier thing then prayer, and therefore Priests that must both continually
pray and also be occupied about the receiving or ministering the holy Sacrament
daily, must live continently.



And of al other, Beza upon this place.
their extremest and most shameful tergiuersation is, that the Apostle here
forbids * not the admission of such widow as have been twice married,
but only them that have had two husbands at once. which was a very
improbable and extorted exposition before, concerning Bishops and Deacons, c.
3. and (as S. Hierom says ep. 83.) malo n^do malus cuneus: but here that an
exception should be made only against widow that had had two husbands
together (which was a thing never lavvful no^ never heard of) that is a most
intolerable impudency, The Caluinists most absurd exposition of the Apostles
words.
and a co^struction that never came to any wise man's cogitation before: and
yet these their fancies must be Gods word, and bigamus or bigamia must against
their old natures and use of al vvriters, be al one with Polygamus and
Polygamia. They give an example of such widow, in women divorced justly
from their husbands in the old law. As though S. Paul here took order for the
Jews widow only, or that had been such a common case among the Jews
also, that the Apostle needed to take so careful order for it, Their blasphemy
against the plain text.
finally, they let not to say that if the Apostle should be understood to
refuse a widow twice married at sundry times, it were unreasonable and
injurious to second marriages, which have no more indecencie or sign of
incontinencie (say they) then the first. Thus bold they are with the Apostle
and al antiquity.

11. Wanton in Christ.] Widow vvaxing vvarme, idle, and well fed by the
Church, Just after husbands, as also Apostate-Priests and Superintendents
marie, specially after they have gotten good Ecclesiastical livings. Which is
to wax vvanton in Christ, or against Christ. (...). (...)
The Greek word signifies to cast of the raines or bridle, that is, the bond
or promis of continency which they had put upon them.

11. They vvil.] The very vvil to break the vovv of chastity, is damnable.
In the chastity of vvidovvhod or Virginity (says S. Augustine) the
excellency of a greater gift is sought for. Which being once desired, chosen,
and offered to God by vovv, it is not only damnable to enter afterward into
marriage, but though it come not actually to marriage, only to have the vvil to
marie is damnable. Aug. li. de bono viduit. cap. 9.

12. Having damnation.] It signifies not blame, check, or reprehension of
men, as some to make the fault seem less, would have it: but (...)
judgment or eternal damnation, which is a heavy sentence. God grant al
married Priests and Religious may consider their lamentable case. What a
grievous sin it is, see S. Ambrose ad virginem lapsam cap. 5 and 8.

12. Their first faith.] All the ancient fathers that ever wrote commentaries
upon this Epistle, Greek and Latin, as S. Chrysostom, Theodorete, Oecumenius,
Theophylactus, Primasius, S. Ambrose, Ven. Bid, Haimo, Anselme, and the rest:
also al others that by occasion use this place, as the 4 Council of Carthage
ca. 104. and the 4 of Toleto c. 55. S. Athanasius li. de virginitate. Breaking
of their first faith, is (by the consent of a antiquity) when they bre^ke
their vovv of chastity.
S. Epiphanius har. 48. S. Hierom cont. Iouinianum li. 1. c. 7. and in c. 44.
Ezech. prope finem. S. Augustine in exceeding many places: al these expound the
Apostles words of the vovv of Chastity or the faith and promis made to
Christ to live continently. What is to break their first faith ^ says S.
Augustine. They vowed, and performed not. In ps. 75. prope fin^m. Again in an
other place, They break their first faith, that stand not in that which they
vowed. Li. de Sancta virgin. c. 33. Again he and a^ the fathers with him in
Carthage Council before named: If any widow, how young so ever they were
left of their husbands deceased, have vowed them selves to God, left their
laical habit, and under the testimony of the Bishop and Church have appeared
in religious vveede, and afterward go^ any more to secular marriage, according
to the Apostles sentence they shall be damned, because they were so bold to
make void the faith or promis of Chastity which they vowed to our Lord. So
says he and 215 fathers more in that Council. Why this vow is called faith or
fidelity.


And this promis of chastity is called, faith, because the fidelity betwixt
married persons is ordinarily called of holy writers, faith: and the vovv of
chastity made to God, joins him and the persons so vovving, as it were in
marriage, so far, that if the said persons break promis, they are counted and
called in the last alleged Council, Gods adulterers. In the 3 to the Romans
also and often else where, faith is taken for promis or fidelity. And that it
is so taken here, the words irritum facere (to frustrate and make void) do
prove. for that term is commonly used in matter of vovv, Why the first faith.
promis, or compacte. Genesis 17. Number. 30. This promis is called here prima fides
(the first faith) in respect of the later promis which vovvbreakers make to
them with whom they pretend to marry. So says S. Augustine li. de bono
viduit. c. 8. and 9. and Innocentius 1 ep. 2 ^ap. 13. to. 1. Con^. And this is
the only native, evident, The heretics exposition of this first faith,
impossible and against the text.
and agreeable sense to the circumstance of the letter. And the vain evasion of
the Heretics to save the Apostate-Monkes, Friars, Nuns, and Priests from
damnation for their pretended marriages, is frivolous: to wit, that first faith
here signifies the faith of Baptism or Christian belief, and not the promis
or vovv of Chastity. But we ask them if this faith of Baptism be broken by
marriage or no. For the text is plain that by intending to marie, they break
their faith, and by breaking their faith they be damned, if they die without
repentance. In truth which way so ever they writhe them selves to defend
their sacrilege or pretended marriages, they lose their labor and struggle
against their own conscience and plain Scripture.

14. I vvil the younger.] S. Paul means not that widow professed should
marie.
He speaks of such young ones as were yet free. For such as had already made
vovv, neither could they without damnation marie, were they young or old, nor
he without sin command or counsel them to it. Neither (as S. Hierom proves
to otherwise Ag^ruchia ep. 11.
Gerontia, and S. Chrysostom upon this place) does he precisely command or
counsel the young ones that were free, to marie, or absolutely forbid them to
vovv chastity: God for bid, say they. But his speech contains only a wise
admonition to the frailer sort, that it were far better for them not to have
vowed at all, but to have married again, then to have fallen to aduoutrie and
Apostasy after profession. It is better for the frailer sort, that are in
danger of falling, to marie rather then to vow.
Which is no more but to prefer second marriage before fornication: and a
good warning, that they which are to profess, look well what they do. S.
Paul's experience of the fall of some young ones to marriage, caused him to give
this admonition here: as also that before, that none should be received to the
Churches alms under threescore years of age. Not forbidding the Church for
ever, to accept any vows of widows or virgins til that age, as the
Heretics falsely affirm: but showing what was meet for that time and the
beginning of Christianity, when as yet there were no Monasteries builded, no
prescript rule, Young women may be professed and taken into religion.
no exact order of obedience to Superiors: but the professed (as S. Paul here
notes) coursed and wandered up and down idly, as now our professed virgins
or Nunn^s do not, neither can do. Of whom therefore, where discipline is
observed, there is no cause of such danger. Besides that widows having had
the use of carnal copulation before, are more dangerously tempted, then virgins
that are brought up from their tender age in piety and have no experience of
such pleasures. See S. Ambrose li. de viduis, proving by the example of holy
Anna, who lived a vvidow even from her youth til 80 years of age, in fasting
and praying night and day, that the Apostle does not here without exception
forbid al young widows to vow, yea he esteems that profession in the younger
women much more laudable, glorious, and meritorious. See his book de Viduis in
initio.

15. After Satan.] To marie after the vovv of Chastity, is to go after Satan.
We may here learn, that for those to marie which are professed, is to turn
back after Satan. For he speaks of such as were married contrary to their
vow. And hereupon we call the Religious that marie (as Luther, Bucer, Peter
martyr and the rest) Apostataes. More we learn, that such young ones have no
excuse of their age, or that they be vehemently tempted and burn in their
concupiscences, or that they have not the gift of Chastity. For
notvvithstanding al these excuses, these young professed widows if they marie,
go backwards after Satan, and be Apostataes, and damned, except they repent.
For as for the Apostles words to the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 7.
It is better to marie then to burn, We have before declared out of the
fathers, and here we add, that it pertains only to persons that be free
and have not vowed to the contrary. as S. Ambrose li. ad virg. laps. c. 5. S.
Augustine de bono vid. c. 8. and S. Hierom li. 1. cont. Iouin. c. 7. expound it.

The Heretics of our time think there is no remedy for fornication or
burning, The heretics only remedy against concupiscence is marriage.
but marriage. and so did S. Augustine when he was yet a Manichee. Puta^am me
miserum etc. I thought (says he li. 6. Confess. c. 11.) that I should be an
unhappy and miserable man if I should lack the company of a woman, and the
medicine of thy mercy to heal the same infirmity I thought not upon, because
I had not tried it: and I imagined that continency was in a man's own power
and liberty, which in my self I did not feel: being so foolish not to
understand that no man can be continent unless thou give it. The vow of
chastity lawful, possible to be kept, more grateful to God.
Verily thou would give it, if with inward mourning I would knock at
thy (...), and with sound faith would ^ast my care upon thee.

By all which you may easily prove, that chastity is a thing that may
lavvfully be vowed, that it is not impossible to be fulfilled by prayer,
fasting, and chastisement of men's concupiscence, that it is a thing more
grateful to God then the condition of married persons: for else it should not be
required either in the Clergy or in the Religious. finally, that it is most
abominable to persuade the poor virgins or other professed to such
sacarilegious vvedlocke, which S. Augustine avouches to be worse then
aduoutrie. de b^n. vid^. ^. 4. 11. Iouinian was the first that ever made
marriage equal with virginity or chaste life, Iouinians heresy in this point,
condemned of old, is called of the Protestants, Gods word.
for which he was condemned of heresy. Aug. in argumento li. de bon^
Coniugali. de pec. merit li. 3. c. 7. Li. de hares. har. 82. He was the first
that persuaded professed virgins to marie, which S. Augustine says was so
clearly and without question wicked, that it could never infect any Priest,
but certain miserable Nuns. Yea for this strange persuasion he calls
Iouinian a monster, saying of him thus Li. 2. R^tract. cap. 22. The holy Church
that is there (at Rome) most faithfully and stoutly resisted this monster. S.
Hierom calls the said Heretic and his accomplices, Christian epicures. li 2
cont. Iouin. c. 19. See S. Ambrose ep. 82 ad v^^c^llensem epi^^opum in initi^.
But what would these holy doctors have said, if they had lived in our doleful
time, when the Protestants go quite away with this wickedness, and call it
Gods word?

17. In word and doctrine.] Such Priests specially and Prelates are worthy of
double, that is, of the more ample honor, that are able to preach and teach,
and do take pains therein. Where we may note, that al good Bishops or
Priests in those days were not so well able to teach as some others, Many
good and vvorthie Bishops, that have not the gift of preaching and teaching.
and yet for the ministry of the Sacraments, and for wisdoms and
government, were not unmeet to be Bishops and Pastors. for though it be one
high commendation in a Prelate, to be able to teach, as the Apostle before
noted: yet al can not have the like grace therein, and it is often recompensed
by other singular gifts not less necessary. S. Augustine labored in word
and doctrine, Alipius and Valerius were good Bishops, and yet had not that
gift. Possid. in vit. Aug. c. 5. And some times and countries require preachers
more then other. Al which we note, to discover the pride of Heretics, that
contemn some of the Catholic Priests or Bishops, pretending that they can not
preach as they do, with meretricious and painted eloquence.

^3. Wa^er.] You see how lavvful and how a holy a thing it is, to fast from
some meats or drinks, either certain days, or alvvaies, as this B. Bishop
Timothee did: who was hardly induced by the Apostle to drink a little wine
with his water in respect of his infirmities. And mark vvithal, what a
calumnious and stale cauillation it is, that to abstain from certain meats
and drinks for punishment of the body or devotion, is, to condemn Gods
creatures. See an homily of S. Chrysostom upon these words, to. 5.

CHAP. VI.
What to teach servants. 3 If any teach against the doctrine of the Church
obstinately, he does it of pride and for lucre. 11 But the Catholic Bishop
must follow virtue, having his eye alvvaies to life everlasting and to the
coming of Christ. 17 What to command the rich. 20 Finally, to keep most
carefully the Catholic Churches doctrine, without mutation.



See the an^o^ation before cap. 1, 3. 4.
teach otherwise, (...)
and consent not to the sound words of our Lord JESUS Christ, and to that
doctrine which is according to piety: The epistle for S. Alexius ^ul. 17.
piety with sufficiency is great gain. Job 1, 21.
doubtless, Mat. 6, 25.
But * having food, and vvhervvith to be covered, with these we are
content.; As in the 1. chap. lack of faith and good conscience, so here
covetousness or desire of these temporal things, and in the end of this chap.
presumption, and boasting of knowledge, are causes of falling from the faith:
heresy often being the punishment of former sinner.
which certain desiring have erred from the faith, and have entangled them
selves in many sorrows.

The epistle for S. Timothee, Ian. 24.
pursue justice, piety, faith, charity, patience, mildenes. Io. 18, 37*
and Christ JESUS who * gave testimony under Pontius Pilate a good
confession: Apoc. 17, 14. 19, 16.
the * King of kings and Lord of lords, Io. 1, 18.
* whom no man has seen, yea neither can see, to whom be honor and empire
everlasting. Amen.

Alms deeds and good works laid for a fou^datio^ and ground to attain
everlasting life. So say the doctors upon this place.
foundation for the time to come, that they may apprehend the true life.

depositum, avoiding the profane (...).
novelties of voices, and oppositions of falsely called knowledge. S.
Chrysostom.
have erred about the faith. Grace be with thee: Amen.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. VI.
4. Languishing.] Even these be the good disputes of our new Sect-maisters,
and the world has to long proved these inconveniences here named, to be the
fruits of such endless altercations in religion as these unhappy sects have
brought forth.

20. Depositum.] The whole doctrine of our Christianity being taught by the
Apostles, and delivered to their successors, and coming down from one Bishop
to an other, is called the Depositum, Depositum, is the Catholic truth
descending from the Apostles by succession of Bishops, even unto the end.
as it were a thing laid into their hands, and committed unto them to keep.
Which because it passes from hand to hand, from age to age, from Bishop to
Bishop without corruption, change, or alteration, is al one with Tradition,
and is the truth given unto the holy Bishops to keep, and not to lay men. See
the notable discourse of Vincentius Lirinensis upon this text. li. cont.
profan. har. Nouationes. And it is for this great, old, and known treasure
committed to the Bishops custody, that S. Irenaeus calls the Catholic
Church Depositorium dives, the rich treasury of truth. li. 3. c. 4. And as
Clemens Alexandrinus vvriteth li. 2 Strom, this place makes so much against al
Heretics who do al change this Depositum, that (...) only, such men in his
days denied this Epistle. The Heretics of our days challenge also the truth,
and say it is the old truth. but they leap 14 or 15 hundredth years for it over
men's heads to the Apostles. The Protestants can show no such depositum.
But we call for the Depositum, and ask them in whose hands that truth
which they pretend, was laid up, and how it came down to them* for it can
not be Apostolical, unless it were Depositum in some Timothees hand, so to
continue from one Bishop to an other until our time and to the end.

20. Profane novelties.] Non dixit antiquitates (says Vincentius Lirinensis)
non dixit vetustates, sed prophanas nouitates. Nam si vitanda est nouitas,
tenenda est antiquitas: si prophana est nouitas, sacratae est vetustas. that
is, He said not, ANTIQVITIES: he said not, AVNCIENTNES: but PROFANE NOVELTIES.
For if novelty is to be avoided, antiquity is to be kept: if novelty be
profane, auncientnes is holy and sacred. See his whole book against the
profane novelties of heresies.

We may not measure the nevvnes or oldnes of words and terms of speaking in
religion, Profane novelties of words how to be tried and examined.
by holy Scriptures only: as though all those or only those were new and to be
rejected, that are not expressly found in holy write: but we must esteem them
by the agreablenes or disagreablenes they have to the true sense of Scriptures,
to the form of Catholic faith and doctrine, to the phrase of the old
Christians, to the Apostolic use of speech come unto us by tradition of all
ages and Churches, and to the prescription of holy Councels and Schools of the
Christian world: which have given out (according to the time and questions
raised by heretics and contentious persons) very fit, artificial, and
significant words, to discern and defend the truth by, against falshod.

These terms, Catholic terms not expressly in the Scriptures, but in sense,
are no such novelties of words.
Catholic, Trinity, Person, Sacrament, Incarnation, Mass, and many more, are
not (in that sense wherein the Church uses them) in the Scriptures at all,
and diverse of them were spoken by the Apostles before any part of the new
Testament was written, some of them taken up straight after the Apostles
days in the vvrittings and preachings of holy Doctors, and in the speech of
all faithful people, and therefore can not be counted Novelties of words.
Others beside these, as, Consubstantial, Deipara, Transsubstantiation, and the
like, which are neither in express terms found in Scriptures, not yet in
sense (if we should follow the judgment of the special sects against which
the said words were first invented, the Arians crying out against Nicene
Council, for the first: the Nestorians against the Ephesiue Counsel, for the
second: the Lutherans and Caluinists against the Latera^ and the later
Councels, for the third) these words also notwithstanding, by the judgment
of holy Church and Councels approved to be consonant to Gods word, and made
authentical among the faithful, are sound and true words, and not of those
kind which the Apostle calls Novelties.

The words then here forbidden, Heretical novelties of words.
are the new profane terms and speeches invented or specially used by
heretics, such as S. Irenee records the Valentinians had a number most
monstrous: as the Manichees had also diverse, as may be seen in S. Augustine:
The Arians had their (...).
Similis substantia, and Christ to be ex non existentibus: the other heretics
after those days had their (...).
Christiparam, and such like, agreeable to their sects. But the Protestants
pass in this kind, The Protestants profane novelties of words.
as they excede most heretics in the number of new opinions: as their Seruum
arbitrium', their sole faith, their fiduce, their apprehension of Christ's
justice, their imputative righteousness: their horrible terms of terrors,
anguishes, distresses, distrust, fears and feeling of hell pains in the soul
of our Savior, to express their blasphemous fiction of his temporal
damnation, which they call his descending to hell: Their marks, tokens, and
badges Sacramental, their Companation, Impanation, Circumpanation, to avoid
the true conversion in the Eucharist: their presence in figure, in faith,
sign, spirit, pleadge, effect, to avoid the real presence of Christ's body.
These and such like innumerable which they occupy in every part of their
false doctrine, are in the sense that they use them, all false, captious and
deceitful words, and are nouitates vocum here forbidden.

And though some of the said terms have been by some occasion obiter without
il meaning spoken by Catholics before these Heretics arose, yet now knovving
the^ to be the propre speeches of Heretics, Christia^men are bound to avoid
them. Wherein the Church of God has ever been as diligent to resist Novelties
of words, as her Adversaries are busy to invent them* for which cause she
vvil not have us communicate with them, Catholics must abhor from heretical
phrases and words.
nor follow their fashion and phrase newly invented, though in the nature of
the words sometime there be no harm. In S. Augustines days when Christian
men had any good befalle^ them, or entered into any man's house, or met any
frind by the way, they used alvvaies to say, Deo gratias. The Donatistes and
Circumcellions of that time being nevvsangled, forsook the old phrase and
would alvvaies say, Laus Deo: from which the Catholic men did so abhor (as
the said Doctor vvriteth) that they had as leefe met a thief as one that
said to them, ^ Ps. 132.
Laus Deo, in steed of Deo gratias. As now we Catholics must not say, The
Lord, but Our Lord: as we say, Our Lady, for his mother, not, The Lady. Let us
keep our forefathers words, and we shall easily keep our old and true says
that we had of the first Christians. Let them say, Amendment, abstinence, the
Lords Supper, the Communion table, Elders, Ministers, Superintendent,
Congregation, so be it, praise ye the Lord, Morning-Praier, Euening-praier, and
the rest, as they will: Let us avoid those Novelties of words, according to
the Apostles prescript, and keep the old terms, Penance, Fasting, Priest,
Church, Bishop, Mass, Mattins, Euensong, the B. Sacrament, Altar, Oblation,
Host, Sacrifice, Alleluia, Amen, Lent, Palme-Sunday, Chrisimas, and the very
words vvil bring us to the faith of our first Apostles, and condemn these
new apostates new faith and phrases.

20. Falsely called knowledge.] Heretics arrogate knowledge falsely so called.
It is the property of al Heretics to arrogate to them selves great
knowledge, and to condemn the simplicity of their fathers the holy Doctors
and the Church* but the Apostle calls their pretended skill, a knowledge
falsely so called, being in truth high and deep blindness. Such (says S.
Irenaeus li. 5 c. 17.) as forsake the preaching of the Church, argue the holy
Priests of unskillfulness, not considering how far more vvorth a religious
idiote is, them a blasphemous and impudent sophister, such as al Heretics be.
And again Vincentius Lirinensis speaking in the person of Heretics says,
Come o ye folish and miserable men, that are commonly called Catholics, and
learn the true faith which has been hid many ages heretofore, but is
revealed and shevved of late, etc. See his whole book concerning these
matters.

THE ARGUMENT OF THE SECOND EPISTLE OF S. PAVL TO TIMOTHEE.
THE chief scope of this second to Timothee, is, to open unto him that his
martyrdom is at hand. Which yet he does not plainly before the end: preparing
first his mind with much circumstance, because he knevv it would grieve him
sore, and also might be a tentation unto him. Therefore he talks of the cause
of his trouble, and of the revvard: that the one is honorable, and the other
most glorious: and exhorts him to be constant in the faith, to be ready
alvvaies to suffer for it, to fulfill his ministry to the end, as him self
now had done his.

Whereby it is certain, that it was written at Rome, in his last
apprehension and emprisonment there: as he signifies by these words Cap. 1:
Onesiphorus was not ashamed of my chain, but when he was come to Rome,
carefully sought me, etc. And of his martyrdom, thus: For I am now ready to be
offered, and the time of my resolution (or death) is at hand. cap. 4.

THE SECOND EPISTLE OF PAVL TO TIMOTHEE.
CHAP. I.
With his praises he covertly exhorts him not to be dismayed for his
trouble, 6 (having grace given in Orders to help him, 8 and knovving for what
cause he is persecuted) and namely with the example of Onesiphorus.



;Here again it is plain that holy Orders give grace, and that even by and in
the external ceremony of imposing the Bishops hands. And it is a manner of
speech specially used in this Apostle and S. Luke, that Orders give grace to
the ordered, and that to take orders or authority to minister Sacraments or
preach, is, to be given or delivered to Gods grace. Act. 14, 25.
grace of God, which is in thee by the imposition of my hands. Tit. 3, 5.
* not according to our works, but according to his purpose and grace, Tit.
1, ^.
which was given to us in Christ JESUS * before the secular times. of our
Savior JESUS Christ, who has destroyed death, and illuminated life and
incorruption by the Gospel: 1 Timo. 2, 7.
depositum unto that day.

Faith and love coupled commonly together in this Apostles vvritings.
(...)
in the love in Christ JESUS. depositum by the holy Ghost, which dwells in
us.

2 Timothy 4, 19.
because he has often refreshed me, and has;What a happy and meritorious
thing it is to relieve the afflicted for religion, and not to be ashamed of
their disgrace, yro^s or what miseries so ever.
not been ashamed of my chain.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. I.
5. In thy grandmother.] Though God show mercy to many that be of
incredulous, heretical or il parents, A great blessing, to have Catholic
progenitors: and very commendable to cleave fast to their faith.
yet it is a goodly benediction of God to have good education and to have good
faithful progenitors and Catholic parents. And it is a great sin to forsake
the faith of our fathers that be Catholics, or contrary to our education in
the Church to follow strange doctrines, abandoning not only our next natural
parents faith, but the ancient faith and belief of al our progenitors for
many hundred years together. And if to follow the faith of mother and
grandmother only, the Christian religion being then but newly planted, was
so commendable even in a Bishop, how much more is it now laudable to cleave
fast to the faith of so many our progenitors and ages that continued in the
same Christian religion which they first received?

Our Protestants in their great wisdoms laugh at good simple men when they
talk of their fathers faith. Apol. co^t.
But S. Hierom, Ruff. li. 1. c. 8.
I am a Christian, The peoples speeches of their fathers faith, is very
Christian and laudable.
says he, and borne of Christian parents, and carry the sign of the cross in
my forehead. And again ep. 65. c. 3. Until this day the Christian world has
been without this doctrine, that faith vvil I hold fast being an old man,
wherein I was borne a child. And the holy Scriptures set us often to schole
to our fathers. Deuteronomy. 32. and Ps. 43.
Ask thy fathers, and they vvil show thee, thy auncetours, and they vvil tell
thee. And again, Our fathers have shevved unto us. And commonly the true God
is called the God of the faithful and of their forefathers. Dan. 2. 3. And
false Gods and new doctrines or opinions be named, New and fresh, such as
their fathers worshipped not. Deuteronomy. 32. Finally S. Paul both here and Act. 24.
often else alleges for his defense and commendation, that he was of faithful
progenitors. And it is a case that Heretics can not lightly brag of, no one
sect commonly during so long without intermission, 2 Cor. 11.
that they can have many progenitors of the said sect, Which is a
demonstration that their faith is not true* and that it is impossible our
Catholic faith to be false, supposing the Christian religion to be true.

12. Depositum.] A great comfort to al Christians, Al our good deeds are laid
up with God, to be revvarded
that every of their good deeds and sufferings for Christ, and all the vvorldly
losses sustained for defense or confession of their faith, he extant with God,
and kept as depositum, to be repaied or received again in heaven. Which if
the vvorldings believed or considered, they would not so much marvel to see
Catholic men so willingly to lose land, liberty, credit, life and al for
Christ's sake and the Churches faith.

13. A form.] The Apostles did set down a platform of faith, doctrine, and
phrase of Catholic speech and preaching, and that not so much by vvriting (as
here we see) as by word of mouth: to which he refers Timothee over and
above his Epistles unto him. And how precisely Christian Doctors ought to
keep the form of words aunciently appropriated to the mysteries and matters
of our religion, We must speak in Catholic terms, after a certain rule of
faith, and form of words.
S. Augustine expresses in these words li. 10 de ciuit. c. 23. Philosophers
speak with freedom of words etc. but we must speak according to a
certain rule, lest licentious liberty of words breed an impious opinion of
the things also that are signified by the same. Trinity, person, essence,
Consubstantial, Transsubstantiation, Mass, Sacrament, and such like, be verba
sana (as the Apostle speaks) sound words, given to express certain high
truths in religion, partly by the Apostles and first founders of our religion
under Christ, and partly very aptly invented by holy Councels and fathers, to
express as near as could be the high inestable or unspeakable verity of some
points, and to stop the Heretics audacitie and invention of new words and
profane speeches in such things, which the Apostle vvarneth Timothee to avoid
1 ep. c. 6, 10. and 2 ep. 2, 16. See the Annotations there.

18. Our Lord.] Relieuers of Cath. prisoners.
To have this prayer of an Apostle, or any Priest or poor Cath. man so
relieved, gives the greatest hope at the day of our death or general
judgment, that can be: and it is worth all the lands, honors, and riches of
the world.

CHAP. II.
He exhorts him to labor diligently in his office, considering the revvard
in Christ, and his denial of them that deny him. 14 Not to contend, but to
shun heretics: neither to be moved to see some subverted, considering that
the elect continue Catholics, and that in the Church be of al sorts. 24 Yet
vvithal svveetenes to reclaim the deceived.

; Mark here that the elect (though sure of salvation) yet are saved by means
of their preachers and teachers, as also by their own endeavors.
I sustain al things for the elect, that they also may obtain the salvation,
which is in Christ JESUS, with heavenly glory. Mat. 10, To. 3, 3.
we shall also reign together. * If we shall deny, he also vvil deny us.

Contend not in words, for it is profitable for nothing, but for the
subversion of them that hear. See the Annotatio^ before 1 Timothy 6. v. 20.
profane and vain speeches avoid: for they do much grow to impiety:



Tit. 3, 9.
; Conversion from sin and heresy is the gift of God and of his special
grace: yet here we see, good exhortations and prayer and such other helps of
man be profitable thereunto. Which could not be, if we had not free will.
God give them repentance to know the truth:

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. II.
4 No man being a soldier.] What secular affairs do not agree nor consist
with spiritual men's function.
First of al, the Apostle (1 Cor. 7.) makes marriage and the needful cares,
solicitude, and distractions thereupon ever depending, special impediments of
al such as should employ them selves wholy to Gods service, as Bishops and
Priests are bound to do. He that is with a wife (says he) is careful for the
world, how to please his wife, and is distracted or divided. 2 Cor. 7.

Secondly, the practice of Physic, merchandise, or any other profane faculty
and trade of life to gather riches, and much more to be given to hunting,
hauking, gameuing, shows, enterludes, or the like pastimes, is here forbidden.

Thirdly, the services of Princes and manifold base offices done to them for to
obtain dignities and promotions, How spiritual men may serve secular Princes,
and deal in civil causes.
are disagreable to Priestly functions* not so, to be their chaplens for his
purpose to preach unto them, to hear their confessions, to minister the
Sacraments unto them, to say Divine service before them, and such other
spiritual duties, for, al such services done to principal persons both of the
Clergy and Laity, be godly and co^sonant to Priestly vocation. As also
serving of Princes and Commonvveales in civil causes and matters of state, in
making peace and quietness among the people, by deciding or compounding their
controversies, and al such like affairs tending to the honor of God and good
of men, and to the upholding of true religion, when they may be done without
notorious damage or hinderance of their spiritual charge, or when the hurtes
thereof be abundantly recompensed by the necessary duties done for the
general good of kingdom or Country: in vit. 8. Ambr. and Bern.
al such things (I say) be lavvful and often very requisite. And S. Augustine,
S. Ambrose, S. Bernard, and other holy Bishops of old were much occupied
therein, as we see in S. Augustines book de opere Monachorum c. 29. and
Possid. in vit. c. 19.

15. Rightly.] Catholics only, right ha^dlers of the Scripture.
The Scriptures or challenge of the word of God is common to Catholics and
Heretics, but al is in the handling of them, these later handle them
guilefully, adultering the word of God, 2 Cor. 2 and 4.
as * else where the Apostle speaks: the other sincerely after the manner of
the Apostles and doctors of Gods Church. Which the Greek expresses by a
significant word of cutting a thing straight by a line, (...).

17. Their speech.] Heretical books and sermons are to be avoided.
The speeches, preachings, and vvritings of Heretics be pestiferous,
co^tagious, and creeping like a canker. therefore Christian men must never hear
their sermons nor read their books. For such men have a popular way of talk
whereby the unlearned, and specially women laden with sin, are easily
beguiled. Nothing is so easy (says S. Hierom) as with voluble and rolling
tongue to deceive the rude people, which admire whatsoever they understand not.
Ep. 2. ad Nepot. c. 10.

20. In a great house] He means not that Hymenaeus and Philetus (of vvho^ he
spoke immediately before) or other heretics, be properly within the Church, as
catholic men are, Who are out of the Church or within it.
though grievous sinners: but that evil men who for the punishment of their
sins become heretics, were before they fell from their faith as vessels of
contumely, within the Church. Yea and often also after they be severed in
heart and in the sight of God, so long as they stand in external profession and
use of the same, Sacraments, and in the outvvard fellowship of Catholics, not
yet either separated of them selves, nor cast out by the governors of the
Church, so long (we say) they be after a sort in the Church: though properly
and in deed they be out of the compass of Gods house. Mary of those that are
openly severed in Sacraments, Service, and communion, there is no question but
they are out of the Church.

21. Cleanse him self.] Free vvil.
Man then has free vvil to make him self a vessel of salvation or damnation:
though salvation be attributed to Gods mercy principally, the other to his
just judgment: neither of both being repugnant to our free vvil, but vvorking
with and by the same, al such effects in us as to his providence and our
deserts be agreeable.

CHAP. III.
He prophecieth of Heretics to come, 6 and notes certain then also for such,
bidding him to avoid them, 10 and (whatsoever persecution befall for it) to
continue constant in the Catholic doctrine, both because of his Master (S.
Paul him self) 15 and also because of his own knowledge in the Scriptures.

1 Timot. 4, 1.
that * in the last days shall approache perilous times. sins, which are
led with diverse desire^.; That those Magicians which resisted Moses, were
thus called, it is not written in all the old Testament, therefore it came to the
Apostles knowledge by tradition, as the Church now has the names of the 3
kings, of the penitent thief, of the soldier that pierced Christ's side on
the Cross, and of the like.
Iannes and Mambres * resisted Moses, so these also resist the truth, Exo. 7.
men corrupted in mind, reprobate concerning the faith.

; In all danger and diversity of false sects, S. Paul's admonition is, ever to
abide in that was first taught and delivered, never to give over our old faith
for a new fancy. This is it which before he calls depositum. 1. Tim. 6. and
2. Tim. 1.
continue in those things which thou have learned, and are committed to thee:
knowing of whom thou have learned:

2. Pet. 1, 21.
is profitable to teach, to argue, to correct, to instruct in justice:

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. III.
2. Men shall be.] Al these words S. Cyprian expounds of such as by pride and
disobedience resist Gods Priests. Let no faithful man, says he, that keeps
in mind our Lords and the Apostles admonition, marvel if he see in the later
times some proud and stubburne fellows and the enemies of Gods Priests, go
out of the Church or impugn the same: when both our Lord and th Apostle
foretold us that such should be. Cypr. ep. 55. nu. 3.

6. Women laden.] Women easily seduced by heresy.
Women laden with sins, are for such their deseruings, and through the
frailty of their sex, more subject to the heretics deceites, then men: the
enemy attempting (as he did in the fall of our first parents) by them to
overthrow men. See S. Hierem upon the 3 chapter of Jeremy. Where he adds
that every heresy is first broched propter gulam and ventrem, for gluttony
and belly-cheere.

9. Folly manifest.] The folly of Heretics in time appears.
Al heretics in the beginning seem to have some show of truth, God for just
punishment of men's sins permitting them for some while in some persons and
places to prevail: but in short time God detecteth them, and opens the eyes
of men to see their decei tes: in so much that after the first brunt they be
maintained by force only, al wise men in manner seeing their falshod, though for
troubling the state of such commonweals where vnluckely they have been
received, they can not be so suddenly extirped.

12. All that vvil live.] Persecution.
Al holy men suffer one kind of persecution or other, being grieved and
molested by the wicked, one way or an other: but not all that suffer
persecution, be holy, as al malefactors. The Church and Catholic Princes
persecute heretics, and be persecuted of them again, as S. Augustine often
declares. See ep. 48.

13. Prosper.] Though heresies and the authors of them be after a while
discovered and by little and little forsaken generally of the honest, discrete,
and men careful of their own salvation, yet their authors and other great
sinners proceed from one error and heresy to an other, and finally to plain
Atheism and al Devilish disorder.

16. Al Scripture.] Besides the Apostles teaching and tradition, the reading of
holy Scriptures is a great defense and help of the faithful, and specially of
a Bishop, not only to avoid and condemn al heresies, The great profit of
reading the Scriptures.
but to the guiding of a man in all justice, good life and works. Which
commendation is not here given to the books of the new Testament only
(whereof he here speaks not, as being yet for a great part not written) but
to the Scripture of the old Testament also, yea and to every book of it. For
there is not one of them, nor any part of them, but it is profitable to the end
aforesaid, if it be read and understood according to the same Spirit wherewith
it was written.

The Heretics upon this commendation of holy Scriptures, The Heretics folish
argument: Al Scripture is profitable, ergo only Scripture is necessary and
sufficient.
pretend (very simply in good sooth) that therefore nothing is necessary to
justice and salvation but Scriptures. As though every thing that is profitable
or necessary to any effect, excluded al other help, and were only enough to
attain the same. By which reason a man might as well prove that the old
Testament were enough, and so exclude the new: or any one piece of all the old,
and thereby exclude the rest. For he affirms every Scripture to have the
foresaid vtilities. and they might see in the very next line before, that he
requires his constant perseverance in the doctrine which he had taught him
over and above that he had learned out of the Scriptures of the old Testament,
which he had read from his infancy, but could not thereby learn all the
mysteries of Christian religion therein. Neither does the Apostle affirm here
that he had his knowledge of Scriptures, by reading only, without help of
masters and teachers, as the Adversaries hereupon (to commit the holy
Scriptures to every man's presumption) do gather: but affirms only that
Timothee knevv the Scriptures and therefore had studied them by hearing good
readers and teachers, as S. Paul him self did of Gamaliel and the like, and as
al christian students do, that be trained up from their youth in Catholic
universities in the study of Divinity.

CHAP. IIII.
He requires him to be earnest while he may, because the time vvil come when
they vvil not abide Catholic preaching, 5 and to fulfill his course, as him
self now has done. 9 and to come unto him with speed, because the rest of
his train are dispersed, and he draws now to heaven.

The Epistle for holy Doctors, and for S. Dominike August. 4.
and by his aduent, and his kingdom: The martyrdom of saints is so acceptable
to God, that it is counted as it were a sacrifice in his sight, and therefore
has many effects both in the party that suffers it, and in others that are
partakers of the merit as of a sacrifice: which name it has by a Metaphore.
to be sacrificed: and the time of my resolution is at hand. judge: and not
only to me, but to them also that love his coming.

Col. 4, 14*
Titus into Dalmatia. ^vvil deliver
^ has deliuered' me from al evil work: and vvil save me unto his heavenly
kingdom* to whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen.

2 Timo. 1, 16.
and * the house of Onesiphorus. This Linus was coadiutor with and under ^.
Peter, and so counted second in the number of Popes.
Linus and Claudia, and all the brethren, salute thee.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. IIII.
3. There shall be a time.] If ever this time come (as needs it must that the
Apostle foresavv and foretold) now it is undoubtedly* The Apostle prophesied
of our new delicate preachers.
for the properties fall so just in every point upon our new Masters and
their Disciples, that they may seem to be pourtered out, rather then
prophesied of. Never were there such delicate Doctors that could so pleasantly
clavv and so sweetly rub the itching ears of their hearers, as these,
which have a doctrine framed for every man's phamsie, lust, liking and desire*
Esa. 30. v. 10.
the people not so fast crying, Speak placentia, things that please: but the
Masters as fast vvarranting them to do placentia.

8. Acrovvne of justice.] This place conuinceth for the Catholics, Works
meritorious.
that al good works done by Gods grace after the first justification, be
truly and properly meritorious, and fully worthy of everlasting life: and
that thereupon heaven is the due and just stipend, crown, or recompense,
which God by his justice owes to the persons so vvorking by his grace* for
he renders or repaieth heaven as a just judge, How heaven is due both of
justice and mercy.
and not only as a merciful gives* and the crown which he paieth, is not
only of mercy or favor or grace, but also of justice. It is his merciful
favor and grace, that we work well and merit heaven: it is his justice,
for those merits to give us a crown correspondent in heaven. S. Augustine
upon these words of the Apostle, expresses both breifely thus, How should
be repay as a just judge, unless he had first given as a merciful father. (...).
de great. and lib. arbit. c. 6.

And when you hear or read any thing in the Scriptures, that may seem to
derogate from man's works in this case, it is alvvaies meant of works
considered in their own nature and valor, not implying the grace of Christ,
by which grace it comes, and not of the work in it self that we have a
right to heaven and deserve it vvorthily: It is not of us, but of Gods grace,
that works be meritorious.
which the Apostle in the 6 to the Hebrews more then insinuates, saying these
words, God is not unjust, to forget your work and love which you have
shovved in his name etc. As though he would say, Mat. 20.
that he were unjust if he did forget to recompense their works. * The
parable also of the men sent into the vineyard, proves that heaven is our
own right, bargained for and wrought for, and accordingly paid unto us as
our hire at the day of judgment, To such good works heaven is due: to say
the contrary, is to derogate from Gods grace.
for that is (...) and (...) whereby the Scripture so often calls it. It is
the goal, the mark, the price, the hire, of al striving, running, laboring,
due both by promis and by covenant and right debt. See a notable place in S.
Augustine in Psalm. 83* in fine: and 100 in initie, and ho. 14* c. 2. li. 50*
hom: S. Cyprian also, and namely the later end of his book de opere and
^^^mosyna: and thou shall easily contemn the contrary falshod, which does
not so much derogate from man's works, as from Gods grace which is the cause
and ground of al worthiness in man's merits. S. Augustines words be these, In
Ps. 100*
Mark that he to whom our Lord gave grace, has our Lord also his detter. He
found him a giver, in the time of mercy: he has him his detter in the time of
judgment. See the place and the rest her coted, where he examineth and
explicateth the matter at large.

THE ARGUMENT OF THE EPISTLE OF S. PAVL TO TITUS.
THAT Titus was a Gentil, and not a Jew, and that he was in S. Paul's
train, at the least the 14 year after his conversion, if not before, we
understand by the Epistle to the Galatians c. 2. And that he continued with
him to the very end, appears in the second to Timothee c. 4. Where he makes
mention that he sent him from Rome into Dalmatia, when him self was shortly
after to be put to death.

And therefore although S. Luke never name him in the Acts, as neither him
self, yet no doubt he comprehends him commonly, when he speaks thus in the
first person plural: Forthwith we sought to go into Macedonia. Act, 16. For
S. Paul also sent him to Corinth, between the vvriting of his 1 and 2 to the
Corinthians (which time concurreth with Act. 19) by occasion whereof he
makes much and honorable mention of him in the said second Epistle c* 2. etc.
7. and again * he sent him with the same Epistle: 2 Corinthians. 8.
both times about great matters: so that no doubt he was even then also a
Bishop, and received accordingly of the Corinthians, with fear and trembling.
2. Cor. 7, v. 15. But the same is plainer in this Epistle to him self c. 1. v.
5. Where the Apostle says: for this cause I left thee at Crete, etc. By
which words it is manifest also, that this Epistle was not written during
the story of the Acts (seeing that no mention is there of S. Paul's being in
the i will of Crete) but after his dismission at Rome out of his first trouble,
and before his second or last trouble there, as is evident by these words:
When I shall send to thee Artemas or Tychicus, make have to come to me to
Nicopolis, for there I have determined to vvinter. Tit. 3.

Therefore he instructs him (and in him, all Bishops) much like as he does
Timothee, what qualities he must require in them that he shall make priests
and Bishops, in what sort to preach, and to teach al sorts of men, to commend
good works unto them: finally, him self to be their example in all goodness.

THE EPISTLE OF PAVL TO TITUS.
CHAP. I.
Of what quality the Priests and Bishops must be: 9 namely learned,
considering the Iudaical seducers of that time. 12 That the Cretensians must be
roughly used, 10 have them continue sound in faith.

2. Tim. 1, 9.


1. Tim. 3, 2.
the husband of one wife, having faithful children, not in the accusation of
riote, or not obedient.

must be controuled. who subvert whole houses, teaching the things they ought
not, for filthy lucre. Epimenides.
their ov^ne proper prophet, The Cretensians alvvaies lier^, naughty beasts,
slouthful bellies.

He speaks not of the Churches abstaining from meats some times, which is
not for any uncleanness in the creatures, but for chastening their bodies: but
he means the Jewish superstition, who now being Christians, would not
cease to put difference of clean and unclean according to their old law. See
S. Augustine Cont. Faust. li. 31. c. 4.
clean to the clean: Romans 14, 20.
but to the polluted and to infidels nothing is clean: but polluted are both
their mind and conscience.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. I.
5. Ordain Priests.] Priests must be consecrated by Bishops only.
Though Priests or Bishops may be nominated and elected by the Princes, people,
or Patrons of places, according to the use of the time and diversity of
Countries and fashions, yet they can not be ordered and consecrated but by a
Bishop who was him self rightly ordered or consecrated before, as this Titus
was by S. Paul. And here it seems that he did not only consecrate them
whom the people had elected before, The popular election of the Clergy taken
away.
but him self also made choice of the persons, no mention being here made of
any other election popular. Which though it were long used in the primitive
Church, yet for diverse causes and specially for continual tumultes,
partialities, and disorders which S. Augustine much complains of in his
time, was justly taken away, and other better means of their designement
appointed. See Conc. Laodic. cap. 12. 13. S. August. de adult. coniug. li. 2.
^. 20. Ep. 110. and Possid. in vita. Aug. ^. ^.

And that the ordering of Priests or imposition of hands to that purpose,
belongs only to Bishops, The preemine^ce of a Bishop above a Priest.
and to no inferior Priests or other persons, it is plain by the Apostolic
practice set down in the Scriptures, namely in the Acts, and in the Epistles
to Timothee and Titus. And S. Hierom, who seems sometimes to say that in the
primitive Church there was no great difference betwixt a Bishop and Priest,
yet he ever excepteth giving holy Orders, which preeminence he attributes to
Bishops only. ep. 85. as he does also Confirming the Baptized by giving them
the holy Ghost through imposition of hand and holy Chrisme. To put no
difference between them is Aerius heresy.
Dial. cont. Lucifer. c. 4. Note also that Aerius was of old condemned of
heresy, for holding that there was no difference betwixt a Priest and a
Bishop. Epiph. har. 75. August. har. 53. Note lastly the fraudulent translation
of the Heretics alvvaies, turning for Priests (which here is evident to be a
calling of Order and office) elders, saying, That thou ordain Elders. which
in our vulgar tongue signifies the age, and not the Office properly: Heret.
translation.
and all this for hatred of Priests.

6. Of one wife.] To that which is said upon the like words 1 Timothy 3: add
this testimony of S. Epiphanius li. 3. (...). 2. cont. harese^ in fine. Holy
Priesthod, says he, for the most part proceeds of Virgins: Bigami excluded
from holy Orders, and the causes thereof.
and if not of virgins, yet of them that live a sole or single life: but and if
the single and sole persons suffice not to the Ministry, of such as contain
from their vviues, or after once marying remain widow. For, him that has
him married twice, it is not lavvful to take to Priesthod etc. If you list to
see the causes why bigamie is forbidden them that are to be Priests, and
continency required of the Clergy, see the same author li. 2. to. 1. hares.
59. S. Ambrose li. 1. Offic. c. 50. and upon 1 Timothy 3. S. Augustine de b^no
Coniugal. c. 18. S. Hierom ep. 50 c. 5 ad Pammachium, and against Iouinian li.
1 c. 19. S. L^o ^p. 87. and other ancient authors.

And if the studious reader peruse al antiquity, The notable men of both
Testame^ts, that lived co^tine^tly from vviues.
he shall find al notable Bishops and Priests of Gods Church to have been
single, or continent from their vviues, if any were married before they came to
the Clergy. So was S. Paul, and exhorts al men to the like. 1 Cor. 7, 7. So
were all the Apostles after they followed Christ, at S. Hierom witnesses,
affirming that our Lord loved John specially for his virginity. Apol. ad
Pammach. c. 8. and li. 1 cont. Iouin. c. 14. S. Ignatius ^p. ^ ad Philadelph.
says of the said John, and of Timothee, Titus, Euodius, Clement, that they
lived and died in chastity, reckening up of the Old Testament diverse notable
personages that did the same, as Elias, Jesus Naue (otherwise called Iosue)
Melchlsedec, Elisaeus, Hiere^^^e, John Baptist. No man is ignorant that all the
notable fathers of the Greek and Latin Church lived chaste: Athanasius, Basil,
Nazianzene, Chrysostom, Cyprian, Hilarie (who entered into holy Orders after
his vviues death) Ambrose, Hierom, Augustine, Leo, Gregory the great. Certain
other notable fathers had once vviues, but no holy men ever used them, much
less married, after they were in holy Orders. Only the Protestants complain
that they have not the gift of chastity.
A marvelous thing, that so many heretofore should have the gift of chastity
then, and now so fevv, if the Protestants say true, that skarse one among them
in our age of al their sects, even of their principal Superintendents, has
had it.

CHAP. II.
What to preach both to old and young (not only with word but with example
also) and to servants. 11 For there are of al sorts in the Church, and they
must be instructed accordingly.

(...) pudicos*
chaste, wise, sound in the faith, in love, in patience. Ephesians. 6, 5.
having no evil to say of us. Col. 3, 22.
in all things pleasing, not gainsaying: 1. Pet. 2, 18.


The Epistle at the first Mass on Christmas day, and upon the Circumcision of
our Lord.
(...)*
aduent of the glory of the great God and our Savior JESUS Christ, good
works.;Bishops must be stout and command in Gods cause, and the people must
in no wise disobey or contemn them.
with al authority. Let no man contemn thee.

CHAP. III.
To teach them obedience unto Princes, and meekenes toward al men,
considering that we also were as they, til God of his goodness brought us to
Baptism. 8 To teach good works, 9 and to avoid vain question^; 10 and
obstinate Heretics.

The Epistle at the 2 Mass on Christmas day, and in the Votiue Mass of our B.
Lady between Christmas and Candlemas.
the benignity and (...)
kindness tovvard man of our Savior God appeared: 2, Tim. 1, 9.
As before in the Sacrament of holy Orders (1. Tim. 4. and 2 Timothy 1) so here it
is plain that Baptism gives grace, and that by it as by an instrumental
cause we be saved.
by the lauer of regeneration and renouation of the holy Ghost,

1 Timothy 4.
2. Tim. 2, 23.
and co^tentions, and controversies of the Law avoid. For they are
unprofitable and vain.

; These admonitions or correptions must be given to such as err, by our
Spiritual Governors and Pastors: to whom if they yield not, Christian men must
avoid them.
admonition avoid:

(...) praesse.
to excel in good works to necessary uses: that they be not unfruitful.
thee: salute them that love us in the faith. The grace of God be with you al.
Amen.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. III.
10. A man that it an Heretic.] Who is proprely an Heretic, and who is not.
Not every one that erreth in religion, is an Heretic, but he only that after
the Churches determination, vvilfully and stubburnely stands in his false
opinion, not yelding to decree of Council or the chief Pastors of the Church
therein. They (says S. Augustine ep. 162.) that defend their sentence (though
false and perverse) with no stubburne stomach or obstinate heart, specially if
it be such as them selves by bold presumption broched not, but received it of
their deceived parents, Description or marks how to know an Heretic.
and do seek the truth warily and carefully, being ready to be reformed if
they find it, such are not to be reputed among Heretics. And again. li. 18.
de Ciuit. c. 55. They that in the Church of Christ have any cr^^ed or per^^rse
opinion, if being admonished to be of a sound and right opinion, they resist
obstinatly, and vvil not amend their pestiferous opinions, but persist in
defense of them, are thereby become Heretics, and going forth out of the
Church, are counted for enemies that exercise us. Again, li. 4 de Bapt. cont.
Donat. c. 16. He is an Heretic that, when the doctrine of the Catholic faith
is made plain and manifest unto him, had rather resist it, and choose that
which him self held etc. And in diverse places he declares that S. Cyprian,
though he held an error, yet was no Heretic, because he would not have
defended it after a general Council had declared it to be an error. li. 2 de
bapt. c. 4. So Possidonius in the life of S. Augustine reports, vit Aug. c.
1^.
how, after the determination of the Sea Apostolic that Pelaglus opinion was
heretical, al men esteemed Pelagius an Heretic, and the Emperor made laws
against him as against an Heretic. Again S. Augustine says, He is an
Heretic in my opinion, that for some temporal commodity, and specially for
his glory and principality, coineth or else follows false or new opinion.
de vtillit. credendi cap. 1.

Let our Protestants behold them selves in this glass, The former marks agree
to the Protestants.
and vvithal let them mark al other propretles that old Heretics ever had,
and they shall find al definitions and marks of an Heretic to fall upon them
selves. And therefore they must not marvel if we vvarne al Catholic men by the
words of the Apostle in this place, to take heed of them, and to shun
their preachings, books, Their books, service, and preaching must be avoided.
conuenticles and companies. Neither need the people be curious to know what
they say, much less to confure them: but they must trust Gods Church, which
does refute and condemn them. And it is enough for them to know that they be
condemned, as S. Augustine notes in the later end of his book de heresibus.
And S. Cyprian says notably to Antonianus demanding curiously what heresies
Nouatianus did teach: Ep. 52. nu. 7.
No matter, quod he, What heresies he has or teaches, when he teaches
without. that is to say, out of the Church.

11. Subueried.] The Church seeks the amendment of the most obstinate
Heretics.
Heretics be often in corrigible, yet the Church of God cease not by all
means possible to revoke them. therefore S. Augustine says ep. 162. The
Heretic him self though swelling with odious and detestable pride, and mad
with the frovvardnes of wicked contention, as we admonish that he be aucided
lest he decriue the vveaklings and little ones, so we refuse not by all means
possible to seek his amendment and reformation.

11. By his own judgment.] Heretics cut them selves from the Church.
Other grievous offenders be separated by excommunication from the communion of
Saints and the fellowship of Gods Church, by the sentence of their Superiors
in the same Church: but Heretics more miserable and unfortunate then they,
run out of the Church of their own accord, and so give sentence against
their own souls to damnation.

THE EPISTLE OF PAVL TO PHILEMON. THE ARGUMENT.
Hearing of Philemons virtue, who was a Colossian, he vvriteth a familiar
letter from Rome (being prisoner there) about his fugitive servant Onesimus:
not doubting but that he might command him, yet rather requesting that he vvil
forgive him, yea and receive him as he would Paul him self, who also hops
to come unto him.



; Faith and charity commended alwais together, both necessary to make a
complete Christian man, and to justification and salvation.
charity and faith which thou have in our Lord JESUS, and tovvard all the
saints:; The duties of charity and mercy done to Christ's prisoners, are
exceeding acceptable to God and al good men.
have rested by thee brother.

Col. 4, 9.
; Al Spiritual men ought to be exceeding propense and ready to procure men's
pardon, and reco^ciliation to al penitents.
do thou receive him as mine own bowels.; The great debt and duty that we
owe to such as be our spiritual parents in Christ.
that thou ovvest me thine own self also. (...)
God grant I may enjoy thee in our Lord. Refresh my bowels in our Lord. vvilt
do above that also which I do say.



ANNOT.
5. Tovvard all the saints.] The Apostle sticks not to say, Charity and
faith in Christ and al his Saints, Faith and belief in Saints.
which our captious Adversaries count in Catholic men's speeches and
vvritings, very absurd, feining that in all such we make no difference betwixt
the love we bear to Christ, and the love we owe to our neighbors: betwixt
the trust or belief we have in God, and that which we have in his holy
Saints. Malice and contention does so blind al Heretics.

THE ARGUMENT OF THE EPISTLE OF S. PAVL TO THE HEBREWS.
THAT the Hebrews were not all the Jews, but only a part of them, it is
manifest Act, 6: where the primitive Church of Jerusalem, although it
consisted of Jews only, as we read Act. 2, yet is said to consist of two
sorts, Greeks and Hebrews. Which again is manifest Phil. 3. where S. Paul
co^paring him self with the Iudaical false-Apostles, says, that he also is, an
Hebrew of Hebrews. Finally, they seem to have been those Jews which were
borne in Jury, which for the most part dwelled also there. Therefore to the
Christian Jews in Jerusalem and in the rest of Jury, S. Paul vvriteth this
Epistle, out of Italic: saying thereupon, The brethren of Italy salute you.
Heb. 13. By which words, and by these other in the same place, Know ye our
brother Timothee to be dimissed, with whom (if he come the sooner) I vvil see
you, it is evident, that he vvrote this, not only after he was brought
prisoner to Rome, wherein S. Luke ends the Acts of the Apostles: but also
after he was set at liberty there again.

Many causes are given of the Doctors, why vvriting to the Jews, he does not
put his name in the beginning, Paul an Apostle etc. as he does lightly in his
Epistles to the Churches and Bishops of the Gentiles. The most likely cause is,
for that he was the preacher and Apostle and Master of the Gentiles. 2. Tim. 1.
And again in an other place he says, 1. Tim. 2.
that himself was appointed the Apostle of the Gentiles, at Peter of the
Jews. Gal. 2. Only S. Peter therefore vvriting to the Jews, 1. Pet. 1.
does use this style: Peter an Apostle of JESUS Christ etc. because he was
more peculiarly their Apostle as being the vicar of Christ, who was also
himself Yet was Christ head of the Gentiles also. So likewise his vicar S.
Peter, notwithsta^di^g his more peculiar Apostleship over the Jews.
more specially the minister of the Circumcision that is (as him self speaks)
not sen^ but to the sheep which were lost of the house of Israel. Romans 5.
Mat. 15.

The Argument of the Epistle S. Paul him self does tell us in two words,
calling it verbum solatij, Heb. 1^.
the word of solace and comfort. Which also is plain in the whole course of
the Epistle namely in the tenth chapter. v. 32. etc. Where he exhorts them
to take great comfort and confidence in their manifold tribulations sustained
of their own country men the Jews, whereof the Apostle also makes
mention to the Thessalonians. 1 Thessalonians. 2. v. 14. Those persecutions then of
the obstinate incredulous Jews their country men, was one great tentation
unto them. An other tentation was, the persuasions that they brought unto them
out of Scriptures, to cleave unto the Law, and not to believe in JESUS the
dead man.

And whereas the Jews did magnify their law, by the Prophets, and by the
Angels by whom it was given and by Moses, and by their land of promise, into
which Iosue brought them, and by their father Abraham, and by their Aaronicall
or Leuitical priesth^d and sacrifices, by their Taberna^le, and by their
Testament: he shows that our Lord JESUS, as being the natural son of God,
passes incomparably the Prophets, the Angels, and Moses: that the Rest or
quietness which God promised, was not in their earthly land, but in heaven:
that his figure Melchisedec far passed Abraham: and that his priesthod,
Sacrifice, Tabernacle, and testament, far passed theirs. In all which he
shoots often at these three marks: to take away the scandal of Christ's
death, by giving them sundry good reasons and testimonies of it: to erect
their minds from visible and earthly promises (to which only, the Jews
were wholy bent) to invisible and heavenly: and to insinuate that the
Ceremonies should now cease, the time of their correction by Christ being now
come.

The Epistle may be divided into these parts: the first, Of Christ's
excellency above the Prophets, Angels, Moses, and Iosue: c. 1. 2. 3. 4. The
second, of his priesthod and excellency thereof above the priesthod of the old
Testament: c. 5. unto the midst of the 10. The last part is of exhortation c.
10. v. 9. to the end of the Epistle.

THE EPISTLE OF PAVL THE APOSTLE TO THE HEBREWS.
Let the Christian Reader note the corruption and impudent boldness of our
Adversaries, Heretical corruption.
that upon a false private persuasion of their own, that S. Paul was not the
author of this Epistle, In the English Bible of the yer^ 2579.
leave out his name in the title of the same, contrary to the authentical
copies both Greek and Latin. The Epistle to the Hebrews, is S. Paul's.
In old time there was some doubt who should be the writer of it, but then,
when it was no less doubted whether it were Canonical Scripture at al.
Afterward the whole Church (by which only we know the true Scriptures
from other vvritings) held it and delivered it, as now she does, to the
faithful, for Canonical, and for S. Paul's Epistle. Notvvithstanding the
Adversaries would have refused the Epistle, as well as they do the Author, but
that they falsely imagine certain places thereof to make against the Sacrifice
of the Mass.

CHAP, I.
God spoke to their fathers by the Prophets: but to them selves by his own
Son, 14 who incomparably passes all the Angels.

The Epistle at the third mass on Christmas day.
Sap. 7, 26.
(...)
brightness of his glory, and the (...)
figure of his substance, and carrying al things by the word of his power, The
excellency of Christ above Angels.
making purgation of sins, sits on the right hand of the Majesty in the
high places:

Ps. 2, 7. 2. reg. 7, 14.
Thou art my son, to day have I begotten thee? and again, I vvil be to him a
father, and he shall be to me a son. in the first begotten into the world, he
says, Ps. 96, 8.
And ^ let all the Angels of God adore him. Ps. 103, 4.
He that makes his Angels, spirits: and his ministers, Ps. 44, 7.
a flame of fire. Thy throne o God for ever and ever: a rod of equity, the rod
of thy kingdom. Ps. 101, 26.
Thou in the beginning o Lord did found the earth: and the works of thy
hands are the heavens. Ps. 109, 1
Sit on my right hand, 1. Cor. 15, 25.
until I make thine enemies the footestoole of thy feet? The holy Angels
(says S. Augustine) to the society of whom we aspire in this our
peregrination, as they have eternity to continue, so also facility to know,
and felicity to rest: for they do help us without al difficulty, because
with their spiritual motions pure and free, they labor or travel not. De
Ciuis. li. 11. c. 31.
ministering spirits: sent to minister for them which shall receive the
inheritance of salvation?

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. I.
3. The figures.] (...)
To be the figure of his substance, signifies nothing else but that which S.
Paul speaks in other words to the Phillippians c. 2. v 6. that he is the
form and most express resemblance of his fathers substance. So S. Ambrose and
others expound it, and the Greek word Character is very significant to that
purpose. The B. Sacrament a figure, and yet the true body.
Note also by this place, that the Son, though he be a figure of his ^athers
substance, is notvvithstanding of the same substance. So Christ's body in the
Sacrament and his mystical death and sacrifice in the same, though called a
figure, image, or representation of Christ's visible body and sacrifice upon
the Cross, yet may be and is the self same in substance.

6. Let all the Angels adore.] The Heretics marvel that we adore Christ in the
B. Sacrament, when they might learn by this place, The adoration of Christ in
the B. Sacrament.
that wheresoever his person is, there it ought to be adored both of men and
Angels. And where they say it was not made present in the Sacrament nor
instituted to be adored, we answer that no more was he incarnate purposely
to be adored: but yet straight upon his descending from heaven, it was the
duty both of Angels and al other creatures to adore him.

CHAP. II.
He infers of the foresaid, that it shall be incomparably more damnable for
them to neglect the new Testament then the old, 3 considering the irrefragable
authority of the Apostles also. 5 Then he prosecuteth the excellency of
Christ above the Angels, 9 who nevertheless, was made lesser then Angels, to
suffer and die for men, to destroy the dominion of the Devil, 15 to deliver men
from fear of death, 17 and to be a fit Priest for men.

As that which runs out of a broken vessel, or that runs by, is lost.
(...)
lest perhaps we run out. escape if we neglect so great salvation? which
when it was begone to be declared by our Lord, of them that heard was
confirmed on us, Mar. 16, 20.
What is man, that thou art mindeful of him: Ps. 8, 5.
or the son of man, that thou visitest him? 1 Cor. 15 Ephesians. 1.
and constituted him over the works of thy hands. For in that he subjected
al things to him, he left nothing not subject to him. But now we see not as
yet al things subjected to him. P^ilip. 2, 8.
This proves against the Caluinists that Christ by his Passion merited his
own glorification. which they would not for shame deny of Christ, but that
they are at a point to deny al meritorious works, yea eue^ in Christ also* and
therefore they translate also this sentence heretically, by transposing the
words. In the Bible printed the year 1579.
because of the passion of death, crowned with glory and honor: that
through the grace of God he might taste death for all. I vvil declare thy name to
my brethren: Ps. 21, 23
in the mids of the Church vvil I praise thee. Ps. 17, 3.
And again, Ivvil have affiance in him. And again, Behold here am I and my
children: Es. 8, 18.
whom God has given me. Ose. 13, 14. 1 Cor. 15, 54.
that is to say, the Devil:

The dignity of man, in that Christ took our nature unto his person in
Deity, and not the nature of Angels.
the seed of Abraham he takes.

CHAP. III.
By example of Christ (who is incomparably more excellent then Moses also) he
exhorts them to be faithful unto God. 7 Their revvard shall be, to enter into
everlasting rest, if they persevere, as contrarievvise to be excluded (as was
shadowed in their forefathers in the wilderness) if they sin and become
incredulous.

The excellency of Christ above Moses.
as also * Moses in all his house. Nu. 12, 7


Wherefore, Ps. 94, 8
as the holy Ghost says, To day if you shall hear his voice,

to day is named, that none of you be obdurate with the fallacy of sin,
Faith is the ground work of our creation in Christ, which if we hold not fast,
all the building is lost.
beginning of his substance firm unto the end. To day if you shall hear his
voice, do not obdurate your hearts as in that exacerbation. Nu. 14, 37. 21, 23.
* whose carcasses were overthrown in the desert?

CHAP. IIII.
That they must fear to be excluded out of the foresaid rest (which he
proves out of the psalm) 12 considering that Christ sees their most inward
secrets. 14 And that he (as their Priest who also him self suffered) is able
and ready to strengthen them in confession of their faith.

Ps. 94, 11
as he said, As I swore in my wrath, if they shall enter into my rest: and
truly the works from the foundation of the world being perfited. If the
Apostle had not evidently here showed that the Sabboths rest was a figure of
the eternal repose in heaven, who durst to have applied that Scripture of Gods
rest the seventh day, to that purpose? Or how can our Adversaries now
reprehend the like application manifoldly used in all holy ancient writers to
the like end?
seventh day, Genesis 2, 2.
thus: And God rested the seventh day from al his works. If they shall enter
into my rest. Heb. 3, 7.
To day, in David saying, after so long time, as is above said, To day if you
shall hear his voice: do not obdurate your hearts. So Iosue is called in
Greek.
Jesus had given them rest: he would never speak of an other day afterward.

Whatsoever God threateneth by his word concerning the punishment of sin and
incredulity, shall be executed, be the offense never so secret, deep, or
hidden in our hearts* because Gods speech passes easily and searches thoroughly
every part, power, and faculty of man's soul.
the word of God is lively and forcible, and more persing then any two edged
svvord: and reaching unto the division of the soul and the spirit, of the
joints also and the marowes, and a discerner of the cogitations and intentes
of the heart.

The Epistle in a Mass for the election of the Pope.


ANNOTATIONS CHAP. IIII.
16. Let us go with confidence.] The Adversaries go about to prove by these
words that we need no help of Saints to obtain any thing, Christ him
self being so ready, and we being admonished to come to him with confidence
as to a most merciful Mediator and Bishop. Scripture abused against invocation
of Saints.
But by that argument they may as well take away the helps and prayers of the
living one for an other. And we do not require the help either of the Saints
in heaven, or of our brethren in earth, for any mistrust of Gods mercy, but
for our own vnvvorthines: being assured that the prayer of a just man
avails more with him, then the desire of a grievous sinner: and of a number
making intercession together, rather then of a man alone. which the Heretics
can not deny except they reprove the plain Scriptures Neither do we come
less to him, or with less confidence, when we come accompanied with the
prayers of Angels, Saints, Priests, or just men joining with us, as they
fondly imagine and pretend: but with much more affiance in his grace, mercy,
and merits, then if we prayed our selves alone.

CHAP. V.
That Christ being a man and infirms, was therein but as al Priests. and that
he also was called of God to this office: offering as the others: 8 and
suffered obediently for our example. 11 Of whose Priesthod he has much to
say, but that the Hebrews have need rather to hear their Catechism again.

The Epistle for a Bishop that is a Confessor, and for S. Thomas of Canterbury.
is appointed for me^ in those things that pertain to God: that he may offer
gifts and sacrifices for sins: 2 Par. 26, 18.
1 Par. 23 13.
Ps. 2, 7.
but he that spoke to him, My Son art thou, I this day have begotten thee.
Ps. 109, 4.
Thou art a priest for ever, according to the order of Melchisedec.

as have need of milk, and not of strong meat.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. V.
1. Every high Priest.] The description of a Priest, and his office.
By the description of a Priest or high Priest (for to this purpose al is one
matter) he proves Christ to be one in most excellent sort, First then, a
Priest must not be an Angel, or of any other nature but man's. Secondly, every
man is not a Priest, but such an one as is specially chosen out of the rest,
and preferred before other of the community, severed, assumpted, and exalted
into a higher state and dignity then the vulgar. Thirdly, the cause and
purpose why he is so sequestered and piked out from the residue, is to take
charge of Divine things, to deal as a mediator betwixt God and the people, to
be the Deputy of men in such things as they have to crave or to receive of
God, and to present or give to him again. Fourthly, the most proper and
principal part of a Priests office is, to offer oblations, gifts, and
sacrifices to God for the sins of the people: without which kind of most
sovereign duties, no person, people, or Commonwealth can appertain to God:
and which can be done by none, of what other dignity or calling soever he be
in the world, 3 Reg. 13.
that is not a Priest: diverse Princes (as we read in the Scriptures) punished
by God, 2 Par. 26.
and king Saul deposed from his kingdom, specially for attempting the same.

And generally we may learn here, 1 Reg. 13.
that in ijs qua sunt ad Deum, The Princes temporal authority how far it
extends.
in an matters touching God, his service, and religion, the Priest has only
charge and authority: as the Prince temporal is the peoples governor, guider,
and so retain, in the things touching their vvorldly affairs: Which must for all that by him be directed and manneged no otherwise, but as is agreeable to
the due worship and service of God. against which if the terrene Powers
commit any thing, the Priests ought to admonish them from God.

We learn also hereby, There is a peculiar order and calling of Priests of
the new Testament.
that every one is not a Priest, and that the people must alvvaies have
certain persons chosen out from among them, to deal in their suits and causes
with God, to pray, to minister Sacraments, and to sacrifice for them. And
whereas the Protestants vvil have no Priest, Priesthod, nor sacrifice, but
Christ and his death, pretending these words of the Apostle to be verified
only in the Priesthod and Service of the old law, and Christ's person alone,
and after him of no more: therein they show them selves to be ignorant of the
Scriptures, and of the state of the new Testament, Priests and sacrifice
necessary in the new Testament, and nothing derogatorie to Christ's priesthod
or sacrifice.
and induce a plain Atheism and Godlesnesse into the world. for, so long as
man has to do with God, there must needs be some deputed, and chosen out
from among the rest, to deal according to this declaration of the Apostle, in
things pertaining to God, and those must be Priests. for else, if men need to
deal no more, but immediately with Christ, what do they with their
Ministers? Why let they not every man pray, and minister for him self, and to
him self? What do they with Sacraments, seeing Christ's death is as well
sufficient without them, as without sacrifice? Why stands not his death as
well with Sacrifice, as with Sacraments: as well with Priesthod, as with
other Ecclesiastical function? There is no other cause in the world, but that
(Sacrifice being the most principal act of religion that man owes to God,
both by his Law, and by the law of nature) the Devil by these his ministers,
under pretense of deferring or artributing the more to Christ's death, would
abolish it.

This definition of a Priest and his function, The difference and excellency
of Christ's Priesthod.
with all the properties thereto belonging, holds not only in the law of
Moses, and order of Aarons Priesthod, but it was true before, in the law of
nature, in the Patriarchs, in Melchisedec, and now in Christ, and all his
Apostles, and Priests of the new Testament: saving that it is a peculiar
excellency in Christ, that he only offered for other men's sins, and not at
all for his own, as all other do.

4. Takes to him self.] A special prouiso for all Priests, Al true priests and
preachers must be lawfully called thereto.
preachers, and such as have to deal for the people in things pertaining to
God, that they take not that honor or office at their own hands, but by
lavvful calling and consecration, even as Aaron did. By which clause if you
examine Luther, Calvin, Beza, and the like, or if al such as now a days
intrude them selves into sacred functions, look into their consciences, great
and foul matter of damnation vvil appear.

5. Did not glorify him self.] The dignity and function of Priesthod is not
to be usurped.
The dignity of Priesthod must needs be passing high and sovereign, when it
was a promotion and pereferment in the son of God him self according to his
manhod, and when he would not usurp, nor take upon him the same, without
his fathers express commission and calling thereunto: An eternal example of
humility, and an argument of condemnation to al mortal men, that arrogate
unjustly any function or power spiritual, that is not given them from above,
and by lavvful calling, and commission of their superiors.

6. A Priest for ever.] In the 109 Psalm, from whence this testimony is
taken, both Christ's kingdom and Priesthod are set fourth. Christ both Priest
and king: but his Priesthod more excellent of the two.
but the Apostle urges specially his Priesthod, as the more excellent and
preeminent state in him, our Redemption being* vrought and achieved by
sacrifice, which was an act of his Priesthod, and not of his kingly power,
though he was properly a king also, as Melchisedec was both Priest, and king,
being a resemblance of Christ in both, but much more in his Priesthod. And our
Lord had this excellent double dignity (as appears by the discourse of S.
Paul, Psalm. 2. 109.
and his allegations here out of the Psalms) at the very first moment of his
conception or incarnation. Christ a Priest as he is man, not as he is God.
for you must bevvare of the wicked heresy of the Arians and Caluinists
(except in these later it be rather an error proceeding of ignorance) that
stick not to say, that Christ was a Priest, or did sacrifice, according to
his Godhead. Which is to make Christ, God the fathers Priest, and not his
son, and to do sacrifice and homage to him as his Lord, and not as his equal
in dignity and nature. Therefore S. Augustine says in Psalm. 109. That as he
was man, he was Priest: as God, he was not Priest. And Theodorete in Psalm
109. As man, he did offer sacrifice: but as God, he did receive sacrifice. And
again, Christ touching his humanity was called a Priest, and he offered no
other host but his own body. etc. (...). page 89.
Dialog. 1 circa med. Some of our new Masters not knovving so much, did let
fall out of their pens the contrary, and being admonished of the error, and
that it was very Arianisme, yet they persist in it of mere ignorance in the
grounds of Divinity.

7. With a strong cry.] The sacrifice on the Cross, was the principal act
of Christ's priesthod.
Though our Savior make intercession for us, according to his humane nature,
continually in heaven also: yet he does not in any external creatures make
sacrifice, nor use the prayers sacrificall, by which our redemption was
achieved, as he did in the time of his mortal life, and in the act of his
Passion, and most principally, when with a loud voice, and with this prayer,
In manus tuas commend spiritum meum, Luc. 23. 46.
he voluntarily deposed his soul, yelding it in most proper sort for a
sacrifice. for in that last point of his death, consists specially his high
Priestly office, and the very work and consummation of our redemption.

Observe more over, Priests prayers more effectual.
that though commonly every faithful person pray both for him self and others,
and offer his prayers to God, yet none offers by office, and special
deputation, and appointment, in the person of the whole Church and people,
saving the Priest. Whose prayers therefore be more effectual in them selves,
for that they be the voice of all faithful men together, made by him that is
appointed and received of God for the peoples legate. Christ's Priestly actions.
And of this kind were all Christ's prayers, in all his life and death, as all
his other actions were: his fasting, watching, preaching, instituting,
ministering, or receiving Sacraments: every one being done as Priestly actions.

7. For his reverence.] Notorious Heretical tra^slatio^ to maintain Caluins
horrible blasphemy.
These words have our English Translators perniciously and most
presumptuously corrupted, turning them thus, In that which he feared,
contrary to the version and sense of al antiquity, (...) Flac. Illyr. upon
this place.
and to Erasmus also, and contrary to the ordinary use of the Greek word,
as Beza him self defines it Luc. 2 v. 25: and contrary to the propriety of
the Greek phrase, as not only the Catholics, but * the best learned
Lutherans do show and prove by many examples. They follow herein the singular
presumption of Calvin, who was the first (as his fellovv Beza confesses)
that ever found out this interpretation. Which neither S. Chrysostom, nor any
other, as perfect Graecians as they were, could ever epsy. Where, only to
have made choice of that impious and arrogant Sectaries sense, before the said
fathers and all the Churches besides, had been shameful enough: but to set the
same down for very Scripture of Gods blessed word, that is intolerable, and
passes al impiety. And we see plainly that they have no conscience,
indifferency, nor other purpose, but to make the poor Readers believe, that
their opinions be Gods own word, and to dravv the Scriptures to sound after
the fantasy of their heresies. But if the good Reader knevv, for what point
of doctrine they have thus framed their translation, they would abhor them
to the depth of Hell. Caluins blasphemy that Christ suffered hell pains upon
the cross, and that his death otherwise were insufficient.
forsooth it is thus: they would have this Scripture mean, that Christ was
in horrible fear of damnation, and that he was not only in pains corporal
upon the Cross (which they hold, not to have been sufficient for man's
redemption) but that he was in the very sorrows and distresses of the damned,
without any difference, but that it was not everlasting, as theirs is.

For this horrible blasphemy (which is their interpretation of Christ's
descending into Hell) Gods holy word must be corrupted, and the sacrifice of
Christ's death (whereof they talk so presumptuously) must no^ be enough for
our redemption, except he be damned for us also to the pains of Hell. Vvo be to
our poor Country, that must have such books, and read such translations. See
Calvin and Beza in their Commentaries and Annotations upon this place, and you
shall see, that for defense of the said blasphemies they have thus translated
this text. See the Annotations before, Christ yelding up the Ghost,
accomplished our redemption.
Act. 2, 27 and Mat. 27, 46.

9. Consummate.] The full work of his sacrifice, by which we were redeemed,
was wholy consummate and accomplished, at the yelding up of his spirit to God
the Father, when he said, Consummatum est. Io. 19. 30*
though for to make the same effectual to the salvation of particular men, he
him self did diverse things, and now does in heaven, and our selves also must
use many means, for the application thereof to our particular necessities. See
the next Annotation.

9. Was made to all.] The Protestants upon pretense of the sufficiency of
Christ's Passion, and his only redemption, Christ's Passion sufficient for all,
but profitable to them only which obey, not by faith only, but by doing as he
and his Church command.
oppose them selves guilefully in the sight of the simple, against the
invocation of Saints, and their intercession, and help of us, against our
penitential works or suffering for our own sins, either in this life or
the next: against the merits of fasting, praying, alms, and other things
commended to us in holy Vvritte, and against most things done in the Church, in
sacrifice, Sacrament, and ceremony. But this place and many other show, that
Christ's Passion, though it be of it self far more sufficient and forcible,
then the Protestants in their baseness of understanding can consider, yet
profits none but such, as both do his commandments, and use such remedies
and means to apply the benefit thereof to them selves, as he appoints in
his word, or by the Holy Ghost in his Church. And the Heretics that say,
faith only is the thing required to apply Christ's benefits unto us, are
hereby also easily refuted. for we do not obey him only by believing, but by
doing whatsoever he commands. Lastly, we note in the same words, that
Christ appoints not by his absolute and eternal election, men so to be
partakers of the fruit of his redemption, without any condition or respect of
their own works, obedience, or free vvil: but with this condition
alvvaies, if men vvil obey him, and do that which he appoints. See S.
Augustine (or Prosper) to. 7 Respons. Prosperi li. 2. ^r^iculo 1 ad obiectiones
Vincentij, where he says of the cup of Christ's passion, It has in deed in
it self, to profit al: but if it be not drunken, it heals not.

11. Inexplicable.] The Apostle omitteth to speak of the B. Sacrament as a
mystery then to deep for the Jews capacity.
Intending to treat more largely and particularly of Christ's or Melchisedek^
Priesthod, he forvvarneth them that the mystery thereof is far passing their
capacity, and that through their feeblenes in faith and weakness of
understanding, he is forced to omit diverse deep points concerning the
Priesthod of the new law. Among which (no doubt) the mystery of the
Sacrament and Sacrifice of the altar, called MASS, was a principal and
pertinent matter: which the Apostles the Fathers of the primitive Church used
not to treat of so largely and particularly in their, vvritings, which might
come to the hands of the unfaithful, who of al things took soonest scandal of
the B. Sacrament, as we see Io. 6. He spoke to the Hebru^s (says S. Hierom ep
126) that is, to the Jews, and not to faithful men, to whom he might have
been hold to utter the Sacrament. And in deed it was not reasonable to talk
much to them of that sacrifice which was the resemblance of Christ's death,
when they thought not right of Christ's death it self. Which the Apostles
wisdoms and silence our Adversaries wickedly abuse against the holy Mass.

CHAP. VI.
He exhorts them to be perfect scholars, and not to need to be Catechumen^
again* 4 considering they can not be baptized again: 9 and remembering their
former good works; for the which God vvil not fail to perform them his
promis, if they fail not to imitate Abraham by perseverance in the faith with
patience. 20 And so ends his digression, and returns to the matter of
Christ's Priesthod.

Heb. 10, 26.
to come,

It is evident by these words, against the Nouatians and the Caluinists, that
S. Paul meant not precisely, that they had done, or could do any such sin,
whereby they should be put out of all hope of salvation, and be sure of
damnation^, during their life.
we confidently trust of you, my best beloved, better things and nearer to
salvation: although we speak thus. Genesis 22, 16.
he swear by him self,

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. VI.
1. The foundation of penance.] The Apostles form of Catechism, and the
poi^ts thereof.
We see hereby, what the first grounds of Christian institution or
Catechism were in the primitive Church, and that there was ever a necessary
instruction and belief of certain points had by word of mouth and tradition,
before men came to the Scriptures: which could not treat of things so
particularly, as was requisite for the teaching of al necessary grounds.
Among these points were the 12 Articles contained in the Apostles Creed: the
doctrine of penance before Baptism: the manner and necessity of Baptism* the
Sacrament of Imposition of hands after Baptism, called Confirmation: the
articles of the Resurrection, Judgment, and such like. Without which things
first laid, if one should be sent to pick his faith out of the Scripture,
there would be mad rule quickly. See S. Augustine in exposit. inchoat. ep.
ad To. versut finem.

4. Impossible.] The Nouatians (as al Heretics) made Scripture the ground of
their heresy.
How hard the holy Scriptures be, and how dangerously they be read of the
unlearned, or of the proud be they never so well learned, this one place might
teach us. Ambr. de poenit. li. 2. c. 2.
Vvhereat the Nouatians of old did so stumble, that they thought, and
heretically taught, that none falling into any mortal sin after Baptism,
could be received to mercy or penance in the Church: and so to a contentious
man, that would follow his own sense, or the bare words, without regard of
the Churches sense and rule of faith (after which every Scripture must be
expounded) the Apostles speech does here sound. Even as to the simple, Other
places make no more for the Protestants then this does for Nouatus.
and to the Heretic that submits not his sense to the Churches judgment,
certain places of this same Epistle, seem at the first sight, to stand
against the daily oblation or sacrifice of the Mass: which yet in truth make
no more for that purpose, then this text we now stand on, serves the
Nouatians: as when we come to the places, it shall be declared.

And let the good Readers beware here also of the Protestants exposition, for
they are herein worse then Nouatians, Caluins heresy upon this place, worse
then the Nouatians.
specially such as precisely follow Calvin: holding impiously, that it is
impossible for one that forsakes entirely his faith, that is, becomes an
Apostata or an Heretic, to be received to penance or to Gods mercy. To
establish which false and damnable sense, Ambr. loco cit. and in ep. ad Heb.
Chry. ho. 9 in c. 6 ad Hebr.
these fellows make nothing of S. Ambroses, S. Chrysostoms, and the other
fathers exposition, which is the holy Churches sense, That the Apostle means
of that penance which is done before and in Baptism. The fathers exposition
of this place.
which is no more to say, but that it is impossible to be baptized again, and
thereby to be renouated and illuminated, to die, be buried, and rise again the
second time in Christ, in so easy and perfect penance and cleansing of sins,
as that first sacrament of generation did yield: which applies Christ's death
in such ample manner to the receiver, that it takes away al pains due for
sins before committed: and therefore requires no further penance afterward,
for the sins before committed, al being vvashed away by the force of that
Sacrament duly taken. S. Augustine calls the remission in Baptism, Magnam
indulgentiam, a great pardon. Enchirid. c. 64.

The Apostle therefore warns them, The Sacrament of penance is ready for all
sinners whatsoever.
that if they fall from their faith, and from Christ's grace and law which
they once received in their Baptism, they may not look to have any more that
first great and large remedy applied unto them, nor no man else that sins
after Baptism: Hiero. ep. 8 ad Demetriad. c. 6.
though the other penance, which is called the Second table after shipwreck,
which is a more paineful medicine for sin then Baptism, requiring much
fasting, praying, and other afflictions corporal, is open not only to other
sinners, but to al once baptized, Heretics, or oppugners of the truth
maliciously and of purpose or what way so ever, during this life. See S.
Cypriah ep. 52. S. Ambrose upon this place. S. Augustine cont. ep. Parm. li. 2.
c. 13. and ep. 50. S. Damascene li. 4. c. 10.

10. God is not unjust.] Gods justice in revvarding meritorious works.
It is a world to see, what wringing and vvrithing the Protestants make, to
shift them selves from the evidence of these words, which make it most
clear to all not blinded in pride and contention, that good works be
moritorious, and the very cause of salvation, so far that God should be unjust,
if he rendered not heaven for the same. Reuera grandis iniustitia Dei (says S.
Hierom) Si tantum peocata puniret, and bona opera non susciperet. That is, In
deed great were Gods injustice ^ if he would only punish sins, and would
not receive good works. Li. 2. cont. Iouin. c. 2.

CHAP. VII.
To prove the Priesthod of Christ incomparably to excel the priesthod of Aaron
(and therefore, that Leuitical priesthod now to cease, and that law also with
it) he scanneth every word of the verse alleged out of the Psalm, Our Lord
has sworn: thou art a Priest for ever, according to the order of Melchisedec.

Genesis 14, 18.
* who met Abraham returning from the slaughter of the kings, and blessed
him: When the fathers and catholic expositours pike out allegories and
mysteries out of the names of me^, the Protestants not endued with the Spirit
vvherby the scriptures were given, deride their holy labors in the search of
the same: but the Apostle finds high mystery in the very names of persons
and places, as you see.
the king of justice: and then also king of Salem, which is to say, king of
peace,

Nu. 18, 21. Deu. 18, 1. Ios. 14, 4.
have commandment to take tithes of the people according to the Law, that is
to say, of their brethren: albeit them selves also issued out of the loins of
Abraham. The tithes given to Melchisedech were not given as to a mere mortal
man, as al of the tribe of Leui and Aarons order were: but as to one
representing the Son of God, who now lives and reigns and holds his
priesthod and the functions thereof for ever.
men that die, receive tithes: but there he has witness, that he lives.
Priesthod.
priestes'. That thou art a priest for ever, according to the order of
Melchisedec. Ps. 109, 4.
Ps. 10^, 4.
Our Lord has sworn, and it shall not repent him: thou art a priest for ever)
The Epistle for a Co^fessor that is a Bishop.
being many, because that by death they were prohibited to continue: them that
go
going' by him self to God: Christ according to his humane nature prays for
us, and continually represents his former passion and merits to God the
Father.
alvvaies living to make intercession for us.

Leu. 9, 7. 16, 6.
then for the peoples. for this he did once, in offering him self.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. VII.
1. Melchisede^.] The excellency of this person was so great, that some of
the antiquity took him to be an Angel, and some the holy Ghost. Which opinion
not only the Hebrews, that avouch him to be Sem the son of Noe, but also the
chief fathers of the Christians do condemn: not doubting but he was a mere
man and a Priest and a king, whosoever he was. for else he could not in office
and order and sacrifice have been so perfect a type and resemblance of our
Savior, as in this Chapter and other is shevved.

3. Without father.] The resembla^ce of Melchisedec to Christ, in many points.
Not that he was without father and mother, says S. Hierom ep. 126: for
Christ him self was not without father, according to his divinity, not
without mother, in his humanity: but for that his petigree is not set out in
the Genesis, as the genealogy of other Patriarchs is, but is suddenly induced
in the holy history, no mention made of his stock, tribe, beginning or
ending, and therefore in that case also resembling in a sort the son of God,
whose generation was extraordinary, miraculous, and ineffable, according to
both his natures, lacking a father in the one, By the sundry excellencies of
Melchisedeck^ Priesthod is proved the excellency of the Priesthod and
sacrifice of the new Testament.
and a mother in the other. his person having neither beginning nor ending, and
his kingdom, and Priesthod specially, in him self and in the Church, being
eternal, both in respect of the time past, and the time to come: as the said
Doctor in the same epistle vvriteth.

4. Behold.] To prove that Christ's Priesthod far passes the Priesthod of
Aaron: and the Priesthod of the new Testament, the Priesthod of the old law:
and consequently that the sacrifice of our Savior and the sacrifice of the
Church does much excel the sacrifices of Moses law, he disputes pro^oundly
of the preeminences of Melchisedec above the great Patriarch Abraham, who was
father of the Levites.

4. Tithes.] The first preeminence, that Abraham paid tithes, and that of the
best and most chief things that he had, unto Melchisedec, as a duty and
homage, not for him self only in person, He received tithes of Abraham, and
consequently of Leui and Aaron.
but for Leui, who yet was not borne, and so for the whole Priesthod of
Leuies stock, acknovvledging thereby, Melchisedec not only to be a Priest,
but his Priest and Superior, and so of all the Leuitical order. And it is here
to be observed, that whereas in the 14 of Genesis, whence this holy narration
is taken, both in the Hebrew, and in the 70, it stands indifferent or
doubtful, whether Melchisedec paid tithes to Abraham, or took tithes of
him: the Apostle here puts al out of controversy, plainly declaring that
Abraham paid tithes to the other, at the inferior to his Priest and Superior.
Tithes.
And touching payment of tithes, it is a natural duty, that men owe to God in all laws, and to be given to his Priests in his behalf, for their honor and
liuelihod. Jacob promised or vowed to pay them, Genesis 28. Moses appointed them
Leuit. 27. Number. 18. Deuteronomy. 12. 14. 26. Christ confirms that duty Mat. 23: and
Abraham specially here gives them to Melchisedec plainly thereby approving
them or their equivalent to be due to Christ and the Priesthod of the new
Testament, much more then either in the law of Moses, or in the law of
Nature. Of which tithes due to the Clergy of Chrises Church see S. Cyprian
ep. 66. S. Hierom ep. 1* c. 7. and ep. 2 c. 5. to Hellodorus and Nepolianus. S.
Augustine ser. 119 de tempore.

7. Is blessed of the better.] He blessed Abraham.
The second preeminence is, that Melchisedec did bless Abraham: which we see
here S. Paul makes a great and sovereign holy thing, grounding our Saviors
prerogative above the whole order of Aaron therein: and we see that in this
sort it is the proper act of Prieshod ^ and that without al controversy as
the Apostle says, Blessing a great preemine^ce, specially in Priests.
he is greater in dignity, that has authority, to bless, then the person
that has not, and therefore the Priests vocation to be in this behalf far
above any earthly king, who has not power to give benediction in this sacred
manner, neither to man, nor other creature. As here Melchisedec, so Christ
blessed much more, and so have the Bishops of his Church done, and do, Which
no man can marvel that our forefathers have so highly esteemed and sought for,
if he mark the wonderful mystery and grace thereof here expressed. (...)
also which here takes blossing of Melchisedec, him self (though in an
inferior sort) blessed his sons, as the other Patriarchs did, and fathers do
their children by that example.

11. If consummation.] The full accomplishment of man's redemption was not by
Aarons but by Melchisedecks Priesthod.
The principal proposition of the whole epistle and all the Apostle discourse,
is inserted and grounded upon the former prerogatives of Melchisedec above
Abraham and Leul: that is, that the end, perfection, accomplishment, and
consummation of al man's duties and debtes to God, by the general redemption,
satisfaction, full price and perfect ransom of al mankind, was not achieved
by any or all the Priests of Aarons order, not by any sacrifice or act of that
Priesthod, or of all the law of Moses, which was grounded upon the Leuitical
Priesthod, but by Christ and his Priesthod, which is of the order and rite of
Melchisedec.

11. What necessity.] This disputation of the preeminence of Christ's
Priesthod above the Leuitical order, The Apostle to consute the Jews false
persuasion of Aarons Priesthod and sacrifices, speaks altogether of the
sacrifice of the Cross.
is against the erroneous persuasion of the Jews, that thought their law.
Priesthod, and sacrifices to be everlasting, and to be sufficient in them
selves, without any other Priest then Aaron and his successors and without al
relation to Christ's Passion or any other redemption or remission, then that
which their Leuitical offices did procure: not knovving that they were all
figures of Christ's death, and to be ended and accomplished in the same. Which
point well understood and kept in mind, will clear the whole controversy
betwixt the Catholics and Protestants, concerning the sacrifice of the
Church, for, the scope of the Apostles disputation being, to avouch the
dignity, preeminence, necessity, and eternal fruit and effect of Christ's
Passion, he had not to treat at all of the other, which is a sacrifice
depending of his Passion, specially vvriting to the Hebrews, that were to be
instructed and reformed first touching the sacrifice of the Cross, before they
could fruitfully hear any thing of the other, though in covert and by most
evident sequel of disputation, the learned and faithful may easily perceive
whereupon the said Sacrifice of the Church (which is the Mass) is grounded.
And therefore S. Hierom says, ep. 126: that al these commendations of
Melchisedec are in the type of Christ, euius profectus Ecclesiae sacramenta
sunt.

12. Translated.] Note well this place, and you shall perceive thereby, that
every lavvful form and manner of law, No lavvful state of people with out an
external Priesthod.
state, or government of Gods people depends on Priesthod, rises, stands,
falls, or alters with the Priesthod. In the law of Nature, the state of
the people hanged on one kind of Priesthod: in the law of Moses, of an other
in the state of Christianity, of an other: and therefore in the former sentence
the Apostle said, that the Jewish people or Commonwealth had their law under
the Leuitical Priesthod, (...)
and the Greek more properly expresses the matter, that they were
legitimated, that is to say, made a lavvful people or community under God, by
the Priesthod* for there is no just nor lavvful Commonwealth in the world,
that is not made legal and Gods peculiar, External Priesthod necessary for the
new Testament.
and distinguished from unlawful Commonvveales that hold of false gods, or
of none at al, by Priesthod. Whereupon it is clear, that the new law, and
al Christian peoples holding of the same, is made lavvful by the Priesthod of
the new Testament, and that the Protestants shamefully are deceived, and
deceive others, that would have Christian Commonvveales to lack an external
Priesthod, or Christ's death to abolish the same* for, this is a demonstration.
that if Christ have abolished Priesthod, he has abolished the new law,
which is the new Testament and state of Grace, which as Christian
Commonvvealths live under. Neither were it true, that the Priesthod were
translated with the Law, if al external Priesthod ended by Christ's death,
where the new law began* for so the law should not depend on Priesthod, but
dure when al Priesthod were ended: which is against S. Paul's doctrine.

Furthermore it is to be noted, External sacrifice also necessary for the same.
that this legitimation or putting Communities under law, and Priesthod, of
what order soever, is no otherwise, but joining one with an other in one
homage or sacrifice external, which is the proper act of Priesthod for, as no
lavvful state can be without priesthod, so no priesthod can be without
sacrifice. And we mean alvvaies of Priesthod and sacrifice taken in their
own proper signification, as here S. Paul takes them, for, the constitution
difference, alteration, or translation of states and laws rise not upon any
mutation of spiritual or metaphorically taken Priesthod, or sacrifice: but upon
those things in proper acception, as it is most plain.

Lastly, it follows of this, that though Christ truly sacrificed him self
upon the Cross (there also a Priest according to the order of Melchisedec) and
there made the full redemption of the world, The translation of the old
Priesthod and sacrifices, must needs be into the said Priesthod and sacrifice
of the Church.
confirmed, and consummated his compact, and Testament, and the law and
priesthod of this his new and eternal state, by his blood: yet that can not be
the form of sacrifice into which the old Priesthod and sacrifices were
translated, whereupon the Apostle infers the translation of the Law. For
they all were figures of Christ's death, and ended in effect at his death, yet
they were not altered into that kind of sacrifice, which was to be made but
once, and was executed in such a sort, that peoples and nations Christened
could not meet often to worship at it, nor have their law and Priests
constituted in the same* though for the honor and duty, remembrance and
representatio^ thereof, not only we Christian^, but also al peoples faithful
both of Jews and Gentiles, have had their priesthod and sacrifices according
to the difference of their states. Which kind of Sacrifices were translated
one into an other: and so no doubt is the Priesthod Leuitical properly turned
into the Priesthod and sacrifice of the Church, according to Melchisedecks
rite, and Christ's institution in the forms of bread and wine. See the next
note.

17. A Priest for ever.] Christ is not called a Priest for ever, only for that
his person is eternal, How Christ is a Priest for eues.
or for that he sits on the right hand of God, and perpetually prays or
makes intercession for us, or for that the effect of his death is everlasting:
for all this proves not that in proper signification his Priesthod is
perpetual: but according to the judgment of all the fathers grounded upon this
deep and divine discourse of S. Paul, and upon the very nature, definition,
and propriety of Priesthod, and the excellent act and order of Melchisedec, and
the state of the new law, Christ's eternal Priesthod consists in the perpetual
sacrifice of his body and blood in the Church.
he is a Priest for ever according to Melchisedecks order, specially in respect
of the sacrifice of his holy body and blood, instituted at his last supper, and
executed by his commission, commandment, and perpetual concurrence with his
Priests, in the forms of bread and wine: in which things only the said high
Priest Melchisedec did sacrifice. For though S. Paul make no express mention
hereof, because of the depth of the mystery, and their incredulity or
feebleness to whom he vvrote: yet it is evident in the judgment of all the
learned fathers (without exception) that ever vvrote either upon this epistle,
or upon the 14 of Genesis, or the Psalm 109, or by occasion have treated of
the sacrifice of the altar, that the eternity and proper act of Christ's
Priesthod, and consequently the immutability of the new, law, consists in the
perpetual offering of Christ's body and blood in the Church.

Which thing is so well known to the Adversaries of Christ's Church and
Priesthod, The Protestants cauilling upon particles, against Melchisedecks
sacrifice and Priesthod, directly against the Apostle.
and so granted, that they be forced impudently to cavil upon certain Hebrew
particles, that Melchisedec did not offer in bread and wine: yea and when
that will not serve, plainly to deny him to have been a Priest: which is to
give checkmate to the Apostle, and to overthrow all his discourse. Thus vvhiles
these wicked men pretend to defend Christ's only Priesthod, they in deed
abolish as much as in them lies, the whole order, office, and state of his
eternal law and Priesthod.

Arnobius says, By the mystery of bread and wine he was made a Priest for
ever. And again, Christ's eternal Priesthod and sacrifice in the Church is
proved out of the fathers.
The eternal memory, by which he gave the food of his body to them that fear
him* in psalm. 109. 110. Lactatius, In the Church he must needs have his
eternal Priesthod according to the order of Melabisedec. Li. 14. Institut. S.
Hierom to Luagrius, Ep. 126.
Aarons Priesthod had an end, bus Melchisedecks, that is, Christ's and the
Churches is perpetual, That is, from Ada^ to the end of the world,
represented by sacrifice.
both for the time past and to come. S. Chrysostom therefore calls the
Churches sacrifice, hostia^ inconsumptib^em, an host or sacrifice that can not
be consumed. ho. 17 in 9 Hebr. S. Cyprian, bostiam qua sublatae, nulla esset
futura religio, an host which being taken away, there could be no religion. de
Cana^ D^mini. nu 2. Emissenus, perpetuam oblationem and perpetuo currentem
redemptionem, a perpetual oblation and a redemption that runs or continues
everlastingly. ho. 5 de Pasch. And our Savior expresses so much in the very
institution of the B. Sacrament of his body and blood: specially when he
calls the later kind, the new Testament in his blood, signifying that as the
old law was established in the blood of beasts, so the new (which is his
eternal Testament) should be dedicated and perpetual in his own blood: not
only as it was shed on the Cross, but as given in the Chalice. And therefore
into this sacrifice of the altar (says S. Augustine li. 17 de Ciuit. c. 20. S.
Leo ser. 8 de Passione, and the rest) were the old sacrifices to be
translated. See S. Cyprian ep. 63 ad Cecil. nu. 2. Ambrose de Sacram. li. 5. 6.
4. S. Augustine in Psalm. 33. Conc. ^. and li. 17. de Ciuit. c. 17. S. Hierom
ep. 17. c. 2. and ep. 126. Epiph. har. 55. Theodoret in Psalm. 109. Damascene
li. 4. c. 14.

Finally if any of the fathers, or all the fathers, had either wisdoms, grace,
or intelligence of Gods word and mysteries, this is the truth. If nothing
vvil serve our Adversaries, Christ Jesus confound them, and defend his eternal
Priesthod, and state of his new Testament established in the same.

18. Of the former commandment.] The old commandment, and the new.
The whole law of Moses containing all their old Priesthod, sacrifice,
sacraments, and ceremonies, is called the Old commandment: and the new
Testament containing the sacrifice of Christ's body and blood, and all the
sacraments and graces given by the same, is named the New mandatum: for which
our forefathers called the Thursday in the holy vveke, Maundy thursday why so
called.
Maundy thursday, because that in it, the new law and Testament was dedicated
in the Chalice of his blood: the old mandatum, law, Priesthod, and sacrifices,
for that they were insufficient and imperfect, being taken away: and this new
sacrifice, after the order of Melchisedec, given in the place thereof. The
introduction of a new Priesthod.


19. The introduction.] Ever observe, that the abrogation of the old law, is
not an abolishing of al Priesthod, of al Priesthod, but an introductio^ of a
new, containing the hope of eternal things, where the old had but temporal.
The eternity of the new Priesthod confirmed by the fathers oath, and Christ's
passion.


21. With an oath.] This oath signifies the infallible and absolute promis of
the eternity of the new Priesthod and state of the Church: Christ by his
death, and blood shed in the sacrifice of the Cross, confirming it, sealing
it, and making him self the surety and pledge thereof. For though the new
Testament was instituted, given, and dedicated in the Supper, yet the
vvarrant, confirmation, and eternal operation thereof, was achieved upon the
Cross, in the one oblation and one general and ever lasting redemption there
made.

23. Being many.] By the comparison of many priests, and one, is not meant that
there is but one Priest of the new Testament.
The Protestants not understanding this place, feine very folishly, that the
Apostle should make this difference betwixt the old state and the new: that in
the old, there were many Priests: in the new, none at all but Christ. Which is
against the Prophet Esaias, Esa. c. 61.
specially prophesying of the Priests of the new Testament (as S. Hierom
declares upon the same place) in these words, You shall be called the (...)*
Priests of God: the (...).
ministers of our God, shall it be said to your and it takes away al visible
Priesthod, and consequently the lawful state that the Church and Gods people
have in earth, with al Sacraments and external worship.

The Apostle then means first, The meaning is, that the absolute sacrifice of
eternal redemption could not be done by those many Aaronical priests but by one
only, Christ Jesus: who lives a Priest for ever, has no successor, and as
chief priest, works and concurreth with al Priests in their priestly
functions.
that the absolute sacrifice of co^summation, perfection, and universal
redemption, was but one, once done, and by one only Priest done, and therefore
it could not be any of the sacrifices, or all the sacrifices of the Jews law,
or wrought by any or by all of them, because they were a number at once, and
succeding one an other, every of their offices and functions ending by their
death, and could not work such an eternal redemption as by Christ only was
wrought upon the Cross. Secondly, S. Paul insinuates thereupon, that Christ
never loses the dignity or practice of his eternal Priesthod, by death nor
otherwise, never yeldeth it up to any, never has successors after him, that
may enter into his room or right of Priesthod, as Aaron and al other had in
the Leuitical Priesthod, but that him self works and concurreth with his
ministers the Priests of the new Testament, in all their acts of Priesthod, as
well of sacrifice as Sacrament, blessing, preaching, praying, and the like
what so ever.

This therefore was the fault of the Hebrews, that they did not acknowledge
their Leuitical sacrifices and Priesthod to be reformed and perfited by
Christ's sacrifice on the Cross: and against them the Apostle only disputes,
and not against our Priests of holy Church, or the number of them, who al
confess their Priesthod and al exercises of the same, to depend upon Christ's
only perpetual Priesthod.

27. This did he once.] This is the special preeminence of Christ, that the
offers for other men's sins only, having none of his own to offer for, as
al other Priests both of the old and new law have. And this again is the
special dignity of his own person, not communicable to any other of what
order of Priesthod so ever, that he by his death (which is the only oblation
that is by the Apostle declared to be irreiterable in it self) paid the one
full sufficient ransom for the redemption of all sins.

CHAP. VIII.
Out of the same Psalm 109 he urges this also, Sit thou on my right hand,
shevving that the Leuitical tabernacle on earth, was but a shadovv of his true
Tabernacle in heaven: without which he should not be a Priest at all: 6
Whereas he is of a better Priesthod the^ they, as also he proves by the
excellency of the new Testament above the old.

Christ living and reigning in heaven, continues his priestly function still,
and is minister not of Moses Sancta and tabernacle, but of his own body and
blood, which be the true holies, and tabernacle, not formed by man, but by
Gods own hand.
minister of the holies, and of the true tabernacle, which our Lord pight and
not man. (...)*
serve the exampler and shadow of heavenly things. As it was ansvvered Moses,
when he finished the tabernacle, Exo, 25, 9. 40.
* See (quod he) that thou make al things according to the exampler which was
shevved thee in the mount.

The promises and effects of the Law were temporal, but the promises and
effects of Christ's Sacraments in the Church be eternal.
if that former had been void of fault, there should not certes a place of a
second been sought. Hier. 31, 31.
For blaming them, he says: Behold the days shall come, says our Lord: and I
vvil consummate upon the house of Israel, and upon the house of Judah a new
Testament: And in saying a new, the former he has made old. And that which
grows ancient and waxes old, is nigh to utter decay.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. VIII.
3. Necessary that he also.] Christ's priesthod and sacrifice is external, not
spiritual only.
Even now being in heaven, because he is a Bishop and Priest, he must needs
have somewhat to offer, and wherein to do sacrifice: and that not in spiritual
sort only, for that could not make him a Priest of any certain order. And it
is most false and wicked, to hold with the Caluinistes, Beza in schol. Test.
Gracolat. in c. 7 Heb. number. 8.
that Melchisedecks Priesthod was wholy spiritual. For then Christ's death
was not a corporal, external, visible, and truly named sacrifice: neither
could Christ or Melchisedec be any otherwise a Priest, then every faithful man
is: which to hold (as the Caluinists following their own doctrine must needs
do) is directly against the Scriptures, and no less against Christ's one
oblation of his body upon the Cross, then it is against the daily sacrifice of
his body upon the altar. Therefore he has a certain host in external and
proper manner, to make perpetual oblation thereby in the Church: for, visible
and external act of sacrificing in heaven he does not exercise.

4. If upon the earth.] How Christ's body is made fit to be sacrificed and
eaten perpetually.
It is by his death, and resurrection to life again, that his body is become
apt and fit in such divine sort to be sacrificed perpetually. For if he had
lived in mortal sort still, that way of mystical representation of breaking
his body and separating the blood from the same, could not have been agreeable,
and so the Church and Christian people should have lacked a priesthod and
sacrifice, and Christ him self should not have been a Priest of a peculiar
order, but either must have offered in the things that Aarons Priests did, or
else have been no Priest at all. For, to have offered only spiritually, as all
faithful men do, that could not be enough for his vocation, and our redemption,
and state of the new Testament. How his flesh was made fit to be offered and
eaten in the B. Sacrament, by his death, see Isychius li. 1 in leuit. cap. 2.

5. Heavenly things.] As the Church or state of the new Testament is commonly
called Regnum coelorum and Dei, Kingdom of heaven, and heavenly things, spoken
of the Church.
in the Scriptures, so these heavenly things be probably taken by learned men,
for the mysteries of the new Testament. And it seems that the pattern given
to Moses to frame his tabernacle by, was the Church, rather then the heavens
them selves: al S. Paul's discourse tending to show the difference betwixt the
new Testament and the old, and not to make comparison between the state of
heaven and the old law. Though incidently, because the condition of the new
Testament more nearly resembles the same, then the old state does, he
sometime may speak somewhat thereof also.

10. Into their mind.] Grace, the effect of the new Testament.
This also and the rest following is fulfilled in the Church, and is the proper
effect of the new Testament, which is the grace and spirit of love, graffed in
the hearts of the faithful by the holy Ghost, vvorking in the Sacraments and
sacrifice of the new law to that effect.

10. Their God.] The new Testament or covenant between God and man.
This mutual covenant made betwixt God and the faithful, is that which was
dedicated and established, Luc. (...).
first in the chalice of his blood, called therefore the new Testament in his
blood: and which was straight after ratified by the death of the ^^stator,
upon the Cross.

11. Shall not teach.] So it was in the primitive Church, in such specially as
were the first founders of our new state in Christ. And that which was
verified in the Apostles and other principal men, Scriptures abused for
pha^tastical inspirations.
the Apostle speaks generally as though it were so in the whole. as S.
Peter applies the like out of Joel, and our Savior so speaks, Act. 2.
when he says that such as believe in him, Io. 14. ^. 12.
shall work miracles of diverse sorts. Christian men then must not abuse this
place to make challenge of new inspirations and so great knowledge that they
need no Scriptures or teaching in this life, as some Heretics do: with much
like reason and show of Scriptures as the Protestants have to refuse external,
sacrifice. And it is no less fantastical madness to deny external sacrifice,
sacraments, or Priesthod, then it is to abolish teaching and preaching.

CHAP. IX.
In the old Testament, that secular Sanctuary had two parts: the one
signifying that time, with the ceremonies thereof for the emundation of the
flesh: the other signifying heaven, which then was shut, until our High
priest Christ entered into it, and that with his own blood, shed for the
emundation of our consciences. Whereupon he concludes the excellency of his
tabernacle and host above the old. 25 Noting also the differences, that he
entered but once (so effectual was that one blouddy offering of himself, for
ever) vvheras the Leuitical High priest entered every year once.

(...)
of service, Exo. 25. 26, 1. 36.
and a secular sanctuary. The Epistle upon Imber saturday in September.
Sancta Sanctorum: 3 Reg. 8.
and * the tables of the testament, 2 Par. 5.
Exo. 25, 22.
of which things it is not needeful to speak now particularly. Exo 30, 10.
Leu. 16, 2. 30.
The way to heaven was not open before Christ's passion. and therefore the
Patriarchs and good men of the old Testament were in some other place of rest
until then.
not yet manifested, the former tabernacle as yet standing. (...)
parable of the time present: according to which are offered gifts and
hosts, which can not concerning the conscience make perfect Al things done in
the old Testament and priesthod were figures of Christ's actions.
him that serves,

The Epistle upon Passion Sunday.
Christ assisting an high Priest of the good things to come, by a more ample
and more perfect tabernacle not made with hand, that is, not of this creation:
Leu. 9, 8, 16, 6. 14*
Nu. 19.
shall
hath' the blood of Christ who by the holy Ghost offered himself unspotted
unto God, cleanse
cleansed' our conscience from dead works, to serve the living God? Gal. 3,
15*
come between. Here we may learn that the Scriptures contain not al
necessary tites or truths, when neither the place to which the Apostle
alludeth, nor any other, mentions half these ceremonies, but he had them by
tradition.
water and scarlet wool and hyssope, sprinkled the very book also it self
and all the people, Exo. 24. 8.


By this word which signifies to empty or draw out even to the botom, is
declared the plentiful and perfect redemption of sin by Christ.
to exhaust the sins of many, the second time he shall appear without sin
to them that expect him, unto salvation. ad exhaurienda, peccata.


ANNOTATIONS CHAP. IX.
4. A golden pot.] Relikes.
The Protestants count it superstitious to keep with honor and reverence the
holy memories or monuments of Gods benefits and miracles, or the tokens of
Christ's Passion, as his Cross, garments, or other things appertaining to him
or his Saints, and think it impossible that such things should dure so long:
They continue without putrefaction.
when they may here see the reverent and long reservation of Manna, which of
it self was most apt to putrify, and of Aarons rod, only for that it
suddenly flourished by miracle, the tables of the Testament etc. See a notable
place in S. Cyril li. 6 cont. Julian. where he defends against Julian the
Apostataes blasphemy, he keeping and honoring of that Cross or vvood which
Christ died on. The holy CROSS.
See also S. Paulinus ep. 11. and what reverence S. Hierom and the faithful of
his time did to the sepulchers of Christ and his Martyrs, and to their relikes.
The sepulchers of Christ and his Saints.
We reverence and worship (says he) every where Martyrs sepulchers, ep. 17.
c. 5.
and putting the holy ashes to our eyes, if we may, we touch it with our
mouth also: and do some think, that the monument wherein our Lord was
buried, it to be neglected? But our Protestant can not skill of this, they had
rather follow Vigilantius, Iulianus the Apostata, and such Masters, then the
holy Doctors and evident practice of the Church is al ages.

5. Cherubins.] You see it is a fond thing, to conclude upon the first or
second commandment, that there should be no sacred images in the Church,
when even among these people that were most prone to idolatry, Images in
Salomons temple commanded by God.
and gross in imagination of spiritual things such as Angels are, and to whom
the precept was specially given, the same God that forbade them graven idols,
did command these images of Angels to be made and set in the sovereign holiest
place of all the Tabernacle or Temple. By which it is plain, that much more
the images of Christ and his B. mother and Saints, that may be more truly
pourtered then mere spiritual substances can be, are not contrary to Gods
commandment, nor against his honor, or repugnant to any other Scripture at
all, which condemn only the Idols or pourtraitures of the Heathen made for
adoration of false Gods.

10. Until the time of correction.] Al those gross and carnal sacrifices,
ceremonies, and observations instituted to cleanse and purify the flesh from
legal irregularities and impurities only, and not reaching to the purging of
the souls and consciences of men, being commanded not for ever, but till
Christ's coming, Sacrifice not taken away by the new Testament, but changed
into a better.
ceased then: and better, more forcible, and more spiritual Sacraments were
instituted in their place. For we may not imagine Christ to have taken away
the old, and put none in their places or to alter the sacraments only into
other sacraments external, and not also to translate the sacrifices to some
other more excellent* for it is called, tempus correctionis, non abolitionis
sacrificij aut legis: the time of correction not of abolishing sacrifice or
law. Neither have they more reason to affirm Christ's one oblation upon the
Cross to have rather taken away al kind of sacrifice, then al manner of
Sacraments. The time and state of the new Testament is not made lavvlesse,
hostlesse, or without sacrifice, but it is the time of correction or
reformation and abettering all the foresaid things.

12. Eternal redemption.] No one of the sacrifices, nor all the sacrifices of
the old law, could make that one general price, One only sacrifice on the
Cross the redemption of the world: and one only Priest (Christ) the redeemes
thereof.
ransom, and redemption of all mankind, and of al sins, saving this one
highest Priest Christ, and the one sacrifice of his blood once offered upon the
Cross. Which sacrifice of redemption can not be often done, because Christ
could not die but once. though the figures also thereof in the law of nature
and of Moses, were truly called sacrifices, as specially this high and
marvelous commemoration of the same in the holy Sacrament of the altar,
according to the rite of the new Testament, Li. de Sp. and lit. c. 11.
is most truly and sigularly (as S. Augustine calls it) a sacrifice. But
neither this sort, nor the other of the old law, being often repeated and done
by many Priests (al which were and are sinners them selves) could be the
general redeeming and consummating sacrifice: nor any one of those Priests, nor
all the Priests together, either of the law of Nature, or of Aarons, or
Melchisedecks order (except Christ alone) could be the general redeemers of
the world.

And this is the Apostles meaning in all this comparison and opposition of
Christ's death to the old sacrifices, and of Christ to their Priests: and not
that Christ's death or sacrifice of the Cross should take away al sacrifices,
The Apostles disputation being only against the error of the Jews concerning
their sacrifices and priests: the Protestants applying it against the sacrifice
of the Mass and priests of the new Testament.
or prove that those Aaronical offices were no true sacrifices at al, nor
those Priests, verily Priests. They were true Priests and true sacrifices,
though none of those sacrifices were the high, capital, and general sacrifice
of our price and redemption: nor none of them, or of those Priests, could
without respect to this one sacrifice of Christ's death, work any thing to
Gods honor, or remission of sins, as the Jews did falsely imagine, not
referring them at al to this general redemption and remission by Christ, but
thinking them to be absolute sacrifices in them selves. And that to have been
the error of the Hebrews, you may read in S. Augustine li. 3. doct. Christ. c.
6. And this, we tell the Protestants, is the only purpose of the Apostle.

But they be so gross, or ignorant in the Scriptures, and so maliciously set
against Gods and the Churches truth, that they peruersely and folishly turn
the whole disputation against the sacrifice of the B. Mass, and the Priests
of the new Testament: as though we held, that the sacrifice of the altar were
the general redemption or redeeming sacrifice, or that it had no relation to
Christ's death, or that, it were not the representation and most lively
resemblance of the same, or were not instituted and done, to apply in
particular to the use of the partakers, that other general benefit of Christ's
one oblation upon the Cross. Against the Jews then only S. Paul disputes,
and against the false opinion they had of their Priests and sacrifices, to
which they attributed al remission and redemption, without respect of
Christ's death.

15. Of those preuarications.] The Protestants do unlearnedly imagine, that
because al sins be remitted by the force of Christ's passion, that therefore
there should be no other sacrifice after his death. Whereas in deed they
might as well say, there ought never to have been sacrifice appointed by God,
either in the law of Nature, or of Moses: as al their arguments made against
the Sacrifice of the Church upon the Apostles discourse, prove as well, or
rather only, that there were no sacrifices of Aarons order or Leuitical law
at all. For against the Jews false opinion concerning them, does he dispute,
and not a word, touching the sacrifice of the Church, unto which ^n all this
discourse he never opposes Christ's sacrifice upon the Cross: al Christian
men well knovving that the host and oblation of those two, though they differ
in manner and external form, yet is in deed al one.

The Apostle then shows here plainly, that all the sins that ever were
remitted since the beginning of the world, were no otherwise forgiven, but
by the force and in respect of Christ's Passion. Yet it follows not
thereupon, that the oblations of Abel, Abraham, Aaron, etc were no sacrifices,
as by the Heretics foolish deduction it should do: S. Paul not opposing
Christ's Passion to them, for the intent to prove them to have been no
sacrifices, but to prove, that they were not absolute sacrifices, nor the
redeeming or consummating Sacrifice, which could not be many, nor done by many
Priests, but by one, and at one time, by a more excellent Priest the^ any of
them, or any other mere mortal man.

And that you may see the blasphemous pride and ignorance of Calvin, and in
him, of al his fellows: Caluins argument against the sacrifice of the altar,
makes no less against the sacrifices of the old Law.
read (so many as may read Heretical books) his commentary upon this place,
and there you shall see him gather upon this, that Christ's death had force from
the beginning and was the remedy for all sins since the creation of the
world, therefore there must be no mo^ but that one sacrifice of Christ's death.
Which must needs by his deduction hold (as it does in deed) no less against
the old sacrifices then the new sacrifice of the Church, and so take away al,
which is against the Apostles meaning and al religion.

20. This is the blood.] Christ's death was necessary for the full
confirmation, ratification, and accomplishement of the new Testament, though
it was begone to be dedicated in the sacrifice of his last supper, The
corresponde^ce of words in dedicating both Testame^ts proves the real
presence of blood in the Chalice.
being also within the compass of his Passion. Which is evident by the
words prouounced by Christ over the holy chalice, which be correspondent to
the words that were spoken (as the Apostle here declares) in the first
sacrifice of the dedication of the old law, having also express mention of
remission of sins thereby, as by the blood of the new Testament. Whereby it
is plain, that the B. Chalice of the altar has the very sacrificall blood in
it that was shed upon the Cross, in and by which, the new Testament (which
is the law of spirit, grace, and remission) was dedicated, and does consist.
And therefore it is also clear, that many divine things, which to the
Heretics or ignorant may seem to be spoken only of Christ's sacrifice upon
the Cross, be in deed verified and fulfilled also in the sacrifice of the
altar. Whereof S. Paul for the causes aforesaid would not treat in plain
terms See Isychius li. 1 in Leuit. c. 4 paulo post initium, applying al these
things to the immolation of Christ also in the Sacrament.

23. The examplers.] All the offices, places, vessels, and instruments of the
old law, were but figures and resemblances of the state and sacraments of the
new Testament, In the old Testament were figures of the now: in the new, is
resemblance of the heavenly state.
which are here called celestials, for that they are the lively image of the
heavenly state next ensuing: which be therefore specially dedicated and
sanctified in Christ's blood, sacrificed on the altar, and sprinkled upon the
faithful, as the old figures and people were cleansed by the blood of beasts.
And therefore by a transition usual in the holy Scriptures, the Apostle suddenly
passes in the sentence immediately following, and turns his talk to Christ's
entrance into heaven, the state whereof, both by the Sacraments of the old
law, and also more specially by them of the new, is prefigured.

25. Offer him self often.] As Christ never died but once, not never shall die
again, so in that violent, painful, and blouddy sort he can never be offered
again, neither needs he so to be offered any more: Christ once offered in
blouddy sort, but vnblouddily often, namely in the sacrifice of the altar.
having by that one action of sacrifice upon the Cross, made the full ransom,
redemption, and remedy for the sins of the whole world. Nevertheless, as
Christ died and was offered after a sort in all the sacrifices of the Law and
Nature, since the beginning of the world (al which were figures of this one
oblation upon the Cross) so is he much rather offered in the sacrifice of the
altar of the new Testament, incomparably more nearly, divinely, and truly
expressing his death, his body broken, his blood shed. then did any figure of
the old law, or other sacrifice that ever was: as being in deed (though in
hidden, sacramental, and mystical, and vnblouddy manner) the very self same B.
body and blood, the self same host, oblation and sacrifice, that was dove upon
the Cross.

And this truth is most evident by the very form of words used by our
Savior in the institution and consecration of the holy Sacrament, The
sacrifice of the altar and that on the Cross, both one.
and by the profession of all the holy Doctors. Our sacrifice, says S.
Cyprian, is correspondent to the Passion of Christ. And, The sacrifice that we
offer, is the Passion of Christ. ep. 63. nu. 4. and nu. 7. S. Augustine de f^d.
ad Pet. c. 19. In those carnal sacrifices was the prosiguring of the flesh of
Christ, which he was to offer for sins, and of the blood, which he was to
sheads. but in this Sacrifice is the commemoration of the flesh of Christ
which he has now given, and of the blood which he has shed: in illis
praenuntiabarut occidendus, in hoc annuntiatur occisus. In them he was
forshevved as to be killed: in these he is shevved, as killed. And S. Gregory
Nazia^^^^ says, oral. in morbum, that the Priest in this sacrifice, immiscet
se magnis Chrisi Passionibus. S. Ambrose li. 1. Offic. c. 48. Offertur Christus
in imagine quasi recipiens passionem. Alexander the first. ep. (...) Orthodox.
nu. 4. (...). 1. Conc. Cuius corpus and sanguis conficitur, passio etiam
celebratur. S. Gregory, ho. 37 in Euang. So often as we offer the host of his
Passion, so often we removve his Passion. And, He suffeteth for us again in
mystery. And Isychius, li. 26. ^ in Leuit. post m^d. By the sacrifice of the
onely-begotten many things are given unto us, to vvitte, the remission or
pardoning of al mankind, and the singular introduction or bringing in of the
mysteries of the new Testament.

And the said fathers and others, The fathers call it the vnblouddy sacrifice
of the altar.
by reason of the difference in the manner of Christ's presence and oblation in
respect of that on the Cross, Comment. in 9 Hebr.
called this the vnblouddy sacrifice, as * Calvin him self confesses, but
answers them in the pride of heretical spirit, with these words: Nihil
moror quod si^ loquantur vttusti scriptores. that is, I pass not for it, that
the ancient vvriters do so speak: calling the distinction of blouddy and
vnblouddy sacrifice, Caluins cont^^pt of the fathers.
scholasticall and frivolous, and diabolicum comment^^m, a devilish devise.
With such ignorant and blasphemous men we have to do, that think they
understand the Scriptures better then all the fathers.

CHAP. X.
Because in the yearly feast of Expiation was only a commoration of sins,
therefore in place of al those old sacrifices the Psalm tells us of the
oblation of Christ's body. 10 which he offered blouddily but once (the
Leuitical Priests offering so every day) because that once was sufficient for
ever, 15 in that it purchased (as the prophet also witnesses) remission of
sins. 19 After all this he prosecuteth and exhorts them unto perseuirance
partly with the opening of Heaven by our high priest, 26 partly with the
terror of damnation if they fall again: 32 bidding them remember how much
they had suffered already, and not lose their revvard.

Leu. 16, 14.
not the very image of the things: every year with the self same hosts which
they offer incessantly, can never make the comers thereto perfect: Ps. 39, 7.
Host and oblation thou would not: but a body thou have fitted to me: For
sin, is the proper name of a certain sacrifice called in Hebrew (...): as
^olocaust is an other kind. See the Annot. 2. Cor. 5. v. 2^.
for sin did not please thee. Because hosts and oblations, and holocaustes,
and for sin thou would not, neither did they please thee, which are
offered according to the law, then said I, Behold I come that I may do thy
vvil o God: he takes away the first, that he may establish that that
follows. Ps. 109.
which can never take away sins: Cor. 15, 25.
for ever * sits on the right hand of God, Hier. 31, 33, 34.
And this is the Testament which I vvil make to them after those days, Heb.
8, 8.
says our Lord, giving laws This is partly fulfilled in and by the grace of
the new testament, but it shall be perfectly accomplished in heaven.
in their hearts, and in their minds vvil I superscribe them:

(...)
To dedicat, is to be author and beginner of a thing. The Protestants
translate, he has prepared, for their heresy that Christ was not the first
man that entered into heaven.
Heb. 6, 4
Deu. 19. 15. Mat. 18, 16. to 8, 17.
without any mercy * dies under two or three vvitnesses. Heresy and
Apostasy from the Catholic faith, punishable by death.
how much more think you, does he deserve worse punishements which has
trodden the son of God under foot, and esteemed the blood of the testament
polluted, wherein he is sanctified, and has done contumely to the spirit of
grace? Deu. 32, 35. Romans 12, 19.
Revenge to me, I vvil repay. And again, That our Lord vvil judge his people.
Ps. 134, 14.


The Epistle for many Martyrs.
wherein being illuminated, you sustained a great fight of passions. and a
permanent substance. Good works make great confidence of salvation, and have
great revvard.
confidence, which has a great remuneration. Aba^, 2, 3. To. ^1, 17. Gal. 3,
12.
that doing the vvil of God, you may receive the promise.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. X.
1. A shadovv.] The sacrifices and ceremonies of the old law, were so far from
the truth of Christ's Sacraments, and from giving spirit, grace, remission,
redemption, and justification, The old sacrifices obscurely shadowed, but the
sacrifice of the altar most plainly reprosenteth the sacrifice on the Cross.
and thereupon the entrance into heaven and joys celestial, that they were
but mere shadows, imperfectly and obscurely representing the graces of the new
Testament and of Christ's death: whereas all the holy Churches rites and
actions instituted by Christ in the Priesthod of the new law, contain and give
grace, justification, and life everlasting to the faithful and worthy
receivers: and therefore they be not shades or dark resemblances of Christ's
passion, which is the fountain of all grace and mercy, but perfect images
and most lively representations of the same, specially the sacrifice of the
altar, which because it is the same oblation, the same host, and offered by
the same Priest Christ JESUS (though by the ministry of man and in mystery)
is the most pure and near image, character, and correspondence to the
sacrifice of Christ's passion, both in substance, force, and effect, that can
be.

2. They should have ceased.] If the hosts and offerings of the old law had
been of them selves perfect to all effects of redemption and remission, as the
Hebrews (against whom the Apostle disputes) did think, and had had no
relation to Christ's sacrifice on the Cross or any other absolute and
universal oblation or remedy for sin, but by and of their own efficacy
could have generally purged and cleansed man of all sin and damnation: then
they should never have needed to be so often repeated and reiterated. For being
both, The Jews sacrifices were not absolute and Independe^t, because they
were often repeated.
generally auailable for all, by their opinion, and particularly applied (in as
ample sort as they could be) to the several infirmities of every offender,
there had been no sins left. But sins did remain, even those sins for
which they had offered sacrifices before, notvvithstanding their sacrifices
were particularly applied unto them. For, offering yearly they did not only
offer sacrifices for the new committed crimes, but even for the old, for which
they had often sacrificed before: the sacrifices being rather records and
attestations of their sins, then a redemption or full remission, as Christ's
death is. Which being once applied to man by Baptism, vvipeth away all sins
past, God never remembering them any more, nor ever any sacrifice or sacrament
or ceremony being made or done for them any more, though for new sins other
remedies be daily requisite. Their sacrifices then could not of them selves
remitte sins, much less make the general redemption without relation to
Christ's Passion. And so you see it is plain every where, The Apostle proves
by the often repeating of the Jews sacrifices, not that they were none, but
that they were not absolute and sufficient.
that the Apostle proves not by the often repetition of the Jewish sacrifices,
that they were no sacrifices at all, but that they were not of that absolute
force or efficacy, to make redemption or any remission, without dependence of
the one universal redemption by Christ: his whole purpose being, to incul^ate
unto them the necessity of Christ's death, and the oblation of the new
Testament. As for the Churches holy sacrifice, it is clean of an other kind
then those of the Jews, and therefore he makes no opposition betwixt it, and
Christ's death or sacrifice on the Cross, in all this Epistle: but rather as a
sequel of that one general oblation, covertly alvvaies infers the same: as
being in a different manner the very self same host and offering that was done
upon the Cross, and continually is wrought by the self same Priest.

4. Impossible.] The hosts and sacrifices of the old law, which the carnal
Jews made all the count of, The old sacrifices remitted not sins, but were
only signs thereof.
without relation to Christ's death, were not only not perfect and absolute
sufficient in them selves, but they did not, nor could not remit any sins at
all, being but only signs thereof, reserring the offenders for remission in
deed, to Christ's Passion. I or the blood of bruit beasts could have no other
effect, nor any other element or creature, before Christ's death* the fruit
whereof, before it was extant, could be no otherwise properly applied unto
them, but by belief in him.

5. Host and oblation.] God refuses the Jews sacrifices, not al sacrifice.
He means not that God would no host nor sacrifice any more, as the
Protestants falsely imagine: for that were to take away not only the sacrifice
of Christ's body upon the altar, but the sacrifice of the same body upon the
Cross also. Therefore the Prophet speaks only of the legal and carnal
sacrifices of the Jews, signifying that they did never of them selves please
God, but in respect of Christ, by whose oblation of his own body they should
please.

5. But a body.] If Christ had not had a body, he could not have had any
worthy matter or any matter at all to sacrifice in visible manner, That Christ
should have a body, was necessary for his Priesthod, and sacrifice.
other then the hosts of the old law. Neither could he either have made the
general redemption by his one oblation upon the Cross, nor the daily sacrifice
of the Church: for both which, his body was fitted by the divine wisdoms.
Which is an high conclusion, not understood of Jews, Pagans, nor the
Heretics of our time, that Christ's humane nature was taken to make the Son
of God (who in his divine nature could not be either Priest or host) fit to
be the sacrifice and Priest of his father, The body of Christ is the sacrifice
of the alter.
in a more worthy sort, then all the Priests or oblations of the old law. And
that this body was given him, not only to be the sacrifice upon the Cross,
but also upon the altar, S. Augustine affirms in these words. The table
which the Priest of the new Testament does exhibit* is of his body and blood:
for that it the sacrifice which succeeded al these sacrifices that were
offered in shadovv of that to come. Ps. 39.
For the which also we acknovvledge that voice of the same Mediator in the
psalm, BUT A BODY THOU HAVE FITTED TO ME, because in steed of all those
sacrifices and oblations his body is offered, and is ministered to the partakers
or receivers. Li. 17 Ciuit. Dei. c. 20. And again li. 4 de Trin. c. 14. Who so
just and holy a Priest, as the only son of God? What might so conveniently
be offered for men, of men, as man's flesh? and what so fit for this
immolation or offering, as mortal flesh? what so clean for cleansing the
vices of mortal men, as she flesh borne of the virgins womb? and what can be
offered and received so gratefully, as the flesh of our sacrifice, made the
body of our Priest?

8. Neither did they please thee.] The Jews sacrifices refused, not al
sacrifice.
By that he says, the things offered in the Law, did not please God, and
likewise by that he says, the former to be taken away, that the second may
have place, it is evident, that all hosts and sacrifices be not taken away by
Christ, as the Heretics folishly conceive: but that the old hosts of brute
beasts be abrogated to give place to that which is the proper host of the
new law, that is, Christ's own body.

1^. Often offering the same hosts.] We must often note that the Apostles
speech of many Priests and often sacrificing, concerns only the Jews
Priests and sacrifices, not the Priests and sacrifice of the new Testament.
As S. Paul is forced often to inculcate that one principle of the efficac^e
and sufficiency of Christ's death, because of the Hebrews to much attributing
to their legal sacrifices, and for that they did not (...) them to Christ's
only oblation: so we, through the intolerable ignorance and importunity of
the Heretics of this time (abusing the words of the Apostle spoken in the
dew defense and declaration of the valor and efficacy of Christ's Passion
above the sacrifices of the Law) are forced to repeat often, that the Apostles
reason of many Priests and often repetition of the self same sacrifices,
concerns the sacrifices of the Law only, unto which he opposes Christ's
sacrifice and Priesthod: and speaks no word of or against the Sacrifice of
the new Testament, which is the sacrifice of Christ's own Priesthod, Law,
and institution, yea the same sacrifice done daily vnblouddily, that once was
done blouddily: made by the same Priest Christ Jesus, though by his ministers
hands: and not many hosts, as those of the old law were, but the very self
same in number, even Christ's own body that was crucified. And that you may
see that this is the judgment of all antiquity, and their exposition of these
and the like words of this Epistle, and that they seeing the very same
arguments that the Protestants now make so much a do vvithall among the
simple and unlearned, yet well perceived that they made nothing against the
daily oblation or sacrifice of the altar, and therefore ansvvered them before
the Protestants were extant, The Caluinists arguments against Christ's body
often offered, and in many places, ansvvered by the fathers long a go.
1200 years: we vvil set down some of their words, whose authority and
exposition of the Scriptures must prevail in all that have wisdoms or the
fear of God, above the false and vain gloses of Calvin and his folovvers.

Thus then first says S. Ambrose: in 10 cap. Hebr.
Quid (...) etc. What we then? do not we offer every day? we offer surely:
but this sacrifice is an exampler of that: for we offer alvvaies the self
same, and not now one lamb, to morovv an other, but alvvaies the self same
thing: therefore it is one sacrifice, otherwise, by this reason because it is
offered in many places, there should be many Christ's, not so, but it is one
Christ in every place, here whole, and there whole, one body. But (...)
which we do, is done for a commemoratie^ of that which was done* for we
offer not an other sacrifice, as the high Priest of the old law, ibidem.
but alvvaies the self same, etc. Prima^ius S. Augustines scholar does also
preoccupate these Protestants objections thus: What shall we say then I do not
our Priests daily offer sacrifice? they offer surely, because we sin daily,
and daily have need to be cleansed: and because he can not die, he has given
us the sacrament of his body and blood: that as his Passion was the redemption
and absolution of the world, so also this oblation may be redemption and
cleansing to all that offer it in truth and verity. The general redemption
upon the Cross is particularly applied in the sacrifice of the altar.
So says this holy father, to vvitte, that as the sacrifice of the Cross was
a general redemption, so this of the altar is, to all that use it, a particular
redemption or application of Christ's redemption to them. In which sense also
V. Bid calls the holy Mass, redemption^^ corporis and anima (...), Primas.
le^^ citate.
the everlasting redemption of body and soul. li. 4 c. 22. histor. Again the
same Primasius, The divinity of the Word of God which is every where, makes
that there are not many sacrifices, but one, although it be offered of many,
and that as it is one body which he took of the Virgins womb, not many
bodies, even so also one sacrifice, not diverse, as those of the Jews were.

ho. 17 in ep. ad Heb.
S. Chrysostom also, and after him Theophylacte, and Oecumenius, and of the
Latins, Haimo, Paschasius, Remigius, and others, object to them selves thus:
Do not we also offer every day? we offer surely, but this sacrifice is an
exampler of that, for we offer alvvaies the self same: and not now one lamb,
to morrow an other, but the self same: therefore this is one sacrifice.
Otherwise, because it is offered in many places, there should be many
Christ's. And a little after, Not an other sacrifice, as the high Priest of the
old Law, but the self same we do alvvaies offer, rather vvorking a
remembrance or commemoration of the sacrifice. See the Annotation Luke 22, 19.
upon these words, A commemoration. Thus did all the ancient fathers Greek
and Latin treat of these matters, and so they said Mass, and offered daily,
and many of them made such forms of celebrating the divine sacrifice, as the
Greeks and Latins do use in their Liturgies and Masses, and yet they law
these places of the Apostle and made commentaries upon them, and understood
them (I trow) as well as the Protestants.

He that for his further confirmation or comfort list see what the ancient
Councels and Doctors believed, Councels and fathers.
taught, and practiced in this thing, let him read the first holy Council of
Nice cap. 14: and in fine Conc. ex Grace. the Council of Ephesus Anathematis.
11. the Chalcedon Council act. 3. page 112. Conc. Aneyran. c. 1. 4. and 5.
Neocaesar. can. 13. Laodic. can. 19. Carthag. 2 cap. ^. Carthag. 3 cap. 24. and
Carthag. 4 cap. 33. etc. 41. S. Denis cap. 3 Eccl. hier. S. Andrew in
historia Passiones. S. Ignatius ep. ad Smyrnonses. S. Martialis ep. ad
Burdegalenses. S. Iustine Dialog. cum Triphone. S. Irencus li. 4 cap. 32. 34.
Tertullian de cultu forminarum, and de corona milis. Origin homil. (...) in
Leuit. S. Cyprian ep. ad Cecilium. nu. 2. and de Cana Domini. nu. 14. and
Eusebius demonst. Euang. li. 1 cap. 10. and the rest which we have cited by
occasion before, and might cite but for rediousnes: a truth most known and
agreed upon in the Christian religion.

18. Now there is not.] When the Apostle seems to say, there is no remission
or oblation for sin, he alvvaies means that full remission by Baptism.
Christ's death can not be applied unto us in that full and ample sort as it is
in baptism, but once: Christ appointing that large remission and application
to be made but once in every man, as Christ died but once. for it is not meant,
that all sin shall cease after Christ's sacrifice upon the Cross, nor that
there should be no oblation for sins committed after Baptism, or that a man
could not sin at al after Baptism, or that if he sinned afterward, he could
have no remedy or remission by Gods ordinance in the Church, which diverse
falsehods sundry Heretics gather of this and such like places: but only the
Apostle tells the Hebrews, as he did before chap. 6, and as he does straight
afterward, that if they fall now (whereunto they seemed very prone) to their
old law, and voluntarily after the knowledge and profession of the Christian
faith by Baptism, commit this sin of incredulity and apostasy, they can
never have that abundant remission applied unto them by Baptism, which can
never be ministered to them again And that general full pardon he calls here,
oblation, and afterward in the 26 verse, hostiam pro peccato, an host for
sin.

26. If we sin willingly.] The Caluinists heresy against remission of
sins.
As the Caluinists abuse other like places against the holy sacrifice of the
Mass, so they abuse this as the Nouatians did before them, to prove that an
Heretic, Apostata, or any that vvilfully forsakes the truth, can never be
forgiven. Which (as is before declared in the 6 chapter) is most wicked
blasphemy: the meaning hereof being, as is there said, only to terrify the
Hebrews, Al sins may be remitted by penance, but not so fully as by Baptism.
that falling from Christ they can nor so easily have the host of Christ's
death applied unto them, because they can not be baptized any more, but must
pass by sacramental penance, and satisfaction, and other hard remedies which
Christ has prescribed after Baptism in the Churches discipline. Therefore S.
Cyril says, li. 5 in Io. cap. 17. Penan^e is not excluded by these words of
Paul, but the renewing by the lauer of regeneration. He does not here take
away the second or third remission of sins (for he is not such an enemy to
our salvation) but the host which is Christ he denies that it is to be
offered again upon the Cross. Perilous reading of the Scriptures.
So says this holy Doctor. And by this place and the like you see, how
perilous a thing it is for Heretics and ignorant persons to read the
Scriptures. Which by following their own fantasy * they pervert to their
damnation. 2 Pet. 3.


29. The blood of the Testament.] Whosoever makes no more account of the
blood of Christ's sacrifice, Contempt of Christ's blood in the Sacrament.
either as shed upon the Cross, or as in the holy Chalice of the altar (for
our Savior calls that also * the blood of the new Testament) then he does
of the blood of calves and goats, Luc. 22.
or of other common drinks, is worthy death, and God vvil in the next life,
if it be not punished here, revenge it with grievous punishment.

31. It is horrible.] Penance.
Let al Christian people do satisfaction and penance for their sins in this
life. for the judgments of God in the next life done by God him self, of what
sort soever, whether temporal as in Purgatory, or eternal as in Hell, be
exceeding grievous.

34. You had compassion.] Mercy to the emprisoned for religion.
To be merciful to the afflicted for religion, and to be partakers of their
miseries, is a very meritorious work, and gives great confidence before God
in the day of repaiment or remuneration for the same.

34. With joy.] Loss of goods for religion.
If all Christian men would consider this, they would not think it so great
a matter to lose their land or goods for defense of the Catholic faith.

38. Lives of faith.] Faith is the comfort of the afflicted.
Faithful men afflicted in this life, have their comfort in their assured faith
and hope of Christ's coming to deliver them once from all these miseries: and
so by that faith and comfort they live, whereas otherwise this miserable life
were a death.

CHAP. XI.
He exhorts them by the definition of faith, to stick unto God, though they
see not yet his revvard: shevving that all the Saints aforetime did the like,
being all constant in faith, though not one of them received the promis, that
is, the inheritance in heaven: but they and we now after the coming of
Christ receive it together.

By this word substance is meant, that faith is the ground of our hope.
the substance of things to be hoped for, (...)
the argument of things not appearing.

Genesis 1, 13
we understand that the worlds were framed by the word of God: that of
invisible things visible things might be made.

Genesis 4, 4
Abel offered a greater host to God the^ Cain: * by which he obtained
testimony that he was i^st, Mat. 23, 35.
God giving testimony to his gifts, and by it, he being dead, yet speaks.
Here it appears that Henoch yet lives and is not dead: against the
Caluinists. See the annot. Apocal. chap. 11.
Henoch was translated, Genesis 5, 24. Eccl. 44, 16.
that he should not see death, and he was not found: because God translated
him. for before his translation he had testimony that he had pleased God. We
must believe that God will reward all our good works: for he is a rewarder of
true justice, not an accepter or imputer of that that is not.
revvarder to them that seek him.

Genesis 6, 13. Eccl. 44, 17.
Noe having received an answer concerning those things which as yet were not
seen, seating, framed the arc for the saving of his house, by the which he
condemned the world: and was instituted heir of the justice which is by
faith.

Genesis 12, 4. 13, 1.
he that is called, Abraham, obeyed to go forth into the place which he was
to receive for inheritance: and he went forth, not knovving vvhither he went.
in cottages with Isaac and Jacob the coheires of the same promise.

Genesis 17, 19. 18, 10. 21, 2.
Sara also her self being barren, received virtue in conceauing of seed, yea
past the time of age: because she believed that he was faithful which had
promised.

Eccl. 44 22.
and as the sand that is by the sea shore innumerable.



Genesis 22, 9.
Abraham offered Isaac, when he was tempted: and his onlie-begotten did he
offer who had received the promises: Genesis 21, 12. Romans 9, 7.
( That in Isaac shall seed be called to thee.) That is, in figure and mysteri^
of Christ dead, and alive again.
for a parable.

Genesis 27, 27, 36.
also of things to come, Isaac blessed Jacob and Esau.

Genesis 48, 15.
Jacob dying, blessed every one of the sons of Joseph: Genesis 47, 31.
* and adored the top of his roddo.

Genesis 50, 24, 25.
and gave commandment The translation of Relikes or Saints bodies, and the
due regard and honor we ought to have to the same, are proved hereby.
concerning his bones.

Exo. 2, 2.
Moses being borne, was hid three months by his parents: because they
savv him a proper infant, and they feared not * the kings edict. Exo. 1, 16.


Exo. 2, 11
Moses being made great, denied him self to be the son of Pharaos daughter:
The Protestants that deny we may or ought to do good in respect or for
revvard in heaven, are hereby confuted.
he looked unto the remuneration. Exo. 12, 37.
the Pasche, and the sheading of the blood: that he which destroyed the
firstborn, Genesis 14, 22.
might not touch them.

Ios. 6, 10
by the circuting of seven days.

Ios. 6, 23 25. 2, 3.
Rahab the harlot perished not with the incredulous, receiving the spies with
peace.

The Epistle for many Martyrs.


ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XI.
1. Faith is.] By this description of faith, and by all the commendation thereof
through the whole chapter, Not only or a special faith.
you may well perceive that the Apostle knevve not the forged special faith of
the Protestants, whereby every one of these new Sectmasters and their
folovvers believe their sins are remitted, and that them selves shall be
saved, though their sects be clean contrary one to an other.

^. Not appearing] This is the praise of faith, says S. Augustine, if that
which is believed, be not seen. Faith is of things not seen: as in the B.
Sacrament.
For what great thing is it, if that be believed, which is seen? according to
that sentence of our Lord when he rebuked his disciple, saying: Because then
have seen me Thomas, thou have believed: blessed are they that have not seen
and have believed. Aug. in euang. Io. tract. 79. Which may be a rebuke also
and a check to al those faithles speeches, I would see him, taste him, touch
him and feel his very flesh in the Sacrament, otherwise I vvil not believe.

6. He that comes.] Nothing profitable or meritorious with out faith.
Faith is the foundation and ground of all other virtues and worship of God,
without which no man can please God. Therefore if one be a Jew, a Heathen, or
an heretic, that is to say, be without the Catholic faith, al his works
shall profit him no whit to salvation.

21. Ad^red the top of his rod.] The citatio^s the new Testament, not only
according to the Hebrew, but to the Septuagi^ta.
The learned may see here that the Apostle does not tie him self to the Hebrew
in the place of Genesis whence it is alleged, Genesis 47. v. 31.
but follows the Septuaginta, though it differ from the Hebrew, as also the
other Apostles and Evangelists and our Savior him self did: neither were they
curious (as men now a days) to examine all by the Hebrew only, because they
vvriting and speaking by the holy Ghost, knevve very well that this
translation Aug. de ciu. Dei li. ^5 c. 14.
is the sense of the holy Ghost also, and as true, and as directly intended as
the other: and therefore also that translation continued alvvaies authentical in
the Greek Church, notvvithstanding the diversity thereof from the Hebrew. The
vulgar latin translation.
Even so we that be Catholics, follow with all the Latin fathers the
authentical Latin translation, though it be not alvvaies agreeable to the Hebrew
or Greek that now is. But Calvin is not only very saucie, but very ignorant,
when he says that the Septuaginta were deceived, (...), rod.
and yet that the Apostle without curiosity was content to follow them:
because it is evident, that (...)
the Hebrew being the^ without points, (...), bed.
might be translated the one way as well as the other. Which they understood
so well (and therefore were not deceived) that within three lines after* in
the beginning of the next chapter, they translate the same word, as he would
have it in this place.

Again observe in those words, He adored the top of his rod, that
adoration (as the Scripture uses this word) may be done to creatures,
Adoration of creatures, and namely of holy things.
or to God at and before a creatures as at or Ios. 7, 6.
before the Arc of the Testament in old time, now at or before the crucifixe,
relikes, images: and in the Psalms 93. 131. Adore ye his footesto^le. Adore ye
tovvard his holy mount. We vvil adore tovvard the place where his feet
stood: or (which by the Hebrew phrase is al one) Adore ye his holy mount. We
will adore the place where his feet stood. as also Oceum. in collect.
the Greek fathers, S Damascene li. 1 de imaginibus, and Leontius cited of
him, yea S. Chrysostom also do handel these places, and namely that of the
Apostle which we now speak of, interpreting the Greek as our Latin has,
and as we do, He adored the rod or the top of his rod, that is, the scepter
of Joseph now Prince of Egypt, so fulfilling Joseph's dreams which foretold
the same Genesis 37: and vvithal signifying as it were by this prophetical fact,
3 Reg. 11, 12.
the kingdom of Israel or of the ten tribes that was to come of Joseph by
Ephraim his younger son in the first king Jeroboam. thus the Greek fathers.
Where unto may be added, that all this was done in type and figure of Christ's
scepter and kingdom, whom he adored by and in his Cross, as he did Joseph by
or in his rod and scepter: and therefore the Apostle says, he did it by faith,
Corrupt translation against Dulia.
as having respect tovvard things to come. By all which it is evident, that it
is false which the Calu^nists teach, that we may not adore image, cru^ifixe,
or any visible creature, that is, we may not adore God at or by such
creatures, nor kneel before them: and therefore their corrupt translation of
this place for the same purpose is intolerable, saying thus, (LEANING) upon his
staff he adored (GOD)* adding no less then two words more then is in the
Greek, which though it might be the sense of the place, and S. Augustine so
expounds it, yet they should not make his exposition the text of holy
Scripture, specially whereas he only of all the ancient fathers (as Beza
confesses) so expounds it.

33. Wrought justice.] Men are not just by belief only, as the Protestants
affirm, but by vvorking justice. Not faith only.
And we may note that in all this long commendation of faith in the fathers
and holy persons, their good works are also specially recounted, as Rahabs
harboring the spies, Abraham's offering his son (which their works S.
James does inculcate:) Ia^. 2.
No^s making the Arc Genesis 6. Abels better oblation then Cains Genesis 4. and
Hebr. 11. v. 4. and so forth. therefore S. Clement Alexandrinus says, Li. 4
Stro. page 240.
that the said persons and others were lust by says and obedience, by faith
and hospitality, by faith and patience, by faith and humility.

The Apostles purpose then is nothing else, No works of the Patriarchs or any
other profitable, but by their faith in Christ. Which is alvvaies the Apostles
meaning in commending faith.
but to prove to the Hebrews (who made so great account of their Patriarchs
and forefathers and their famous acts) that all these glorious personages and
their works were commendable and acceptable only through the faith they had
of Christ, without which faith none of all their lives and works should
have profited them any whit: the Gentiles doing many noble acts (as Heretics
may also do) which are of no estimation before God, because they lack faith.
And that is the scope of S. Paul's Epistle to the Romans, and of al other
passages where he commends faith: further proving specially in this Epistle
to the Hebrews, that all their sacrifices were nothing else but figures and
attestations of the Christian faith in Christ and his death. Al which high
resolution and conclusion against the Jews and Gentiles, that the Christian
faith is the true faith and religion, the Heretics of our time ignorantly and
brutishly abuse against Christian works, sacrifice, and Sacraments, which
the Apostle meant specially to commend and establish by his high commendation
of the faith in Christ.

40. Without us should not.] The Patriarchs and other just not in heaven before
Christ.
The fathers before Christ could not be accomplished; that is, not admitted to
the heavenly joys, vision, and fruition of God, till the Apostles and other of
the new law were associate to them, and the way to everlasting glory
opened by our Lords death and Ascension. Neither shall either they or we be
fully perfected in glory both of body and soul, till the general resurrection:
Gods providence being so, that we should not one be consummated without an
other, all being of one faith, and redeemed by one Lord Christ.

CHAP. XII.
By the foresaid examples he exhorts them to patience, 2 and by example of
Christ him self crucified, 5 and because this discipline it an argument that
they be Gods children, 9 with vvh^se rod they should be much more content
then vvish that of their carnal fathers: and because it brings justification.
12 Exhorting them therefore to pluck up their hearts, and to take faster
footing: 18 considering that all bring now so svveete, and not terrible* as in
the old Testament, their damnation, if they refuse to hear, vvil be so much
the greater.

Col. 3. 8.
* laying away al weight and sin that compasses us, 1 Pet. 2, 1.
by patience let us run to the fight proposed unto us,

Prou. 3, 11.
My son, neglect not the discipline of our Lord: neither ^e thou vvearied
vvhiles thou art rebuked of him. Apoc. 3, 19.
he chasteneth: and ^ he scourges every child that he receives,



Romans 12, 18.
but rather be healed. shall see God: That we be not good, there is no lack on
Gods part, who offers his grace to us: but the defect is in our selves that
are not answerable to Gods calling of us and grace toward us.
be vvanting to the grace of God: lest any root of bitterness springing up do
hinder, and by it many be polluted. Such as forsake their salvation and
religion to save their lands and goods, are like Esau.
as Esau: * who for one dish of meat sold his first-birth-rightes. Genesis 25,
33.
Genesis 27, 38.
* for ^ he found not place of repentance, although with tears he had sought
it.

Exo. 19. 20.
and an ^kindled (or) burning.
accessible'fire, and vvhirlevvinde, and darkness, and storm, And if a beast
shall touch the mount, Exo. 19, 12.
it shall be stoned. I am frighted and tremble. The faithful are made fellows
of Angels and of all the perfect souls departed since the beginning of the
world, and of Christ him self.
you are come to mount Sion, and the city of the living God, heavenly
Jerusalem, and the assembly of many thousand Angels, (...)
made perfect,

Genesis 4, 10.
for if they escaped not, refusing him that spoke upon the earth: much more
we, that turn away from him speaking to us from heaven. Ag. 2, 7.
saying, Yet once: and I vvil move not only the earth, but heaven also. Yet
once, he declares the translation of moveable things as being made, that those
things may remain which are immovable. (...)
let us serve pleasing God, with fear and reverence. Deu. 4, 24.


ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XII.
6. He scourges.] Temporal punishment after remission of sins, either here,
or in ^urgatorie*
By this we prove that God often punishes the sins even of his loving
children, though not with eternal damnation, yet with temporal chastisement
and correction: and that he does not alvvaies together with the remission of
deadly sins and eternal punishment, exempt the offender received to his
grace, from al fatherly correction either in this life or in the next. Neither
have the Heretics of this time any reason or scripture in the world, why
they should take away Gods chastisement of his children in the next life, more
then in this world.

17. He found not.] It is not meant, that Esau could not find remission of his
sin at Gods hand: but that, having once sold and yielded up the right of his
first-birth to his younger brother, it was to late to be sorry for his
unadvised bargain.

CHAP. XIII.
He commands unto them mutual love, 2 hospitality, 3 compassion, 4 chastity,
5 contentation, 7 imitation of the faith of their Catholic Prelates and
Martyrs (not harkening to the doctrines of Heretics, nor fearing the casting
out of the Jews synagogus) 17 and obedience to their present pastors. 18 And
so with requesting their prayers, and praying for them, he ends the Epistle.

(...)
the charity of the fraternity abide in you. Romans 12. 10.
1 Pet. 4.
for by this, Genesis 18, 3. 19, 2. 3.
certain being not aware, * have received Angels to harbor. Deu. 31.
For he said, I vvil not leave thee, neither vvil I forsake thee. Ios. 1.
Our Lord is my helper: Psalm. 55, 12. 117, 6.
I vvil not fear what man shall do to me.

The epistle for a Confessor that is a Bishop.
which have spoken the word of God to you: the end of whose conversation
beholding, imitate their faith. New, diverse, changeable, and strange doctrines
to be avoided, for such be heretical. Against which the best remedy or
preservative is, alvvaies to look back to our first Apostles, and the holy
fathers doctrine.
various and strange doctrines be not led away. For it is best that the heart
be established with grace, ^ not with meats: which have not profited those
that walk in them.

Leu. 16, 27.
Ose. 14, 3.
that is to say, * the fruit of lips confessing to his name.

(...), that is, make you perfect and absolute in all goodness.
aptet vos
fit you in all goodness, that you may do his vvil, doing in you that which
may please before him by JESUS Christ: to whom is glory for ever and ever.
Amen.



ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XIII.
2. Hospitality.] Hospitality.
Hospitality, that is, receiving and harboring of poor pilgrims, persecuted
and desolate persons, Angels harbo^red.
is so acceptable to God and so honorable, that oftentimes it has been men's
good hap to harbor Angles in steed of poor folk unawares. Which must
needs be ever a great benediction to them and their families, as we see by
Abraham and Lot Genesis 18. and 19. (and the like fell also to S. Gregory, as Io.
Diaconus vvriteth, to whose ordinary table of poor men, not only Angels but
Christ also came in Pilgrims vveede. In vit. li. 1. c. 10. and li. 2. c. 22,
23.) whereof if we had not example and vvarrant by S. Paul's words in this
place, and many other express Scriptures of the old Testament, these scorneful
miscreants of this time making so little account both of good works and such
miraculous entrance of Christ and his Angels into holy men's harbor, would
make this also seem fabulous, as they do other like things.

4. Marriage honorable.] How marriage is honorable in all, if the Apostle did so
say, as he does not.
The Apostle (says a holy doctor) says, Marriage honorable in all, and the bed
undefiled. And therefore the servants of God in that they are not married, think
not the good of marriage to be a fault, but yet they doubt not perpetual
continency to be better them good marriage, specially in this time when it is
said of continency, He that can take, let him take. De fid. ad Pet. 6. 3. apud
Aug. in fine. Mark the doctrine of the fathers and of the Catholic Church
concerning matrimony, that it is honorable, and so honorable, that it is a
holy sacrament, but yet 1 Cor. 7. v. 38.
inferior to virginity and perpetual continency: honorable in all, that is,
all such as may lawfully marie and are lawfully married: not in brother and
sister, not in persons that have vowed the contrary, to whom the same Apostle
says it is damnable. 1. Tim. 5. v. 11. And this were the meaning of this
place, if it were to be read thus, Marriage is honorable.

But to see how the Protestants in all their translations, One short place
manifoldly corrupted by the Protestants.
to abuse the simple, do falsify this sentence of the Apostle, to make it
serve for the marriage of Votaries, it is notorious. First, they use deceit in
supplying the verb substantive that wants, making it the Indicative mood
thus, Marriage is honorable etc. as though the Apostle affirmed al marriage to be
honorable or lavvful, They restrai^e the sense to their Heretical fancy.
where the verb to be supplied ought rather to be the Imperative mood, Let
marriage be honorable, that so the speech may be an exhortation or
commandment to them that be or vvil be married, to use them selves in that
state in all fidelity, cleanliness, 1 Pet. 3.
and coniugal continency one tovvard an other: 1 These. (...)
as when S. Peter also and this Apostle exhort married men to give honor to
their vviues as to the weaker vessels, and to possess their vessel in honor,
not in the passions of ignominy and vncleanlinesse: this is honorable or chaste
marriage, to which he here exhorts. And that it is rather an exhortation,
then an affirmation, it is evident by the other parts and circumstances of
this place both before and after: al which are exhortations in their own
translations, this only being in the mids, and as indifferent to be an
exhortation as the rest (by their own confession) they restrain of purpose.
Our text therefore and al Catholic translatio^s leave the sentence indifferent
(...).
as it is in the Greek, and as true translatours ought to do, not presuming to
addict it to one side, lest they should restrain the sense of the holy Ghost
to their own particular fantasy.

Again, The Eng. Bib. 1577.
our new Translatours corrupt the text in that they translate, in omnibus,
among al men, because so they think it would sound better to the ignorant,
that Priests, Religious, and al whosoever, may marie: where they can not tell
either by the Greek or Latin, that in omnibus should be the masculine gendre,
rather then the neutre (as not only Erasmus, but O^cum. in Collect.
the Greek doctors also take it) to signify that marriage should be honorably
kept between man and wife in all points and in all respects. See S. Chrysostom.
and Theophyl. in hunc locum. For there may be many filthy abuses in vvedlocke,
which the Apostle vvarneth them to take heed of, and to keep their
mariage-bed undefiled. But the third corruption for their purpose aforesiad,
and most impudent, is, Beza in no. Test. Groecolat. an. 1565.
that some of the Caluinistes for, in omnibus, translate, inter quosuis, with
a marginal interpretation to signify al orders, conditions, states, and
qualities of men. So boldly they take away al indifferency of senses, and make
Gods word to speak just that which them selves would, and their heresy
requires, in which king they pass al impudency and al heretics that ever
were.

7. Remember your Prelates.] We must have regard to the faith and doctrine of
the fathers.
We be here warned to have great regard in our life and belief, to the holy
fathers, Doctors, and glorious Bishops gone before us in Gods Church, not
doubting but they being our lawful Pastors, had and taught the truth: of whom
S. Augustine said, That which they found in the Church, they held fast: that
which they learned, they taught: that which they received of their fathers,
the same they delivered to their children. Cont. Julian. li. 2 c. 10. Which
respect to our holy forefathers in faith, is now in this wicked contempt of
the Heretics, so much the more to be had. See the said holy doctors second
book against Julian the Pelagian throughout, what great account he makes of
them in the confutation of heresies, Memories and feasts of Sai^cts.
and how far he prefers them above the proud Sectmaisters of that time: as
we must now do against our new doctors. This place also is rightly used to
prove that the Church of God should keep the memories of Saints departed, by
solemn holidaies and other devout ways of honor.

9. Not with meats.] Iudaical abstinence from meats.
He speaks not of Christian fastes, but of the legal difference of meats,
which the Hebrews were yet pro^e unto: not considering that by Christ's faith
they were made free from al such observations of the Law.

10. We have an altar.] He puts them in mind by these words, that in
following to much their old Jewish rites, Material altars for the sacrifice of
christ's body.
they deprived them selves of an other manner and a more excellent sacrifice and
meat: meaning, of the holy altar, and Christ's own blessed body offered and
eaten there. of which, they that continue in the figures of the old Law, could
not be partakers. This altar (says I sychius) is the altar of Christ's body,
which the Jews for their incredulity must not behold. Li. 6 c. 21 in Leuit.
(...).
And the Greek word (as also the Hebrew answering thereunto in the old
testament) signifies properly an altar to sacrifice on, and not a metaphorical
and spiritual altar. (...).
Whereby we prove against the Heretics, that we have not a common table or
profane communion board, to eat mere bread upon, but a very altar in the
proper sense, to sacrifice Christ's body upon: and so called of the fathers in
respect of the said body sacrificed. Greg. Nazianz. in orat. de sorore
Gorgonia. Chrysostom. demonst. quod Christus sit Deus. Socrat. li. 1. c. 20. 25.
Aug. ep. 86. De ciu. Dei. li. 8. c. 27. and li. 22. c. 10. Confess. li. 9 c.
11. 13. Cont. Faust. Manich. li. 20. c 21. Theophyl. in 23. Mat. And when it
is called a table, it is in respect of the heavenly food of Christ's body and
blood received.

15. The host or praise.] The Sacrifice of the altar is the principal host of
praise and thanks giving, therefore called, Eucharistia.
Though it may signify the spiritual sacrifices of praise and thanksgiving of
what sort soever: ye it specially may be thought to signify the great
Sacrifice of the B. body and blood of Christ: not as upon the Cross, which
was but once done in bloody sort, but as in the Church, and new Testament,
where it is daily done vnblouddily, being the proper host of laud and thanks
giving* and therefore called the Eucharist, and being the fruit and effect of
Christ and his Priests lips or words, that is, of consecration: because
this sacrifice is made by the force of the holy words, And when we read in
the psalm and other places of the old Testament, of the host of praise, it
may be thought to be a prophecy of the new Sacrifice, and not of every vulgar
thanks giving. And so the old fathers in the primitive Church to hide the
mysteries from the unworthy or heathen, often speak. What is (says S.
Augustine) a more holy sacrifice of praise, then that which consists in
thanks giving, all which the faithful do know in the sacrifice of the
Church. Li. 1. cont. aduers. leg. and preph. c. 18. Again, c. 20. The Church
from the times of the Apostles by the most certain successions of Bishops,
offers to God in the body of Christ the Sacrifice of praise. And a (...)
afterward, Now Israel according to the spirit, that is, the Church offers a
singular Sacrifice according to the spirit: of whose house be vvil not take
calves nor goats, but vvil take the Sacrifice of praise, not according to the
order of Aaron, but according to the order of Melchisedec. See ep. 120. c. 19.
and ep. 57. ad q. 1. in fine. Thus you see, when the holy fathers handle the
Scriptures, they find Mass and Sacrifice in many places, where the ignorant
heretics or the simple might think they speak only of a common thanks
giving.

16. God is promerited.] This latin word promeretur, cannot be expressed
effectually in any one English word. The Protestants avoid the word merit.
It signifies, Gods favor to be procured by the foresaid works of alms and
charity, as by the deserts and merits of the doers. Which doctrine and word
of merits the Adversaries like so il, that they flee* both here and else where
from the word, (...)
translating here for, promeretur Deus, God is pleased, more near to the
Greek, as they pretend. Which in deed makes no more for them then the latin,
which is agreeable to most ancient copies, Good works meritorious.
as we see by Primasius S. Augustines scholar. For if God be pleased with
good works and show favor for them, then are they meritorious, and then only
faith is not the cause of Gods favor to men.

17. Obey your Prelates.] The Apostle does inculcate obedience to the Priests
and Bishops of Gods Church.
There is nothing more inculcated in the holy Scriptures, then obedience of the
lay people to the Priests and Prelates of Gods Church, in matters of soul,
conscience, and religion. Whereof the Apostle gives this reason, because they
have the charge of men's souls, and must answer for them: which is an
infinite preeminence and superiority, joined with burden, and requires
marvelous submission and most obedient subjection of all that be under them and
their government. From this obedience there is no exception nor exemption of
kings nor Princes, be they never so great. If they have souls, No person
exempted from this obedience, in matters of religion.
and be Christian men, they must be subject to some Bishop, Priest, or other
Prelate. And whatsoever he be (though Emperor of all the world) if he take
upon him to prescribe and give laws of religion to the Bishops and Priests,
whom he ought to obey and be subject unto in religion, he shall he damned
undoubtedly, except he repent, because he does against the express word of
God and law of nature. And by this you may see the difference of an heretical
and a disordered time, from other Catholic Christian days. For heresy and
the like damnable reuoltes from the Church of God, is no more but a rebellion
and disobedience to the Priests of Gods Church, when men refuse to be under
their discipline, to hear their doctrine, and interpretation of Scriptures, to
obey their laws and counsels. This disobedience and rebellion from the
Spiritual Governor, under pretense of obedience to the Temporal, is the bane
of our days, and specially of our Country, where these new Sects are
properly maintained by this false principle, That the Prince in matters of
soul and religion may command the Prelate: which is directly and evidently
against this Scripture and all other, that command the sheep of Christ's fold
to obey their spiritual Officers.

THE ARGUMENT OF THE EPISTLE OF S. JAMES.
THIS Epistle (as the rest following) is directed specially, as S. Augustine
says, against the error of only faith, which some held at that time also, by
misconstruing S. Paul's words. Yea not only that, but many other errors
(which then also were annexed unto it, as they are now) does this Apostle
here touch expressly.

He says therefore, that not only faith, but also good works are necessary:
that not only faith, but also good works do justify: that they are acts of
Religion, or service and worship of God: that to keep all the commandments
of God, and so to abstain from al mortal sin, is not impossible, but
necessary: that God is not author of sin, no not so much as of tentation to
sin: that we must stay our selves from sinning, with fear of our death, of
the Judgment, of hell: and stir our selves to doing of good, with our
revvard that we shall have for it in heaven. These points of the Catholic
faith he commends earnestly unto us, inueighing vehemently against them that
teach the contrary errors. Howbeit he does vvithal admonish not to neglect
such, but to seek their conversion, shevving them how meritorious a thing
that is. Thus then he exhorts generally to all good works, and dehorteth
from al sin. but yet also namely to certain, and from certain: as, from
acception of persons, from detraction and rash judging, from concupisce^ce and
love of this world, from swearing: and, to prayer, to alms, to humility,
confession and penance: but most copiously to patience in persecution.

Now, Which James vvrote this epistle.
who this James was: It is not be, whose feast the Church keeps the 25 of
Iulie, which was S. John's brother, and whose martyrdom we have Act. 12. but
he, whom the Church vvorshippeth the first of May, who is called Frater
Domini, our lords brother, and brother to Jude, and which was the first
Bishop of Jerusalem, of whom we read Act. 15 and 21. and also Gal. 2. of
whose wonderful austeritie and purity of life, the Ecclesiastical stories
do report. Eusebius. li. 2. c. ^2. Hiero. in Catalogo.

Therefore as the old High Priest had power and charge over the Jews, not
only in Jerusalem and Jury, but also dispersed in other Countries (as we
understand Act. 9. v. 1, and 2.) so S. James likewise, being Bishop of
Jerusalem, and having care not only of those Jews with whom he was
resident there in Jury, I^. 1.
but of all the rest also, vvriteth this Epistle, To the twelve tribes that are
in dispersion. and in them, to al Christians universally dispersed through the
world.

THE CATHOLIC EPISTLE OF JAMES THE APOSTLE. The Church reads these Catholic
or Canonical Epistles in order at Mattins, from the 4 Su^day after Easter until
Vvhitsunday.

Catholic Epistle.] The Protestants abhor the word Catholic.
The word Catholic though in the title of this Epistle and the rest following
(called The Catholic Epistles) it be not wholy in the same sense, as it is in
the Creed: yet the Protestants so fear and abhor the word altogether, that
in some of their Bibles they leave it clean out, although it be in the Greek,
and in some they had rather translate ridiculously thus, The general Epistle
etc. whereas these are famously known and * specified in antiquity, by the
name of Catholic Epistles, Eusebius. li. 2. hist. c. 22.
for that they are written to the whole Church, not to any peculiar people or
person, as S. Paul's are.

CHAP. I.
We have to rejoice in persecution (but if we be patient, and vvithal
abstain from al mortal sin) 9 considering how we shall be exalted and
crowned for it, when the persecutor (who enricheth him self with our
spoils) shall fade away. 13 But if any be tempted to fall, or to any other
evil, let him not say, God it the author of it, who is the author of al good
only. 19 Such points of the Ca^^-faith we must be content to learn without
contradiction and anger, and to do accordingly. 26 Because otherwise we may
talk of Religion, but in deed it is no Religion.



The Epistle for a Martyr.
my brethren, al joy, when you shall fall into diverse tentatio^s: To. 5, 3.
Mat. 21, 22.
for he that doubts, is like to a vvaue of the sea, Mar. 11, 24.
which is moved and carried about by the vvinde. receive any thing of our Lord.

Ps. 102, 15. Eccl. 14, 18.
in his exaltation. Es. 4, 6,
1 Pet. 1, 24.
and the flower of it fell away, and the beauty of the shape thereof perished:
so the rich man also shall wither in his ways. The Epistle for a Martyr that
is a Bishop.
Job 5, 17.
for when he has been proved, he shall receive the crown of life, which God
has promised to them that love him.

The ground of te^tation to sin, is our concupiscence, and not God.
every one is tempted of his own concupiscence abstracted and allured.

The Epistle on the 4 Sunday after Easter.
Prou. 17 27.


The Epistle on the 5 Sunday after Easter.
in meekness receive the engraffed word, Mat. 7, 21.
which is able to save your souls. To. 2, 13.
and not a doer: he shall be compared to a man beholding the countenance of his
nativity in a glass. Beatitude or salvation consists in well vvorking.
blessed in his deed. is this, to visit pupilles and widow in their
tribulation: and to keep him self unspotted from this world.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. I.
6. Ask in faith nothing doubting.] The Protestants would prove by this, that
no man ought to pray without assurance that he shall obtain that which he
asks. What faith is required in prayer.
Where the Apostle means nothing else, but that the asker of lavvful things
may not either mistrust Gods power and hability or be in diffidence and
despair of his mercy: but that our doubt be only in our own unworthiness
or undue asking.

13. Let no man say that he is tempted of God.] We see by this, that when the
Scriptures (as in the Pater noster and other places) seem to say, God is not
author of evil.
that God does sometimes tempt us, or lead us into tentation: they mean not,
that God is any ways the author, causer, or mouer of any man to sin, but
only by permission, and because by his gracious power he keeps not the
offender from tentations. Therefore the blasphemy of Heretic, making God the
author of sin, is intolerable. See S. August. ser. 9. de diverse. c. 9.

13. God is not a tempter of evils.] Partial and willful translation.
The Protestants as much as they may, to diminish the force of the Apostles
conclusion against such as attribute their evil tentations to God (for other
tentations God does send to try men's patience and prove their faith) take and
translate the word passuely, in this sense, that God is not tempted by our
evils. Where more consonantly to the letter and circumstance of the words
before and after, and as agreably (...).
to the Greek, it should be taken actiuely as it is in the Latin, that God is
no tempter to evil, for being taken passiuely, there is no coherence of sense
to the other words of the Apostle.

15. Concupiscence when it has conceived.] Concupisce^ce of it self no sin.
Concupiscence (we see here) of it self is not sin, as Heretics falsely
teach: but when by any consent of the mind we do obey or yield to it, then is
sin engendered and formed in us.

15. Sin consummate ingendreth death.] Here we see that not al sin nor al
consent unto concupiscence is mortal or damnable, Not every sin mortal.
but when it is consummate, that is, when the consent of man's mind fully and
perfectly yeldeth to the committing or liking of the act or motion whereunto
concupiscence moves or inciteth us.

25. The law of perfect liberty.] The law of the Gospel and grace of Christ,
is called the law of liberty, What is the law of liberty in the New
Testament.
in respect of the yoke and burden of the old carnal ceremonies, and because
Christ has by his blood of the new Testament delivered all that obey him,
from the servitude of sin and the Devil. But not as the Libertines and other
Heretics of this time would have it, that in the new Testament every man may
follovv his own liking and conscience, and may choose whether he vvil be
under the laws and obedience of Spiritual or Temporal Rulers, or no.

27. Religion clean.] Good works a part of man's justice.
True religion stands not only in talking of the Scriptures, or only faith,
or Christ's justice: but in purity of life, and good works, specially of
charity and mercy done by the grace of Christ. This is the Apostolical
doctrine, and far from the Heretical vanity of this time.

CHAP. II.
Against acception of person. 10 From al and every sin we must abstain,
having in all our words and deeds, the Judgment before our eyes: wherein
works of mercy shall be required of us, 14 and only faith shall not avail
us. 18 And that the Catholic by his works shows that he has faith:
whereas the Heretics has no more faith than the Devil, talk he of faith
never so much, and of justification thereby only, by the example of Abraham
To. 4. Abraham in deed was justified by works also, 25 and likewise Rahab.

Leu. 19, 15. Deu. 1, 16.
Have not the faith of our Lord JESUS Christ of glory in acception of persons.
Pro. 24, 23. Eccl. 42, 1.
Leu. 19, 18. Mat. 22, 39.
Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self, you do well: Romans 13.
reproved of the Law as transgressors. Leu. 19, 37. Deu. 1, 18.
is made guilty of al. (...)
exalts it self above judgment.

Io. 3, 17
and lack daily food: also believe and tremble. He speaks to al heretics
that say, faith only without works does justify, calling them vain men,
and comparing them to Devils.
o vain man, that faith without works is dead
idle'? Genesis 22, 10.
* offering Isaac his son upon the altar? Genesis 15, 6. To. 4, 3. Gal. 3
Abraham believed God, and it was reputed him to justice, and he was called
the freende of God. Ios. 2, 1. 18. and 6, 22.
was not she justified by works, receiving the messengers, and putting them
forth an other way?

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. II.
1. In acception of persons.] Scripture abused by the Anabaptists to make no
distinction of persons.
The Apostle means not, as the Anabaptists and other seditious persons
sometime gather hereof, that there should be no difference in Commonvveales or
assemblies, betwixt the Magistrate and the subject, the free man and the bond,
the rich and the poor, betwixt one degree and an other. for, God and nature,
and the necessity of man, have made such distinctions, and men are bound to
observe then. But it is meant only, or specially, that in spiritual gifts and
graces, in matters of faith, Sacraments, and salvation, and bestovving the
spiritual functions and charge of foul, we must esteem of a poor man or a
bond man, no less then of the rich man and the free, What the Apostle means
by acception of persons.
then of the Prince or the Gentleman: because as Christ him self calls all,
and endueth al sorts with his graces: so in such and the like things we must
not be partial, but count al to be fellows, brethren, and members of one
head. And therefore the Apostle says with a special clause, That we should
not hold or have the Christian faith with or in such differences or
partialities.

10. Is made guilty of al.] He means not, that whosoever is a thief, is
also a murderer, or that every murderer is an aduouterer also: How he that
offends in one commandment, is guilty of al.
or that al sins be equal, according to the Stoikes and the Heresy of
Iouinian: much less, that he shall have as great damnation that transgresses
one commandment, as if he had offended against every precept. but the sense
is, that it shall not avail him to salvation, that he seems to have kept
certain and not broken all the commandments: seeing that any one
transgression of the Law, proves that he has not observed the whole, which
he was bound to do, so far as is required, and as is possible for a man in
this life. S. Augustine disputing profoundly in his 29 Epistle to S. Hierom, of
this place of S. James, expounds it thus: that he which offends in one,
that is, against the general and great commandment of love or charity
(because it is in manner al, as being the sum of al, the plentitude of the
law, and the perfection of the rest) breaks after a sort and transgresses
al, no sin being committed but either against the love of God, or of our
neighbor.

13. Judgment without mercy.] Works of mercy exceeding grateful to God.
Nothing gives more hope of mercy in the next life, then the works of
alms, charity, and mercy, done to our neighbors in this life. Neither shall
any be used with extreme rigor in the next world, but such as used not
mercy in this world. August. de pec. merit. li. 2. c. 3. Which is true, not
only in respect of the judgment to everlasting damnation, but also of the
temporal chastisement in Purgatory, as S. Augustine signifies, declaring that
our venial sins be vvashed away in this world with daily works of
mercy, The proud and impudent dealing of the heretics against this Epistle;
because it is so plain against only says.
which otherwise should be chastised in the next. See epist. 29. aforesaid in
sine. and li. 21 de Ciu. Dei c. 17 in fine.

14. What shall it profit, if a man say he has faith?] This whole passage of
the Apostle is so clear against justification or salvation by only faith,
damnably defended by the Protestants, and so evident for the necessity,
merit, and concurrence of good works, that their first author Luther and
such as exactly follow him, boldly (after the manner of Heretics) when they
can make no shift nor false gloss for the text, deny the book to be Canonical
Scripture. But Calvin and his companions disagreing with their Masters,
confess it to be holy Scripture. but their shifts and fond gloses for answer
of so plain places, be as impudent as the denying of the Epistle was in the
other. who would never have denied the book, thereby to show them selves
Heretics, if they had thought those vulgar euasions that the Zuinglians and
Caluinists do use (whereof they were not ignorant) could have served. In both
sorts the Christian Reader may see, that all the Heretics vaunting of express
Scriptures and the word of God, is no more but to delude the world. whereas
in deed, be the Scriptures never so plain against them, they must either be
wrested to sound as they say, or else they must be no Scriptures at all. And to
see Luther, Calvin, Beza, and their fellows, sit as it were in judgment
of the Scriptures, to allow or disallovv at their pleasures, it is the most
notorious example of Heretical pride and misery that can be. See their
prefaces and censures upon this Canonical Epistle, the Apocalypse, the
Machabees, and other.

21. Abraham was he not justified by works?] Only faith, an old heresy.
It is much to be noted that S. Augustine in his book de fide and operibus c.
14. vvriteth, that the heresy of only faith justifying or saving, was an old
Heresy even in the Apostles time, gathered by the false interpretation of some
of S. Paul's profound disputation in the Epistle to the Romans, S. James and
the rest inculcate good works against the error of only faith falsely
gathered of S. Paul's words.
wherein he commended so highly the faith in Christ, that they thought good
works were not auilable: adding further, that the other three Apostles,
James, John, and Jude, did of purpose write so much of good works, to
correct the said error of only faith, gathered by the misconstruction of S.
Paul's words. Yea when S. Peter (Ep. 2 c. 3.) vvarneth the faithful that
many things be hard in S. Paul's vvritings, and of light unlearned men mistaken
to their perdition: Ioco citate.
the said S. Augustine affirms, that he meant of his disputation concerning
faith, which so many Heretics did mistake to condemn good works. And in
the preface of his commentary upon the 31 Psalm, he vvarneth al men, that
this deduction upon S. Paul's speech, Abraham was justified by faith,
therefore works be not necessary to salvation: is the right way to the gulf
of Hell and damnation.

And lastly (which is in it self very plain) that we may see this Apostle
did purposely thus commend unto us the necessity of good works, S.
Augustines whole disputation in this poi^t very notable, and directly against
only faith.
and the inanity and insufficiency of only faith, to correct the error of
such as misconstrued S. Paul's words for the same Li. 83 q. q. 76.
the said holy Doctor notes that of purpose he took the very same example of
Abraham, whom S. Paul said to be justified by faith, and declares that he
was justified by good works, specifying the good work for which he was
justified and blessed of God, to vvitte, his obedience and immolation of his
only son. But how S. Paul says that Abraham was justified by faith, see
the Annotations upon that place. To. 4. v. 1.

22. Faith did work with.] Heresies against good works.
Some Heretics hold, that good works are pernicious to salvation and
justification: other, that though they be not hurtful but required, yet they be
no causes or workers of salvation, much less meritorious, but are as effects
and fruits issuing necessarily out of faith. Both which fictions, falshods,
and flightes from the plain truth of Gods word, are refuted by these words,
when the Apostle says, That faith works together with good works:
Works co^curre with faith as cause of justification.
making faith to be a coadiutor or cooperator with works, and so both
jointly concurring as causes and workers of justification: yea afterward he
makes works the more principal cause, when he resembles faith to the body,
and works to the spirit or life of man.

23. The friend of God.] By this also an other false and frivolous evasion of
the Heretics is overtaken, Works make us just in deed before God.
when they feine, that the Apostle here when he says, works do justify,
means that they show us just before men, and avail not to our justice before
God. For the Apostle evidently declares that Abraham by his works was made
or truly called the friend of God, and therefore was not (as the Heretics
say) by his works approved just before man only.

24. Not by faith only.] The Protestants say, by faith only: S. James clean
contrary, Not by faith only.
This proposition or speech is directly opposite or contradictorie to that
which the Heretics hold. For the Apostle says, Man is justified by good
works, and not by faith only. but the Heretics say, Man is not justified by
good works, but by faith only. Neither can they pretend that there is the
like contradiction or contrariety betwixt S. James speech and S. Paul's. for
though S. Paul say, man is justified by faith, yet he never says, by faith
only, nor ever means by that faith which is alone, but alvvaies by that
faith which works by charity, Gal. ^.
as he expounds him self. Though concerning works also, there is a
difference betwixt the first justification, whereof S. Paul specially
speaks: and the second justification, whereof S. James does more specially
treat. Of which thing See the annot. upon the epistle to the Romans c. 2. v.
13.
else where there is enough said.

The fathers in deed use sometimes this exclusive, sola, only: but in far
other sense then the Protestants. For some of them thereby exclude only the
works of Moses law, against the Jews: some, the works of nature and moral
virtues without the grace or knowledge of Christ, The manifold meaning of
certain fathers, when they say, Only faith.
against the Gentiles: some, the necessity of external good works where the
parties lack time and means to do them, as in the case of the penitent
thief: some, the false opinions, sects, and religions contrary to the
Catholic faith, against Heretics and miscreants: some exclude reason, sense,
and arguing in matters of faith and mystery, against such as vvil believe
nothing but that they see or understand: some, the merit of works done in
sin before the first justification: some, the arrogant Pharisaical vaunting
of man's own proper works and justice, against such as refer not their
actions and good deeds to Gods grace. To these purposes the holy Doctors say
sometimes, that only faith saves and serves: but never (as the Protestants
would have it) to exclude from justification and salvation, the cooperation of
man's free vvil, dispositions and preparations of our hearts by prayers,
penance, and sacraments, the virtues of hope and charity, the purpose of
vvel-vvorking and of the observation of Gods commandments: much less, the
works and merits of the children of God, proceeding of grace and charity,
after they be justified and are now in his favor: which are not only
dispositions and preparations to justice, but the meritorious cause of greater
justice, and of salvation.

25. Rahab.] S. Paul names faith, and S. James works, causes of
justification: but neither the one, faith only: nor the other, works only.
This Apostle alleges the good works of Rahab by which she was justified,
and S. Paul (11 Hebr.) says she was justified by faith. Which are not
contrary one to the other. for both is true, that she was saved by faith, as
one faith: and that she was saved by her works, as the other says. But it
were vutruely said, that she was saved either by only faith, as the
Heretics say: or by only good works, as no Catholic man ever said. But
because some Jews and Gentil Philosophers did affirm: they, that they should
be saved by the works of Moses law: these, by their moral works: therefore
S. Paul to the Romans disputed specially against both, proving that no works
done without or before the faith of Christ, can serve to justification or
salvation.

26. Faith without works is dead.] Faith without works is a true says,
but not auailable: as the body without the spirit is a true body, though it be
dead.
S. James (as the Protestants feine) says that faith without good works is
no faith, and that therefore it justifies not, because it is no faith. for he
says that it is dead without works, as the body is dead without the soul,
and therefore being dead has no actiuity or efficacy to justify or save. But
it is a great difference, to say that the body is dead, and to say that is no
body. even so it is the like difference, to say that faith without works is
dead, and to say that faith without works is no faith. And if a dead body be
notvvithstanding a true body, then according to S. James comparison here, a
dead faith is notvvithstanding a true faith, but yet not auailable to
justification, because it is dead, that is, because it is only faith without
good works.

And therefore it is a great impudency in Heretics, and a hard shift, to say
that the faith of which the Apostle disputes all this while, What faith the
Apostle speaks of: and that he knevv no special faith.
is no true or proprely called faith at all. It is the same faith that S. Paul
defined and commended in all the 11 chapter to the Hebrews, and the same which
is called the Catholic faith, and the same which being formed and made alive
by charity, justifies. Mary true it is, that it is not that special faith
which the Heretics feine only to justify, to wit, when a man does firmly
believe as an article of his faith, that him self shall be saved. this special
faith it is not whereof the Apostle here speaks. for neither he, nor S.
Paul, nor any other sacred writer in all the holy Scriptures ever speak or
knevve of any such forged faith.

CHAP. III.
Against proud Masters and authors of Sects. 5 Of the manifold sins of the
unbridled tongue. 13 The difference betwixt proud, co^tentious, and vvorldly
wisdoms, and that wisdoms which is heavenly, peaceable, modest, and so forth.

Mat. 23, 8.
knovving that you receive the greater judgment, Eccl. 14, 1. 19, 16.
* If any man offend not in word: this is a perfect man. he is able also with
bridle to turn about the whole body. are they turned about with a little
stern whither the violence of the director vvil. (...).
vaunteth great things. Behold how little
much' fire what a great vvood it kindles? can it yield salt and svveete water.
can the salt water yeld' sweet.

The difference betwixt the humane wisdoms, specially of heretics: and the
wisdoms of the Catholic Church and her children.
wisdoms descending from above: but earthly, sensual, devilish.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. III.
1. Many masters.] He means principally Sect-maisters that make them selves
several Ringleaders in sundry sorts of new devised doctrines: every one
arrogating to him self to be master, Many masters are many proud Sectmaisters.
and none so humble as to be a scholar, either to Gods Church and true Pastors,
or to other guides and authors of the said sects. So did Zuinglius disdain to
be Luthers scholar, and Calvin to be the follower of Zuinglius.

CHAP. IIII.
By concupiscence and love of this world, we are made enemies to God: but we
should rather humble us to him, punishing our selves for our sins. 11 Against
detraction, and rash judging. 13 To remember alvvaies the vncertenti^ of our
life.

1. Io. 2, 15.
know you not that the * friendship of this world, is the enemy of God?
Whosoever therefore vvil be a friend of this world: is made an enemy of God.
To envy does the spirit covet which dwells in you? The boldness of
Haeretikes adding here the word Scripture to the text thus, And the Scripture
gives greater grace.
gives greater grace. Prou. 3, 35. 1 Pet. 5, 5.
For the which cause it says, God resists the proud, and gives grace to the
humble.

Free vvil and man's own endeavor necessary in coming to God.
Approach to God, and he vvil approach to you. Cleanse your hands, ye sinners:
and purify your hearts, ye double of mind. 1 Pet. 5, 6.
He forbids detractio^, evil speaking, slaundering.
Detracte not one from an other my brethren. (...)
He that detracteth from his brother, or he that judges his brother,
detracteth from the Law, and judges the Law. But if thou judge the Law, thou
art not a doer of the Law, but a judge. To. 14, 4.


Behold now you that say, To day or to morovv we vvil go into that city,
and there certes vvil spend a year, and vvil traficke, and make our gain ( Al
promises and purposes of our worldly affairs are to be made under condition of
Gods good liking and pleasure: and it becomes a Christian man to have usually
this form of speech in that case, if God vvil, if God otherwise dispose not.
If our Lord vvil: and, If we shall live, we vvil do this or that.

ANNOTATION CHAP. IIII.
8. Purify your hearts.] Man (we see here) makes him self clean and purges
his own heart. Man's vvorking with Gods grace, is no derogation thereunto.
Which derogateth nothing to the grace of God being the principal cause of the
same. Yet Protestants think we derogate from Christ's Passion when we
attribute such effects to our own works, or to other secundarie helps and
causes.

CHAP. V.
By the damnation to come upon the unmerciful rich, he exhorts the
persecuted to patience* and by their own revvard, and by examples. 12 Not to
swear at all (...) talk. talk. ^ In affliction, to pray: in prosperity, to
sing: in sickness, to call for the Priests, and that they pray over them and
anoile them with oil: and (...) the sick persons confess their sins. 19
Finally, how meritorious it is, to convert the erring unto the Catholic
faith, or the sinner to amendment of life.

A fearful description of the miseries that shall befall in the next life to
the unmerciful covetous men.
hovvling in your miseries which shall come to you. condemned
presented, and slain the just one: and he resisted you not.

He means either fruit or rain.
the timely and the latevvard. is as hand.
vvil approche'. Mt. 5, 34
no: that you fall not under judgment. The Epistle in a votiue Mass for the
sick.


Mr. 6, 13
* anoiling him with oil in the name of our Lord. The Epistle in Maioribus
Litanijs on S. Marks day, and in the Rogation days.
Confess therefore your sins one to an other: and pray one for an other that
you may be saved. for the continual prayer of a just man avails much. the
heretics translate, Acknovvledge your sins. etc. So little they can abide the
very word of confession.
3 reg. 17.
and with prayer he prayed that it might not rain upon the earth, Eccl. 48.
and it rained not for three years and six months. Lu. 4, 25
3. reg. 18, 41.
and the heaven gave rain, and the earth yielded her fruit.

He that has the zeal of converting sinners, procures thereby mercy and
remission to him self: which is a singular grace.
covers a multitude of sins.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. V.
4. The hire.] The sins crying to heaven.
To vvithhold from the poor or labourer the hire or wages that is due or
promised to him for his service or work done, is a great iniquity, and one
of those five sins which in holy Write be said to call for vengeance at
Gods hand, as we see here, They be called in the Catechism, Sins crying to
heaven. The other four be, Murder. Genesis 18 v. 20. Usury, Exodus 22. v. 27. The
sin against nature, Genesis 18. v. 20. The oppression and vexation of widow,
pupilles, strangers, and such like, Ib. and Exodus 3. v. 9.

12. Swear not.] What oaths are lawful, what are not.
He forbids not al oaths, as the Anabaptists falsely say* for in justice and
judgment we may be by our lavvful Magistrate put to swear, and may
lavvfully take an oath, as also for the aduantaging of any necessary truth
when time and place require, but the custom of swearing, and al vain, light,
and unnecessary oaths in our daily speech do displease God highly, and are
here forbidden by the Apostle, as also by our Savior. Mat. 5.

14. Let him bring in the Priests.] Heretical translation against Priesthod.
The Protestants for their special hatred of the holy order of Priesthod, as
else where often, so here they corrupt the text evidently, translating
Presbyteros, elders. As though the Apostle had meant men of age, and not such
as were by holy office, Priests. S. Chrysostom who knevv the sense and
signification of the Greek word according to the Ecclesiastical use and the
whole Churches judgment, better then any Protestant alive, takes it plainly
for Sacerdotes, Neither their Elders (so called) nor their Ministers, can be
those vvho^ the Apostle here calls, Presbyteros.
that is, Priests li. 3 de Sacerdotio prope initium. And if they confess that
it is a word of office with them also, though they call them Elders, and not
Priests: then we demand whether the Apostle mean here men of that function
which they in their new Churches call Elders. If they say no, as they must
needs (for Elders with their are not deputed specially to public praying or
administration of the Sacraments, such as the Apostle here requires to be sent
for) then they must needs grant, that their Elders answer not to the
function of those which in the new Testament are called Presbyteri in Greek
and Latin, and therefore both their translation to be false and fraudulent, and
also their naming of their new degrees or orders to be fond and incongruous.

If they say their Ministers be correspondent to such as were called
Presbyteri in holy write and in the Primitive Church, and that they are the
men whom the Apostle vvi^^eth to be called for to anoile the sick and to pray
for him* why do they not then translate Presbyter^s* Ministers? which they
might do with as good reason, They have no reason to call their Ministers by
that name.
as call such as they have taken in steed of our Catholic Priests, Ministers.
Which word being in large acception common to all that have to do about the
celebration of divine things, was never appropriated by the use either of
Scripture or of the holy Church, to that higher function of public
administration of the Sacraments and Service, which is Priesthod: Their
Deaco^s should rather be called Ministers.
but to the order next under it, which is Deaconship. And therefore if any
should be called Ministers, their Deacons properly should be so termed. And the
Protestants have no more reason to keep the ancient Greek word of Deacon*
appropriated to that office by the use of antiquity, then to keep the word
Priest, being made no less peculiar to the state of such only as minister the
holy Sacraments, and offer the Sacrifice of the Altar. But these fellows
follow neither Gods word nor Ecclesiastical use, nor any reason, but me^e
fantasy, novelty, and hatred of Gods Church* They should keep the name
Priest, as well as deacon.
And how little they follow any good rule or reason in these things may appear
by this, that here they avoid to translate Priests, and yet in their Communion
book, in their order of visiting the sick, they commonly name the Minister,
Priest.

14. Anoiling with oils.] Here is the Sacrament of extreme Unction so plainly
promulgated (for it was instituted, as al other Sacraments of the new
Testament, by our Savior Christ him self, and, as Venerable Bede thinks and
other ancient vvriters, the anoiling of the sick with oil Marc. 6.
pertains thereunto) that some Heretics, for the evidence of this place also
(as of the other for good works) deny the Epistle. The Sacrament of EXTREME
UNCTION.
Other (as the Caluinists) through their confidence of cunning shifts and
gloses, confessing that S. James is the author, yet condemn the Church of God
for using and taking it for a Sacrament. But what dishonor to God is it (we
pray them) that a Sacrament should be instituted in the matter of oil, more
then in the element of water? Why may not grace and remission of sins be
annexed to the one as well as to the other, without derogation to God?

But they say, The heretics ob^ections against the said Sacrament, ansvvered:
and vvithal it is proved to be a Sacrament.
Sacraments endure for ever in the Church, this but for a season in the
Primitive Church. What Scripture tells them that this general and absolute
prescription of the Apostle in this case, should endure but for a season? when
was it taken away, abrogated, or altered? They see the Church of God has
alvvaies used it upon this vvarrant of the Apostle, who knevve Christ's meaning
and institution of it better then these deceived men, who make more of their
own fond ghesses and co^iectures, grounded neither on Scripture nor upon any
circumstance of the text, no^ any one authentical author that ever vvrote, then
of the express word of God. It was (say they) a miraculous practice of
healing the sick, during only in the Apostles time, and not long after. We
ask them whether Christ appointed any certain creature or external element
unto the Apostles generally to work miracles by. Him self used sometimes clay
and spittle, sometimes he sent them that were diseased, to vvash them selves
in waters. but that he appointed any of those or the like things for a general
medicine or miraculous healing only, that we read not for in the beginning,
for the better inducing of the people to faith and devotion* Christ would have
miracles to be wrought by sundry of the Sacraments also. Which miraculous
works ceasing, yet the Sacraments remain still unto the worlds end.

Again we demand, whether ever they read or heard that men were generally
commanded to seek for their health by miraculous mea^es. Thirdly, whether al
Priests, or (as they call them) Elders, had the gift of miracles in the
primitive Church? No, it can not be, for though some had, yet al these
indifferently of whom the Apostle speaks, had not the gift: and many that
were no Priests, had it, both men and women, which yet could not be called
for, as Priests were in this case. And though the Apostle and others could
both cure men and revive them again, yet there was no such general precept
for sick or dead men, as this, to call for the Apostles to heal or restore
them to life again. Lastly, had any external element or miraculous practice,
unless it were a Sacrament, Remission of sins annexed to creatures.
the promise of remission of al kind of actual sins joined unto it? or
could S. James institute such a ceremony him self, that could save both body
and soul, by giving health to the one, and grace and remission to the other?
At other times these contentious vvranglers rail at Gods Church, for annexing
only the remission of venial sins to the element of water, made holy by the
Priests blessing thereof in the name of Christ, Holy water.
and his word: and lo here they are driven to hold that S. James prescribed a
miraculous oil or creature which had much more power and efficacy. Into
these straites are such miscreants brought that vvil not believe the express
word of God, interpreted by the practice of Gods universal Church.

Venerable Bede in 9 Luc. says thus. It is clear that this custom was
delivered to the holy Church by the Apostles them selves, Holy oil blessed by
the Bishop.
that the sick should be anointed with oil consecrated by the Bishops
blessing. See for this, and for the assertion and use of this Sacrament, S.
Innocentius ep. 1 ad Decentium Eugubinum cap. 8. to. 1. Conc and Lib. 2. de
visitatione infirmorum in S. Augustine cap. 4. Council. Cabilonense 2. cap. 48.
Conc. Wormati^nse cap. 72. to. 3. Conc. Aquisgra. c. 8. Flcrentinum, and other
later Councel^. The peoples devotion tovvard such hallowed creatures.
S. Bernard in the life of Malachie in fine. This holy oil because the
faithful savv to have such virtue in the primitive Church, diverse carried it
home and occupied it in their infirmities, not using it in the Sacramental sort
which the Apostle prescribes, as the Adversaries unlearnedly object unto us:
but as Christians now do (and then also did) concerning the water of
Baptism, which they used to take home with them after it was hallowed, The
sacrame^tal words.
and to give it their diseased to drink

15. The prayer of faith.] He means the form of the Sacrament, that is, the
words spoken at the same time when the party is anoiled, which no doubt
are most ancient and Apostolic. Not that the word or prayer alone should
have that great effect here mentioned, but joined with the foresaid unction,
as is plain.

15. Shall save.] The three effects of this Sacrament.
The first effect of this Sacrament is, to save the soul, by giving grace and
comfort to vvithstand the terrors and tentations of the enemy, going about
(specially in that extremity of death) to drive men to desperation or
distress of mind and other damnable inconveniences. the which effect is
signified in the matter of this Sacrament specially.

15. Shall lift him up.] When it shall be good for the salvation of the party,
or agreeable to Gods honor, this Sacrament restores also a man to bodily
health again, as experience often teaches us. Which yet is not done by way
of miracle, to make the party suddenly whole, but by Gods ordinary providence
and use of second causes, which otherwise should not have had that effect,
but for the said Sacrament. This is the second effect.

15. They shall be remitted him.] What sins soever remain vnremitted, they
shall in this Sacrament and by the grace thereof be remitted, if the persons
vvorthely receive it. this is the third effect. S. Chrysostom of this effect
says thus: They (speaking of Priests) do not only remit sins in baptism,
Priests (and not Elders) are the ministers of this sacrament.
but afterward also, according to the saying of S. James. If any be sick, let
him bring in the Priests etc. Li. 3 de Sacerd. prope initiu^. Let the
Protestants mark that he calls Presbyter^s, sacerdotes: that is, Priests,
and makes them the only ministers of this Sacrament, and not elders or other
lay men. By all which you see this Sacrament of al other to be maru^lous
plainly set forth by the Apostle. Only sick men and (as (...)
the Greek word gives) men very vveake must receive it: only Priests must
be the ministers of it: the matter of it is holy oil: the form is prayer, in
such sort as we see now used: the effects be as is aforesaid. Yet this so
plain a matter and so profitable a Sacrament, the enemy by Heretics would
wholy abolish.

16. Confess therefore.] It is not certain that he speaks here of
sacramental Confession: yet the circumstance of the letter well bears it, and
very probable it is that he means of it: and Origin does so expound it ho. 2
in Leuit. and Venerable Bede vvriteth thus, In this sentence (says he) there
must be this discretion, In hunc locum.
that our daily and little sins we confess one to an other, Confession
unto our equals, and believe to be saved by their daily prayer. but the
uncleanness of the greater leprosy let us according to the law open to the
Priest, and at his pleasure in what manner and how long time he shall command,
let us be careful to be purified. But the Protestants fleing from the very
word confession in despite of the Sacrament, translate thus, Acknovvledge your
faults one to an other. They do not well like to have in one sentence,
Priests, praying over the sick, anoiling them, forgiving them their sins,
confession, and the like.

17. He prayed.] Truths unwritten and known by tradition.
The Scriptures to which the Apostle alludeth, make no mention of Elias
prayer. therefore he knevv it by tradition or revelation. Whereby we see that
many things unwritten be of equal truth with the things written.

20. Makes to be converted.] Converting of souls
Here we see the great revvard of such as seek to convert Heretics or other
sinners from error and wickedness: and how necessary an office it is,
specially for a Priest.

20. Shall save.] Our salvation attributed to men, without derogation to Christ.
We see, it derogateth not from God, to attribute our salvation to any man or
Angel in heaven or earth, as to the workers thereof under God, by their
prayers, preaching, correction, counsel, or otherwise. Yet the Heretics are
so folish and captious in this kind, that they can not hear patiently, that
our B. Lady or others should be counted means or workers of our salvation.

THE ARGUMENT OF BOTH THE EPISTLES OF S. PETER, THE FIRST, AND THE SECOND.
OF S. Peter we read at large, both in the Gospels, and in the Acts of the
Apostles: and namely* that Christ designed him, ^. 10. v. 2.
and also made him his vica^ (as S. Matthew for that cause in the catalogue of
the Apostles, calls him Primus, the first, and all antiquity. Princeps
Apostolorum, the Prince of the Apostles) and that he accordingly executed that
office after Christ's departure, plating the Church first among the Jews in
Jerusalem and in all that country and coasts about, as Christ also him self
before had preached to the Jews alone.

But preaching at length to the Gentiles also, according to Christ's commission
(Mat. 28. v. 19.) and being now come to Rome, the head city of the Gentiles,
from thence he vvriteth this Epistle to his Christian Jews, having care of
them in his absence, no less then when he was present: and not to the
Jews, that were at home, (belike because they had S. James, or his successor
S. Simon Cleoph^, resident with them) but * to them that were dispersed in
Pontus, 1 Pet. 1.
Galatia, Cappadocia, and Bithynia.

And that he vvriteth it from Rome, 1 Pet. 5.
him self signifies, saying: The Church that is in Babylon saluteth you. See
the Annotation 1 Pet. 5. v. 13.
Where by Babylon he means Rome, as al antiquity does interpret him: not,
that he so calls the Church of Rome, but the heathen state of the Roman
empire, which then, and 300 years after, unto the conversion of Constantinus
the Emperor, did persecute the elect Church of Rome, in so much that the first
33 Bishops thereof unto S. Siluester, were al Martyrs.

For the matter whereof he vvriteth, him self does signify it in these
words: This lo the second Epistle I write to you, 2 Pet. 3.
my dearest, in which (Epistles) I stir up by admonition, your sincere
mind, that you may be mindeful of those words etc. So he says there of both
together. And again of the first to the same purpose, 1 Pet. 5.
in an other place: I have breefely written, beseeching and testifying that
this is the true grace of God, wherein you stand. For, there were at that
time certain Seducers (as See the Annotatio^ upon S. James epistle c. 2. v. 21.
S. August. also has told us) who went about to teach Only faith, as though
good works were not necessary, nor meritorious. there were also great
persecutions, to compel them with terror to deny Christ and al his religion.
He therefore exhorts the^ accordingly, neither for persecution* neither by
seduction to forsake it: though in the first, his exhortation is more
principally against persecution: and in the second, more principally against
seduction. The first epistle is noted to be very like to S. Paul's epistle to
the Ephesians, in words also, and so thick of Scriptures, as though he spoke
nothing else.

The time when the first was written, is uncertain: the second was
vvritte^ a little before his death, as is gathered by his words in the same.
c. 1. v. 14.

THE FIRST EPISTLE OF PETER THE APOSTLE.
CHAP. I.
He comfort them in their persecutions (being now by Baptism made the
children of God) with the hope of their heavenly exh^ritance: 6 shevving how
meritorious it is for them to be so constant in faith, 10 and confirming them
therein with the authority of the Prophets and of the Holy Ghost* 15
Exhorting them to live also accordingly in all holiness. 15 considering the
holiness of God* the vprightnes of his judgment, the price of their redemption
by Christ, 22 and the virtue of the seed in them (which is grace regeneratiue
in Baptism) foretold by the Prophet also.

The Epistle In Cathedra S. Petri. Roma. Ian. 10.
to the elect strangers of the dispersion of Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia,
Asia, and Bithynia,

2 Cor. 1, 3. Ephesians. 1, 3.
who according to his great mercy has regenerated us unto a lively hope, The
Epistle for many martyrs.
by the resurrection of JESUS Christ from the dead, souls.

Chastity not only of body but also of mind, is required. S. Bid upon this
place.
mind girded, sober, trust perfectly in that grace which is offered you, in
the revelation of JESUS Christ, Leu. 11, 19. 20, 7
You shall be holy, because I am holy. Deu. 10.
him which * without acception of persons judges according to every ones God
vvil judge men according to every ones works, and not by faith only.
work: To. 2.
in fear converse ye the time of your peregrination. Gal. 2.
1 Cor. 6, 20. 7, 23
gold or silver, you are redeemed from your vain conversation of your fathers
He means the errors of Gentility. or if he write to the Jews dispersed, he
means the yoke of the Law with the fond and heavy additio^s of their later
Masters, called Deuteroses The Heretics, to make it sound to the simple
against the traditions of the Church, corrupt the text thus, Which you have
received by (...) of (...). fathers.
tradition: To. 16, 25. Col. 1, 26. Tit. 1, 2.
Christ, Esa. 40, 6.
al flesh is as grass: and all the glory thereof as the flower of grass. the
grass is withered, and the flower thereof is fallen away.

CHAP. II.
Now after their Baptism, what must be their meat: 4 and being come to
Christ, how happy they be about their incredulous brethren, according to the
Scriptures also. 11 Whereupon he beseeches them to shine in good life among
the Heathen, so to procure their conversion: 13 to be obedient subjects to
higher Powers (howsoever some misconster Christian liberty) 14 and servants
to obey their Masters. 19 And so, doing well, though they suffer for it. it is
very meritorious, 21 whereas Christ also not only gave them example, 24 but
also by his death has made them able to live justly.

The Epistle upon Saturday in Easter week.
and al guile, and simulations, and enuies, and al detractions, a spiritual
house,
spiritual houses', a holy priesthod, to offer spiritual hosts, acceptable to
God by JESUS Christ. Es. 28, 16.
Behold I put in Sion a principal corner stone elect, precious. and he that
shall believe in him, shall not be confounded. Ps. 117.
the stone which the builders rejected, the same is made into the head of the
corner: Mt. 21.
Act. 4.
and a rock of scandal, to them that stumble at the word, Es. 8.
neither do believe vvhereto also they are ordained.
wherein also they are put'. To. 9, 33.
Exo. 19.
a The Protestants can no more gather of this, that al Christians be Priests:
then, that al be kings: as is most plain Apocalyp. 1, 6. and 5, 10. Thou have
made us a kingdom (or kings) and priests.
kingly priesthod, Apoc. 1.
a holy nation, a people of purchase: that you may declare his virtues which
from darkness has called you into his marvelous light. Ose. 2.
Which sometime not a people: but now the people of God. To. 9.
Which not having obtained mercy: but now having obtained mercy. Gal. 5, 16.


The Epistle upon the 3 Sunday after Easter.
* to refrain your selves from carnal desires which war against the soul,
Mt. 5, 16*
So is the Greek, but the Protest, in favor of temporal laws made against
the Cath. religion, translate it very falsely thus, to al manner ordinance of
man: the^ selves boldly rejecting Ecclesiastical decrees as men's ordinances.
humane (...)
creature for God: To. 13, 1.
whether it be to king, as excelling: as having the freedom for a cloak of
malice, but as the servants of God. In this speech is often commended the
unity of al Christians among them selves.
Love the fraternity. Fear God. Honor the king.

The Epistle upon the a Sunday after Easter.
you
vs', leaving us
you', an example that you may follow his steps. Es. 53, 9.
who did no sin, neither was guile found in his mouth (...)
did not revile: when he suffered, he threatened not: but delivered him self to
him that judged him unjustly. Es. 53, 4.
Mt. 8, 17.
that dead to sins, we may live to justice. by whose stripes you are healed.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. II.
^. Spiritual hosts.] Spiritual hosts and Priests.
Here we see, that as he speaks of spiritual hosts, which every Christian
man offers, so he speaks not properly of priesthod, when he makes al
Priests, but of a spiritual priesthod. Which spiritual priesthod was also in all the Jews: but the priesthod (properly so called) was only in the sons
of Aaron, and they offered the sacrifices (properly so called) which none
besides might offer.

13. Be subject.] Obedience to temporal princes.
Not only our Master Christ, but the Apostles and al Christians were ever
charged by such as thought to bring them in hatred with Princes, with
disobedience to kings and temporal Magistrates. To. (...).
therefore both * S. Paul and this Apostle do specially vvarne the faithful,
that they give no occasion by their il demeanure to secular Princes, that the
Heathen should count them disobedient or seditious workers against the States
of the world.

13. To every humans creature.] So he calls the temporal Magistrate elected
by the people, or holding their Souerainty by birth and carnal propagation, God
instituted the Spiritual gouerneme^s in more excellent manner then the temporal.
ordained for the vvorldly wealth, peace, and prosperity of the subjects: to
put a difference betwixt that humane Superiority, and the spiritual Rulers and
regiment, guiding and governing the people to an higher end, and instituted by
God him self immediately. for Christ did expressly constitute the form of
regiment used ever since in the Church. He made oue the cheese, placing Peter
in the Supremacy: he called the Apostles and Disciples, Act. 1.
giving them their several authorities. Aftervvared * God guided the lot for
choice of S. Marthias in Judas place: and the Holy Ghost expressly and namely
severed and chose Paul and Barnabas unto their Apostolical function: Act. 20,
and generally the Apostle faith of al spiritual Rulers, The holy Ghost has
placed you to rule the Church of God.

And although al power be of God, and kings rule by him, yet that is no
otherwise, but by his ordinary concurrence, and providence, whereby he
procures the earthly commodity or wealth of men, by maintaining of due
superiority and subjection one toward an other, and by giving power to the
people and Commonwealth to choose to them selves some kind or form of
Regiment, under which they be content to live for their preservation in peace
and tranquillity. But Spiritual superiority is far more excellent, as in more
excellent ^ort depending, not of man's ordinance, election, or (as this Apostle
speaks) creation, but of the Holy Ghost, who is alvvaies resident in the
Church (which is Christ's body mystical, and therefore an other manner of
Commonwealth then the earthly) concurring in singular sort to the creation of
al necessary Officers in the said Church, Ephesians. 4.
even to the worlds end, as S. Paul vvriteth to the Ephesians.

Lest therefore the people, being then in so precise sort alvvaies warned of
the excellency of their Spiritual governors * and of their obedience tovvard
them, Hebr. 13.
might neglect their duties to Temporal Magistrates, specially being infidels,
and many times tyrants and persecutors of the faith, as Nero and other were
then: therefore S. Peter here vvarneth them to be subject, for their bodies and
goods and other temporal things, even to the vvorldly Princes both infidels and
Christians, whom he calls humane creatures.

13. To the king as excelling.] Heret. translation.
Some simple heretics and other also not unlearned, at the beginning, for lack
of better places, would have proved by this, that the king was head of the
Church, and above al Spiritual rulers: and to make it ^ound better that way,
they falsely translated it, To the king as to the chief head. The Kings
excellency of power is in respect of the nobility and lay magistrates under
him.
In the Bible of the year 1562. But it is evident that he calls the king, the
precellent or more excellent, in respect of his Vicegerents which he calls
Dukes or Governors that be at his appointment: and not in respect of Popes,
Bishops, or Priests, as they have the rule of men's souls: who could not in
that charge be under such kings or Emperors as the Apostle speaks of: no
more then the kings or Emperors then, could be heads of the Church, being
Heathen men and no members thereof, much less the chief members. See a
notable place in S. Ignatius ep. ad Smyrnenses, where he exhorts them first
to honor God, next the Bishop, and then the king.

This is an invincible demo^stration, Christian Princes have no more right to
be supreme heads in spiritual causes, then the Heathen.
that this text makes not for any spiritual claim of earthly kings, because
it gives no more to any Prince then may and ought to be done and granted to a
Heathen Magistrate. Neither is there any thing in all the new Testament that
proves the Prince to be head or chief governor of the Church in spiritual or
Ecclesiastical causes, more then it proves any heathen Emperor of Rome to
have been. for they were bound in temporal things to obey the heathen being
lavvful kings, to be subject to them, even for conscience, to keep their
temporal laws, to pay them tribute, to pray for them, and to do al other
natural duties: and more no scriptures bind us to do to Christian kings.

16. Not as having.] There were some Libertines in those days, as there be
now, that under pretense of liberty of the Gospel, Libertines.
sought to be free from subjection and laws of men as now under the like
wicked pretense, Heretics refuse to obey their spiritual rulers and to
observe their laws.

18. But also the vvaivvard.) The Vviclefistes and their folovvers in these
days, sometimes to move the people unto sedition, Deadly sins of Princes or
Superiors exempt not the subjects from obedience, as Wicleffe held.
hold and teach that masters and magistrates lose their authority over their
servants and subjects, if they be once in deadly sin, and that the people in
that case need not in conscience obey them. Which is a pernicious and false
doctrine, as is plain by this place, where we be expressly commanded to obey
even the il-conditioned, which must be alvvaies understood, if they command
nothing against God. for then this rule is ever to be followed. We must obey
God rather then men. Act. 5. 29.

CHAP. III.
The duty of vviues and husbands to each other. 9 None to do or speak evil by
their persecutors, 15 but to answer them alvvaies with modesty, and
specially with innocenci^, after the example of Christ most innocent: whose
body though they killed, yet his soul lived and preached afterward to the
souls in Hell (namely to those in the time of Noes flood being a figure of our
Baptism) rose again, and ascended.

How vviues should behave them selves tovvard their husbands.
that if any believe not the word, Ephesians. 5, 28. Col. 3, 18.
by the conversation of the women without the word they may be vvonne, 1 Timothy 2, 9.
Against the proud, curious and costly attire of vvome^, where in this il time
of ours excedeth.
or laying on gold round about, or of putting on vestures: of a quiet and a
modest spirit, which is rich in the sight of God. Genesis 18.
adorned them selves, subject to their own husbands. (...)
whose daughters you are, doing well, and not fearing any perturbation. How
husbands should behave them selves tovvard their vviues.


in faith
in fine' al of one mind, having compassion, lovers of the fraternity, Pro.
17, 13. Mat. 5, 44.
merciful, modest, humble. Ps. 33, 13*
For he that vvil love life, and see good days: let him refrain his tongue from
evil, and his lips that they speak not guile. Mat. 5, 10.


The Epistle upon friday in Easter week.
the just for the unjust: that he might offer us to God, mortified certes in
flesh, but quickened in spirit. those spirits
them' also that were in prison: Genesis 6.
when the arc was a building: Mat. 24*
in the which, fevv, that is, * eight souls were saved by water. Genesis 7, 7*
us
you' also: not the laying away of the filth of the flesh, but the examination
of a good conscience tovvard God by the resurrection of JESUS Christ.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. III.
19. To them that were in prison.] S. Augustine in his 99 Epistle in
principio, Christ in soul descended unto hell, vvhiles his body lay in the
grave.
con^e^^eth this place to be exceeding hard to understand, and to have many
difficulties which he could never explicate to his own satisfaction. Yet
unto Heretics this and al other textes be easy, not doubting but that is that
sense which them selves imagine, whatsoever other men deem thereof. S.
Augustine only sindeth him self sure of this, that Christ's descending into Hell
in soul after his death, is plainly proved hereby. Which thing he declares
there, to be conformable to diverse other express words of holy Write, and
namely to this same Apostles sermon Act. 2. And at length he concludes thus,
The Caluinists denying the same, are (by S. Augustines judgment) infidels.
Quis ergo nisi infidelis negauerit ^uisse apud infer^s: Christum? that is,
Therefore who but an infidel, vvil deny that Christ was in Hell? Calvin the^
(you see) with al his solovvers are infidels, who in steed of this
descending of Christ in soul after his death, have invented an other desperate
kind of Christ's being in Hell, when he was yet alive on the Cross. S.
Athanasius also in his epistle cited by S. Epiphanius (...). 77 in principio,
and in his book de Incarnatione Verbi propius initie, S. Cyril de re^t fide ad
Theodosium, Oecumenius, and diverse others upon this place, prove Christ's
descending to Hell. As they likewise declare upon the words following. that
he preached to the spirits or souls of me^ det^ined in Hell or in Prison.

But whether this word Prison or Hell be meant of the inferior place of the
damned, Certain difficulties whereof S. Augustine doubts.
or of Limb^^ patrum called Abraham's bosom, or some other place of temporal
chastisement: and, to whom he preached there, and who by his preaching or
presence there were delivered, and who they were that are called,
Incredulous in the days of Noe: al these things S. Augustine calls great
profundities, confessing him self to be unable to reach unto it: only holding
last and assured this article of our faith, that he delivered none deputed to
damnation in the (...), and yet not doubting but that he released diverse out of
places of pains there. Purgatory.
which can not be out of any other place then Purgatory. See the said
Epistle, where also he insinuates other expositions for explication of the
manifold difficulties of this hard text, which were to long to rehearse, our
special purpose being only to note briefly the things that touch the
controversies of this time.

20. Incredulous sometime.] They that take the former words, What were the
incredulous persons of whom the Apostle here speaks.
of Christ's descending to Hell, and delivering certain there detained, do
expound this, not of such as died in their infidelity or without al faith in
God, for such were not delivered: but either of some that once were
incredulous, and afterward repented before their death: or rather and
specially of such as otherwise were faithful, but yet trusted not Noes
preaching by his work and word. that God would destroy the world by
water. Who yet being otherwise good men, when the matter came to pass,
were sorry for their error, and died by the flood corporally, but yet in
state of salvation. and being chastised for their fault in the next life, were
delivered by Christ's descending thither. and not they only, but al others in
the like condition. For the Apostle gives these of Noes time but for an
example.

21. Of the like form.] The water bearing up the Arc from sinking, and the
persons in it from drowning, Noah's Ark and the water, a figure of christ's
Cross and Baptism.
was a figure of Baptism, that likewise saves the vvorthie receivers from
everlasting perishing. As Nee (says S. Augustine) with his, was delivered by
the water and the vvood, so the family of Christ by Baptism signed with
Christ's Passion on the Cross. Li. 12. Cont. Faustum c. 14. Ibid. c. 17.
Again he says, that as the water saved none out of the Arc, but was
rather their destruction: so the Sacrament of Baptism received out of the
Catholic Church at Heretics or Schismatikes hands, though it be the same
water and Sacrament that the Catholic Church has, Baptism received of
Heretics or Schismatikes, when damnable, when not.
yet profits none to salvation, but rather works their perdition. Which
yet is not meant in case of extreme necessity, when the party should die
without the said Sacrament, except he took it at an Heretics or Schismatikes
hand. Neither is it meant in the case of infants, to whom the Sacrament is
cause of salvation, they being in no fault for receiving it at the hands of the
unfaithful, though their parents and friends that offer them unto such to be
baptized, be in no small fault. S. Hierom to Damasus Pope of Rome, compares
that See to the Arc, and them that communicate with it, Ep. 57.
to them that were saved in the Arc: al other Schismatikes and Heretics, to
the rest that were drowned.

21. The examination of a good conscience.) The ceremonies of Baptism, namely
Abr^^^ntio. etc.
The Apostle seems to allude here to the very form of Catholic Baptism,
conceining certain interrogatories and solemn promises made of the articles
of the Christian faith, and of good life, and of renouncing Satan and al his
pompes and works. which (no doubt) howsoever the Caluinists esteem of
them, are the very Apostolic ceremonies used in the ministration of this
Sacrament. See S. Denis in fine Ec. hierarchia. S. Cyril li. 12 in (...). c.
64. S. Augustine ep. 23. S. Basil de Sp. sancto c. 12 and 15. S. Ambrose de ijs
qui mysterijs initiantur 6. 2. 3. 4.

CHAP. IIII.
That they arm them selves to sin no more after Baptism, against the
tentations of the Heathen, considering that the general and now approaches. 8
specially tovvard their euen-Christians to show their charity, hospitality*
and grace, doing al to the glory of God. 1^ And as for being persecuted
because they are Christians, to rejoice, considering the revvard that they shall
have with Christ, and damnation that they avoid thereby.

It has the same difficulty and sense that the other like words have before,
Chap. 3. See the annotation there v. 19. and S. Aug. ep. 69. and Oecumenius
upon this place.
it euangelized to the dead: that they may be judged in deed according to men,
in the flesh: but may live according to God in the Spirit. ^is at hand.
^shal approche'.

Be wise therefore: and vvatch in prayers. The Epistle upon Sunday next after
the Ascension.
Prou. 10
having mutual charity continual among your selves: because * ^ charity
covers the multitude of sins. To. 12,
Heb. 13.
To. 12, 6.
ministering the same one tovvard an other: as good dispensers of the manifold
grace of God.

The Epistle for a Martyr.
Mt. 5, 11.
glory, and virtue of God, and the Spirit which is his, shall rest upon you.
Hier. 25, 29.
Prou. 11, 31.
where shall the impious and sinner appear?

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. IIII.
9. Charity covers.] Faith only cannot justify, Not only faith.
seeing that charity also does cause remission of sins. And saying charity,
he means love and charitable works tovvard our neighbors, Works of
mercy.
unto which works of mercy the Scriptures do specially attribute the force
to extinguish al sins. See S. Augustine c. 69 E^chiridij and tract. 1. in ep.
1. Io. ^. 1. and venerable Bede upon this place. And in the like sense the holy
Scriptures commonly commend unto us alms and deeds of mercy for redemption
of our sins. Proverb. c. 10. Ecclesiastici 12. v. 2. Danielis ^. 4. v. 24.

17. That judgment begin.] In this time of the new Testament, The better me^
most afflicted in this life.
the faithful and al those that mean to live godly (specially of the Clergy)
must first and principally be subject to Gods chastisement and temporal
afflictions, which are here called judgment. Which the Apostle records for
the comfort and confirmation of the Catholic Christians, who were at the
time of the vvriting hereof, excedingly persecuted by the heathen Princes and
people.

18. If the just.] Not that a man dying just and in the favor of God, The just
man him self is hardly saved.
can afterward be in doubt of his salvation, or may be rejected of God: but
that the just being both in this life subject to assaults, tentations,
troubles, and* dangers of falling from God and losing their state of justice,
and also oftentimes to make a strait count, and to be temporally chastised in
the next life, Against the vain security of only faith.
cannot be saved without great vvatch, fear, and trembling, and much
laboring and chastisement. And this is far contrary to the Protestants
doctrine, that puts no justice but in faith alone, makes none just in deed
and in truth, teaches men to be so secure and assured of their salvation, that
he that has lived wickedly al his life, if he only have their faith at his
death, that is, if he believe steadfastly that he is one of the elect, he shall
be as sure of his salvation immediately after his departure, as the best liver
in the world.

CHAP. V.
He exhorts Priests to feed their flocks, only for Gods sake and revvard
of heaven, without al lordlines. 5 the lay to obey: al to be humble one
to^ards an other. 8 to be constant in the Catho. faith, considering it is not
man, but that lion the Devil that persecuteth them, 9 as he does the whole
Church also, and that God vvil after a while make them secure in heaven.

The Epistle for S. Apollinaris Iul. 23.
I beseech, my self a fellovv senior with them and a witness of the passions
of Christ, who am also partaker of that glory which is to be revealed in
time to come: (...)
providing not by constrainte, but willingly according to God: Desire of
Iucre, or to exercise holy functions for gain, is a filthy fault in the
Clergy, and therefore much to be avoided.
neither for filthy lucre sake, but voluntarily:

God resists the proud: The Epistle upon the 3 Su^day after Pentecost.
and to the humble he gives grace. Prou 3.
that he may exalt you in the time of visitation: Iac. 4.
Iac. 4.
because he has care of you. Psa. 54, Mt. 6, 25


To. 16, 16. 1 Cor. 16, 20. 2 Cor. 1^, 12.


ANNOTATIONS CHAP. V.
1. Seniors.] Senior in the vulgar translation is often Priest or Bishop. See
Act. ^5.
Though the Latin, Senior, be not appropriated to holy order by use of speech,
neither in the Latin nor in our language: yet it is plain that the Greek
word Presbyter, which the Apostle here uses, is here also (as commonly in
other places of the new Testament) a word of Ecclesiastical office, and not of
age, and is as much to say as Priest or Bishop. For the Apostle him self being
of that order, speaks (as by his words it is plain) to such as had charge
of souls, saying, Feed^ the flock of God which is among you. Because we
follow the vulgar latin translation, we say Seniors and Senior: whereas
otherwise we might and should say according to the Greek, The Priests
therefore I beseech, my self a follovv-priest with them. So does S. Hierom read
(Presbyteros compresbyter) and expound ep. 85. So translateth Erasmus, and Beza
him self.

3. Ouerruling.] Not superiority, Not Superiority but tyranny and lordlines
is forbidden in the Clergy.
preeminence, souerainty, or rule on the one side, not obedience, subjection,
and inferiority on the other side, be forebidden in the Clergy: but tyranny,
pride, and ambitious domination be forbidden, and humility, meekenes,
moderation are commended in Ecclesiastical Officers. the Greek word here of
ruling or ouerruling, being the same that our Savior uses in the Gospel of
the tyrannical rule of secular Heathen Princes, (...).
saying to his Apostles, that it shall not be so among them: according as here
the prince of the Apostles teaches his brethren the Ecclesiastical rulers.
Mat. 20. v. 25.


3. The Clergy.] Some of the English new translations turn it corruptly,
Heret. translation.
Parishes: others heritages: both, to avoid the most known, true, and common
word in all Christian languages, to wit, Clergy, a word, by use of al
antiquity, and agreably to the holy Scriptures, made proper to the Spiritualty
or Clergy, though in an other more vulgar acception it may agree to al Christ's
chosen heritage, as well of lay people as Priests. which the Protestants had
rather follow, The name of Clergy and Clerk.
because they will have no difference between the laity and the Clergy. But
the holy fathers far otherwise even from the beginning. Whereof see S.
Cyprian ep. 4. 5. 6. etc. And S. Hierom ep. 2 to Nepotianus ^. 5. where he
interprets this word. Therefore (says he) Clericus, that is, a Clergy man,
which serves the Church of Christ, let him first interpret his name, and the
signification of the name being declared, let him endeavor to be that which he
is called. If (...)(Cle^us) in Greek, be called in Latin, Sors, therefore are
they called Clerici, that is, Clergy men, because they are of the lot of our
Lord, or because our Lord him self is the lot or portion of Clergy men etc.

Which calling no doubt was taken out of the holy Scriptures, Numer. 18. and
Deutero, 18. where God is called the inheritance. (...).
lot, and portion of the Priests and Levites: and now when men be made of the
Clergy, they say, Dominus pars haereditatis meae that is, Our Lord is the
portion of mine inheritance. but specially out of the new Testament, Act. 1,
17. 25. and 8, 21. Where the lot or office of the Ecclesiastical ministry is
called by this word (...), (...).
Cle^us. Priests crowns.
See in Venerable Bede the causes why this holy state being severed by name
from the Laity, does vvear^ also a crown on their head for distinction. Lib.
5. hist. Angl. c. 22.

4. Crown of glory.] A^ life everlasting shall be the revvard of all the just,
The heavenly crown of Doctors and preachers.
so the preachers and Pastors that do well, for their doing shall have that
revvard in a more excellent degree, expressed here by these words, Crown of
glory. according to the saying of Daniel c. 12. They that sleep in the dust
of the earth, shall awake, one sort to life everlasting, others to everlasting
rebuke. but such as he learned, shall shine as the brightness of the firmament:
and such as instruct many to justice, shall be as stars, during al eternity.

31. That is in Babylon.] S. Peter vvriteth from Babylon, that is, Rome.
The Protestants show them selves here (as in all places where any
controversy is, or that makes against them) to be most dishonest and partial
handlers of Gods word. The ancient fathers, namely S. Hierom in Catalogo de
scriptoribus Ecclesiasticis verbo Marcus:, Eusebius li. 2 c. 14 hist.
Oecumenius upon this place: and many more agree, that Rome is meant by the word
Babylon, Why Rome was called Babylon.
here also as in the 16 and 17 of the Apocalypse: saying plainly, that S.
Peter vvrote this Epistle at Rome, which is called Babylon for the resemblance
it had to Babylon that great city in Chaldaea (where the Jews were
captives) for magnificence, Monarchy, resort and confusion of al peoples and
tongues, and for that it was before Christ and long after, the seat of al
Ethnike superstition and idolatry, and the slaughter house of the Apostles and
other Christian men, the Heathen Emperors the^ keeping their chief reside^ce
there. See S. Leo Ser. 1. in Nati. Petri and Pauli.

This being most plain, The Protestants vvil have Babylon to signify Rome in
other places but not here.
and co^sonant to that which follows of S. Mark whom all the Ecclesiastical
histories agree to have been Peter's scholar at Rome, and that he there vvrote
his Gospel: yet our Adversaries fearing hereby the sequel of Peter's or the
Popes supremacy at Rome, deny that ever he was there, or that this Epistle
was written there, or that Babylon does here signify Rome: but they say that
Peter vvrote this Epistle at Babylon in (haldaea, though they never read
either in Scriptures or other holy or profane history, that this Apostle was
ever in that town. but see their shameless partiality. here Babylon (say they)
is not taken for Rome, because it would follow that Peter was at Rome etc.
but in the Apocalypse where al evil is spoken of Babylon, there they will
have it signify nothing else but Rome, and the Roman Church also, not (as the
fathers interpret it) the temporal state of the Heathen Empire there. So do
they follow in every* word no other thing but the advantage of their own
heresy. See the Annotation upon the last of the Romans v. 16. and upon the 17
of the Apocalypse. v. 5.

And as for their wrangling upon the supputation of the time of his going
thither, The Protestants vvra^gle about the time of Peter's being at Rome.
and the number of years that he was there, and the diversity that seems to
be in the Ecclesiastical vvriters concerning the same, read B. Fisher and other
that substantially answer al such cauils. And if such contentious reasoning
might, take place, we should hardly believe the principal things recorded
either in Ecclesiastical histories, or in the Scriptures them selves.
Concerning the time of Christ's fleing into Egypt, of the coming of the Sages
to adore him, yea of the years of his age, and time of his death, al ancient
vvriters do not agree. and concerning the day of his last supper and
institution of the holy Sacrament, there is diversity of opinions. Shall we
therefore infer that he never died, Many things most true (even in the
Scriptures) are not agreed upon concerning the time.
and that the other things never were? Can the Heretics accord all the
histories that seem even in holy Scripture to have contradiction? Can they tell
us certainly, when David first came to Saul, and the like? doubt they
whether the world was ever created, because the count of the years is
diverse? Do they not believe that Paradise ever was, because no man knovveth
where it is? and such other like things infinite to rehearse? Which when
they were done, were plain and known things in the world: and now for us
to call them to an account, after so many years, ages, and worlds, is but
sophistication and plain infidelity. And this sect of the Protestants
standing only upon destruction. and negatiues, and dealing with our religion
even as Julian, Porphyrie, and Lucian did, it is an easy thing for them to
bestovv their time in picking of quarrels.

THE SECOND EPISTLE OF PETER THE APOSTLE.
CHAP. I.
How much God has done for them, making them Christians: 5 and that they
again must do their part, not having only faith, but al other virtues also
and good works, that so they may have the m^re assurance to enter into the
kingdom of heaven, 13 And that he is so careful to admonish them, knovving that
his death is as hand, knovving also most certainly the ^^^ming of Christ by
the witness of the Father him self, as also by the Prophets. Concerning whom
he vvarneth them that they follow not private spirits, but the holy Ghost
(speaking new in the Church.)

made partakers of the divine nature, fleeing the corruption of that
concupiscence which is in the world.



The Epistle in the Transifiguration of our Lord, Aug. 6.
not having followed unlearned fables, have we made the power and ^prescience
^presence' of our Lord JESUS Christ known to you: but By this it is plain,
that either John, James, or Peter must be the author of this epistle. for these
three only were present at the Tra^sfiguration. Mat. 17^.
made beholders of his greatenesse. Mt. 17, 5
* he receiving from God his father honor and glory, this manner of voice
coming down to him from the magnifical glory, This is my beloved son in
whom I have pleased my self, hear him. You see that places are made holy by
Christ's presence, and that al places be not alike holy. See Annot. Act. 7, 33.
holy mount. 2 Timothy 3, 17.


ANNOTATIONS CHAP. I.
10. By good works.] Here we see, that Gods eternal predestination and
election consists with good works: Good works must concur with Gods
predestination to the effect thereof.
yea that the certainty and effect thereof is procured by man's free will and
good works, and that our well doing is a mean for us to attain to the
effect of Gods predestination, that is, to life everlasting. and therefore it is
a desperate folly and a great sign of reprobate persons, to say, If I be
predestinate, do what I vvil, I shall be saved. Nay, the Apostle says, If
thou hope to be one of the predestinate (for know it thou can not) do well,
that thou may be the more assured to attain to that thou hopest: or, make it
sure by good works. The Protestants in such cases not much liking these
words, by good works, (...).
though the latin have it universally, and some Greek copies also, as Beza
confesses, leave them out in their translations, by their wonted policy.

15. After my decease also.] These words though they may be easily altered by
co^struction into diverse senses not untrue, yet the corresponde^ce of the
parts of the sentence going before and following, The heretics (according to
their custom) exclude this sense altogether by their false translation.
give most plain this meaning, that, as during his life he would not omit to
put them in memory of the things he taught them, so after his death (which he
knew should be shortly) he would not fail to endeavor that they might be
mindeful of the same. Signifying that his care over them should not cease by
death, and that by his intercession before God after his departure, he would
do the same thing for them, that he did before in his life by teaching and
preaching. Oecum. in hunc l^^. Gagn.
This is the sense that the * Greek Scholies speak of, and this is most
proper to the text, and consonant to the old use of this Apostle and other
Apostolic Saints and fathers of the primitive Church.

S. Clement in his Epistle to S. James our Lords brother, witnesses, that S.
Peter encouraging him to take after his decease the charge of the Apostolic
Roman See, S. Peter's Pastoral care and protection of the Church after his
death.
promised that after his departure he would not cease to pray for him and his
flock, thereby to ease him of his Pastoral burden. To. 1 Council. ep. 1. S.
Clem. in initio. And S. Leo the Great one of his successors in the said See,
often attributes the good administration and government thereof to S. Peter's
prayers and assistance: namely in these goodly works Ser 3 in anniuers. (...)
assumpt. ad Pontif. We are much bound (says he) to give thanks to our Lord
and Redeemer Jesus Christ, that has given so great power to him whom he made
the Prince of the whole Church: that if in our time also any thing be done
well and be rightly ordered by us, it is to be imputed to his works and his
geuernement, Luc. 22. Io. 21.
to whom it was said, And thou being converted, confirm thy brethren: and to
whom our Lord after his resurrection said thrice, leede my sheep. Which now
also without doubt the godly Pastor does execute, confirming us with his
exhortations, and not ceasing to pray for us, that we be euercome with no
tentation. etc.

Yea it was a common thing in the primitive Church among the ancient
Christians, The Saints in heaven pray for the living.
and alvvaies since among the faithful, to make covenant in their life time,
that whether of them went to heaven before the other, he should pray for his
friend and fellovv yet alive. See the Ecclesiastical history of the holy
virgin and Martyr Potamiaena, promising at the hour of her Martyrdom, that
after her death she would procure mercy of God to Basilides one of the
souldiars that led her to execution, and so she did, Eusebius. li. 6. c. 4. Also
S. Cyprian ep. 57 in fine. Let us, (says he) pray mutually one for an other,
and whether of us two shall by Gods elemencie be first called for, let his
love continue, and his prayer not cease for his brethren and sisters in the
world. So said this holy Martyr at that time when Christians were so far
from Caluinisme (which abhors the prayers of Saints and praying to them)
that to be sure, they bargained before hand to have the martyrs and other
Saints to pray for them. The same S. Cyprian also in his book De disciplina
and habitu virginum, in fine, after a godly exhortation made to the holy
Virgins or Nonnes in his time, speaks thus unto them: Tantum tunc mementote
nostri, cum incipiet in vobis virginitas honorari. that is, Only then have us
in remembrance, when your virginity shall begin to be honored. that is, after
their departure. Where he insinuates the use of the Catholic Church in
keeping the festiual days and other duties tovvard the holy Virgins in
heaven. Feasts of holy Virgins.
S. Hierom also in the same manner speaks to Heliodorus, saying, that when
he is once in heaven, then he vvil pray for him that exhorted and incited him
to the blessed state of the Monastical life. Ep. 1. c. 2.

And so does he speak to the virtuous matrone Paula after her death, desiring
her to pray for him in his old age* Invocation of Saints.
affirming that she shall the more easily obtain, the neeres she is now joined
to Christ in heaven, in Epitaph, Paul in fine. It were to long to report,
how S. Augustine desires to be helped by S. Cyprians prayers (then and long
before a Saint in heaven) to the understanding of the truth concerning the
peace and regiment of the Church. li. 5 de Bapt. cont. Donatistas c. 17. And in
an other place the same holy Doctor alleges the said S. Cyprian saying, that
great numbers of our parents, brethren, children, friends, and other, expect us
in great solicitude and carefulnes of our salvation, being sure of their own.
li. 1 de praedest. Sanctorum c. 14. S. Gregory Nazianzene in his orations of
the praise of S. Cyprian in fine, and of S. Basil also in fine, declares how
they pray for the people, which two Saints he there inuocateth, as all the
ancient fathers did, both generally al Saints, and (as occasion served)
particularly their special Patrones. Among the rest see how holy Ephrem (in
orat. de laud. S. Deipara) prayed to our B. Lady with the same terms of
Aduocatt, Hope, Reconciliatrix, that the faithful yet use, and the Protestants
can not abide. S. Basil ho. de 40 Martyribus in fine. S. Athanasius Ser. in
Euang. de S. Deipara in fine. S. Hilarie in Psalm. 124. S. Chrysostom ho. 66 ad
po. Antiochenum in fine. Theodorete de curat. Grae^orum affectuum li. 8 in
fine. Finally all the fathers are full of these things: who better knevv the
meaning of the Scripture and the sense of the Holy Ghost, then these new
interpreters do. Private fantastical interpretation^.


20. Private.] The Scriptures can not be rightly expounded of every private
spirit or fantasy of the vulgar reader: but by the same spirit vvherevvith
they were written, which is resident in the Church.

CHAP. II.
At not only Prophets, but also false-prophets were in the old Testament, so
now likewise there shall be Masters of Heresy, to the damnation of them
selves, and of their folovvers. 4 And of their damnation he pronounces by
examples (as he comfort the virtuous Catholics or true believers with the
example of Lot) because of their railing at their Superiors and Prelates, their
blaspheming of Catholic doctrine, their voluptuous living, their lechery,
their covetousness, their manner of seducing, and the persons seduced, 20 for
whom it had been less damnable, if they had never been Christians.

1 Timothy 4. Jude.
and deny him that has bought them, (...)
the Lord: bringing upon them selves speedy perdition. Heretics (of whom he
prophecieth here) do gain scholars, by preaching liberty, and by their own
licentious life, which is specially joined to the heresy of these days.
many shall follow their riotousnesses, by whom the way of truth shall be
blasphemed. All the sweet words of heretics, speaking much of the word of
the Lord, the Gospel, JESUS CHRIST etc. are but terms of art to bie and sell
poor men's souls.
with feined words make merchandise of you, unto whom the judgment now
long since cease not: and their perdition slumbereth not. Gen, 7.
Noe, the preacher of justice, bringing in the deluge upon the world of the
impious. Genesis 19.
Genesis 19, 16.
abominable men.

The special properties of heretics.
from our Lord
against them. So heretics blaspheme the highest mysteries of our faith
through ignorance.
in those things which they know not, blaspheming, shall perish in their
corruption, coinquinationes and maecula,
coinquinations and spots, flowing in delicacies, in their feastings rioting
with you, Nu. 22, 23.


Who ever promised more liberty to their folowers then Luther, Calvin, and
the like, taking away penance, fasting, continency or chastity, keeping of
vows, necessity of good works (because faith does al) obedience to
Ecclesiastical pastors and Councils, and such like*
promising them liberty, whereas them selves are the slaves of corruption.
for * vvherevvith a man is overcome: Io. 8, 34.
of that he is the slave also. To. 6, 16.
they again entangled with the same be overcome: Mt. 12. 45.
* the later things are become unto them worse then the former. Pro. 26* 11.
* The dog returned to his vomit: and, The sovve vvashed (...)
into her vvallovving in the mire.

CHAP. III.
Th^se (...) Epistles ^e vvriteth to confirm them in the Apostles doctrine,
and vvarnet^ them of scorners that shall come, and deny Domesday. 5 Whose vain
argument he answers, and gives the reason of Gods so long patience, 10
exhorting to al holiness of life in respect of that terrible day. 16 Finally
giving warning of such as misinterprete S. Paul's Epistles and the other
Scriptures, and that we must not for any thing fall from the true faith.

in quibus
in which I stir up by admonition your sincere mind: 2 Timothy 3, 1. Jude, 18.
vvalking according to their own concupiscences, Ps. 89, 4
my dearest, that * one day with our Lord is as a thousand years, and a
thousand years as one day. Ezec. 33.
but he does patiently for you, 1 Timothy 2.
* not vvilling that any perish, Mt. 24.
but that al return to penance. 1 These. 5.
but the elements shall be resolved, with heat, Apoc. 3.
and the earth and the works which are in it, shall be burnt.

Esa. 65, 17. Apo. 21, 1.
and the elements shall melt with the heat of fire? to his promises, in
which justice inhabiteth.

To. 2, 4.


ANNOTATIONS CHAP. III.
16. Certain things hard.] The heretical proud spirit of private
interpretation of Scriptures.
This is a plain text to convince the Protestants, who (as al heretics
lightly do and did from the beginning) say the Scriptures be easy to
understand, and therefore may be not only read safely, but also expounded
boldly of all the people, as well unlearned as learned: and consequently every
one by him self and his private spirit, without respect of the expositions of
the learned fathers, or expectation of the Churches, their Pastors and Prelates
judgment, may determine and make choice of such sense as him self likes or
thinks agreeable. For this is partly their saying, partly the necessary
sequel of their folish opinion, which admits nothing but the bare
Scriptures. And Luther said that the Scriptures were more plain then all the
fathers commentaries: and so al to be superfluous but the Bible. Pra^fat.
assert. art. damnat.

Against al which Devilish and seditious arroga^cie, tending to make the
people esteem them selves learned or sufficient without their Pastors and
spiritual rulers help, to guide them selves in all matters of doctrine and
doubts in religion: The Scriptures be hard, namely S. Paul's epistles,
specially where he speaks of justification by faith.
the holy Apostle here tells and forevvarneth the faithful, that the
Scriptures be full of difficulty, and specially S. Paul's epistles of al other
parts of holy write, and that ignorant men ^ad unstable or pha^tastical
fellows puffed to and fro with every blast of doctrine and haeresie, abuse,
pervert, and misconster them to their own damnation. And De fid. and op. c. 14
S. Augustine says, that the special difficulty in S. Paul's epistles, which
ignorant, and evil men do so pervert and which S. Peter means, is his hard
speech and much commendation of that faith which he says does justify.
which the ignorant even from the Apostles time, and much more now, have and
do so misconster, as though he had meant that only faith without good works
could justify or save a man. Against which wicked collection and abuse of S.
Paul's words, the said father faith, al these Canonical or Catholic epistles
were written.

But the Haeretikes here to shift of the matter, and to creep out after their
fashion, answer, The Protestants idle distinction between difficulty in the
Epistles and difficulty in the things.
that S. Peter says not, S. Paul's epistles be hard, but that many things in
them are hard. Which may be to the Catholics an example of their sophistical
euasions from the evidence of Gods word. As though it were not al one to say,
Such an author or writer is hard: and, There be many things in that writer
hard to be understood. For, whether it be that the argument and matter be high
and past vulgar capacity, as that of praedestination, reprobation, vocation of
the Gentiles, and justifying faith: or whether his manner of style and
vvriting be obscure: al prove that his epistles be hard, and other Scriptures
also: because S. Peter here affirms that by reason of the difficulties in
them, The Greek copies, have both, some (...), in which things: some (...),
in which epistles.
whether in the style, or in the depth of the matter, the ignorant and
unstable (such as Heretics be) do pervert his vvritings, as also other
Scriptures, to their own damnation. Whereby it is plain that it is a very
dangerous thing for such as be ignorant, or for vvilde vvitted fellows, to
read the Scriptures. For such conditioned men be they that become Heretics,
and through ignorance, pride, and private fantasy, meeting with hard places
of S. Paul's epistles or other Scriptures, breed Haeresies.

And that not only the things treated of in the holy Scriptures, but also that
the very manner of vvriting and enditing thereof, is high and hard, and
purposely by Gods providence appointed to be written in such sort, see S.
Augustine li. 2 de doct. Christ. c. 6. and ep. 119. S. Ambrose ep. 44 in
principio. S. Hierom to Paulinus ep. 103 c. 5. 6. 7. who also (ep. 65. c. 1.)
says, Not only the matter, but the style of the Scriptures is hard.
that in his old age when he should rather have taught then be taught, he
went as far as Alexandria, only to hear Didymus, and to have his help for
the understanding of the Scriptures, and confesses with great thanks to the
said Didymus, that he learned of him that which before he knevve not. Ps. 118.
David says, Give me understanding, and I vvil search thy law. The Eunuch in
the Acts said, Act. 8.
How can I understand with out an interpreter? The Apostles, til Christ
opened their sense to understand the scriptures, Luc. 24. v. 45.
could not understand them. The holy Doctors by continual study, watching,
fasting, and praying, had much a do to understand them: that great clerk S.
Augustine confessing in the foresaid epistle 119. c. 21. that there were many
more things that he understood not, then that he understood. The Heretics say
the fathers did commonly err* and how could such great wise learned men be
deceived in reading and expounding the Scriptures, if they were not hard? and
if they were hard to them, how are they easy to these new masters the
Haeretikes? finally, why do they write so many new glosses, schol^es,
commentaries, as a cart cannot carry? Why do Luther, Zuinglius, Calvin, and
their Companions agree no better upon the interpretation of the Scriptures, if
they be not hard? vvhereat stumbled all the old heretics and the new, Arius,
Macedonius, Vigilantius, Nestorius, Eutyches, Berengarius, Vvicleffe,
Protestants, Puritanes, Anabaptists, and the rest, but at the hardness of the
Scriptures? They be hard then to understand* and Heretics pervert them to
their own damnation.

THE ARGUMENT OF S. JOHN'S THREE EPISTLES.
OF S. John was said in the Argument before his Gospel. Now here follow his
three Epistles: one to al Catholics (though Higinus ep. 2. to. 1. Council.
August. li. 2. Euang. quaest. q. 39.
some ancients do call it, Ad Parthos:) the other two being very short, unto a
certain Lady, and to one Gaius. The effect of al is, to witness unto them the
certainty of the Catholic faith, and to exhort them to continue still in it:
also to love the Catholic Church* and so, neither to become heretics, nor
Schismatikes: but rather to avoid al such, as the forerunners of Antichrist,
and to remember, that Catholics need not to go to schole to any such
Masters, having at home in the Catholic Church, the doctrine of the holy Ghost
him self, who was given to the Church visibly in the beginning, to lead her
into al truth, and to continue with her for ever. Therefore he says* That
which you have heard from the beginning, 1. Ioh. 2. v. 24.
let it abide in you. Likewise a little after. v. 27. and ep. 2. v. 6. This is
the commandment, that as you have heard from the beginning, you walk in the
same, because many seducers are gone out into the world. and v. 8. and 9.

And not only thus in general, but also in particular he expresses the points
which the heretics did then call in question. Some were about Christ him
self. for they denied that JESUS is Christ, that he is the very son of God,
that he is incarnate. Ep. 1. c. 2. v. 22. and Ep. 2. v. 7. And against such it
was that he vvrote his Gospel also, as he there signifies. Ioh. 20. v. 31.
Other points are about our justification, De fid. and op. c. 14.
against only faith, and for good works, as also S. Aug. noted, whose
words were cited before. Hereupon he says: If we say we have society
with God, 1. Ioh. ^ and 5.
and walk in darkness, we lie. Ep. 1. c. 1. Again, He that says he
knovveth God, and keeps not his commandments, is a lier. Again, This is
the charity of God, that we keep his commandments, and his commandments
are not heavy. Finally, Children let no man seduce you, he that does justice,
is just, even as he is just. Ep. 1. c. 3. v. 7. 8. 9. likewise c. 2. v. 29.
and in deed in all the three Epistles through out, he does inculcate good
works and keeping the commandments, against the heresy of only faith.

THE FIRST EPISTLE OF JOHN THE APOSTLE.
CHAP. I.
Good cause there is to believe the Apostles preaching. 5 And this is one point
of their preaching, that to have participation with God, we must not only
believe, but also abstain from al mortal sin, 8 though we al sin venially.



Io. 8, 12.
and declare unto you, That * God is light, and in him there is no darkness.
Heb. 9.
1 Pet. 1.
and * ^ the blood of JESUS Christ his son cleanses us ^ from al sin. Apo.
1.
3 Reg. 8, 46.
we seduce our selves, and the truth is not in us. 2 Par. 6, 36.
from al iniquity.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. I.
3. You may have society.] S. John shows manifestly, that whosoever desire
to be partakers with God, No salvation but in the Society of the Church.
must first be united to the Churches society, learn that faith, and receive
those Sacraments, which the Disciples received of the Truth it self,
conversant with them in flesh. So says Venerable Bede upon this place.
Whereby we see there is no society with God in sects or schisms, nor any
where but in the unity, fellowship, and communion of that Church which can
prove it self to descend from the Apostles.

7. The blood of Jesus.] Whether sins he remitted by prayers, by fasting, by
alms, by faith, by charity, Many means and instruments of remitting sin,
but al by the force and merit of Christ's blood applied by them.
by sacrifice, by Sacraments, and by the Priests, (as the holy Scriptures do
plainly attribute remission to every of these) yet none of al these do
otherwise remit, but in the force, by the merit and virtue of Christ's blood:
these being but the appointed means and instruments by which Christ vvil have
his holy blood to work effectually in us. which means whosoever
contemns, depriueth him self of the commodity of Christ's own blood, and
continues still in sin and uncleanness, vaunt he him self never so much of
Christ's death. Which point let the Protestants mark well, and cease to
beguile their poor deceived folovvers, persuading them, that the Catholics
derogate from Christ's blood, or seek remission otherwise then by it, for that
they use humbly the means appointed by Christ to apply the benefit of his
holy blood unto them.

7. From al sin.] Al remission of sins is by the Passion of Christ though
by secu^darie means also.
From original and actual, venial and mortal, a culpa and poena, that is, from
the fault and the pain due for the same. V. Bid says, that Christ's Passion
does not only remit in Baptism the sins before committed. but al other
afterward also done by frailty: yet so, if we use for the remission of them,
such means as be requisite and as Christ has appointed, whereof he reckeneth
some. Bid upon this place. See S. Augustine also upon this place to. 9. and S.
Hierome li. 2 con.* Pelag. c. 3.

8. That we have no sin.] We gather by these words and the former, that
there be two sorts of sins: Some sins venial.
one mortal, excluding us from light and the society of God: an other venial,
which is found even in those that walk in the light, and are in the society
of God. Also we note against the Pelagians, A man may be truly just,
notvvithstanding venial sins.
that we be truly called the sons of God, and so just in deed, though we
be not without al sins, every one of us, as well just as unjust, being
taught and bound to confess our offenses, and to ask pardon daily of God, by
this petition of the Pater noster, Forgive us our debtes. Therefore S. Augustine
li. de natura and great. c. 36. reckeneth up all the holy Patriarchs, Prophets,
and renowned just persons, to have been sinners, even when they were in
grace and Justice: excepting alvvaies our B. Lady, de qua propter honorem
Domini, nullam prorsus, cum de peccatis agitur, S. Augustine excepteth our B.
Lady from sinners.
habere volo quaestionem. of whom, says he, for the honor of our Lord. when
we talk of sins, I vvil have no question. And Pelagius asking what sins
Abel and such just men did commit, c. 3^.
S. Augustine a^svvereth, that they might laugh sometime immoderately, or jest
to much, or covet somevvhat inte^peratly, or pluck fruit over greedily, or in
eating take somevvhat more then afterward was well digested, Examples of
venial sins.
or have their intention in time of prayer somevvhat distracted, and such like.
thus in sense S. Augustine. Whereby we may learn which be venial sins,
that consist with true justice and de (...) perseuera^s. c. 2.
can not alvvaies be avoided even of holy men in this life. In the book de
fide ad Petrum c. 41. are excepted from this common rule of sinners, the
children which be nevvely baptized and have not yet use of reason to sin
either mortally or venially.

CHAP. II.
If any sin mortally, he must not despair. 3 To know God rightly, is not to
believe onley, but to keep his commandments: 7 and that this is no new
doctrine, but the very primitive, though a new life it is. 9 Therefore he that
believes must also love his brethren: 12 and that men must not love the
world* but do that which God wills. 18 Many are gone out of the Church
and become Seducers all the ministers of Antichrist: but true Christians must
continue in their old faith, considering the revvard, and that they need not
go to schole to any Heretic, the Holy Ghost himself being the scholemaster of
the Church, 29 he does earnestly inculcate iusti^e and good works.

(...)
advocate with the Father, JESUS Christ the just:

Io. 13, 34 15, 12.
^ Io. 3, 14.


How al sin and tentation proceed of these three, see S. Thomas Sum. 1. 2.
quaest. 77. art. 5.
all that is in the world, is the concupiscence of the flesh, and the
concupiscence of the eyes, and the pride of life, which is not of the Father,
but is of the world. and the concupiscence thereof. But he that does the vvil
of God, abides for ever.

(...)
Antichrist comes: now there are become ^ many antichrists: whereby we
know, that it is the last hour. They were of us for the time, that is, of
and in the Church: otherwise they could not have gone out. but they were not
of the co^sta^t sort, or of the elect and predestinat: for then they had tarried
within, or returned before their death.
were not of us. for if they had been of us, they would surely have remained
with us: but ^ that they may be manifest that they are not al of us. (...)
Chrisma. whereof Christ and Christians
the unction from the Holy one, and ^ know al things. Keep that firmly and
constantly which you have heard even from the beginning, by the mouth of the
Apostles: and not that only which you have received by vvriting.
heard from the beginning, let it abide in you. If that abide in you which you
have heard from the beginning, you also shall abide in the Son and the Father.

or, in it.
in him. We see it is Apostolical doctrine, that men may do or work justice,
and that so doing they be just by their works proceeding of Gods grace, and not
by faith or imputation only.
which does justice, is borne of him.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. II.
1. That you sin not.] S. John (says V. ^ede upon his place) is not
contrary to him self, in that he seeks here to make them vvi^hout sin*
whom he said in the last chapter could not be without al sins. but in the
former place he warned us only of our frailety, that we should not arrogate
to our selves per^^ct innocence: here he provoke us to vvatchfulnes and
diligence in resisting and avoiding si^nes, specially the greater, which by
Gods grace may more easily he repelled.

1. An advocate.] How Christ is our only Advocate.
The calling and office of an Advocate, is in many things proper to Christ, and
in every condition more singularly and excellently agreing to him then to any
Angel, Saint, or creature living. though these also be rightly and cruely so
called, and that not only without al derogation, but much to the honor of
Christ's aduocation. To him soly and only it agrees to procure us mercy
before Gods face, by the general ransom, price, and payment of his blood for
our delivery, as is said in the sentence following, And he is the propitiation
for our sins, and not for ours only, but for the whole worlds. In which
sort he is our only advocate, because he is our only redeemer, and hereupon
he alone immediately, by and through him self. and without the aid or
assistance of any other* man or Angel, in his own name, right, and merits,
confidently deals in our causes before God our judge, and so procures our
pardon, which is the highest degree of aduocation that can be.

Al which notvvithstanding* How Angels, Saints, and men alive are our
advocates.
yet the Angels, and Saints* and our fellows alive, may and do pray for us,
and in that they deal with God by intercession to procure mercy for us, may
justly be called our advocates: not so as Christ is, who demands al things
immediately by his own merits, but as secondary intercessors, who never ask
nor obtain any thing for us, but per Christum Dominum nostrum, by and through
Christ our common Lord, Advocate, and Redeemer of mankind. And behold how S.
Augustine (tract. 1 in ep. Io. upon these very words) prevented the Heretics
cauillations. Sed dicit aliquis etc. But some man vvil say, Do not the Saints
them pray for us? do not Bishops then or Prelates and Pastors pray for the
people? Yet^ says he: Mark the Scriptures, and you shall find that the
Apostles prayed for the people, and again desired the people to pray for them,
and so the head prays for all, Saints in heaven pray for us.
and the members one for an other. And likewise (lest the Heretics should
say, there is a difference betwixt the living and the dead in this case) thus
the same holy father vvriteth upon the 85 Psalm in fine. Our Lord Jesus Christ
does yet make intercession for us, all the Martyrs that be with him, pray for
us: neither vvil their intercession cease* til we cease our gronings.

In this sense therefore whosoever prays for us, either alive or dead, is our
advocate. as S Augustine (ep. 59 to Paulinus circa med.) calls Bishops, the
peoples advocates, when they give them their benediction or blessing. So does
the holy Church call our B. Lady our advocate, by the very words of S.
Irenaeus, Iren. li. 3. c. 33. and li. 5 post med.
that you may see such speeches be no new inventions of the later ages, The B.
virgin is our advocate.
but Apostolical. The obedient Virgin MARIE (says he) is made the advocate of
the disobedient virgin Eve. And to confound the Protestants plainly, in that
they think or pretend that the aduocation or patronage of Saints should be
injurious to Christ, remember that * our Savior acknowledges Angels to be
deputed for the protection (which is nothing else but aduocation) of infants
before the face of God, D. Hiero. in Mat. c. 18.
besides the plain examples in the old Testament Genesis 48. v. 16. Tob. 5. v.
27. etc. 12. v. 12. Dan. 10. And this not only the Catholic Church, Angels
are our protectors.
but the very English Protestants them selves in their service book and in the
Collect of Michelmas day, profess, and pray for the same protection or
aduocation of Angels, and defend the same against their younger brethren the
Puritanes.

2. For the whole worlds.] S. Augustine gathers hereof against the
Donatistes, and al other Heretics, The Catholic Church is the only true
Church.
that would drive the Church into corners or some certain countries, from the
universality of al Nations (whereof it was named by the Apostles, Catholic)
that the true religion, and Church, and consequently the effect of Christ's
propitiation, death, and aduocation, pertains not to one age, nation, or
people, but to the whole world. S. Augustine upon this place to. 9. tract. 1
in ep. Io.

4. He that says he knovveth.] Not only faith
To know God here, signifies (as it does often in the Scriptures) to love,
that is, as in the last chapter, to be in society with him, and to have
familiar and experimental knowledge of his graces. If any vaunt them selves
thus to know God, and yet keep not his commandments, he is a lier, as al
Caluinistes and Lutherans, that profess them selves to be in the favor of God
by only faith: affirming, that they neither keepe^ not possibly can keep his
commandments.

18. Many antichrists.] Al Heretics are antichrists the foreru^ners of the
great Antichrist.
The holy Apostle S John (says S. Cyprian) did not put a difference betwixt
one heresy or schism and an other, not meant any sort that specially
separated them selves, but generally called al without exception,
antichrists, that were adversaries to the Church, or were gone out from the
same. And a little after, It is evident that al be here called antichrists,
that have severed them selves from the charity and unity of the Catholic
Church. So vvriteth he ep. 76. nu. 1 ad Magnum. Whereby we may learn, that
al Heretics, or rather Arch-heretikes be properly the precursors of that one
and special Antichrist, which is to come at the last end of the world, and
which is called here immediately before, (...), that peculiar and singular
Antichrist.

19. They went cut from us.] An evident note and mark, whereby to convince
al Heretics and false teachers. The mark of al heretics is, their going out
of the Catholic society.
to wit, that being once of the common Catholic Christian fellowship, they
forsook it, and went out from the same. Simon Magus, Nicolas the Deacon,
Hymenaeus, Alexander, Philetus, Arius, Macedonius, Pelagius, Nestorius,
Eutyches, Luther, Calvin, and the like, were of the common society of al us
that be Christian Catholics, they went out from us whom they savv to live in
unity of faith and religion together, and made them selves new conuenticles.
therefore they were (as the Apostle here shows) antichrists, and we and all that abide in the ancient fellowship of Christian religion, that went not
out of their fellowship, in which we never were, nor out of any other
society of known Christians, can not be Schismatikes or Heretics, but must
needs be true Christian Catholic men. Let our adversaries tell us, out of
what Church we ever departed, The Catholics can not be proved to have gone
out.
when, and where, and under what persons it was that we revolted, as we
can tell them the year, the places, the Ringleaders of their revolt.

19. They were not of us.] He means not, that Heretics were not, or could
not be in or of the Church, before they went out or fell into their heresy or
schism: but partly that many of them which afterward fall out, How
Heretics are of the Church, before they fall.
though they were before with the rest, and partakers of all the Sacraments
with other their fellows, yet in deed were of naughty life and conscience
when they were within, and so being rather as if humors and superfluous
excrements, then true and lively parts of the body, after a sort may be said
not to have been of the body at al. So S. Augustine expounds these words in
his commentary upon this place. tract. 3. but else where, more agreably as it
seems, that the Apostle means, that such as vvil not tarry in the Church,
but finally forsake it to the end, in the prescience of God, and in respect of
the small benefit they shall have by their temporal small abode there, be not of
or in the Church, though according to this present state, they are truly
members thereof. Li. de corrept. and gr. c. 9 and de dono perseu^^. c. 8.

19. That they may be manifest] God permits heresy to be, that such as be
permanent, constant, By heresies constant Catholics are known.
and chosen members and children of the Catholic Church, only known to God
before, may now also be made manifest to the world, by their constant
remaining in the CHVRCH, when the vvinde and blast of every heresy or
tentation drives out the other light and unstable persons.

20. Know al things.] Every good Catholic is sufficiently taught by the
Church to salvation.
They that abide in the unity of Christ's Church, have the unction, that is,
the Holy Ghost, who teaches al truth, not that every member or man thereof
has al knowledge in him self personally, but that every one which is of that
happy society to which Christ promised and gave the Holy Ghost, is partaker
of al other men's gifts and graces in the same holy Spirit, to his salvation.
Neither need any to seek truth at Heretics hands or others that be gone
out* when it is within them selves and only within them selves in Gods
Church. If thou love unity (says S. Augustine) for thee also has he,
whosoever has any thing in it, take away envy, it is thine which I have,
it is mine which thou have. etc. Tract. 32 in Euang. Joan.

CHAP. III.
It is not for the sons of God, to sin mortally, but for the sons of the
Devil, vvherby they are known one from an other, and not by only faith. 11
True faith is, that we also love our brethren, giving both our life and
substance for them. 19 Such unfeigned love may have great confidence before God.
23 because the keeping of his commandments does much please him, which
consist in faith and charity.

Not by nature, as Christ is: but by grace and adoption.
the sons of God. For this cause the world does not know us, because it has
not known him. How we shall see God, and be like unto him in the next life,
see S. Augustine ep. 111. 112. and li. 12. de ciuit. Dei c. 29.
see him as he is. This teaches us that man sanctifies him self by his free
will working together with Gods grace. S. Augustine upon this place.
sanctifies him self, as he also is holy. Es. 53, 4.
and ^ sin is iniquity. 1 Pet. 2, 24.
* and sin in him there is none. Io. 8, 44
is of the devil: because the devil ^ sins from the beginning. For this,
appeared the Son of God, that he might dissolve the works of the devil. The
Epistle for S. Polycarpus, Ian. 26.
is not of God, and he that loves not his brother. Io. 13. 15
* That you love one an other. Genesis 4, 8


The Epistle upon the 2 Su^day after Pentecost.
if the world hate you. Io. 15, 13
I^. 2, 15.
Every man is bound to give alms according to his ability, when he sees his
brother in great necessity.
see his brother have need, and shall shut his bowels from him: how does the
charity of God abide in him?

Mat. 21.
^ we shall receive of him: because we keep his commandments, Io. 14.
and do those things which are pleasing before him. 1 Io. 5.
Io. 17, 3. 13, 34.
that we believe in the name of his son JESUS Christ: and Lest any man
should think by the words next before, only faith in Christ to be commanded
or to please God, he adds to says the commandment of charity or love of
our neighbor.
love one an other, as he has given commandment unto us. Io. 14, 23.


ANNOTATIONS CHAP. III.
4. Sin is iniquity.] Iniquity is not taken here for wickedness, as it is
commonly used both in Latin and in our language, as is plain by the Greek
word (...), signifying nothing else but a svvaruing or declining from the
straight line of the law of God or nature. So that the Apostle means,
Concupiscence remaining after Baptism is no sin, without consent.
that every sin is an obliquitie or defect from the rule of the law: but not
contrary, that every such svvaruing from the law, should be properly a sin,
as the Heretics do untruly gather, to prove that concupiscence remaining
after Baptism is a very sin, though we never give our consent unto it. And
though in the 5 chapter following verse. 17. the Apostle turn the speech,
affirming every iniquity to be a sin, yet there the Greek word is not the
same as before, (...), but (...) by which it is plain that there he means
by iniquity, man's actual and proper transgression which must needs be a
sin. See S. Augustine cont. Julian. li. 5 c. 3. S. Ambr. li. d^ Apologia
David c. 13.

6. Sins not.] Iouinian and Pelagius falsely;(as Heretics use to do)
argued upon these words, and those that follow verse. Heretical exposition of
Scriptures.
9: the one, that the baptized could sin no more: the other, that no man
being or remaining just could sin. But among many good senses given of this
place, this seems most agreeable, that the Apostle should say, that mortal
sin does not consist together with the grace of God, and therefore can not be
committed by a man continuing the son of God. and so is the like speech in
the 9 verse following to be taken. No man in grace sins mortally.
See S. Hierom li. 2 cont. louinianum c. 1.

7. He that does justice.] He does inculcate this often, that man's true
justice or righteousness consists in doing or vvorking justice, and that so he
is just, and bids them not to be seduced by Heretics, True justice.
in this point.

8. Sins from the beginning.] The Devil was created holy and in grace, and
not in sin: but he fell of his own free vvil from God. Therefore these
words, from the beginning, may be interpreted thus, from the beginning of
sin, and so the Apostle vvil say, The Devil committed the first sin. How
the Devil sinned from the beginning.
Augustine li. 11 de eiu. Dei c. 15 expounds it. The most simple meaning
seems to be, that he sinned from the beginning of the world, not taking the
beginning precisely for the first instant or moment of the creation, but
straight upon the beginning, as it must needs also be taken in S. John's Gospel
c. 8. 44.

22. We shall receive, because.] Not any faith.
Let the Protestants be ashamed to say, that we obtain al of God by only
faith, the Apostle here attributing it to the keeping of Gods commandments.
Note here also that Gods commandments are not impossible to be kept, but
were then, and are now observed of good men.

CHAP. IIII.
We may not believe all that boast of the spirit, but try them, whether they
teach Catholic articles of the faith (namely the incarnation of Christ:)
whether their doctrine be not worldly, and them selves disobedient hearers of
the Apostles. 7 Vee must love one an other, considering the exceeding love of
God in sending his son to save us. 17 An argument of perfect charity is, if
we have nothing in our conscience to fear in the day of Judgment. 19 And an
argument that we love God is, if we love brethren.

(...)
antichrist, of whom you have heard that he comes, and now he is in the
world. Io. 8, 47 10, 27.
* He that knovveth God, hears us. he that is not of God, hears us not. in
this we know the spirit of truth, and the spirit of error.

The Epistle upon the first Sunday after Pentecost.
Io. 3, 16.


Io. 1, 18. 1 Timothy 6, 16.
No man in this life, nor with corporal eyes, ca^ see the proper essence or
substance of the Deity. See S. August. ad Paulin. de vide^do Deo. ep. 112.
no man has seen at any time. If we love one an other, God abides in us, and
his charity in us is persired. Io. 13, 34, 15, 12.
how can he love?

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. IIII.
1. Believe not every spirit.] Heretical boasting of the spirit.
That is, Receive not every doctrine of such as boast them selves to have the
spirit. For there be many false prophets, that is to say, Haeretikes, which
shall go out of the Church, and challenge the spirit, and vaunt of Gods word,
Scripture, and Gospel, which in deed be seducers.

1. Prove the spirits.] The Church only, not every private man, has to prove
and discern spirits.
It is not meant by this place, as the Protestants would have it, that every
particular person should of him self examine, try, or judge who is a true or
false doctor, and which is true or false doctrine. But the Apostle here would
every one to discern these diversities of spirits, by taking knowledge of
them to whom God has given the gift of discerning spirits and doctrines
(which S. Paul expressly says is given but to some, and not to every one, 1
Cor. 12.) and by obeying the Church of God, to whom Christ has given * the
Spirit of truth. Io. 14, 16.
And this is only the sure way to prove the spirits and doctrines of these
days. And al they that would bring us from our Pastors and the Churches
judgment, to our own private trial, seek nothing else but to drive us to
miserable uncertainty in all our belief. Calvin.
as Calvin does, who upon this place says, that private men may examine the
general Councels doctrines.

2. Every spirit that confesses.] To confess or deny any article which the
Cath. Church teaches, is at al times a certain mark of Catholic or heretic.
The Apostle speaks according to that time, and for that part of Christian
doctrine which then was specially to be confessed, taught, and maintained
against certain wicked Haeretikes, Cerinthus, Ebion, and the like, that
taught wickedly against the person and both natures of Christ JESUS. The
Apostle therefore gives the faithful people this token to know the true
teachers of those days from the false. Not that this mark would serve for all
times, or in case of al'other false doctrines, but that it was then a
necessary note. As if a good Catholic writer, Pastor, or parents would
vvarne al theirs, now in these days, to give care only to such teachers as
acknowledge Christ our Savior to be really present, and sacrificed in the B.
Mass, and that al such are true preachers and of God, the rest to be of the
Devil, or to be counted the spirit of Antichrist. Which spirit of Antichrist
(he says) was come even then, and is no doubt much more now in all Haeretikes,
al being precursors of that great Antichrist which shall come toward the
later end.

3. That dissolueth.] Many old heresies that dissolved Christ.
To dissolve, loose, or separate JESUS a sunder, was proper to al those old
Heretics that taught either against his Divinity, or Humanity, or the Unity
of his person, being of two natures, as Cerinthus, Ebion, Nestorius, Eutyches,
Manes or Manichaeus, Cerdon, Apelles, Apollinaris and the like. And this is one
place by which we may see that the common Greek copies be not ever
authentical, The Greek text corrupted by old heretics.
and that our old approved translation may not alvvaies be examined by the
Greek that now is, which the Protestants only follow: but that it is to be
presupposed, when our old Latin text differs plainly from the Greek, that
in old time either al or the more approved Greek reading was otherwise, and
that often the said Greek was corrupted then or since by Heretics or
otherwise. For of the Greeks, S. Irenaeus li. 3. c. 18: among the Latin
fathers, S. Augustine tract. 6. in fine, S. Leo ep. 10. c. 5, and Venerable Bede did read as we do. and this reading makes more against the said
Heretics, then that which the common Greek now has, to wit, Every spirit
that confesses not Christ to have come in flesh, is not of God. which is also
in effect said before verse. 2. And that therefore it was corrupted and altered
by Heretics, see the words of Socrates also a Greek writer, very agreeable
to this purpose. li. 9. 9. 3^.
Nestorius (says he) being eloquent by nature, which is often in Heretics,
accounted him self therefore learned, and disdained, to study the old
interpreters, counting him self better then them all: being ignorant that in S.
John's Catholic epistle old (Greek) copies had, EVERY ONE THAT DISSOLVETH
JESUS, IS NOT OF GOD. So says he, adding moreover that such as would separate
the divinity from the, dispensation of Christ's humanity, took out of the old
copies this sense. for which the old expositours noted that these which would
loose JESUS, had corrupted this Epistle. See also the Tripartite li. 12. c. 4.

6. In this, we know.] A sure mark of true of false teachers.
This is the most sure and general mark to know the true spirits and
prophets from the false: that those which be of God, will hear and obey their
Apostles and lavvful pastors succeding the Apostles, and submit them selves to
the Church of God: the other, that be not of God, will not hear either Apostle,
pastor, or Church, but be their own judges.

17. That we may have confidence.] Confidence called in Latin Fiducia, ^
Against the Protestants special faith and presumptnoua security of salvation.
is neither alone with faith, nor a persuasion infallible that makes a man no
less secure and certain of his salvation, then of the things that we are
bound to believe, as the Protestants falsely teach: but it is only a hope well
corroborated, confirmed, and strengthened upon the promises and grace of God,
and the parties merits. And the words both following and going before, prove
also evidently against the Protestants, that our confidence and hope in the day
of judgment depends not only upon our apprehension of Christ's merits by
faith, or upon his grace and mercy, but also upon our conformity to Christ in
this life, in charity and good works. 2 Pet. 1, 10.
And that is the doctrine of S. Peter when he said, Labor, that by good
works you may make sure your vocation and election. and S. Paul's meaning,
when he said, I have fought a good fight, 2. Tim. 4. 7.
there is laid up for me a crown of justice, which our Lord vvil render to
me in that day, a just judge.

18. Fear is not in charity.] The fear of God in just men, co^n^fisteth with
charity.
The Heretics very falsely understand this place so, that Christian godly men
ought to have no doubt, mistrust, or fear of hell and damnation. Which is most
evidently against the Scriptures, commending every where unto us the awe and
fear of God and his judgments. Fear him (says our Savior Mat. 10) that can
cast body and soul into hell. And Psalm. 118. Pearse my flesh with thy fear.
Which fear of Gods judgments caused S. Paul and al good men to chastise
their bodies, 1. Cor. 9.
lest they should be reprobate and damned. Prou. 28.
And the wise man for this cause affirms him to be happy, that is ever
fearful. And holy Job faith, Job c. 9.
I feared al my works. And the Apostle, With fear and trembling work your
salvation. Phil. 2.
Which kind of fear is even in the iustest men and most full of charity,
consisting well with the same virtue, and is called Filialis is timer, because
it is such as the good child ought to have toward his father.

But there is a kind of fear which stands not with charity, What fear
agrees not with charity.
and is clean against hope also, that which brings such perplexity and
auxietie of conscience, that it induces a man to mistrust or despair of Gods
mercies. That servile fear also which makes a man often to leave sinning and
to do the external works of justice, not for any love or delight he has in
God or his laws, Servile fear is not il.
but only for fear of damnation, though it be not il in it self, but very
profitable, as that which helps toward the love of God, yet it stands not
with charity neither, but is daily more and more lessened, and at length quite
driven out by charity. Of these kind of fears then the Apostle speaks, and
(as some expound) of the fear of men also, of which our Savior says, Fear
not them that kill the body. Mat. 10.


CHAP. V.
They that love God, must love his natural son JESUS, and his sons by
adoption, and keep his commandments, which to the regenerate are light. 4
But not, unless they continue in the Catholic faith, namely of this article,
that JESUS is the son of God, and therefore able to give us life everlasting,
14 and al our petitions, 16 and our prayers for all our brethren that sin not
unto death, dying in their mortal sins by impenitence. Last of al, he
vvarneth them not to communicate with idols.

Mao. 11, 30.
The Epistle upon Dominica in albis or Low Sunday.
overcomes the world. and this is the victory which overcomes the
world, our faith. 1 Cor. 15, 57.
but he that believes that JESUS is the son of God? the Spirit which
testifies, that Christ is the truth.

Io. 3, 36.


Mt. 7, 7. 21, 22. 1 Io. 3, 22.
* what soever we shall ask according to his will, he hears us. or, if we
know.
we know that he hears us whatsoever we shall ask: we know that we
have the petitions which we request of him.

(...)
is sin. And there is a sin not to death.
to death'. Luc. 24, 45.
that we may know the true God, (...)
and may be in his true son. This is the true God, and life everlasting.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. V.
5. His commandments are not heavy.] The commandments possible to be kept.
How can the Protestants say that Gods commandments can not possibly be
fulfilled or kept in this life, seeing the Apostle says, they be not heavy:
and Christ says, Mat. ^^.
his yoke is svveete, and his burden light? See for the full understanding of
this place. S. Augustine de perfectione iustitia c. 10. The Heretics in favor
of their foresaid error, Heret. translation.
rather translate, His commandments are not (...)
grievous; then, are not heavy.

7. Three which give testimony.] Three persons and one substance in the B.
Trinity.
An express place for the distinction of three persons, and the unity of
nature and essence in the B. Trinity: against the Arians and other like
Heretics, who have in diverse ages found them selves so pressed with these
plain Scriptures, that they have (as it is thought) altered and corrupted the
text both in Greek and Latin many ways: even as the Protestants handle those
textes that make against them. The Arians corrupt the text of Scripture.
But because we are not now troubled with Arianisme so much as with
Caluinisme, we need not stand upon the variety of readings or expositions of
this passage. See S. Hierom in his epistle put before the 7 Canonical or
Catholic Epistles.

16. A sin to death.] What is a sin to death.
A sin to death is an other thing then a mortal sin, for it is that mortal
sin only, whereof a man is never penitent before his death, or in which he
continues til death, and dies in it. I affirm (says S. Augustine de correp.
and great. c. 12) that a sin to death is to leave faith vvorking by charity
even til death. So likewise in the words before, a sin not to death, is
not that which we call a venial sin, but any that a man commits and
continues not therein til death.

16. For that I say not.] If the sin to death where of he speaks, be the
sin wherein a man dies without repentance, according to S. Augustines
words before rehearsed: then the prayer which he speaks of, Prayer for the
dead*
must needs be prayer for the dead. because he speaks of praying, or not
praying, for them that died in deadly sin, exhorting us to pray, and
encouraging us to do it with confidence to be heard, if we pray, for them
that departed this life not in deadly sin: and contrariwise in manner
dissuading and discouraging us from praying for such as continued in wickedness
even til their lives end. And S. Augustine sets down the Churches practice
agreeable to the Apostles meaning, Some of the dead may not be prayed for.
li. 21 c. 24. de Ciuit. Dei. if there be any (says he) that persist til death
in impenitence of heart, does the Church now pray for them, that is for the
souls of them that so are departed? So says he. And this is the cause, that
Concilium Bracharense primum sap. 34 forbids to pray for such as die in
desperation, or kill them selves: and the reason, why the Church forbeareth to
pray for Heretics that die in their heresy, or maintain heresy unto death
and by their death. It is proved that the Apostle speaks of praying for the
dead.


And that the place is most properly or only meant of praying for the
departed, this conuinceth, that neither the Church nor any man is dehorted here
from praying for any sinner yet living, not for: he remission of any sin in
this life: al sins (of what sort soever) being pardonable, so long as the
committers of them be in case and state to repent: as they be, so long as they
be in this world. And we see that the Church prays, and is often heard, for
Heretics, Jews, Turks, Apostataes, The Caluinists blasphemy, to avoid this
sense of the Apostle.
and what other infidels or il men soever, during their lives. And it is great
blasphemy that the Caluinistes utter upon this place: to wit, that Apostasy
and certain other sins of the reprobate, can not be forgiven at al in this
life. Which they hold, only to avoid the sequel of praying for the dead upon
these words of S. John, besides that they must take upon them presumptuously,
to know and discern of Gods secrets, who be reprobate, and who be not, and
according to that, pray for some, and not for othersome* al which is most
wicked and absurd presumption.

As for their allegation, that S. Jeremy the Prophet was forbidden to pray
for the Jews, and warned that he should not be heard, Chap. 7. 11. 14: there
is great difference. first, he had a revelation by the words of God, that
they would continue in their wickedness, as we have not of any certain
person, whereof S. John here speaks. secondly, Jeremy was not forbidden to
pray for the remission of their sins, nor had denial to be heard therein for
any man's particular case, whereof the Apostle here speaks: but he was told
that they should not escape the temporal punishment and affliction which he
had designed for them, and that he would not heard him therein.

21. From idols.] Heret, translation against sacred images.
It is so known a treachery of Heretics to translate idola images (as here
and in a number of places, specially of the English Bible printed the year
1562) that we need not much to stand upon it. As this also is seen to all the
world, that they do it of purpose to seduce the poor ignorant people, and to
make them think, that whatsoever in the Scriptures is spoken against the
idols of the Gentiles (which the Prophet calls Simulachra Gentium) is meant
of pictures, Psalm. 113.
sacred images, and holy memories of Christ and his Saints. Against such
seducers the second sacred Council of Nice, The 2 Council of Nice pronou^ceth
anathema, that is, a curse against the Caluinists.
called the seventh Synod, Edit. Colo^. an. 1567.
decrees thus Act. 4. page 122. Quicunque sententias sacrae scriptura de
Idolis, contra venerendas imagines addu^unt, anathema. Qui venerandas imagines
idola appellant, ana^thema, Qui dicunt^ Christiani adorant imagines vt Deos,
anathema* that is, Ana^thema to al them that bring the sentences of holy
Scripture touching Idols; against the venerable images, Anathema to them that
call the venerable images, idols. Anathema to them that say, Christiam adore
images as gods.

Now in their later translations the Heretics perceiving that the world
sees their dishonest dealing, corrected them selves in some places, and in this
place have put, idols, in the text: but to give the people a vvatchvvord that
the Churches images are to be comprised in the word, idols, The Bible of the
year 1577.
they have put, images, in the margent. But concerning this matter, it is most
evident that neither every idol is an image, The great difference of idol and
image.
nor every image an idol: and that, howsoever the origin or etymology of the
word, idol, may be taken in the Greek, yet both the words and the things be
in truth and by the use of al tongues, far differing. The great dragon that the
Babylonians adored (Dan. 14) was an idol, but not an image: the Cherubins in
Salomons temple were images, but not idols* and the face of the Queen in her
coin or elsvvhere, as Caesar's face upon the coin that Christ called for, is
an image, but not an idol* and the Heretics dare not translate that text of
Scripture thus, Whose idol is this superscription? nor call the Queens image,
the idol of the Queen: nor Christ, the idol of his father: nor woman, the
idol of the man: nor man, the idol of God* al which in Scripture be named
images for all that, and be so in deed, and not idols. which conuinceth, that
the Heretics be false and corrupt translatours in this place and other the
like, confounding these two words as if they were al one.

But as for the having of images or purtraites of holy things, not only in
private houses, but also in Churches, Sacred images in Churches, by Gods own
vvarrant.
God him self does vvarrant us, Exodus 25.
who * commanded even the Jews them selves (a people most prone to
idolatry, and that after he had given them a special precept of not having,
making, or worshipping of idols) to make the images of Angels (the Cherubins)
and that in the sovereign holiest place of adoration that was in the Temple,
and about the Arc* yea and in respect of which sacred images partly, they did
(as S. Hierom says ep. 17 c. 3) so great reverence to the holy place called
Sancta sanctorum. If they then were warranted and commanded to make and have
in so great reverence the images of mere spirits or Angels, whose natural
shape could not be expressed* The 2 Council of Nice was gathered against
Imagebreakers.
how much more may we Christians have and reverence the images of Christ, his
B. mother, the Apostles, and other Saints, being men, whose shape may be
expressed? So does the said Nicene Council argue against the Heretics which
at that time were the Adversaries of images.

And note here, that eight hundred years ago, they were straight counted
Heretics, that began to speak against images, and that Council was called
purposely for them, and condemned them for Heretics, The antiquity of holy
images.
and confirmed the former ancient reverence and use of sacred images. which
began even in our Saviors time or little after, when good religious folk for
love and reverence made his image, namely the woman that he healed of the
blouddy flux. which image was also approved by miracles, as the
Ecclesiastical history tells, and namely Eusebius Eccl. hist. li. 7 c. 14.
(...) citato.
who also witnesses that the images of Peter and Paul were in his days. as
you may see also in S. Augustine (li. d. consens. Evangelist. c. 10) that their
pictures commonly stood together in Rome, even as at this day. Of our Ladies
image see S. Gregory li. 7. ep. 5. indict. 2 ad Ianuar. and ep 53. In whom
also (li. 7. ep. 109) you may see the true use of images, and that they are the
books of the unlearned, and that the people ought to be instructed and taught
the right use of them, The use and fruit of holy images.
even as at this day good Catholic folk do use them to help and increase
their devotion, in all Catholic Churches: yea the Lutherans them selves retain
them still. S. Damascene vvrote three books in defense of sacred images
against the foresaid Heretics.

THE SECOND EPISTLE OF JOHN THE APOSTLE.
He commends the lady and her sons for continuing in the old says, bidding
them so to do hereafter also, lest they lose the revvard of their works in
the day of judgment: and to Jove the true believers, but with Heretics to
have no society: expr^ssing also the points then in controversy.



Io. 15, 12.
* that we love one an other. 1 Io. 3, 11.


Revvard for keeping fast the Catholic faith.
revvard. To go back or revolt from the received truth and doctrine
Apostolical, it damnable.
reuolteth, and persisteth not in in the doctrine of Christ: has not God. He
that persiteth in the doctrine: the same has both the Father, and the Son.
To. 16, 17.
and bring not this doctrine: receive him not into the house, nor say, God save
you, unto him. God save you, communicates with his wicked works.



ANNOT.
6. From the beginning.] This is the rule of a Christian Catholic man, to
walk in that faith and worship of God which he has received from the
beginning. To hold fast the old received faith.
Which is that which we now call according to the Scriptures, the tradition
of the Apostles: that which is come to us from man to man, from Bishop to
Bishop, and so from the Apostles. So shall a faithful man avoid seducers that
rise up in every age, teaching new doctrine.

10. This doctrine.] To bring vvilfully an other doctrine then the Catholic
Church sets down, is alvvaies a mark of seducers and Heretics.
The Apostles, and true Pastors their lavvful successors, and the Church of God
in holy Council, use to set down the true doctrine in those points which
Heretics call into controversy. Which being once done and declared to the
faithful, they need no other mark or description to know an Heretic or
false teacher by, but that he comes with an other doctrine then that which
is set down to them. Neither can the Heretics shift them selves, as now a
days they would do, saying, o let us first be proueds Heretics by the
Scriptures, let them define an Heretic. No, this is not the Apostles rule.
Many a good honest shepherd knovveth a wolf, that can nor define him. but
the Apostle says. If he bring not this set doctrine, he is a seducer. So holy
Church says now, Christ is really in the B. Sacrament, under form of bread
and wine etc. If therefore he bring not this doctrine, he is a seducer, and an
Heretic and we must avoid him, whether in his own definitions and
censures he seem to him self an Heretic or no.

10. Receive him not.] Though in such times and places where the community or
most part be infected, When and wherein to co^uerse with Heretics, is
tolerable: when and wherein, it is damnable.
necessity often forces the faithful to converse with such in vvorldly
affairs, to salute them, to eat and speak with them, and the Church by
decree of Council, for the more quietness of timorous consciences provides,
that they incur not excommunication or other censures for communicating in
vvorldly affairs with any in this kind, except they be by name
excommunicated or declared to be Heretics yet even in worldly coonuersatio^
and secular acts of our life, we must avoid them as much as we may, because
their familiarity is many ways contagious and nolsome to good men, namely to
the simple: but in matter of religion, in praying, reading their books,
hearing their sermons, presence at their service, partaking of their
Sacraments, and al other communicating with them in spiritual things. It is a
great damnable sin to deal with them.

10. Nor say, God save you.] S. John would not be in one bath with Cerinthus
the Heretic.
S. John (...) anotable story of this holy Apostle touching to is point out of
S. Polycarpus, which is this. There be some (says he) that have heard
Polycarpe say, that when John the disciple of our Lord was going to Ephesus,
into a bath, to vvash him self, and savv Corinthus the Heretics within the
same, he so denly skipt out, saying that he feared lest the bath should fall,
because Corinthus the enemy of truth was within. So says he of S. John, and
adds also a like vvorthie example of S. Polycarpe him self: who on a time
meeting Marcion the Heretic, The like zeal of S. Polycarpe, and other
Apostolic men in not communicating with Heretics.
and the said Marcion calling upon him, and asking him whether he knew him
not: Yes, quoth Polycarpe, I know thee for Satan's sound and heir. So great
fear (says S. Irernaeus) had the Apostles and their disciples to communicate
in word only, Tit. 3.
with such as were adulterers or corrupters of the truth, as S. Paul also
uvarned, when he said, A man that is an Heretic, after the first and second
admonition avoid. So far Irenaeus. If then, to speak with them or salute
them, is so earnestly to be avoided according to this Apostles example and
doctrines what a sin is it to flatter them, to serve them, to marie with
them, and so forth?

THE THIRD EPISTLE OF JOHN THE APOSTLE.
He commends Gaiues, for continuing in the truth, and for susteining or
succouring true preachers, 9 noting Diotrepes for the contrary, and praising
Demetrius.



pleasure.
thanke' have I not of them, then that I may hear my children do walk in
truth. (...)
A great grace to be beneficial to strangers, specially to them that be of our
Catholic faith and suffer for the same.
and that upon strangers. of the Gentiles.

It seems (says S. Bid) he was an Arch-heretike or proud Sectmaister.
primacie among them, Diotrepes, does not receive us. That is, I vvil rebuke
them and make them known to be wicked. Bid.
commonebo. (...)
I vvil advertise his works which he does: with malicious words chatting
against us. and as though these things suffice him not: neither him self does
receive the brethren, and them that do receive, he prohibiteth, and casts out
of the Church.



THE ARGUMENT OF THE EPISTLE OF S. IVDE.
IN the Gospel these are called Fratres Jesus, Mat. 1^*
the brethren of Jesus: James and Joseph, and Simon, and Jude. Their father is
called Alpha^us, Mat. 1^.
where James is termed, James of Alphaeus: Mat. 1^.
and their mother, Maria Iacobi minoris. Marie the mother of James the younger
and of Joseph. Which Marie in an other place being called Maria Cleophae, Ioh.
19.
we perceive their father was named both Alphaeus and also Cleophas. And that
this Cleophas was brother to Joseph our Ladies husband, Eusebius. hist. li. 3. c.
10.
Hegesippus tells us. Therefore because Joseph was called the father of
Christ, his brothers children, were called the brethren, that is (according to
the custom of the scripture also) the kinsmen of our Lord: and not because they
were the children of Joseph him self by an other wife, much less (as
Heluidius the heretic did blaspheme) by our B* Lady the perpetual virgin
MARIE. Howbeit some good authors say, that their mother Marie was the natural
sister of our Lady, and that therefore they are called, Fratres Domini, the
brethren of our Lord.

Howsoever that be, Lu^. ^.
three of them are reckened among the 12. Apostles, James, and Simon Cananaeus,
Mat. 10.
and Jude. Yea and that they were somevvhat more then Apostles, though less
then Peter, S. Paul signifies, where he says speaking of him self and
Barnabas: As also the other Apostles, and the brethren of our Lord, and Cephas.
1. Cor. 9.

And as S. Luke calls this Jude, Jude of James, so he calls him self in
this Epistle of his, Jude the servant of Jesus Christ, and the brother of
James. Mat. 10.
S. Matthew and S. (...), as Lebbaeus also in the Greek. Man. 3.
His feast and his (...) Church keeps October. 28. called Simon and Iudes day.

His Epistle is an (...) against a^ heretics (as it were a Commentary of 2
Pet. 2.) and namely (as * ^. Aug. has told us) against those, page 379. 646.
which misconstred S. Paul's Epistles and held Only faith. whom he calls
therefore, Men that transfer or (...) grace of God into rio^ousnes* v. 4.
exhorting Catholics to be constant and (...) from their old faith, and to
contend for the keeping thereof, v. 3. (...). heretics ^ says he) segregate
them selves from the Church and from (...) v. 19.

THE CATHOLIC EPISTLE OF IVDE THE APOSTLE.
He exhorts them to stand to their old faith, sh^vving them by examples, that
it is damnable not to continue and be constant: 8 inueighing against the
lechery, blasphemy, apostasy, banketing of the heretics, 14 and that their
damnation was long foretold. 17 Catholics therefore to be immovable, to
reprove the obstinate, to recover al not desperate, to confirm the vveake, and
to live them selves virtuously and without mortal sin, which by Gods grace
they may do.



Diverse Heretics abuse the liberty of Christ's grace and Gospel, to the
fulfilling of their carnal lusts and co^cupisce^ces.
into riotousnes, and denying the only Dominator, and our Lord JESUS Christ. 2
Pet. 2.
This is our Savior, not Iosue, as S. Hierom notes ep. 17. see Abac. c. 3. v.
18.
JESUS, saving the people out of the land of Aegipt, Nu. 14, 37.
* secondly destroyed them which believed not. Genesis 19.
exf^rnicat^*
fornicated, and going after other flesh, were made an example, sustaining the
pain of eternal fire. Such be heretics, that will not be subject to any (...)
refuse to obey the laws either of Spiritual or Temporal rulers. in which
kind (specially in blaspheming the supreme Spiritual Magistrate) the
Protestants do pass.
despise dominion, and blaspheme majesty. When Michael the Archangel,
disputing with the Devil, made altercation for the body of Moses: he durst
not infer judgment of blasphemy, but said, Our Lord rebuke*
commaund' thee.

because they*
vvhich' have gone in the way of * Ca^n: and with the error of * Balaam,
have for revvard povvred out them selves, Genesis 4, 8*
and have perished in the contradiction of Core. Nu. 22.
Nu. 16.
spots, feasting together without fear, feeding them selves, clouds
without water which are carried about of vvindes, trees of autumn,
unfruitful, twice dead, plucked up by the roots,

1 Timothy 4*
2 Timothy ^.
according to their own desires vvalking in impieties. 2 Pet. 3.
your*
our' most holy faith, in the holy Ghost, praying,



ANNOT.
9. For the body of Moses.] Truths unwritten, and known by tradition.
When, why, or how this altercation or combat was between S. Michael and the
Devil about Moses body, no man can declare. only this we see that many
truths and stories were kept in the mouths and hearts of the faithful, that
were not written in Scriptures canonical, as this was among the Jews.

10. They blaspheme.] He speaks of Heretics, who being ignorant in Gods
mysteries and the divine doctrine of his Church, Ignorance makes Heretics
blaspheme.
when they can not reprove the things, then they fall to execrations,
irrisions, and blasphemies against the Priests, Church, and Sacraments, and
whatsoever is godly.

11. Cain, Balaa^, Core.] The Apostle would have Heretics specially to be
known by the resemblance they have, Heretics ^^sembled to Cain, Balaam, and
Core.
first to Cain, in that for envy that his brothers service and sacrifice was
accepted and his rejected, s^ewe his said brother, and was a fugitive from the
face and city of God, which is the Church. Secondly, by their resemblance to
Balaam, who for money was induced to curse Gods people, as covetousness is
commonly the cause that first makes Heretics and false Prophets. whereupon S.
Augustine says, He is an Heretic that for temporal commodities sake either
coi^ath or follows new opinions. S. August. li. de Vtil. ^red. cap. 1. And
lastly by the resemblance they have with the ancient and notorious
Schismatike Core, and his companions, who forsook the ordinary Priesthod
appointed by God, and would needs do sacrifice them selves without lavvful
calling.

Such in deed be al Heretics, and such be al their sacraments, service, and
offices in their Church, as Cores were in his schismatical tabernacles. And as
pride was the cause of his reuolting from the obedience of Moses and Aaron
his Priests and true Governors: so is intolerable pride the cause of al
Heretics forsaking their lavvful Pastors and Rulers, and namely of forsaking
Christ's own Vicar in earth, our true Aaron, as S. Bernard calls him. De
consid. li. 2. cap. 8. To al such forsakers the Apostle here gives the curse
and Va due to the said three, Cain, Balaam, and Core, and tells them that the
storm of darkness and eternal damnation is provided for them: most lively
describing al Heretics (as in some we to our woe have experience by their
manners in our days) in all this passage even to the end of the epistle.

19. These are they which segregate them selves.] Al Heretics segregate them
selves.
The conditions in the later days, that is, ever since Christ's time, not of
these only of our age. For there were many that forsook Gods Church and
segregated them selves from the fellowship of the faithful even in the
primitive Church: that we may the less marvel at these men's segregating them
selves, and going out from the rest into several sects, which S. Augustine
therefore calls Segregations.

THE ARGUMENT OF THE APOCALYPSE OF S. JOHN.
THAT which the old Testament foretold of Christ him self, the Apostles could
report the fulfilling thereof in the new Testament, by way of an history,
even from his Conception to his Glorification. But of his Church, they could
not do the like: because in their time it did but begin: being to continue
long after them, even to the end of the world, and then at length to be
glorified, as Christ her Spouse already is, Hereupon God would have S. Luke
to report in the Acts of the Apostles, the story of the Churches beginning*
and for the rest of it to the end, (that we might receive this benefit also
by the Apostles hands) he would S. John to tell us of it in this book by
way of a prophecy.

Of which book S. Hierome says: Hier. ad Paulin.
The Apocalypse of S. John has as many sacrament or mysteries, as words. Yea
more then that, In every word there are hid manifold and sundry senses.
Therefore it is very little that can here be noted, in respect. Yet to give the
good Catholic (whose comfort is here) some little help, the book may be
divided into five parts.

The first (after the Pro^^me) contains seven Epistles from Christ now in
glory, Ca. 1. 2. 3.
to seven Churches of Asia, 1 part.
or (for, these he makes al one) to the seven Bishops of those Churches:
meaning no to those only, but to al his Churches and Bishops throughout the
world: saying therefore in every one of them, to al in general: He that has
an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the Churches. As also in every
one he exhorts us to fight manfully (in this spiritual warfare of ours
against sin) for the victory, and in every one accordingly promises us a
revvard in heaven. But before this, in the beginning of every one, be partly
commends, partly reprehendeth, and exhorts to penance. Where this is much
to be noted, and feared, that among so many, he reproves somevvhat in all, save
only in two, which are the second and the sixth. In the beginning also of
every one, he takes some piece out of the apparition going before, to frame
thereof his slyle agreably to the matter of each Epistle.

After this admonition to Pastors and their flocks: Ca. 4. to the 8.
the second part follows, 2.
wherein the Church and whole course thereof from the beginning to the end,
is expressed in the opening of a book in Gods hand, and the seven seals
thereof, by Christ, for the which, he sees praise sung now in heaven and
earth, not only to the Godhead, as before, but also (after a new manner) to
Christ according to his Manhod. And here, when he is come to the opening of
the last seal, signifying Domesday, he lets that matter alone for a while,
and to speak more fully yet of the said course of the Church, Ca. 8. to the 12*
he brings in an other pagent (as it were) of seven Angels with seven
Trumpets. The effect of both the Seals and Trumpets, in this: That the Church
beginning and proceeding, there should be raised against it, cruel persecutions,
and pestilent heresies: and at length after al heresies, a certain most
blasphemous Apostasy, being the next preparatiue to the coming of Antichrist:
After al which, Antichrist him self in person shall appear in the time of the
sixth seal, and sixth trumpet, persecuting and seducing (for the short time of
his reign) more then al before him. The Church notvvithstanding shall still
continue, and vvade through al* because Christ her Spouse is stronger then al
these adversaries, who also straight after the said sixth time, shall in the
seventh, come in majesty and judge al.

Of the which judgment, 3*
differring yet a while to speak at large, C. 12. 13. 14.
he does first in the third part entreat more fully of the Devils vvorking by
Antichrist and his company against the Church, that the justice of Christ
afterward in judging, may be more manifest.

At length, 4*
therefore in the fourth part he comes to the seven last plagues, C. 15. to
the 21.
the seventh of them containing the final damnation of the whole multitude
society or corpse of the wicked, from the beginning of the world to the end.
Which multitude, in the Gospel and first Epistle of this same S. John (as also
in the other Scriptures commonly) is often called Mundus, 1 Io. 2,
the world, Apoc. 17.
and here he calls it partly, Meretricem, a whore or harlot, because with
her concupiscence she entiseth the carnal and earthly men away from God:
partly, Ciuitatem Babylon, the City of Babylon, because it makes war
against Jerusalem the City of God, and labors to hold Gods people captive
in sin, as it was shadowed in Nabuchodonosor and his Babylonias, leading
and holding the Jews with their Jerusalem, in captivity, until Cyrus (in
figure of Christ) delivered them. But whether al these seven plagues should be
understood (as the seventh) of Domesday it self, it is hard to define. More
like it is, that the first six are to go before Domesday: but whether
corporally and literally, (so as Moses plagued Egypt) or rather spiritually,
it is more hard to define. Yet it seems more easy, to understand them
corporally, as also the plagues vvherevvith Elias and his fellovv shall in the
time of Antichrist plague the wicked (which peradventure shall be the same
last plagues) where of we read in this book c. 11. v. 6. But not content to
have described thus the damnation of the whole adulterous and blouddy
society, he does also expressly report of their three grand Captains
damnation, which are these, Antichrist, and his False prophet, and the Devil
him self the author of all this mischief.

Finally, 5*
on the other side, C. 21. 22.
in the fifth part he reports the unspeakable and everlasting glory, that
the Church after all this suffering, shall by Christ her glorious Spouse be
assumpted unto. And so he concludes the book.

THE APOCALYPSE OF JOHN THE APOSTLE. The Church reads this book at Ma^tins
from the 3 Su^day after Easter unto the 4.

CHAP. I.
9. S. John being banished in the i will Patmos* The 1 part. Seven epistles to the
Churches.
is commanded to write to the seum Churches of Asia (signified by the seven
candlestickes) that which he savv upon a Sunday, round about the Son of man:
13 whose manner of appar^tion is described.

The Epistle upon Michelmas day September. 29, and on the Apparition of S.
Michael May. 8.
to make manifest to his servants the things which must be done quickly: and
signified, sending by his Angel to his servant John, There be many (specially
now a days) that be great readers, hearers and talkers of Scriptures* but
that is not enough to make them good or blessed before God, except they keep
the things prescribed and taught therein* according to our Saviors saying
(Luc. 11.) Blessed are they that hear the word of God, and keep it.
keeps those things Which be written in it* for the time is nigh.

Exo. 3, 14.
and that was, and that shall come, and from the seven spirits which are in
the sight of his throne, Col. 1.
Heb. 9.
who has loved us, 1 Pet. 1.
and * vvashed us from our sins in his blood, 1 Pet. 2.
Zach. 12*
and every eye shall see him, and * they that pricked him. And all the tribes of
the earth shall, bewail them selves upon him. Esa. 44.
yea, Amen. Apo. 21. 22, 13.
says our Lord God, which is, and which was, and which shall come, the
omnipotent.

Banished thither for religion by Nero, or rather by Domitian, almost 60 years
after Christ's Ascensio^.
the Island, which is called Patmos, for the word of God and the testimony of
JESUS. I had a vision, and not with my corporal eyes, but in spirit I beheld
the similitudes of the things following.
in spirit on the Dominical day, and heard behind me a great voice as it were
of a trompet The I GENERAL VISION of the 7 according to S. Ambrose.
And I turned, to see the voice that spoke with me. And being turned I savv
seven candlestickes of gold: It seems not to be Christ him self, but an Angel
bearing Christ's person, and using diverse speeches proper to Christ.
like to the Son of man, vested in a podere Sap. 18, 24.
priestly garment to the foot, and girded about near to the pappes with a
girdle of gold. Esa. 41, 4. 44, 6.
* I am the first and the last, S. Irenaeus alluding to this says, The Church
every where preaches the truth, and this is the seuenfold candlestick,
bearing the light of Christ etc. Li. 5. aduers^haer.
the seven candlestickes, are the seven churches.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. I.
1. APOCALYPSE.] An admonition to the reader concerning the difficulty of this
book.
Of the Apocalypse thus vvriteth the ancient father Denis. Bishop of Corinth*
as Eusebius alleges him li. 7 c. 20 hist. Eccl. Of this book (says he) this
is my opinion, that the matter thereof is far more profound then my wit can
reach unto, and I doubt not but almost in every sentence of it, there lies
hidden a certain sense exceeding mystical and marvelous, which though I
understand not, yet I conceive that under the words there is a deep meaning,
and I measure not the matter by reason, but attribute al to faith, taking it to
be more high and divine, then I can by cogitation comprise: not reproving that
which I understand not, but therefore I admire with reverence, because my wit
can not attain to it. Again S. Augustine says, that in the Apocalypse many
things are obscurely spoken, to exercise the mind of the reader: and yet some
fevv things left evident, that through them a man may with labor search out
the rest, specially for that the author so repeateth the same things in diverse
sorts, that seeming to speak of sundry, matters, in deed is found bus to
utter the same things diverse ways. li. 20 de Ciuit. Del c. 17.

Which we set down here in the beginning, to vvarne the good Christian
reader, to be humble and wise in the reading both of al other holy Scriptures,
and namely of this divine and deep prophecy: giving him further to
understand, that we vvil in our Annotations, according to our former trade and
purpose, only or cheefely note unto the studious, such places as may be used
by Catholics, or abused by Heretics, in the controversies of this time, and
some other also that have special matter of edification, and that as breefely
as may be, for that the volume grows great.

4. To the 7 Churches.] That certain numbers may be observed as significatiue
and mystical, it is plain by many places of holy Scripture, Numbers mystical.
and by the ancient Doctors special noting of the same to many purposes.
Whereby we see the rashness of our Adversaries, in condemning generally al
religious respect of certain numbers in our prayers, fastes, or actions.
Namely the number of Seven, is mystical; and prophetical, perfect, and which
(as S. Augustine says.) the Church knovveth by the Scriptures, to be specially
dedicated to the Holy Ghost: and to appertain to spiritual mundation, as in
the Prophets appointing of Naam in to vvash seven times in lordan, and the
sprinkling of the blood seven times against the tabernacle. The number of Seven
mystical: specially in this book.
li. 4 qu^st. in numer. q. 33, See li. 5. c. 5 de Genesis ad lit. and li. 5 quest
in Deuter. q. 42. Al these visions stand upon Seuens. seven Churches, seven
Angels, seven stars, seven spirits, seven candlestickes, seven lamps, seven
trumpets, seven vial^, seven horne^ of the Lamb, seven hills, seven thunders,
seven heads of the Dragon, signifying the Di^el: seven of the beast that is
Antichrist: seven of the beast that the harlot rid upon: finally the number
also of the visions is specially marked to be seven, in this book, and every
time that this number is used in this prophecy, it has a mystery and a more
large meaning, then the nature of that number is precisely and vulgarly taken
for. As when he vvriteth to seven Churches. it is to be understood of all the
Churches in the world: as the seven Angels, for all the Angels or governors of
the whole Catholic Church: and so forth in the rest, because the number of
Seven, has the perfection of universality in it, as S. Augustine says li. 5
qu^st. in Deuter. q. 42.

4. From the 7 spirits.] The Holy Ghost may be here meant, and so called for
his seven fold gifts and graces, as some expositours think. but it seems
more probable that he speaks of the holy Augels, by comparing this to the
like in the 5 Chapter following: where he seems to call these, Grace and
peace from God and the holy Angels.
the seven spirits sent into all the world, as S. Paul to the Hebrews (c. 1.
14) speaks of Angels. and so the Protestants take it in their commentaries:
which we note, because thereupon they must needs confess that the Apostle
here gives or wishes grace and peace, not from God only, but also from his
Angels: though that benediction comes one way of God, and an other way of
his Angels or Saints, being but his creatures. And so they may learn, that
the faithful often loyning in one speech, God and our Lady save us, and the
like.
God and our Lady, our Lord and any of his Saints, to help us or bless us,
is not superstitious, but an Apostolical speech. and so the Patriarch said
(Genesis 48. v. 16.) The Angel that delivers me from al evils, bless these
children. See the Annot. Act. 25, 28.

6. A kingdom and Priests.] As all that truly serve God, and have the dominion
and superiority over their concupiscences and whatsoever would induce them
to sin, How al Christians be both kings and Priests.
be kings: so all that employ their works and them selves to serve God and
offer al their actions as an acceptable sacrifice to him, be priests.
Nevertheless, as if any man would thereupon affirm that there ought to be no
other earthly powers or kings to govern in vvorldly affairs over Christians,
be were a seditious Heretic, even so are they that upon this or the like
places where al Christians, be called priests in a spiritual sort, would
therefore infer, that every one is in proper signification a Priest, or that
al be Priests alike, or that there ought to be none but such spiritual priests.
for it is the seditious voice of Core, saying to Moses and Aaron, Let it
suffi^^ you, that all the multitude is of holy ones, and the Lord is in the^^.
Why are you extolled over the people of the Lord! Number. 16.

10. On the Dominical day.] Difference of holy days and vvorkedaies.
Many notable points may be marked here* first, that even in the Apostles time
there were days deputed to the service of God, and so made holy and
different, though not by nature, yet by use and benediction, from other profane
or (as we call them) vvorke-daies.

Secondly, Sunday made holiday by the Apostles and the Churches authority.
that the Apostles and faithful abrogated the Sabbath which was the seventh
day, and made holy day for it, the next day following, being the eight day in
count from the creation: and that without al Scriptures, or commandment of
Christ that we read of, yea (which is more) not only otherwise then was
by the Law observed, but plainly otherwise then was prescribed by God him
self in the second commandment, yea and otherwise then he ordained in the
first creation, Other feasts ordained by the Church.
when he sanctified precisely the Sabbath day, and not the day following. Such
great power did Christ leave to his Church, and for such causes gave he the
holy Ghost to be resident in it, to guide it into al truths, even such as in
the Scriptures are not expressed. And if the Church had authority and
inspiration from God, As Saturday was in memory of the creation, so Sunday of
Christ's resurrection.
to make Sunday (being a vvorke-day before) an everlasting holy day: and the
Saturday, that before was holy day, now a common vvorkeday: why may not the
same Church prescribe and appoint the other holy feasts of Easter,
Vvhitsuntide. Christmas, and the rest? for the same vvarrant she has for the
one* that she has for the other.

Thirdly, it is to be noted that the cause of this change was, for that now
we Christians esteeming more our redemption, then our first creation, have the
holy day which was before for the remembrance of Gods accomplishment of the
creation of things, now for the memory of the accomplishment of our
redemption. Which therefore is kept upon that day on which our Lord rose from
life to death, The Church uses not the Heathenish names of days: but Dies
Dominicus, feriae, Sabbatum.
which was the day after the Sabbath, being called by the Jews; vna or
prima Sabbathi, the first of or after the Sabbath. Mat 28. Act. 10. 1 Cor. 16.
Fourthly, it is to be marked, that this holy day by the Apostles tradition
also, was named Domini^^^ die^, our Lords day, or, the Dominike, which is
also an old Ecclesiastical word in our language. for the name Sunday is a
heathenish calling, as al other of the week days be in our language: some
imposed after the names of planets, as in the Romans time: some by the name of
certain Idols that the Saxons did worship, and to which they dedicated their
days before they were Christians. Which names the Church uses not, but has
appointed to call the first day, the Dominike, after the Apostle here: the
other by the name of Feries, until the last of the week, which she calls
by the old name, Sabbath, because that was of God, and not by imposition of
the heathen. See the marginal Annotation Luc. 24, 1.

Lastly observe, God gives greater grace at holy times of prayer and fasting.
that God reuealeth such great things to Prophets, rather upon holy days, and
in times of contemplation, sacrifice, and prayer, then on other profaue days.
and therefore as S. Peter (Act. 10) had a revelation at the six: hour of
prayer, and Zachary (Luc. 1) at the hour of incense, and Cornelius (Act. 10)
when he was at his prayers the ninthe hour, so here S. John notes that he
had al these marvelous visions upon a Sunday.

13. Vested in a Priestly garment.] Priestly garments.
He appeared in a long garment or vestment proper unto Priests (for so the
word, poderes, does signify, as Sap. 18, 24) and that was most agreeable for
him that represented the person of Christ the high Priest, and appeared to John
being a most holy Priest, and who is specially noted in the Ecclesiastical
history for his Priestly garment called, pe^alon or lamina. Eusebius. li. 3 hist.
Eccl. c. 25. and li. 5 c. 23.

20. The seven stars.] The true religion manifest as the light on a
candlestick.
The Bishops are the stars of the Church, as the Churches them selves are the
golden candlestickes of the world: no doubt to signfie, that Christ preserves
the truth only in and by the lavvful Bishops and Catholic Church, and that
Christ's truth is not to be sought for, Mat. 5. 15*
in corners or conuenticles of Heretics, but at the Bishops hands, and * upon
the candlestick which shines to al in the house.

20. The Angels of the Churches.] Angels Protectors.
The whole Church of Christ has S. Michael for her keeper and Protector, and
therefore keeps his holy day only by name, among al Angels. And as earthly
kingdoms have their special Angels Protectors, as we see in the 10 Chapter of
Daniel: so much more the particular Churches of Christe^dom. Bishops and
Priests are called Angels.
See S. Hierom in 34 Ezech. But of those Angels it is not here meant, as is
manifest. And therefore Angels here must needs signify the Priests or Bishops
specially of the Churches here, and in them, all the governors of the whole
and of every particular Church of Christendom. They are called Angels, for that
they are Gods messengers to us, interpreters of his vvil, our keepers and
directors in religion, our intercessors, the cariers and offerers of our
prayers to him, Malach. 2, 7.
and mediators unto him under Christ, and for these causes and for their great
digni^ie they are here and in * other places of Scripture called Angels.

CHAP. II.
He is commanded to write diverse things to the churches of Ephesiu, S^yrna,
Pergamus, and Thyatira: praising them that had not admitted the doctrine of the
Heretics called Nicola^ta, 22 and calling others by threats unto penance: 26
and promising revvard to him that manfully overcomes.

That which before he willed him to write to the church, he now wills to
be written to the Angels or Bishops of the same only. where we see, it is
al one, to the Church, and to the head or governor thereof.

to the Angel of the Church of Ephesus write, Thus says he which holds the
seven stars in his right hand, which walks in the mids of the seven
candlestickes of gold, name, and have not fainted. By this we see is plainly
refuted that which some Heretics hold, that a man once in grace or charity
can never fall from it.
thou have left thy first charity.

Apoc. 1, 17.
who was dead, and lives, This Church represents the state of them that
are spoiled of their goods, emprisoned, and manifoldly afflicted for the
catholic faith.
poverty, but thou art rich: and thou art blasphemed of them that say them
selves to be Jews and are not, but are the synagogue of Satan. The singular
revvard of Martyrdom.
the crown of life. The death of the body is the first death: the death of
the soul, the second, which Martyrs are surest to escape of al men.
second death.

The special residence of Satan is where the faithful are persecuted for
Christ's truth* where not to deny the Cath. faith for fear, is much here
commended.
where Satan dwells. Nu. 24, 14. 25, 2.
who taught Balac to cast a scandal before the children of Israel, to eat and
commit fornication: (...) calcul^^*
counter: and in the counter, a new name Written, which no man knovveth, but
he that receives it.

fire, and his feet like to latten. None of these are any thing vvorth
without the other.
works, and faith, and thy charity, and ministry, and thy patience and thy
last works more then the former. 3 Reg. 18.
who calls her self a prophetess, to teach, and to seduce my servants, to
fornicate, and to eat of things sacrificed to idols. 1 Reg. 16.
and I vvil give to every one of you Who (...) nor here that good works
deserve al utio^, as il works damnation: and that it is not faith alone that
God revvardeth but that faith which works by charity?
according to his works. Ps. 7, 10*
Ier. 11, 20.
which have not known the depthes*
depth' of Satan, as they say, I vvil not cast upon you an other weight. Ps.
2, 9.
and as the vessel of a potter shall they be broken, This great privilege of
Sa^cts rises of the power and preeminence of Christ, which his father gave
him according to his humanity and therefore to deny it to Saints, is to deny
it to Christ him self.
as I also have received of my father: and I vvil give him the morning star.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. II.
1. Holds the seven.] Christ's care of his Church.
Much to be observed, that Christ has such care over the Church and the
Bishops thereof, that he is said here to bear them up in his right hand, and
to walk in the mids of them: no doubt to uphold and preserve them and to
guide them in all truth.

2. Thy works, labor, patience etc.] Things required in a Bishop* first,
good works, and great patience in tribulation* Special virtues required in a
Bishop.
next, zeal and sharp discipline tovvard offenders is here commended in them*
thirdly, wisdoms and diligence in trial of false Apostles and preachers
coming in sheepeskinnes: where is signified the vvatchful providence that
ought to be in them, that Heretics enter not into their flocks.

5. Vvil move.] Sin is the cause that God takes the Cath. faith from
countries.
Note that the cause why God takes the truth from certain countries, and
remoueth their Bishops or Churches into captivity or desolation, is the sin
of the Prelates and people. And that is the cause (no doubt) that Christ has
taken away our golden candlestick, that is, our Church in England. God grant
us to remember our fall, to do penance and the former works of charity
which our first Bishops and Church were notable and renowned for.

6. Because thou hate.] Zeal against Heretics.
We see here that of al things, Christian people (specially Bishops) should
have great zeal against Heretics and hate them, that is, their wicked
doctrine and conditions, even as God hates them* for which only zeal, our
Lord says here that he bears with some Churches and Prelates, and saves
them from perishing.

6. Of the Nicolaites.] Nicolaites the first Heretics so called, as a pattern
of Arians, Lutherans, and the like peculiar callings.
Heretics have their callings of certain persons, as is noted at large Act.
11, 26. These had their name of Nicolas, one of the 7 first Deacons that were
chosen Act. 6. Who is thought to have taught community of women or vviues,
and that it was lavvful to eat of meats offered to idols. Which later point
is such a thing, as if one should hold it lavvful to receive the bread or wine
of the new Communion, which is a kind of Idolothytae, that is, idolatrous
meats. for though such creatures be good by creation, yet they be made
execrable by profane blessings of Heretics or Idolaters. And concerning the
name of Nicolaites given here by our Lord him self to those Heretics, it is a
very pattern and mark unto the faithful for ever, what kind of men they
should be, Balaam ouercomming Gods people by persuasion of lechery and
bellicheere, was a type of Heretics.
that should be called after the like sort, Arians, Macedonians, Nestorians,
Lutherans, Zuinglians, etc. See S. Hierom cont. Lucifer, in fine.

14. To cast a scandal.] li. 4. Antiq. c. 6.
Josephus vvriteth that when Balaam could not curse Gods people, nor
otherwise anoy them, he taught Balaca way how to overthrow them: to wit*
by presenting unto them their Heathen women very beautiful, and delicate
dishes of meat offered to Bel-phego^: that so being tempted they might fall to
heathenish manners and displease God. 2. Pet. 2, 15. Judah v. 11.
To which crafty counsel of Balaam the Apostle resembles Heretics fraud,
who by offering of liberty of meat, women, Church goods, breach of
vows, and such other licentious allurements, cause many more to fall, then by
their preaching.

20. The woman Iezabel.] He vvarneth Bishops to be zealous and stout against
false Prophets and Heretics of what sort soever, Zeal against Heretics.
by alluding covertly to the example of holy Elias that in zeal killed 450
false prophets of Iezabel, 3 Reg. 18.
and spared not Achab nor Iezabel them selves, but told them to their faces
that they troubled Israel, that is, the faithful people of God. And whether
there were any such great woman then, Achab and Iezabel.
a furtherer and promotour of the Nicolaites, whom the Prophet should here
mean, it is hard to say.

21. She vvil not repent.] See free vvil here most plainly, and that God is
not the proper cause of obduration or impenitence, Free vvil. God is not author
of evil.
but man him self only. Our Lord gives sinners so long life, specially to
expect their amendment: but Iezabel (to whom the Apostle here alludeth) would
never repent.

22. They that commit aduoutrie with her.] They that communicate with
Heretics, shall be damned with them*
Such as communicate with Heretics, shall be damned (alas) with them, for,
not only such as were in their hearts, of Iezabels religion, or inwardly
believed in Baal, but such as externally for fear worshipped him (which the
Scriptures call, bowing of their knees to Baal) are culpable* 3 Reg. 19. v.
18. To. 11.
as now many bovv their knees to the Communion, that bovv not their hearts.

26. I vvil give him power.] Observe that not only Angels have power and
regiment over Countries under God, Saints also are Patrones, not only Angels.
but now for the honor of Christ humane nature, and for his ministry in the
world, the Saints deceased also, being in heaven, have government over men
and Provinces, and therefore have to do with our affairs in the world.
Which is against the Heretics of these days, that to take away our prayers
to Saints, would spoil them of many sovereign dignities, wherein the
Scriptures make them equal with Angels.

CHAP. III.
He is commanded to write to the Churches of Sardis, Philadelphia, and
Laodicia: recalling them that err to penance by threatening, but praising the
rest, and promising revvard to him that overcomes: 15 detesting also the cold
indifferent Christian. 20 He says that God knocks at the door of men's
hearts by offering his grace, for to enter in to him that vvil open unto him by
consent of free vvil.

and keep, and do penance. If therefore thou vvatch not, * I vvil come to thee
as a thief, 1 These. 5, 2. 2 Pet. 3, 10.
and thou shall not know what hour I vvil come to thee. Apo. 16, 15.
Such as have not committed deadly sin after baptism.
which have not defiled their garments: and they shall walk with me in
vvhites, because they Note that there is in man a worthiness of the joys of
heaven, by holy life. and this is a common speech in holy Scripture, that man
is worthy of God, of heaven, of salvation.
are worthy.

Esa. 22, 22.
he that opens, and no man shuts: shuts, and no man opens.

(...) Ecclesiastici 24, 9. 14. Col. 1, 15.
Amen, the faithful and true witness, * which is the beginning of the
creature of God. be made rich: and may be clothed in white garments, that
the confusion of thy nakedness appear not: and with eye salve anoint thine
eyes, that thou may see. Prou. 3, 12. Heb. 12, 6.
do rebuke and chastise. Be zealous therefore and do penance. God first calls
upon man and knocks at the door of his heart: that is to say, offers his
grace* and it lies in man to give consent by free will helped also by his grace.
knock. if any man shall hear my voice, and open the gate, I vvil enter in to
him, and vvil suppe with him, and he with me.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. III
5. He that shall overcome.] In all these speeches to diverse Bishops and their
Churches, Doing well in respect of revvard.
he continually encourages them to constancy in faith and good life, by
setting before their eyes the revvard of the next life. And yet the Caluinists
would have no man do good in respect of such revvard.

9. Adore before thy feet.] You see this word of adoration is in Scriptures
used for worship of creatures also, Adoration of creatures, called Dulia.
and that to fall before the feet of holy men or Angels for duty and
reverence, is not idolatry, except the proper honor due to God, be given unto
them. See the Annotations upon the 19 and 22 Chapter concerning the Apostles
prostration before the Angel. And the Adversaries evasion, saying that the
adoration was of God only: and that, before the feet of the party,
signifies nothing else but, in his presence, is false and against the phrase of
Scriptures. as 4 Reg. 4. where the Sunamite adored Elisaeus, falling down
before his feet* and 4 Reg. 2. the sons of the Prophets adored him in the
same sort. and here this adoration can not be meant but of the Bishop or Angel
of Philadelphia, because he promises this honor as a revvard, and as an
effect of his love toward him, saying* And they shall know that I have
loved thee. And that which he says in the 22 Chapter, I fell down to adore
before the feet of the Angel: the very same he expresses thus in the 19
Chapters, I fell before his feet to adore him: making it al one, to adore
before his feet, and to adore him.

11. That no man take thy crovvn^.] Perseverance in good and continuing to the
end.
That is, his crown of everlasting life and glory, if he persevere not to
the end in faith and good works: otherwise an other shall enter into his
place, as Mathias did both to the dignity of the Apostleship, and to the
heavenly crown due for the well using and executing of the same function:
which Judas might and should have had, if he had perseuered to the end. and as
the Gentiles came into the grace and place of the Jews. Other difficulties
concerning this kind of speech are resolved in Schoolmen, and are not here
to be stood upon.

16. Lukevvarms.] Zeal and fervor is commendable, Neuters of indifferents in
religion.
specially in Gods cause: and the Neuters that be neither hot nor cold, are to
Christ and his Church burdenous and loathsome, as lukevvarme water is to a man's
stomach, provoking him to vomit, and therefore he threateneth to void up such
Neuters out of his mouth.

CHAP. IIII.
1. A door being open in heaven, The 2 part. first, the book with 7 seals:
secondly, 7 Angels with trumpets.
he savv one sitting in a throne, 4 and round about him four and twenty
seniors sitting, 6 and the four beasts here described* 9 which with the 24
seniors continually glorified him that sat in the throne.
THE 2 VISION.
and behold a door open in heaven, In which is represented unto us the glory
and majesty of God in heaven, and the incessant honor and praises of al
Angels and Saints assisting him. Which is resembled in the daily honor done
to him by all orders and sorts of holy men in the Church militant also.
and the first voice which I heard, was as it were of a trompet speaking
with me, saying, Come up hither, and I vvil show thee the things which must
be done quickly after these. These four beasts, and the like described
Ezaech, 1, by the judgment of the holy Doctors signify the 4 Evangelists,
and in them al true preachers* the man, Matthew. the lio^, Mark: the call,
Luke: the egle, John? See the causes hereof in the Sum of the 4 Evangelist.
page 1. S. Gregoin 1. Ezech.
four beasts full of eyes before and behind. Holy, Holy, Holy, Es. 6, 3.
Lord God omnipotent, which was, and which is, and which shall come.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. IIII.
8. Holy, holy. holy.] This word is thrice repeated here, and Esa. 6: and to
the imitation thereof, in the service of the holy Church, The Sanctus thrice
repeated.
at Te Deum, and at Mass, specially in the Preface next before the great
mysteries, for the honor of the three persons in the B. Trinity, and that the
Church militant may join with the triumphant, and with all the orders of
Angels, who also are present at the consecration, and do service there to our
common Lord and Master. as S. Chrysostom vvriteth li. 6 de Sacerdotie. and h^.
1. de verb. Esa. to. 1. The Greeks call it, the hymn Trisagies, that is,
Thrice holy.

CHAP. V.
4. S. John weeping, because no man could open the book sealed with seven
seals: ^ the Lamb that was slain, opened it: which being done, 8 the four
beasts and four and twenty seniors, with an innumerable multitude of
Angels and al creatures, did glorify him excedingly.

THE 3 VISION.
a S. Gregory takes it to be the book of holy Scripture. li. 4. Dialog. c.
42.
book written within and without, sealed with seven seals. He speaks
not of the damned in Hell, of whom there could be no question: but of the
faithful in Abraham's bosom, and in Purgatory.
under the earth, to open the book, nor look on it. So did Jacob (Genesis 49.)
call Christ* for his kingly fortitude in subduing the world unto him.
the * lion of the tribe of Judah, the root of David, has vvonne, Genesis 49, 9.
to open the book, and to loose the seven seals thereof.

The Epistle upon al-Hallovves eve.
And I savv, and behold in the mids of the throne and of the four beasts
and in the mids of the seniors, So Christ is called for that he is the
immaculate host or sacrifice for our sins.
a Lamb standing as it were slain, having seven horns and seven eyes: which
are the seven spirits of God, sent into all the earth. This makes against the
Caluinistes who are not content to say that we merit not, but that Christ
merited not for him self. Calu. Philip. 2. v. 9.
because thou vvast slain, and have redeemed us to God in thy blood out of
every tribe and tongue and people and nation, 1 Pet. 2.
kings*
a kingdom' and priests, and we shall reign upon the earth.

The Epistle in a votiue Mass of the holy Angels.
and of the beasts and of the seniors: and the number of them was *
thousands of thousands, Dan. 7. 10.
riches*
diuinitie', and wisdoms, and strength, and honor, and glory, and
benediction. All the said creatures are bound to give honor, not only to God,
but to Christ as man, and our redeemer: and so they here do.
to the Lamb, Apoc. 4, 11.
benediction and honor and glory and power for ever and ever.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. V.
8. The prayers of Saints.] The Saints in heaven offer our prayers to God.
Hereby it is plain that the Saints in heaven offer up the prayers of
faithful and holy persons in earth (called here saints, and in Scripture
often) unto Christ. And among so many divine and unsearchable mysteries set
down without exposition, it pleased God yet, that the Apostle him self
should open this one point unto us, that these odours be the lauds and prayers
of the faithful, ascending and offered up to God as incense, by the Saints in
heaven, that so the Protestants may have no excuse of their error. That the
Saints have no knowledge of our affairs or desires.

10. A kingdom and priests.] Spiritual kings and Priests.
To serve God and subdue vices and sins, is to reign or to be a king
spiritually, likewise to offer unto him the sacrifices of good works, is to
be a priest after a sort: though neither the one nor the other in proper
speech. See the Annotation before Chap. 1. v. 6.

13. Every creature.] Limbus Patrum and Purgatory.
He means the creatures in heaven, as Angels and Saints. the holy persons in
earth, and those that were in Limbo, or be in Purgatory (for of the damned in
hell he can not speak in this case:) lastly, of the peoples in Islands (here
called the sea) which the Prophets use often to name severally, when they
foretell the spreading of Christ's glory through the world. as Esa. c. 49.
Hear ye ^^andes and you people a far of* etc.

CHAP. VI.
1 Four seals of the seven being opened, there follow diverse effects
against the earth. 9 when the fifth seal was opened, the souls of martyrs
desire that the judgment may be hastened: 12 and at the opening of the sixth,
there are signs shovved of the judgment to come.









This one stole signifies the glory or bliss of the soul only. but at the
day of judgment they shall have it doubled by adding the glory of their body
also.
one: and it was said to them, that they should rest yet a little time, til
their fellovv-serua^tes be complete, and their brethren, that are to be slain
even as they.

The tribulation that shall fall in the time of Antichrist.
behold there was made a great earthquake, and the sun became black as it
were sack cloth of hear: and the whole moon became as blood: and the
rocks: Os^e. 10.
* Fall upon us, and hide us from the face of him that sits upon the throne,
Lu. 23, 50.
and from the wrath of the Lamb:

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. VI.
9. Under the altar.] Christ as man (no doubt) is this altar, under which the
souls of al Martyrs live in heaven, Consecration of altars with Sainct^
relikes.
expecting their bodies, as Christ their head has his body there already. And
for correspondence to their place of state in heaven, the Church says
commonly their bodies also or relikes near or under the altars, where our
Savior: body is offered in the holy Mass: and has a special prouiso that no
altars be erected or consecrated without some part of a Saints body or
relikes. Con^. Asrican, can. 50. Carthag. 5. can. 14. See S. Hierom cont.
vigilant c. 3. S. Augustine de ciuit. li. 8. c. 27. S. Gregory li. 5. ep. 50.
li. 1. ep. 52. li. 2 ep. 58. Vvher unto the Prophet seems here to allude,
making their souls also to have their being in heaven, as it were under the
altar. But for this purpose note well the words of S. Augustine (or what
other ancient writer soever was the author thereof) Ser. 11 de Sanctis. Under
the altar (says he) of God I savv the souls of the slain. What is more
reverent or honorable, then to rest under that altar on which sacrifice is
done to God, and in which our Lord is the Priest: as it is written, Thou art
a Priest according to the order of Melchisedec? Rightly do the souls of the
just rest under the altar, because upon the altar our Lords body is offered.
neither without cause do the just there call for revenge of their blood,
where also the blood of Christ is shed for sinners. and many other goodly
words to that purpose.

This place also the wicked heretic Vigilantius (as S. Hierom vvriting
against him witnesses c. 2) abused to prove, Saints be present at their
tombs and relikes.
that the souls of Martyrs and other Saints were included in some certain
place, that they could not be present at their bodies and monuments (where
Christian people used in the primitive Church to pray unto them, as Catholic
men do yet) nor be where they list, The Caluinistes heresy concerning the
Saints consuted by S. Hierom long ago.
or where men pray unto them. To which the holy doctor answers at large,
that they be wheresoever Christ is according to his humanity: for under that
altar they be. Part of his words be these, that you may see how this blessed
father refuted in that Heretic the Caluinistes so long before they were
borne. Dcst thou (says he) pres^^ribe savves to God? Do thou fe^ter the
Apostles, that they may be kept in prison til the day of judgment, and be kept
from their Lord, of whom it is written, They follow the Lamb vvhither soever
he goes. Apoc. 14.
If the Lamb be in every place, then they that he with the Lamb, must be
every where. And if the devil and wicked spirits gadding abroad in the
world with passing celeritie, be present every where: shall holy Martyrs
after the sheading of their blood, be kept close under an altar, that they can
not stir out from thence? So answers this learned doctor.

Which misliketh our Caluinistes so much, They unlearnedly accuse S. Hierom a^
an Vbiquiste.
that they charge him of great error, in that he says, Christ according to
his humanity is every where, as though he were an Vbiquetarie Protestant.
Where, if they had any judgment, they might perceive that he means not,
that Christ or his Saints should be personally present at once in every place
alike, as God is: but that their motion, speed, and agilitie to be where they
list, is incomparable, and that their power and operation is accordingly.
which they may learn to be the holy doctors meaning, How S. Hiero^ says,
Christ and his Saints are every where.
by the words that follow of the Devil and his ministers: vvho^ he affirms
to be every where no otherwise but by their exceeding celeritie of being and
vvorking mischief now in one place, now in an other, and that in a moment.
For though they be spirits, yet are they not every where at once according to
their essence. And for our new Divines it were a hard thing to determine,
Job. 1.
how long Satan (that told our Lord he had circuited the earth) was in his
journey, and in the particular consideration and tentation of Job: and how
many men he assaulted in that his one circuit. No, no. such curious companions
know nothing, nor believe nothing, but that they see with corporal eyes, and
teach nothing but the way to infidelity.

10. And they cried.] S. Hierom also against the said Vigilantius reports,
that he used an argument against the prayers of Saints out of this place, That
Saints pray for us, S. Hierom proves against the Heretic Vigilantius.
for that these Martyrs cried for revenge, and could not obtain. But we vvil
report his words, that you may see how like one heretic is to an other,
these of our days to those of old. Thou say in thy book (says S. Hierom
c. 3.) that vvhiles we be alive, one of us may pray for an other: but after
we be dead, no man's prayer shall be heard for an other: specially seeing the
Martyrs asking revenge of their blood, could not obtain. So said the Heretic.
Against which the holy Doctor makes a long refu^ation, proving that they pray
much more after they be in heaven, then they did here in earth: and that they
shall be much sooner heard of God, then when they were in the world.

But for the Heretics argument framed out of these words of the Apocalypse
thus, These Martyrs did not obtain, (...) Saints do not pray for us: it was
so frivolous, and the antecedent so manifestly false, that he vouchsaued not to
stand about it. For it is plain that the Martyrs here were heard, and that
their petition should be fulfilled in time appointed by God (whereunto they
did and do alvvaies conform them selves:) for it was said unto them, That
they should rest yet a little time, til etc. And that Martyrs prayers be heard
in this case, our Savior testifies Luc 18 saying, And vvil not God revenge
his elect that cry to him day and night? I say to you, he vvil quickly revenge
them. And if God do not hear the Saints sometime nor grant their requests,
is it therefore consequent that they do not or may not pray? Then Christ him
self should not have prayed his father to remove the bitter cup of death from
him, because that petition was not granted.

10. Reuengest thou not?] How Martyrs cry for revenge.
They do not desire revenge upon their enemies for hatred, but of charity and
zeal of Gods honor, praying that his enemies and the persecutors of his
Church and Saints, that vvil not repent, may be confounded: and that our Lord
would accelerate his general judgment, that so they might attain the perfect
crown of glory promised unto them, both in body and soul: which is to
desire the resurrection of their bodies, which then shall triumph perfectly and
fully over the persecutors that so cruelly handled the bodies of the elect,
which shall then appear glorious to the enemies confusion.

11. Til their fellovv servants be complete.] There is a certain number that
God has ordained to die for the testimony of truth and the Catholic faith,
for conformity of the members to the head CHRIST our chief Martyr, and til
that number be accomplished, the general condemnation of the wicked
persecutors shall not come, nor the general reward of the elect.

CHAP. VII.
The earth being to be punished, 3 they are commanded to save them that are
signed in their foreheads: 4 which are described and numbered both of the
Jews and Gentiles, blessing God. 13 Of them that were clothed in white
stoles or long robes.

The Epistle upon Al hallovves day.
And I savv an other Angel ascending from the rising of the sun, having the
sign of the living God: and he cried with a loud voice to the four Angels,
to whom it was given to hurt the earth and the sea, It is an allusion to the
sign of the Cross which the faithful bear in their foreheads, to show they
be not ashamed of Christ. S. August. tract. 43. in Io.
we sign the servants of our God in their foreheades.

Of all the tribes put together, so many, 144000.
of every tribe of the children of Israel. He signifies by these thousands and
the multitude following all the elect: but the elect of the Jews, to be in a
certain number: the elect of the Gentiles to be innumerable.
twelve thousand signed. twelve thousand signed.

The elect of the Gentiles.
a great multitude which no man could number, of al nations, and tribes, and
peoples, and tongues: standing before the throne, and in the sight of the Lamb,
clothed in white robes, and Boughs of the palm tree be tokens of triumph and
victory.
palms in their hands:

The Epistle for many Martyrs.
and said to me, These that are clothed in the white robes, who be they? and
whence came they? The glory of Martyrs.
Esa. 49, 10.
Es. 25, 8.
and * God vvil wipe away al tears from their eyes. Apo. 21, 4.


CHAP. VIII.
1 The seventh seal being opened, there appear Angels with trempets: 5 and
when an other Angel povvred out fire taken from the altar, upon the earth,
there follow diverse tempests. 7 In like manner, vvhiles four Angels of the
seven sound their trempets, there fall sundry plagues.

THE 4 VISION.
there was made silence in heaven, as it were half an hour. The Priest
standing at the altar praying and offering for the people in the time of the
high mysteries, Christ him self also being present upon the altar, is a figure
of this thing, and thereunto he alludeth.
before the altar, having a golden censar: and there were given to him many
incenses, that he should give of the prayers of al saints upon the altar of
gold, which is before the throne of God. If this be S. Michael or any Angel,
and not Christ him self, as some take it, Angels offer up the prayers of the
faithful, as the 24 Elders did chap. 5. for this vvvord, Saints, is taken here
for the holy persons on earth, as often in the Scripture: though it be not
against the Scriptures, that the inferior Saint or Angel in heaven should
offer their prayers to God by their superiors there. But hereby we conclude
against the Protestants, that it derogateth not from Christ, that Angels or
Saints offer our prayers to God* as also it is plain of Raphael Tob. 12, 12.
of the prayers of the saints ascended from the hand of the Angel before God.







on the earth: because of the rest of the voices of the three Angels which
were to sound with the trompet.

CHAP. IX.
The fifth Angel sounding the tr^mpet, a star falls. 3 The issuing forth of
locustes from the smoke of the deep pit to vex^ men, 7 and the description
of them. 13 The sixth Angel sounding, four Angels are let loose, 18 which
with a great troop of horsemen do murder the third part of men.

Most understand all this of Heretics.
and I savv The fall of an Arch heretic, as Arius, Luther, Calvin, out of the
Church of God. Which have the key of Hell to open and bring forth all the old
condemned heresies buried before in the depth.
a star to have fallen from heaven upon the earth, and there was given to
him the key of the pit of bottomless depth. Innumerable pe^y heretics
following their Masters after the opening and the smoke of the bottomless pit.
locustes into the earth* and power was given to them, as the scorpions of
the earth have power: Apoc. 6, 16.
and shall not find it: and they shall desire to die, and death shall flee from
them.

The chief Master of heretics.
Abaddon, (...), In English, Destroier.
and in Greek Apollyon: in Latin having the name Exterminans.

heard one voice from the four horns of the golden altar, which is before
the eyes of God,



Pagans, Infidels, and sinful impenitent Catholics must be condemned also.
And the rest of men which were not slain with these plagues, neither This
phrase being the like both in greek and latin, signifies such sorrowful and
penal repentance as causes a man to forsake his former sins and depart from
them. (...). See the same phrase. c. 2, 21, 22. and Act. ^. v. 22.
have done penance from the works of their hands, not to adore Devils and
Idols of gold and silver and brass and stone and vvood, which neither can
see, not hear, nor walk,

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. IX.
4. Nor any green thing.] The Heretics never hurt or seduce the green tree,
that is, such as have a living faith vvorking by charity, Who are seduced by
Heretics.
but commonly they corrupt him in faith who should otherwise have perished
for il life, and him that is reprobate, that has neither the sign of the
Cross (which is Gods mark) in the forehead of his body, nor the note of
election in his soul.

7. Prepared into battle.] Heretics being ever ready to contend, do pretend
victory, and counterfeit gold: The manifold hypocrisy of Heretics.
in shape as men, as smothe and delicate as women, their tongues and pens
full of gall and venim: their hearts obdurate: full of noise and shuffling: their
doctrine as pestiserous and full of poison, as the tail and sting of a
scorpion, but they endure for a little season.

20. Idols of gold.] Here again the new Translatours abuse the people, for
idols saying images: Her^t. translation.
the place being plainly against the pourtiates of the Heathen Gods, which
are here and in the Psalm 95 called, damenia, Devils.

CHAP. X.
An other strong Angel crying out, 3 seven thunders do speak. 6 The Angel
swears that there shall be time no more, but at the voice of the seventh Angel
the mystery shall be fully accomplished, 9 He gives John a book to devour.

CHRIST the valiant Angel is here described.
strong, descending from heaven, clothed with a cloud, and a raine-bovv on
his head, and his face was as the sun, and his feet as pillars
a piller' of fire. Many great mysteries and truths are to be preserved in the
Church, which for causes known to Gods providence are not to be written in
the book of holy Scripture.
write them not.

Dan. 12, 7.
This was the manner of taking an oath by the true God. as (...) 32.
lifted up his hand to heaven,

Ezec. 3, 1
And he said to me, * Take the book, and By earnest study and meditation.
devour it: and it shall make thy belly to be bitter, but in thy mouth it shall
be Svveete in the reading, but in fulfilling, somevvhat bitter, because it
commands works of penance and suffering of tribulatio^s.
svveete as it were honey.

CHAP. XI.
S. John measuring the Temple, 3 hears of two vvitnesses that shall preach:
7 whom the beast coming up from the sea shall kill, 12 but they rising again
ascend into heaven, 13 and seven thousand persons are slain with an
earthquake: 15 and as the sound of the seventh Angel, the sour and twenty
seniors give praise, and thanks to God.

Three years and a half* which is the time of Antichrists reign and
persecution.
two and forty months:

The great Antichrist.
beast which ascended from the depth, shall make war against them, and shall
overcome them, and kill them. He means Jerusalem, named Sodom and Egypt for
the imitatio^ of the^ in wickedness. So that we see his chief reign shall be
there, though his tyranny may extend to al places of the world.
great city, which is called spiritually Sodom and Egypt, where their Lord
also was crucified. The wicked rejoice, when holy men are executed by the
tyrants of the world, because their life and doctrine are hurdenous unto them.
shall be glad upon them, and make merry: and shall send gifts one to an other,
because these two prophets tormented them that dwelled upon the earth.

a trompet: and there were made loud voices in heaven saying, The kingdom of
this world usurped before by Satan and Antichrist, shall afterward be Christ's
for ever.
The kingdom of this world is made our Lords and his Christ's, and he shall
reign for ever and ever. Amen.

To repay the hire or wages (for so both the Greek word and the latin
signify) due to holy men, proves against the protestants, that they did
truly merit the same in this life.
to tender revvard to thy servants the prophets and saints, and to them that
fear thy name, little and great, and to destroy them that have corrupted the
earth.



ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XI.
3. My two vvitnesses.] Enoch and Elias, Enoch and Elias yet alive, shall
preach in the time of Antichrist.
as it is commonly expounded* for, that Elias shall come again before the later
day, it is a most notorious known thing (to use S. Augustines words) in the
mouths and hearts of faithful men. See li. 20 de Ciuit. Dei c. 29. Tract. 4 in
Joan. and both of Enoch and Elias, Lib. 1 de pec. merit. c. 3. So the rest of
the Latin Doctors. as, S. Hierom ad Pa^mach ep. 61 c. 11. and in Psalm. 20. S.
Ambrose in Psalm. 45. S. Hilarie 20 can. in Mat. Prospet li. vltim^ de
Promissionibus c. 13. S Gregory li. 14. Moral. c. 11. and he. 12 in Ezech.
Beda in 9 Marci. The Greek fathers also, as S. Chrysostom he. 58 in Mat. and
ho. 4 in 2 Thessal. and ho. 21 in Genes. and ho. 22 in ep. ad Hebr.
Theophylacte and Occumenius in 17 Matthai. S. Damascene li. 4 de Orthodoxa fide
c. 27.

Furthermore, that they live also in Paradise, it is partly gathered out of the
Scripture Ecclici 44. 16. where it is plainly said of Enoch, that he is
translated into Paradise, as al our Latin exemplars do read: and of Elias,
that he was taken up alive, it is evident 4 Reg. 2. And S. Irenaeus says, it
is the tradition of the Apostles, that they be both there. li. 5 in initio.
Dicunt Presbyteri (says he) qui sunt Apostolorum Discipuli. So say the Priests
or Ancients that are the scholars of the Apostles. See S. Iustine q. 85 ad
orthodoxos. Finally, that they shall return into the company of men in the end
of the world, to preach against Antichrist, and to inutie both Jews and
Gentiles to penance, and so be martyred, as this place of the Apocalypse
seems plain, so we have in part other testimonies hereof. Malac. 4. Ecclci
44, 16. 48, 10. Mat. 17, 11. See also Hyppolytus book of Antichrist and the
end of the world. Al which being well considered, the Heretics are to
contentious and incredulous, to discredit the same, as they commonly do.

CHAP. XII.
4 The great dragen (the Devil) watching the woman that brought forth a man
child, to devour it, God took away the child to him self, and fed the
woman in the desert. 7 Michael fighting with the dragon overcomes him. 13
who being thrown down to the earth, persen^teth the vvoma^ and her seed.

THE 3 PART.
This is properly and principally spoken of the Church: and by allusion, of our
B. Lady also.
a woman clothed with the sun, The Dragons incredulous and persecuting
multitude, and Antichrist the chief head thereof.
and the moon under her feet, and on her head a crown of twelve stars:
The great Devil Lucifer.
a great red dragon having seven heads; and ten horns: and on his heads
seven diademes, The spirits that fall from their first state into Apostasy
with him and by his means.
the third part of the stars of heaven, and cast them to the earth, and the
dragon stood before the woman which was ready to be delivered: that when
she should be delivered, he might The Devils endeavor against the Churches
children, and specially our B. Ladies only son the head of the rest.
devour her son. Ps 2, 9.
who was * to govern al nations in an iron rod: and her son was taken
up to God and to his throne, Apoc. 2, 27.


When the Angels or we have the victory, we must know it is by the blood
of Christ, and so al is referred alvvaies to him.
they overcame him by the blood of the Lamb, and by the word of their
testimony, and they loved not their lives even unto death.

unto her place, where she is nourished for This often insinuatio^ that
Antichrists reign shall be but three years and a half (Dan. 7, 25. Apoc. 12,
2. 3. and in this chap. v. 6. c. 13, 5.) proves that the heretics be
excedingly blinded with malice, that hold the Pope to be Antichrist, who has
ruled so many ages.
a time and times, and half a time, from the face of the serpent.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XII.
6. The woman fled.] This great persecution that the Church shall flee from, is
in the time of Antichrist, and shall endure but three years and a half, as is
noted v. 14 in the margent. In which time for all that, The Church shall flee as
to a desert in Antichrists time, but not decay or be unknown, no not for so
short a time.
she shall not want our Lords protection, nor true Pastors, nor be so secret,
but al faithful men shall know and follow her: much less shall she decay, err
in faith, or degenerate and follow Antichrist, as Heretics do wickedly feine.
As the Church Catholic now in England in this time of persecution, because it
has no public state of regiment nor open free exercise of holy functions, may
be said to be fled into the desert, yet it is neither unknown to the faithful
that follow it. nor the enemies that persecute it: as the hid company that
the protestants talk of, was for some worlds together, neither known to
their friends nor foes, because there was in deed none such for many ages
together. And this is true, if we take this flight for a very corporal
retiring into wilderness. Where in deed it may be, and is of most expounded,
to be a spiritual flight, by forsaking the joys and solaces of the world, and
giving her self to contemplation and penance, during the time of persecution
under Antichrist. And by enlarging the sense, it may also very well signify
the desolation and affliction that the Church suffers and has suffered from
time to time in this wilderness of the world, by all the forerunners and
ministers of Antichrist, Tyrants and Heretics.

7. A great battle.] S. Michael fighting with the dragon.
In the Church there is a perpetual combat betwixt S. Michael (protector of
the Church militant as he was sometime of the Jews Synagogue Dan. 10, 21)
and his Angels, and the Devil and his ministers the perfect victory over
whom, shall be at the judgment. Mark here also the cause why S. Michael is
commonly painted fighting with a dragon.

15. To be carried away.] Antichrists atte^pts to draw from the true faith.
By great persecution he would dravv her, that is, her children from the true
faith: but every one of the faithful elect, gladly bearing their part thereof,
overcome his tyranoie At whose constancy he being the more offended, works
malicious attempts in assaulting the frailer sort, who are here signified by
the rest of her seed that keep the commaundemants, but are not so perfect as
the former.

CHAP. XIII.
1 A beast rising up out of the sea, having seven heads and ten horns and ten
diademes, 5 blasphemeth God. 7 and vvarreth against the Saints and destroieth
them. 11 And an other beast rising out of the earth with two horns, was
altogether for the foresaid beast, constraining men to make and adore the image
thereof, and to have the character of his name.

They that now follow the simplest and grossest heretics that ever were without
seeing miracles, would then much more follow this great seducer working
miracles.
in admiration after the beast. No heretics ever liker Antichrist, the^ these
in our days, specially in blasphemies against Gods Church, Sacraments,
Saints, ministers, and al sacred things.
to blaspheme his name, and his tabernacle, and those that dwell in heaven.
Apoc. 3. 5
adored it, * whose names be not written in the book of life of the Lamb,
which was slain from the beginning of the world.

Genesis 9, 6
goes into captivity: * he that shall kill in the svvord, Mt. 26, 52.
he must be killed with the svvord. here is the patience and the faith of
saints.

An other false prophet inferior to Antichrist, shall work wonders also, but
al referred to the honor of his master Antichrist. So does Calvin and other
Arch-heretikes pervert the world to the honor of Antichrist, and so do their
scholars also for the honor of them.
an other beast coming up from the earth: and he had two horns, like to a
lamb, and he spoke as a dragon. and should make, that whosoever shall not
adore the image of the beast, be slain.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XIII.
8. A beast coming up.] Many mysteries expounded.
This beast is the universal company of the wicked, whose head is
Antichrist: and the same is called (Apoc. 17) the vvhoore of Babylon. The 7
heads be expounded (Apoc. 17) seven kings: five before Christ, one present,
and one to come. The 10 horns be also there expounded to be to kings that shall
reign a short while after Antichrist. This dragon is the Devil, by whose
power the vvhoore or beast or Antichrist works* for in the words
following (v. 3 and 4) Antichrist is called the beast, to whom the dragon,
that is, the Devil gives that power of feined miracles* and as we adore God
for giving power to Christ and his folovvers, so they shall adore the Devil for
assisting Antichrist and giving him power.

7. To make battle with the saints.] Great persecution by Antichrist and his
ministers.
He shall kill the saints then living, Elias and Enoch, and infinite more that
profess Christ, whereby we must learn, not to marvel when we see the
wicked persecute and prevail against the just, in this life. Then shall his
great persecution and cruelty try the saints patience, as his wonderful
means to seduce shall try the stedfastnes of their faith, Their blessedness
that continue constant.
which is signified by these words following, Here is the patience and the
faith of saints. And when it is said, They adored the beast, whose names are
not written in the book of life of the Lamb, it gives great solace and hope
to al them that shall not yield to such persecutions, that they are of Gods
elect, and their names written in the book of life.

14. The image of the beast.] The honor of Christ's image is for the honor of
Christ.
They that now refuse to worship Christ's image, would then worship
Antichrists. And we may note here, that as the making or honoring of this
image was not against the honor of Antichrist, but wholy for it, as also the
image erected of Nabuchodo nosor, and the worship thereof was altogether for
the honor of him, so is the worship of Christ's image, the honor of Christ
him self, and not against him, as Protestants madly imagine.

17. The character or the name.] Antichrists triple honor against the honor
of Christ.
As belike for the perverse imitation of Christ, whose image (specially as on
the Roode or crucifixe) he sees honored and exalted in every Church, he vvil
have his image adored (for that is Antichrist, in emulation of like honor,
adversary to Christ) so for that he sees al true Christian men to bear the
badge of his Cross in their foreheads, he likewise vvil force al his to have
an other mark, to abolish the sign of Christ. By the like emulation also and
wicked opposition he vvil have his name and the letters thereof to be sacred,
and to be worn in men's cappes, or written in solemn places, and to be
worshipped, as the name of JESUS is and ought to be among Christian men. And
as the ineffable name of God was among the Jews expressed by a certain
number of 4 characters (therefore called Tetragra^mmaton) so it seems the
Apostle alludeth here to the number of Antichrists name. (...)
The Protestants by abolishing of Christ's image, and cross and irreuere^ce to
the name JESUS, make a ready way to the honor of Antichrist.


And here it is much to be noted, that the Protestants plucking down the
image of Christ out of al Churches, and his sign of the cross from men's
foreheads, and taking away the honor and reverence of the name JESUS, do
make room for Antichrists image, and mark, and name. And when Christ's images
and ensigns or arms shall be abolished, and the Idol of Antichrist set up in
steed thereof, as it is already begone: then is the abomination of desolation
which was foretold by Daniel and our Savior.

18. Let him count.] Though God would not have it manifest before hand to the
world, who in particular this Antichrist should be: yet it pleased him to
give such tokens of him, that when he comes, the faithful may easily take
notice of him, according as it is written of the event of other prophecies
concerning our Savior. Io. 14, 29.
That when it is come to pass, Antichrists name secret.
you may believe. In the mean time we must take heed that we judge not over
rashly of Gods secrets, the holy write, here signifying, that it is a point
of high understanding* illuminated extraordinarily by Gods spirit, to reckon
right and discipher truly before hand, Antichrists name and person.

18. It is the number of a man.] A man he must be, and not a Devil or spirit,
as here it is clear, and by S. Paul 2 Thessal. 2. where he is called,
Antichrist shall be one special man, and of a peculiar name.
the man of sin. Again, he must be one particular person, and not a number,
a succession, or whole order of any degree of men: because his proper name*
and the particular number, and the characters thereof be (though obscurely)
insinuated. Which reproves the wicked vanity of Heretics, that would have
Christ's own Vicars, the successors of his cheese Apostle, yea the whole
order of them for many ages together, to be this Antichrist. Who by his
description here and in the said Epistle to the Thessalonians, must be one
special man, and of a particular proper name, as our Lord JESUS is. And
whosoever he be, these Protestants undoubtedly are his precursors for as they
make his way by ridding away Christ's images, cross, and name, so they
excedingly promote the matter by taking away Christ's chief minister, that al
may be plain for Antichrist.

If the Pope had been Antichrist, The Pope can not be Antichrist.
and had been revealed now a good many years sithence, as these fellows say
he is to them, then the number of this name would agree to him, and the
prophecy being now fulfilled, it would evidently appear that he bare the
name and number here noted* for (no doubt) when lie comes, this count of the
letters or number of his name which before is so hard to know, will be easy*
for he will set up his name in every place, eue^ as we faithful men do now
advance JESUS. And what name proper or appellatiue of al or any of the Popes
do they find to agree with this number, notvvithstanding they boast that they
have found the whole order and every of them these thousand years to be
Antichrist, and the rest before even from S. Peter, forevvorkers tovvard his
kingdom?

1^. The number 666.] Forasmuch as the ancient expositors and other do think
(for certain knowledge thereof no mortal man can have without an express
revelation) that his name consists of so many, Al scaming of letters to
express Antichrists name, is uncertain.
and such letters in Greek, as according to their manner of numbering by the
Alphabete make 666, and forasmuch as the letters making that number, may be
found in diverse names both proper and common: Irem. li. 5 in fine.
(as S. Irenaeus finds them in Latinos and Teitan, Hippolytus in (...),
Aretas in Lampetis, and some of this age in Luderus, which was Luthers name
in the Alman tongue:) therefore we see there can be no certainty, and every
one frames and applies the letters to his own purpose* and most absurd
folly it is of the Heretics, to apply the word, Latinos, to the Pope:
neither the whole order in common, nor ever any particular Pope being so
called* and S. Irenaeus the first that observed it in that word, applied it to
the Empire and state of the Roman Emperor, which then was Heathen, and not
to the Pope of his days or after him: and yet preferred the word, Teitan, as
more agreeable, with this admonition, that it were a very perilous and
presumptuous thing to define any certainty before hand, of that number and
name. And truly whatsoever the Protestants presume herein of the Pope, we
may boldly discharge Luther of that dignity. He is undoubtedly one of
Antichrists precursors, but not Antichrist him self.

CHAP. XIIII.
2 Virgins follovv the Lamb vvhithersoeuer, singing a new canticle. 6. One
Angel Euangelizeth the Gospel: 8 an other Angel tells the fall of Babylon: 9
the third declares their tormants that have adored the beast, Moreover two
having sickles, 15 one of them is commanded to reap down the corn, 18 the
other to gather the grapes as in vintage, which are trodden in the lake of Gods
wrath.

The Epistle upon S. Innocents day in Christmas.
and behold Christ, and the same number of elect that were signed chap. 7.
a La^be stood upon mount Sion, and with him an hundred forty four
thousand having his name, and the name of his Father written in their
foreheads. man could learn (...)*
say' the song, but those hundred forty four thousand, that were bought
from the earth. One state of life more excellent then an other and virgins for
their purity passing the rest, and always accompanying Christ according to
the Churches hymn out of this place, Quecunque pergis, virgins sequuntur etc.
virgins. These follow the Lamb vvhithersoeuer he shall go. These were bought
from among men, This the Church applies to the holy Innocents that died first
for Christ.
the first fruits to God and the Lamb:

Ps. 145.
and adore ye him * that made heaven and earth, the sea and al things that are
in them, Act. 14.
and the fountains of waters.

Esa. 21.
saying, * Fallen fallen is that great The city of the devil, which is the
universal society of the wicked misbeleuers and il livers in the world.
Babylon, Ier. 51.
which of the wine of the wrath of her fornication made al nations to
drink. Apo. 18.


The great damnation that shall follow them that forsake Christ and the Church,
and worship Antichrist or his image.
he also shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God, which is mingled with
pure wine in the cup of his wrath, and shall be tormented with fire and
brimstone in the sight of the holy Angels and before the sight of the Lamb.
Faith is not enough to salvation, without fulfilling of Gods co^mau^dements.
keep the commandments of God and the faith of JESUS.

The Epistle in a daily Mass for the dead.
And I heard a voice from heaven, saying to me, Write, Blessed are the dead
which die in our Lord. from hence forth now, says the Spirit, that they rest
from their labors* for their works follow them.



Joel 3.
* Thrust in thy sickle, Mat. 13.
and reap, because the hour is come to reap, for the harvest of the earth is
dry. (...) lacu^. fat, trough, lake.
press of the wrath of God:

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XIIII.
13. From hence forth now.] This being specially spoken of Martyrs (as not
only S. Augustine seems to take it, Beza.
but the Caluinists them selves, translating, in domino, for our Lords cause)
the Protestants have no reason to use the place against Purgatory or prayer
for the departed, seeing the Catholic Church and al her children confess,
Praying for the dead, and unto Saints, at the altar.
that al Martyrs are straight after their death, in bliss, and need no
prayers. Whereof this is S. Augustines known sentence, He does injury to
the Martyr, that prays for the Martyr. Ser. 17 de verb. Apost. c. 1. and
again to this purpose he vvriteth thus most excellently tract. 84 in Joan. We
keep not a memory of Martyrs at our Lords table, as we do of other that
rest in peace, that is, for the intent to pray for them, but rather that they
may pray for us etc.

But if we take the words generally for all deceased in state of grace, as it
may be also, then we say that even such, though they be in Purgatory and Gods
chastisement in the next life, and need our prayers, The place abused against
Purgatory, ansvvered.
yet (according to the foresaid words of S. Augustine) do rest in peace.
being discharged from the labors, afflictions, and persecutions of this
world, and (which is more) from the daily dangers of sin and damnation, and
put into infallible security of eternal joy with unspeakable comfort of
conscience. and such in deed are more happy and blessed then any living, who
yet are usually in the Scriptures called blessed, even in the mids of the
tribulations of this life. Whereby we see that these words, from hence
forth they shall rest from their labors, may truly agree to them also that are
in Purgatory, and so here is nothing proved against Purgatory. Lastly, this
aduerbe, a modo
a modo, in Latin, as in the Greek (...)
(...), does not properly signify, from this present time forvvard, Photius in
Lexico.
as though the Apostle had said, that after their death and so forvvard they
are happy: but it notes and joins the time past together with the time
present, in this sense, that such as have died since Christ's Ascension, when
he first entering into heaven opened it for others, go not to Limbus Patrum, as
they were wont before Christ's time, but are in case to go straight to
bliss, except the impediment be in them selves. Therefore they are here called
blessed, that die now in this state of grace and of the new Testament, in
comparison of the old faithful and good persons.

CHAP. XV. THE 4 PART

2 They that had now overcome the beast and his image and the number of his
name, Of the 7 last plagues and final damnation of the wicked.
do glorify God. 6 To seven Angels having the seven last plagues, are given
seven cups full of the wrath of God.

The tribulations about the day of judgment.
seven Angels having the seven last plagues. Because in them the wrath of God
is consummate. Baptism.
a sea of glass mingled with fire, and them that overcame the beast and his
image and the number of his name, standing upon the sea of glass, having the
harpes of God: The song of Moses and Christ, is the new Testament and the old.
the song of Moses the servant of God, and the song of the Lamb, saying,
Great and marvelous are thy works Lord God omnipotent: just and true are thy
ways King of the Saints
vvorldes'.

THE EIETH VISION.
and behold the temple of the tabernacle of testimony was opened in heaven:
linen
stone', and girded about the breasts with girdles of gold. (...)
(...).
gave to the seven Angels seven vials of gold full of the wrath of the God that
lives for ever and ever.

CHAP. XVI.
Upon the pouring out of the seven cups of Gods wrath, on the land, the sea,
the fountains, the seat of the beast, Euphrates and the air: there arise
sundry plagues in the world.



every living soul died in the sea.

The great revenge that God vvil do at the later day upon the persecutors of
his Saints.
because they have shed the blood of the Saints and Prophets, and thou have
given them blood to drink, for they are vvorthie.

The desperate and damned persons shall blaspheme God perpetually* which shall
be such only as do not repent in this life.
blasphemed the name of God having power over these plagues, neither did they
penance to give him glory.

See chap. 9. v. 20 in the margent.
did not penance from their works.



The dragon, is the Devil: the beast, Antichrist, or the society whereof he is
head: the false-prophet, either Antichrist him self, or the company of
Heretics and seducers that follow him.
of the dragon, and from the mouth of the beast, and from the mouth of the
false-prophet issue forth three
three' unclean spirits in manner of frogs. Apoc. 3.
Blessed is he that watches, and keeps his garments, 2 Cor. 5, 3.
that he * walk not naked, and they see his turpitude. The hill of theaues, by
S. Hieroms interpretation.
Armagedon.

The city or co^monvvealth of the wicked divided into three parts: into
infidels, Heretics, and evil Catholics. This city is here called Babylon,
whereof see the Annorat. upon the next chapter v. 5.
the great city was made into three parts: and the cities of the Gentiles
fell. And Babylon the great came into memory before God, Ier. 25, 15.
* to give her the cup of wine of the indignation of his wrath.

CHAP. XVII.
The harlot Babylon clothed with diverse ornaments, 6 and drunken of the blood
of Martyrs, sits upon a beast that has seven heads and ten horns: 7 al
which things the Angel expounds.

The final damnation of the whole company of the reprobate, called here the
great vvhoore.
the damnation of the great harlot, which sits upon These many waters are
many peoples. v. 15.
many waters, Mystery: Babylon the great, mother of the fornications and the
abominations of the earth.

It signifies the short reign of Antichrist, who is the chief horn or head
of the beast.
was, and is not, and shall come up out of the bottomeles depth, and go into
destruction: and the inhabitants on the earth (whose names are not written in
the book of life from the making of the world) shall marvel, seeing the beast
that was, and is not. Some expound it of ten small kingdoms, into which the
Roman Empire shall be divided, which shall al serve Antichrist both in his life
and a little after.
ten kings, which have not yet received kingdom, but do
shal' receive power as kings one hour after the beast. 1 Timothy 6, 15. Apo.
19, 16.
because * he is Lord of lords, and King of kings, and they that are with
him, called, and elect, and faithful. Not forcing or moving any to follow
Antichrist, but by his just judgment, and for punishment of their sins,
permitting the^ to believe and consent to him.
God has given into their hearts, to do that which pleases him: that they
give their kingdom to the beast, til the words of God be co^summate.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XVII.
5. Babylon.] The Protestants here vvil needs have Babylon to be Rome, but not
in S. Peter's epistle.
In the end of S. Peter's first Epistle, where the Apostle dateth it at
Babylon, which the ancient vvriters (as we there noted) affirm to be meant
of Rome: the Protestants vvil not in any wise have it so, because they would
not be driven to confess that Peter ever was at Rome, but here for that they
think it makes for their opinion, that the Pope is Antichrist, and Rome the
seat and city of Antichrist, they vvil needs have Rome to be this Babylon,
this great whore, and this purple harlot. for such fellows, in the
exposition of holy Scripture, be led only by their preiudicate opinions and
heresies, to which they dravv al things without al indifferency and
sincerity.

But S. Augustine, Aretas, and other vvriters, most commonly expound it,
neither of Babylon itself a city of Chaldaea or Egypt, By Babylon (according
to all the fathers) is signified, partly the whole society of the wicked,
partly the city of Rome, only in respect of the terrene and heathenish state
of them that persecuted the Church
not of Rome, or any one city, which may be so called spiritually, as
Jerusalem before chap. 11 is named spiritual Sodom and Egypt: but of the
general socitie of the impious, and of those that prefer the terrene kingdom
and commodity of the world, before God and eternal felicity. The author of
the Commentaries upon the Apocalypse set forth in S. Ambrose name, vvriteth
thus: This great vvhoore sometime signifies Rome, specially which at that
time when the Apostle vvrote this, did persecute the Church of God, but
otherwise it signifies the whole city of the Diu^l, li. aduers. Iudan.
that is, the universal corpse of the reprobate. Tertullian also takes it for
Rome, thus, Babylon (says he) in S. John is a figure of the city of Rome,
being so great, so proud of the Empire, and the destroier of the saints.
Which is plainly spoken of that city, when it was heathen, the head of the
terrene dominion of the world, the persecutor of the Apostles and their
successors, the seat of Nero, Bomitian, and the like, Christ's special enemies,
the sink of idolatry, sin, and false worship of the Pagan gods. Then was
it Babylon, when S. John vvrote this, and then was Nero and the rest figures
of Antichrist, and that city the resemblance of the principal place
(wheresoever it be) that Antichrist shall reign in, about the later end of the
world.

Now to apply that to the Roman Church and Apostolic See, either now or
then, which was spoken only of the terrene state of that city, as it was
the seat of Peter, when it did slay above 30 Popes Christ's Vicars, one after
an other, and endeavored to destroy the whole Church: that is most blasphemous
and foolish.

The Church in Rome was one thing, The Church of Rome is never called Babylon.
and Babylon in Rome an other thing. Peter sat in Rome, and Nero sat in Rome,
but Peter, as in the Church of Rome: Nero, as in the Babylon of Rome. Which
distinction the Heretics might have learned by S. Peter him self ep. 1. chap.
5. vvriting thus, The Church saluteth you, that is in Babylon, coelect, So that
the Church and the very chosen Church was in Rome, when Rome was Babylon,
whereby it is plain that, whether Babylon or the great vvhoore do here
signify Rome or no, yet it can not signify the Church of Rome: which is
now, and ever was, differing from the terrene Empire of the same. And if, as
in the beginning of the Church, Nero and the rest of the persecuting Emperors
(which were figures of Antichrist) did principally sit in Rome, so also the
great Antichrist shall have his seat there, as it may well be (though others
think that Jerusalem rather shall be his principal city:) yet even then shall
neither the Church of Rome, nor the Pope of Rome be Antichrist, but shall be
persecuted by Antichrist, and driven out of Rome, if it be possible. for, to
Christ's Vicar and the Roman Church he vvil bear as much good vvil as the
Protestants now do, and he shall have more power to persecute him and the
Church, then they have.

S. Hierom epist. 17. c. 7. to Marcella, to dravv her out of the city of Rome
to the holy land, warning her of the manifold allurements to sin and il
life, that be in so great and populous a city, alludeth at length to these
words of the Apocalypse, and makes it to be Babylon, and the purple vvhoore,
but straight way, lest some naughty person might think he meant that of the
Church of Rome, which he spoke of the society of the wicked only, he adds:
There is there in deeds the holy Church, there are the triumphans monuments of
the Apostles, and Martyrs, there is the true confession of Christ, To. 1.
there is the faith praised, * of the Apostle, and Gentilitie trodden under
foot, the name of Christian daily advancing it self on high. Whereby you see
that whatsoever may be spoken or interpreted of Rome, out of this word
Babylon, it is not meant of the Church of Rome, but of the terrene state, in so
much that the said holy Doctor (li. 2. aduers. Iouinian. c. 19.) signifies,
that the holiness of the Church there, has wiped away the blasphemy written
in the forehead of her former iniquity. But of the difference of the old state
and dominion of the Heathen there, for which it is resembled to Antichrist,
and the Priestly state which now it has, read a notable place in S. Leo
sermon. 1 in natali Petri and Pauli.

5. Mystery.] S. Paul calls this secret and close vvorking of abomination,
Mystery.
the mystery of iniquity. 2. Thessal. 2. and it is called a little after in
this chapter verse. 7. the Sacrament (or mystery) of the woman, and it is also
the mark of reprobation and damnation.

6. Drunken of the blood.] This woman signifies al persecutors of saints.
It is plain that this woman signifies the whole corpse of all the
persecutors that have and shall shede so much blood of the just: of the
Prophets, Apostles, and other Martyrs from the beginning of the world to the
end. The Protestants folishly expound it of Rome, for that there they put
Heretics to death, and allow of their punishment in other countries: but
their blood is not called the blood of saints, Putting heretics to death, is
not to shede the blood of saints.
no more then the blood of thieves, mankillers, and other malefactors: for the
sheding of which by order of justice, no Commonwealth shall answer.

9. Seven hills.] The Angel him self here expounds these 7 hills to be al
one with the 7 heads and the 7 kings: and yet the Heretics blinded excedingly
with malice against the Church of Rome, are so mad to take them for the
seven hills literally, upon which in old time Rome did stand: that so they
might make the unlearned believe that Rome is the seat of Antichrist, The
Protestants madness in expounding the 7 hills, of Rome: the Angel himself
expounding it otherwise.
But if they had any consideration, they might mark that the Prophets visions
here are most of them by Seuens, whether he talk of heads, horns,
candlestickes, Churches, kings, hills, or other things: and that he alluded
not to the hills, because they were just seven, but that Seven is a mystical
number, as sometimes Ten is, signifying universally al of that sort whereof he
speaks, as, that the seven heads, hills, or kingdoms (which are here al one)
should be all the kingdoms of the world that persecute the Christians: being
heads and mountains for their height in dignity above others. And some take
it, that there were seven special Empires, kingdoms, or States, that were or
shall be the greatest persecutors of Gods people, as of Egypt, (hanaan,
Babylon, the Persians, and Greeks, which be fiue-sixtly of the Roman Empire
which once persecuted most of al other, and which (as the Apostle here says)
yet is, or stands. but the seventh, then when S. John vvrote this, was not
come, neither is yet come in our days: which is Antichrists state, which
shall not come so long as the Empire of Rome stands, as S. Paul did Prophecy.
2 Thessa^. 2.

13. The same is the eight.] What is the eight beast.
The beast it self being the congregation of al these wicked persecutors,
though it consist of the foresaid seven, yet for that the malice of al is
complete in it, may be called the eight. Or, Antichrist him self, though he be
one of the seven, yet for his extraordinary wickedness shall be counted the
odd persecutor, or the accomplishment of al other, and therefore is named the
eight. Some take this beast called the eight, to be the Devil.

18. The great city.] If it be meant of any one city, and not of the
universal society of the reprobate (which is the city of the Devil, as the
Church and the universal fellowship of the faithful is called the city of
God) it is most like to be old Rome, The double interpretation of Babylon.
as some of the Greeks expound it, from the time of the first Emperors, til
Constantines days, who made an end of the persecution* for by the authority
of the old Roman Empire, Christ was put to death first, and afterward the
two chief Apostles, and the Popes their successors, and infinite Catholic
men through out the world, by lesser kings which then were subject to Rome.
Al which Antichristian persecution^ ceased, when Constantine reigned, and
yielded up the city to the Pope, who holds not the kingdom or Empire ouet
the world, as the Heathen did, but the fatherhod and spiritual rule of the
Church. Howbeit the more probable sense is the other, of the city of the
Devil, as the auth^r of the homi^ies upon the Apocalypse in S. Augustine,
declares.

CHAP. XVIII.
The fall of Babylon, her judgment, plagues and reuenges: for the which, 9
the kings, 16 and merchants of the earth that sometime did cleave unto her*
shall mourns bitterly: 20 but heaven, and the Apostles and Prophets shall rejoice.

Apo. 14, 8.
saying, * Fallen fallen is Babylon the great: and it is become the habitation
of Devils, and (...)
the custody of every unclean spirit, and the custody of every unclean and
hateful bird:

The measure of pains and damnation, according to the wicked pleasures or
unlawful delites of this life* which is a fore sentence for such people as
turn their whole life to ^^st and riot.
so much give her torment and mourning: because she says in her heart, Es 47, 8*
* I sit a queen, and Widow I am not, and mourning I shall not see.

Kings and Merchants are most encombered, dangered and drowned in the
pleasures of this world: whose whole life and traficke is (if they be not
exceeding virtuous) to find variety of earthly pleasures. Who seeing once the
extreme end of their joys and of all that made their heaven here, to be turned
into pains and damnation eternal, then shall houle and weep to late.
the kings of the earth, which have fornicated with her, and have lived in
delicacies, shall weep, and bewail them selves upon her, when they shall see
the smoke of her burning:



The Angels and al Saints shall rejoice and laud ^od to see the wicked
confounded, and Gods justice executed upon their oppressors and persecutors*
and this is that which the Martyrs prayed for, chap. 6.
Rejoice over her, heaven, and ye holy Apostles and Prophets: because God has
judged your judgment of her. Ier. 51. 63.
saying, * With this violence shall By this it seems clear that the Apostle
means not any one city, but the universal company of the reprobate, which*
shall perish in the day of judgment: the old prophets also naming the whole
number of Gods enemies mystically, Babylon* as Ierem. ^. 52.
Babylon that great city be thrown, and shall now be found no more. shine in
thee, and the voice of the bridegroom and the bride shall no more be heard in
thee: because thy marchantes were the princes of the earth, because al nations
have erred in thine inchauntments.

CHAP. XIX.
^ The Saints glorifying God for the judgment pronounced upon the harl^t, 7
the marriage of the Lamb is prepared. 10 The Angel refuses to be adored of S.
John. 1^ There appears one (who is the word of God, and the King of kings
and Lord of lords) sitting on a horse, with a great army, and fighting
against the beast and the kings of the earth and their armies* 17 the ^irdes of
the air being in the mean time called to devour their flesh.

The Epistle for many martyrs.
Allelu-ia* ALLELVIA*
Praise, and glory, and power is to our God: This often repeating of
Allelu-ia. in times of rejoicing, the Church does follow in her Service.
again they said, Allelu-ia. And her smoke ascends for ever and ever. Amen,
Allelu-ia. Allelu-ia: because our Lord God the omnipotent has reigned. At this
day shall the whole Church of the elect be finally and perfectly for ever joined
unto Christ in marriage inseparable.
the marriage of the Lamb is come, and his wife has prepared her self.

Mat. 22* Lu. 14,
Write, * Blessed be they that are called to the That is the feast of eternal
life prepared for his spouse the Church.
supper of the marriage of the Lamb. And he said to me, Apoc. 22. 9.
These words of God, be true. have the testimony of JESUS. Adore God. For
the testimony of JESUS, is the spirit of prophecy.

Es. 63, 1.
and his name is called, The second person in Trinity, the Son of the Word
of God, which was made flesh. Io. 1.
THE WORD OF GOD. Apoc. 2, 27.
that in it he may strike the Gentiles. And * he shall rule them in a rod of
iron: and he treads the wine press of the fury of the wrath of God
omnipotent. Apo. 17, 14.
* Even according to his humanity also.
KING OF KINGS AND LORD OF LORDS.





ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XIX.
4. Amen, Alleluia.] These two Hebr^e words (as other else where) both in
the Greek and Latin text are kept religiously, (...)
and not translated, unless it be once or twice in the Psalms. Yea and the
Protestants them selves keep them in the text of their English Testaments in
many places. Amen* Alleluia, not translated.
and marvel it. is why they use them not in all places, but sometimes turn,
Amen, into, verily, where of see the Annotation Joan. 8. v. 34. and in their
Service book they translate, Alleluia, into, Praise ye the Lord* as though
Alleluia had not as good a grace in the act of serving God, (where it is in
deed properly used) as it has in the text of the Scripture.

The Church Catholic does often and specially use this sacred word, to join
with the Church triumphant, Alleluia often used in the Church, specially in
Easter time.
consisting of Angels and Saints, who here are said to laud and praise God
with treat rejoicing, by this word Alleluia, and by often repetition thereof:
as the Catholic Church also uses, namely in Easter time even til
Vvhi^-sontide, for the joy of Christ's resurrection, which (as S. Augustine
declares ep. ad Ianuarium) was the general use of the Primitive Church,
Epist. ad Ian. c. 17. etc. 15.
making a greater mystery and matter of it, then our Protestants now do. At
other times of the year also he says it was sung in some Churches, but not in all, and S. Hierom numbereth it among the heresies of Vigilantius, That Alleluia
could not be sung but at Easter. Aduers. Vigilant. c. 1.

The truth is, by the use of the Scriptures it has more in it then, Praise ye
the Lord, signifying with laud, It signifies more then (as the Protestants
translate it) praise ye the lord.
glorifying, and praising of God, a great rejoicing vvithal, mirth, and
exultation of heart in the singers thereof, and that is the cause why the holy
Church says, Laus tibi Domine, Praise be to thee o Lord, in Lent and times of
penance and mourning, but not Alleluia* which (as S. Augustine also declares)
is a term of signification and mystery, joined with that time, and then used
specially in the Church of God, when she represents to us in her Service,
the joys and beatitude of the next life: which is done specially at Easter,
by the joyful celebrating of Christ's glorious Resurrection and Ascension, after
the penal time of Lent which represents the misery of this life. See S.
Augustine Ser. 1. and 5. c. 9* and 6. c. 9 de Diuersis to. 10. and his
ena^tation upon the 148 Psalm. for in the titles and ends of diverse holy
Psalms this Alleluia is full of mystery and sacred signification. ^Palse
translation.
Where we must ask the Protestants, why they have left it out altogether,
being in the Hebrew, saying neither Alleluia, nor, Praise the Lord, in the
Bible 1577: and that nine times in the six last Psalms.

Moreover the said holy Doctor li. 2 de doct, Christ* c. 11) affirms that
Amen and Alleluia be not translated into any other language, Amen and Alleluia
should not be translated into vulgar tongues.
propter sanctiorem authoritatem, for the more sacred authority of the words
so remaining* and ep. 178. he says that it is not lavvful to translate them.
Nam sciendum est etc. for it is to be known (says he) that al nations do
sing Amen and Alleluia in the Hebrew words, which neither the Latin man not
the Barbarous may translate into his own language. See S. Hierom also epist.
137. And namely for our Nation, S. Gregory vvil bear us witness that our
country received, the word Alleluia with their Christianity, Al nations in
the primitive Church sang Amen and Alleluia.
saying thus li. 27 Moral. c. 6. Lingua Britannia qua nihil aliud nouerat quim
barbarum frendere, iamdudum in Diuinis laudibus Hebraeum ^^pit resenare
Alleluia. that is, The Britan tongue, which knevv nothing else but to mutter
barbarously, has begone of late in Gods divine lauds and praises to sound the
Hebrew Alleluia. And for Jury, S. Hierom ep. 17. c. 7 vvriteth, that the
husbandmen at the plough sang Alleluia, which was not then their vulgar
speech. Yea he says that in Monasteries the singing of Alleluia was in
st^ede of a bell to call them together ad Collectam. in Epitaph. Paul^e. c. 10.

This word is a sacred, Christian, mystical, and Angelical song. and yet in
the new service book it is turned into, The Protestants profane this word by
translating it, and diminish the signification thereof.
Praise ye the Lord, and Alleluia is quite gone, because they list neither to
agree with the Church of God, not with the use of holy Scriptures, no not
with their own translations, but no marvel, Psalm. 136.
that they can not sing the song of our Lord and of Angels in a strange
country, that is, out of the Catholic Church, in the captivity of schism
and heresy, Lastly, we might ask them whether it be al one to say Mat. 21,
Hosanna, and, Save us we beseech thees whereas Hosanna is vvithal a^vvord of
exceeding congratulation and joy which they expressed tovvard out Savior, even
so Alleluia has an other manner of sense and signification in it, then can
expressed by, Praise ye the Lord.

8. Iustifications of Saints. Here the Heretics in their translations* could
not alter the word iustifications into ordinances, Iustificatio^s are good
works, not as the effects of says justifying, but because them selves also
with faith justify a man.
or constitutions, as they did falsely in the first of S. Luke, whereof see
the Annotatio^ there verse. 6. but they are forced to say in Latin,
iustificationes, as Beza: and in English, righteousness, (for iustifications
they vvil not say in any case for fea^e of inconvenience*) yea and they can not
deny but these iustifications be the good works of saints. Beza.
but where * they make this gloss, that they be so called, because are the
fruits of effect of faith and of the justice which we have by only faith,
it is most evidently false, and against the very text, and nature of* the word.
for there is no cause why any thing should be called a man's justification* but
for that it makes him just, so that, iustifications, be the virtues of faith,
hope, charity, and good deeds, justifying or making a man just, and not
effects of justification, neither faith only, but they al together be the
very ornaments and inward garments, beauty, and justice of the soul, as here
it is evident.

10. And I fell.] The Protestants abuse this place, and the example of the
Angels forbidding John to adore him being but his fellow servant, S. John's
adoring of the Angel, explicated against the protestants abusing the same.
and appointing him to adore God, against al honor, reverence, and adoration
of Angels, Saints, or other sanctified creatures, teaching that no religious
worship ought to be done vvto them. But in truth it makes for no such
purpose, but only vvarneth us that Divine honor and the adoration due to God
alone, may not be given to any Angel or other creature. S. August. de vera
relig. cap. vltimo. And when the Adversaries reply that so great an Apostle,
as John was* could not be ignorant of that point, not would have given divine
honor unto an Angel (for so he had been an Idolater) and therefore that he was
not reprehended for that, The Protestants are re^elled by their own reason.
but for doing any religious reverence or other honor whatsoever to his
fellovv-seruant (...) ve answer that by the like reason, S. John being so
great an Apostle, if this later kind of reverence had been unlawful and to be
reprehended, as the Protestants hold it is no less then the other, could not
have been ignorant thereof, not would have done it.

Therefore they might much better have learned of S. Augustine (q. 61 in Genes.)
how this fact of S. John was corrected by the Angel, S. John erred only in
the person, mistaking the Angel to be Christ him self, and so adoring him as
God.
and wherein he error was. In effect it is thus, That the Angel being so
glorious and full of majesty, presenting Christ's person, and in his name using
diverse words proper to God* Apoc. c. 1.
as, I am the first and the last, and alive and was dead, and such like, might
well be taken of S. John, by error of his person, to be Christ him self, and
that the Apostle presuming him to be so in deed, adored him with Divine
honor: which the Angel correcting, told him he was not God, but one of his
fellows, and therefore that he should not so adore him, but God. Thus then we
see, John was neither so ignorant, to think that any undue honor might be
given to any creature: not so il, to commit idolatry by doing undue worship
to any Angel in heaven: and therefore was not culpable at al in his fact, but
only erred materially (as the Scholemen call it) that is, by mistaking one for
an other, thinking that which was an Angel, to have been our Lord: Esa. 9 in
Graco.
because he knevve that our Lord him self is also * called an Angel, Malac. 3.
and has often appeared in the visions of the faithful.

And the like is to be thought of the Angel appearing in the 22 of the
Apocalypse, whether it were the same or an other* S. John sinned not in this
adoration.
for that also did so appear, that John not tell whether it were Christ him
self or no, til the Angel told him. Once this is certain, that John did not
formally (as they say) commit idolatry, not sin at al herein, knovving al
duties of a Christian man, no less then an Angel of heaven, being also in as
great honor with God, yea and in more then many Angels. An other explication
of this place.
Which perhaps may be the cause (and consequently an other explication of this
place) that the Angel knovving his great greaces and merits before God, would
not accept any worship or submission at his hands, though John again of like
humility did it, as also immediately afterward chap. 22. which belike he
would not have done, if he had been precisely advised by the Angel but a
moment before, of error and vnduetifulnes in the fact. Howsoever that be,
this is evident, that this the Angels refusing of adoration, takes not away
the due reverence and respect we ought to have to Angels or other sanctified
persons and creatures, and so these words, See thou do it not, The
Protestants by conference of Scriptures might find ^eligious adoration of
creatures.
signify rather an earnest refusal, then any signification of crime to be
committed thereby.

And marvel it is that the Protestants making them selves so sure of the true
sense of every doubtful place by conference of other Scriptures, follow not here
the conference and comparing of Scriptures that them selves so much of only
require. We vvil give them occasion and a method so to do, thus. He that
doubts of this place, finds out three things of question, which must be
tried by other Scriptures. The first, whether there ought to be or may be any
religious reverence or honor done to any creatures* taking the word religion
or religious worship not for that special honor which is properly and only
due to God, Aug. de vera relig. c. 55.
as S. Augustine sometimes uses it, Three points herein examined and proved by
Scriptures.
but for reverence due to any thing that is holy by sanctification or
application to the service of God. The second thing is, whether by use of
Scriptures, that honor be called adoration in latin, or by a word equivalent
in other, languages, (...)*
Hebrew, Greek, or English. Lastly, whether we may by the Scriptures fall
down prostrate before the things, or at the feet of the persons that we so
adore. ^or of civil duty done to our Superiors by capping, (...).
kneeling, or other courtesy, I think the Protestants vvil not stand with
us: though in deed, their arguments make as much against the one as the other.

But for religious worship of creatures (which we speak of) let them see in
the Scriptures both old and new: first, Ps. 5. 137.
whether the Temple, 1 Religious worship of creatures.
the tabernacle, the Arc, the propitiatory, the Cherubins, Dan. 6.
the altar, the bread of proposition, the Sabbath, and al their holies, 3 Reg.
8.
were not reverenced by all signs of devotion and religion: whether the
Sacraments of Christ, Ios. 7. Ps. 98. 131.
the Priests of our Lord, the Prophets of God, the Gospel, Scriptures, the name
of JESUS, such like (which be by use, signification, or sanctification made
holy) are not ^ovv to be reverenced: and they shall find al these things to
have been reverenced of all the faithful, 2 The same is called adoration.
without any dishonor of God, and much to his honor. Secondly, that this
reverence is named adoration in the Seriptures, these speeches do prove Ps. 93.
Adore ye his footestoole, because it is holy. and Hebr. 11. He adored the top
of his rod. Thirdly, that the Scriptures also vvarrant us (as the nature of the
word adoration gives in all three tongues*) to bow down our bodies, 3 Falling
prostrat before the persons or things adored.
to fall flat on the ground at the presence of such things, and at the feet
of holy persons, specially Angels, as John does here, these examples prove.
Genesis 18.
Abraham adored the Angels that appeared to him, Moses also the Angel that
showed him self out of the bush, Exodus 3.
who were creatures, though they represented Gods person, as this Angel here
did, that speak to S. John Balaam adored, the Angel that stood before him
with a svvord drawn. Iosue 5.
Number. 22. Adoring of Angels.
Iosue adored falling flat down before the feet of the Angel, calling him his
Lord, knowing by the Angels own testimony, that it was but an Angel. Who
refused it not, but required yet more reverence, commanding him to pluck of
his shoes, because the ground was holy, no doubt so made by the presence only
of the Angel.

Yea not only to Angels, Adoring of Prophets and holy persons.
but even to great Prophets this devotion was done, as to Daniel by
Nabuchodonosor, Dan. 2.
who fell flat upon his face before him, and did other great offices of
religion, which the Prophet refused not, because they were done to God rather
then to him, as S. Hierom defends the same against Porphyrie, who charged
Daniel with intolerable pride therein, and the said holy doctor alleges the
fact of Alexander the great, that did the like to or, Iaddus.
Ioiadas the high priest of the ^evves. Howsoever that be (for of the
sacrifice there mentioned there may be some doubt, which the Church does
alvvaies immediately to God, and to no creature) the fact of the prophets (4
Reg. 2) to Elizeus, is plain: where they perceiving that the double grace and
spirit of Elias was given to him, 4 Reg. 4. Judith. 13.
fell flat down at his feet and adored. So did * the Sunamite. to omit that
Achior adored Judith, falling at her feet, as a woman blessed of God, and
infinite other places.

Al which things, by comparing the Scriptures, our Adversaries should have
found to be lavvfully done to men, and Angels, and sovereign holy creatures.
Whereby they might convince them selves, and perceive, that that thing could
not be forbidden S. John to do to the Angel, which they pretend: though the
Angel for causes might refuse even that which S. John did lawfully unto him,
as S. Peter did refuse the honor given him by Cornelius, according to S.
Chrysostoms opinion. he. 23 in c 10 Act. yea even in the third chapter of this
book (if our Adversaries would look no further) they might see where this
Augel prophecieth and promises that the Jews should fall down before the
feet of the Angel of Philadelphia and adore, See the Annot* there.

CHAP. XX.
An Angel casts the dragon (or devil) bound, into the depth for a thousand
years, in which the souls of martyes in the first resurrection shall reign
with Christ, 7 After which years, Satan being let loose, shall raise Gog and
Magog, an innumerable army, against the beloved city: 9 but a fire from
heaven shall destroy them. 12 Then books are opened, and he that sits upon
the throne, judges all the dead according to their works.

See in S. Augustine (li. 20. de Ciuit. c. 7. 8. and seq.) the exposition of
this chapter.
having the key of the bottomless depth, and a great chain in his hand.

Quid in millenari^ numero nisi ad proferandam nouam sobolem perfecta
vniuersitas praes^ita generationis exprim^^ (...) hinc per (...) dicitur, It
regnabunt cu^ (...) ^ill^ a^nis, (...) regnum sancta Ecclesia, vniuersitatis
perf^c^ione so^iidatur. D. Gregor. li. 9. Moral. c. 1.
a thousand years. the first resurrection.

S. Augustine thinks that these do not signify any certain nations but all that shall then be joined with the Devil and Antichrist against the Church. li.
20. de Ciuit. c. 11. See S. Hierom in Exech. li. 11.
the nations that are upon the four corners of the earth, Ezec. 38, 14. 39, 2.
* Gog, and Magog, and shall gather them into battle, the number of whom is as
the sand of the sea. See S. Hierom in Exech. li. 11.
where both the beast and the false-prophet shall be tormented day and night
for ever and ever. THE 6 VISION.


They shall then be new, not the substance, but the shape changed. 2 Pet. 3. See
S. Augustine. li. 20. de Ciuit. c. 14.
earth and heaven fled, and there was no place found for them. The books of
men's consciences, where it shall plainly be read what every man's life has
been.
books were opened: Apoc. 3, 5. 21, 27.
and * ^ an other book was opened, which is of life: and the dead were
judged of those things which were written in the books according to their
works. Such as do no good works, if they have age and time to do them, are
not found in the book of life.
he that was not found written in the book of life, was cast into the poole
of fire.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XX.
2. Bound him;] Christ by his Passion has abridged the power of the Devil for
a thousand years, that is, the whole time of the new Testament, until
Antichrists time, when he shall be loosed again, that is, be permitted to
deceive the world, but for a short time only, to wit, three years and a half.

4* I savv seats.] S. Augustine (li. 20 de Ciuit. Dei c. 9) takes this to be
spoken, not of the last judgment, Bishops consistories and judicial power.
but of the Sees or Consistories of Bishops and Prelates, and of the Prelates
them selves, by whom the Church is now governed. As the judgment here given,
can be taken no otherwise better, then of that which was said by our Savior
Mat. 18. Whatsoever you bind in earth, 1. Cor. 5.
shall be bound in heaven* and therefore the Apostle says, What have I to do to
judge of them that are with out?

4. And the souls.] During a thousand years (that is the time ofthis militant
Church) saints reign with Christ in soul only.
He means (says S. Augustine in the place alleged) the souls of Martyrs,
that they shall in the mean time, during those thousand years; which is the
time of the Church militant, be in heaven without their bodies, and reign
with Christ. for, the souls (says he) of the godly departed, are not
separated from the Church, which is even now the kingdom of Christ. for else
there should be kept no memory of them as the altar of God in the
communicating of the body of Christ: neither should it avail to hasten to
Baptism in the perils of death, for fear of ending our life without it: nor
to hasten to be reconciled, if we fortune for penence or of il conscience to
be separated from the same body. And why are al these things done, but for
that the faithful departed also be members of the Church? And though for an
example the Martyrs be only named here, yet it is mean^ of others also that
die in the state of grace.

5. The rest lived not.] The rest are dead and damned in soul, during the same
time.
The rest which are not of the happy number aforesaid, but lived and died in
sin, reign not with Christ in their souls during this time of the new
Testament, but are dead in soul spiritually, and in body naturally, til the
day of judgment. S. August. ibidem.

3. This is the first resurrection.] As there be two regenerations, one by
faith, which is now in Baptism: and an other according to the flesh, when
at the later day the body shall be made immortal and incorruptible: The first
resurrection, of the soul only.
so there are two resurrections, the one now of the souls to salvation when
they die in grace, which is called the first, the other of the bodies at the
later day. S. August. li^. 20 de Ciui^. c. 6.

6. They shall be Priests.] It is not spoken (says S. Augustine li. 20 de
Ciuit. c. 10) of Bishops and Priest^ only, Priests, some proprely so called,
some vnproprely.
which are properly now in the Church called Priests: but as we call al,
Christians, for the mystical Chrisme or ointment, 1. Pet. ^.
so al, Priests, because they are the members of one Priest* of whom the
Apostle Peter says, A holy people, a kingly Priesthod. Which words be
notable for their learning that think there be none properly called Priests
now in the new Testament, no otherwise then al Christian men and women, and
a confusion to them that therefore have turned the name Priests into Ministers.

7. Satan shall be loosed.] The binding and loosing of Satan, explicated by S.
Augustine.
In the whole 8 chapter of the said 20 book de Ciuitate Dei in S. Augustine,
is a notable commentary of these words. Where first he declares, that
neither this binding nor loosing of Satan is in respect of seducing or not
seducing the Church of God: proving that whether he be bound or loose, he can
never seduce the same. The same, says he, shall be the state of the Church at
that time when the Devil is to be loosed, even as since it was instituted.
the same has it been and shall be at al time in her children that succeed each
other by birth and death. And a little after. This I thought was therefore to be
mentioned, left any man should think, that during the little time wherein the
Devil shall be loosed, the Church shall not be upon the earth, he either not
finding it here when he shall be le^ loose, or consuming it when be shall by all
means persecute the same. Secondly he declares, that the Devil to be bound,
is nothing else but not to be permitted by God to exercise al his force or
fraud in tentations: as to be loosed, is to be suffered by God for a small
time, that is, for three years and a half, to practice and prove al his power
and arts of tentations against the Church and her children, and yet not to
prevail against them. Thirdly this Doctor shows by what great mercy our
Lord has tied Satan and abridged his power during the whole millenarie or
thousand years, which is all the time of the new Testament until then: and
with what wisdoms he permits him to break loose that little time of three
years and six months, The short reign of Antichrist.
tovvard the later day, which shall be the reign of Antichrist. Lastly he
shows what kind of men shall be most subject to the Devils seductio^, (even
such as now by tentation of Heretics go out of the Church) and who shall
avoid it.

By all which we may confute diverse false expositio^s of old and late
Heretics* Millenarij or Chiliast^
first, the ancient sect of the Millenaries, that grounded upon these thousand
years named by the Prophet, this heresy, that there should be so many years
after the resurrection of our bodies, in which we should reign with Christ
in this world, in our bodies, in all delites and pleasures corporal, of meats,
drinks, and such like, which they called the first resurrection. of which
heresy Cerinthus was the author. Epiph. haer. 77. in fine. Hiero. C^mment. in
c. 19 Mat. August. har. 8 ad Quodvul^ Deum. Eus^bius also (li. 3 historia c.
33) shows that some principal men were in part (though after a more honest
manner concerning those corporal delicacies) of the same opinion by
misconstruction of these words of S. John. The Scriptures hard.
Whereby we learn and all the world may perceive, the holy Scriptures to be
hard, when so great clerks did err, and that there is no security but in
that sense which the Church allows of.

The late Heretics also by the said S. Augustines words are fully refuted,
affirming not only that the Church may be seduced in that great persecution of
the Devils loosing, By S. Augustines foresaid explication, is eurdently dedu^ed
against the Protestants, that the Church can not err, and that the Pope can
not possibly be Antichrist.
but that it has been seduced even a great piece of this time when the Devil
is bound: holding that the very true Church may err or fall from truth to
error and idolatry, yea (which is more blasphemy) that the chief governor
of the Church is Antichrist him self, and the very Church under him, the
vvhoo^e of Babylon: and that this Antichrist, (which the Scriptures in so many
places, and here plainly by S. Augustines exposition, testify, shall reign
but a small time, and that tovvard the last judgment,) has been revealed long
sithence, to be the Pope him self, Christ's own Vicar, and that he has
persecuted the Saints of their sect for these thousand years at the least.
Which is no more but to make the Devil to be loose, and Antichrist to reign
the whole thousand years, or the most part thereof, that is, almost the whole
time of the Churches state in the new Testament: (which is against this and
other Scriptures evidently, appointing that, to be the time of the Devils
binding:) Yea it is to make Antichrist and the Devil weaker tovvard the day of
judgment then before, An invincible demo^stration.
and the truth better to be known, and the faith more common* the nearer we
come to the same judgment: which is expressly * against the Gospel* and this
prophecy of S. John.

We see that the sects of Luther, Mat. 24.
Calvin, and other, be more spread through the world then they were ever
before, Lu. 18, 8.
and consequently the Pope and his religion lessened, and his power of
punishing (or, as they call it) persecuting the said Sectaries, through the
multitude of his adversaries, diminished. How then is the Pope Antichrist,
Whose force shall be greater at the later end of the world, then before? or how
can it be otherwise, but these Sect^Maisters should be Antichrists near
precursors, that make Christ's chief Ministers and the Churches chief
gouelnours that have been these thousand years and more, to be Antichrists: ^
and them selves and their sects to be true, that come so near the time of the
Devils loosing and seduction and of the personal reign of Antichrist?

8. The camp of the Saints.] The camp^ of Saints is the Catho. Church
through the world.
S. Augustine in the said 20 book de Clui^. Dei cap. 11. It is not, says he,
to be taken that the persecutors shall gather to any place, as though the camp
of the saints or the beloved city should be but in one place, which in deed
are no other thing but the Church of Christ spread through the whole world.
And therefore wheresoever the Church shall then be (which shall be in all Nations
even them, for so much is insinuated by this latitude of the earth here
specified) there shall the tents of saints be, and the beloved city of God,
and there shall she be besieged by all her enemies, which shall be in every
country where she is, As now Heretics in particular countries, so
Antichrist shall persecute the Churches of al nations*
in most cruel and forcible sort. So vvriteth this profound holy Doctor.
Whereby we see, that, as now the particular Churches of England, Scotland,
Flanders, and such like, be persecuted by their enemies in those countries, so
in the time of Antichrist, the Churches of al Nations. as of Italy, Spain,
France, and al other which now be quiet, shall be assaulted as now the
foresaid are, and much more, for that the general persecution of the whole,
shall be greater* then the particular persecution of any Churches in the world.

9. There came down a fire.] What is mean^ by fire from heaven.
It is not meant of the fire of Hell (says S. Augustine ib. c. 12) into which
the wicked shall be cast after the resurrection of their bodies, but of an
extraordinary help that God vvil send from heaven, to give succourse to the
Saints of the Church that then shall fight against the wicked: or, the very
fervent and burning zeal of religion and Gods honor, which God vvil kindle
in the hearts of the faithful, to be constant against all the forces of that
great persecution.

12. An other book.] This is the book of Gods knowledge or predestination,
The book of every man's works, opened in the day of judgment.
wherein that which before was hid to the world, shall be opened, and
wherein the true record of every man's works shall be contained, and they have
their judgment diversely according to their works, and not according to faith
only, or lack of faith only. for, al infidels (as Turks, obstinate ^evves,
and Heretics) shall never come to that examination, being otherwise condemned.

CHAP. XXI.
Heaven and earth being made new, THE 5 PART.
S. John sees the new city Jerusalem prepared and adorned for the spouse of
the Lamb. 6 The just are glorified, The final glorificatio^ of the Church.
7 and the wicked thrust into the poole of fire. 12 The wall and gates and
foundations of the city are described and measured: 18 al which are gold and
crystal, precious stones and pearls.

Esa. 63, 17. 66, 21.
for * the first heaven, The Epistle upon the dedication of a Church.
and the first earth was gone, and the sea now is not. 2 Pet. 3, 13.
The Church triumphant.
the holy city Jerusalem new descending from heaven, prepared of God, as a
bride adorned for her husband. This tabernacle is Christ according to his
humanity.
the tabernacle of God with men, and the vvil dwell with them. And they shall
be his people: Es. 25. 8.
and he God with them shall be their God. Apoc. 7, 17.
This happy day shall make an end of all the miseries of this mortality.
wipe away al tears from their eyes: and death shall be no more. not
mourning, nor crying, neither shall there be sorrow any more, because the
vvhich' first things are gone.

Esa. 43, 19.
said: * Behold I make al things new. And he said to me: Write, because
these words be most faithful and true. Apoc. 1, 8. 22, 13.
* I am Alpha and Omega: the beginning and the end. To him that thirsts I
vvil give of the fountain of the water of life, gratis. He that has the
victory against sin in the Church militant, shall have his revvard in the
triumphant.
shall possess these things, and I vvil be his God: and he shall be my son.
All that commit mortal sins and repent not, shall be damned.
to the fearful, and incredulous, and execrable, and murderers, and
fornicators, and sorcerers, and Idolaters, and al liers, their part shall be in
the poole burning with fire and brimstone, which is the second death.

THE 7 AND LAST VISION.
and spoke with me, saying: Come, and I vvil show thee the bride, the wife
of the Lamb. The glory of the Church triumphant.
having the glory of God. and the light thereof like to a prerious stone, as
it were to the iaspetr stone, even as crystal. The names of the Patriarchs
and Apostles honorable and glorious in the triumphant Church.
the names of the twelve tribes of the children of Israel.

See S. Hierom ep. 17. touching this description of the heavenly Jerusalem,
which is the Church triu^pha^t, teaching that these things must be taken
spiritually, not car^^ally.
the city is situated quadrangle-vvise, and the length thereof is as great as
also the breadth: and he measured the city with the reed for twelve thousand
furlonges, and the length and height and breadth thereof be equal. chrysoprasus:
the eleventh, the hyacinthe: the twelfth, the amethys^e. Al external sacrifice
which now is necessarie^dutie of the faithful, shall then cease and therefore
there shall need no material temple.
temple I savv not therein. for our Lord the God omnipotent is the temple
thereof, Esa. 60, 19,
and the Lamb. Es. 60, 3.
Esa. 60, 11.
None not perfectly clea^sed of their su^nes, can enter into this heavenly
Hieruselem.
not enter into it any polluted thing, nor that does abomination and makes
lie, Apo. 20, 12.
but * they that are written in the book of life of the Lamb.

ANNOTATION CHAP. XXI.
18. Pure gold.] The state of glorified bodies.^
S. Gregory (li. 18. Moral. 6, 28) says, the heavenly state is resembled to
gold, precious stone, crystal, glass, and the like, for the purity, claritie,
glittering of the glorious bodies: where one man's body, conscience, and
cogitations are represented to an other, as corporal things in this life are
seen through crystal or glass.

CHAP. XXII.
The tree of life being watered with living water, yeldeth fruictes every
month. 3 There is neither curse nor night in the city. 6 The Angel that
shevved John al these things, refuses to be adored of him. 14 He tells him
that the just shall enter into the city, but the rest shall be cast forth. 18
Lastly, ^e protests and threateneth against them that shall presume to add to
this prophecy, or take away from the same.

water of life,
^ living water', clear as crystal, proceeding from the seat of God and of the
Lamb. Christ is our tree of life: in the Church, by the B. Sacrame: and in
heaven, by his visible presence and influence of life ever lasting both to our
bodies and souls: of vv^o^ Solomon says, The tree of life to all that
appr^he^d him. Prou. 3.
the tree of life, yelding twelve fruits, rendering his fruit every month,
and the leaves of the tree for the curing of the Gentiles. Apo. 21. Esa. 60
no mo^e: and they shall not need the light of lamp, nor the light of the
sun, because our Lord God does illuminate them, and they shall reign for ever
and ever. THE CONCLUSION.
These words are most faithful and true. And our Lord the God of the spirits
of the prophets, sent his Angel to show his servants those things which
must be done quickly.

Apo. 19, 10.
I fell down You see it is al one to adore before the feet of the angel, and
to adore the Angel: though, to adore him, ^e not expressed as in the 19 chap.
See the an^otatio^ there v. 10.
to adore before the feet of the Angel which shevved me these things: Man by
Gods grace and doing good works, does increase his justice.
let him be justified yet: and let the holy be sanctified yet. Heaven is the
reward, hire, and repaiment for good works, in all the Scriptures. yet the
adversaries will not see it.
according to his works, To. 2, 6.
Apo. 21, 6. 1, 8.
the first and the last, the beginning and the end.

Es. 55, 1.
Come. And he that hears, let him say, Come. And * he that thirsts, let him
come: and he that vvil, let him take the water of life gratis.

Lord JESUS.

ANNOTATIONS CHAP. XXII.
11. He that hurts.] It is not an exhortation, but a commination or
threatening, that how far soever the wicked increase in naughtines* God has
provided answerable punishment for them.

18. If any man shall add.] The curse against adding or diminishing, is against
Heretics, not Catholic expositours.
The author of the commentaries upon this book, bearing the name of S.
Ambrose, says thus of this point. He makes not this protestation against the
expositours of his prophecy, but against Heretics, for the expositour does
add^ or diminish nothing, but opens: the obscurity of the narration, or
shows the moral or spiritual sense. He curses therefore Heretics, that used
to add somevvhat of their own that was false, and to take away other
things that were contrary to their heresies. So says this ancient writer.
And this was the property of them in all ages, and so is it of ours now, as
we have noted through the whole Bible, and as we have in sundry places set
forth to the sight of al indifferent readers, in the new Testament, that all the world may see that the Apostles curse is fallen upon them, and may bevvare
of them.

20. Come Lord Jesus.] A brief petition unto JESUS Christ, to come quickly, as
S. John here speaks, and to judge the cause of Catholics and Protestants.
And now o Lord Christ, most just and merciful, we they poor creatures that
are so afflicted for confession and defense of the holy, Catholic, and
Apostolic truth, contained in this thy sacred book, and in the infallible
doctrine of thy dear spouse our mother the Church, we cry also unto thy
Majesty with tenderness of our hearts unspeakable, COME LORD JESUS QUICKLY,
and judge betwixt us and our Adversaries, and in the mean time give patience,
comfort, and constancy to all that suffer for thy name, and trust in thee. o
Lord God our only helper and protector, tarry not long. AMEN.

A TABLE OF THE EPISTLES AND GOSPELS, AFTER THE ROMAN USE, UPON SVNDAIES,
HOLIDAIES, and other principal days of the year, for such as are desirous to
know and read them according to this translation. And therefore the Epistles
taken out of the old Testament are omitted, till the edition thereof.
Upon Sundaies, Imber Days, and other Feries.
THE 1. SUNDAY in Aduent, Epistle page 415. Gospel page 199. The 2. Sunday in
Aduent, Ep. 419. Gosp. 18. The 3 Sunday in Adue^t, Ep. 533. Gos. ^17. Vvenesday
Imber in Aduent, The Epistles omitted are taken out of the Old Testament.
Gos^ 135. Fridday Imber in Aduent, Gosp. 136. Saturday Imber in Aduent, Ep.
554. Gos. 143. The 4 Sunday in Aduent, Ep. 432. Gosp. 143. Christmas eve, Ep.
38^. Gosp. 4.
CHRISTMAS day at the first mass, Ep. 597. Gosp. 139. second Mass, Epist.
598. Gosp. 140. third Mass, Ep. 603. Gos. 216.

S. Steven, Ep 305. Gosp* 66. S. John the Euang. Gosp, 279. Childermas day, Ep.
724, Gosp. 5. S. Thomas of Canterbury, Ep. 608. Gos. 248. The Su^day within
the Octaue of Christmas, Ep. 504. as on Twelfth eve. Gosp. 14. verse 33 unto
41. The CIRCVMCISION of our Lord, Ep. 597. Gosp. 140. Tvvel^th Eve, Ep. 504.
Gosp. 6. The EPIPHANIE of our Lord called Twelfth day, Gosp. 5. The 1 Sunday
after the Epiphanie. Ep. 412. Gosp. 141. The 2 Sunday after the Epiphanie, Ep.
^^3. Gosp. 220. The 3 Sunday after the Epiphanie, Epis. 413. Gosp. 19. The 4
Sunday after the Epiph. Ep. 414. Gosp. 20. The 5 Sunday after the Epiph. Ep.
542. Gosp. 35. The 6 Sunday after the Epiph. Ep. 546. Gosp. 36. The Sunday of
Septuagesme, Ep. 443. Gosp. 56. The Sunday of Sexagesme. Ep. 489. Gosp. 159.
The Sunday of Quinquagesme, Epist. 456. Gosp. 191. Upon Ash wenesday, Gosp. 15.
Thursday after Ashwenesday, Gosp. 10. Friday after Ash wenesday, Gosp. 13.
Saturday after Ashwenesday, Gosp. 103. The 1 SUNDAY in lent, Ep. 481, Gosp. 9.
Monday in the 1 week of lent, Gos. 73. Tuesday, Gosp. 59. Vvenesday Imber,
gosp. 32. Thursday, gosp. 42. Friday Imber, gosp. 229. Saturday Imber. gosp.
48. The 2 Sunday in lent, Ep 549. Gosp. 48. Monday, Gosp. 243. Tuesday, gosp.
64. Vvenesday, Gosp. 56. verse. 17. the same that is upon the day of the Holy
Cross. Thursday, gosp. 186. Friday, gosp. 60. Saturday. gosp. 183. The 3
Sunday in lent, Ep. 521, gosp. 170. Monday, gosp. 146. Tuesday, gosp. 51.
Vvenesday, gosp. 41. Thursday, gosp. 147. Friday gosp. 225. Saturday, gosp.
242. The 4 Sunday in lent, Ep. 505. Gosp. 232. Monday, gosp. 220. Tuesday,
gosp. 239. Vvenesday, gosp. 245. Thursday, gosp. 156. Friday, gosp. 250.
Saturday, gosp. 242. PASSION Sunday, Epist. 621. Gospel 244. Monday in Passion
week, gosp. 240. Tuesday, gosp. 239. Vvenesday, gosp. 245. Thursday, gosp.
157. Friday, gosp. 252. Saturday, gosp. 254. PALM Sunday, before the
benedictio^ of the palms, gosp. 58. At Mass, Ep. 528. Gosp. 74. Monday in
holy week, gosp. 253. Tuesday, gosp. 124. Vvenesday, gosp. 201. Thursday, Ep.
449. Gosp. 256. Friday, gosp. 268. Saturday, Ep. 542 Gosp. 84. EASTER Day, Ep.
433. Gosp* 131. Monday in Easter week, Ep. 319, Gosp, 211. Tuesday, Ep. 328.
Gosp. 212. Vvenesday, Ep. 297, Gosp. 278. Thursday, Ep. 311. Gosp. 274. Friday,
Ep. 660. Gosp. 85. Saturday, Ep. 657. Gosp. 274. The 1 Sunday after Easter,
called Lovv Sunday, Ep. 685. Gosp. 275. The 2 Sunday after Easter, Ep. 658.
Gosp. 248. The 3 Sunday after Easter, Ep. 657. Gosp. 264. The 4 Sunday after
Easter, Ep. 642. gosp. 264. The 5 Sund. after Easter, Ep. 642. go^. 265* The
Rogation days, Ep 651. Gosp. 170. The Ascension ^ue, Ep. 518. Gosp. 266. The
ASCENSION day, Ep. 289. Gosp. 132. The Sunday within the Octaue of the
Ascension, Ep. 662. Gosp. 263. Vvhitsun-eue, Ep. 347. Gosp. 260. WHIT SUNDAY,
Ep. 293. Gosp. 260. Mu^day in whitsun week, Ep. 319. Gosp. 223. Tuesday, Ep.
311 gosp* 248. Vvenesday Imber in whitsun week, Ep. 301. Gosp. 234. Thursday,
Ep. 310. Gosp. 162. Friday Imber in vvhitsu^ week, Gos. 149. Saturday Imber,
Ep. 393. Gosp. 147. TRINITY Sunday, Ep. 411. Gosp. 85. The 1 Sunday after
Pentecost, Ep. 683. Gosp* 153. CORPUS CHRIST 1 day, Ep. 449. Gosp. 235. The 2
Sunday after Pentecost, Ep. 681. Gosp. 181. The 3 Sunday, Ep. 664. Gosp. 182.
The 4 Sunday, Ep. 400. Gosp. 148. The 5 Sund. Ep. 660*s v. 8. unto 15. Gosp.
12* The 6 Sunday, Ep. 395. Gosp. 107. The 7 Sunday, Ep. 396. Gosp. 18. The 8
Sunday, Ep. 400. Gosp. 185. The 9 Sunday, Ep. 445. Gosp. 194. verse. 41 unto 47.
The 10 Sunday Ep. 454. Gosp. 190. The 11 Sunday, Ep. 464. Gosp. 106. The 12
Sunday, Ep. 476. Gosp. 167.
The 13 Sunday, Ep. 503. gosp. 188. The 14 Sunday, Ep. 509. gosp. 15. The 15
Sunday, Ep. 509. gosp. 556. The 16 Sunday, Ep. 517. gosp. 180. The 17 Sunday,
Ep. 115. gosp. 63. Vvenesday Imber in September, Gosp* 110. Friday Imber in
September, Gosp. 157. Saturday Imber in September, Ep. 621. Gosp. 178. The 18
Sunday after Pentecost, Ep. 425. v. 4 unto the 9. gosp. 22. The 19 sunday, Ep.
519. verse. 23 unto the 29. gosp. 62. The 20 sunday, Ep. 521. gosp. 227. The 21
sunday Ep. 524. gosp. 52. The 22 sunday, Ep. 526, Gosp. 62. verse. 15 to the 22.
The 23 sunday, Ep 531. gosp. 23. The 24 sunday after Pentecost. Ep. 536. Gosp.
68.
For Saints and Festiual days, peculiar and proper.
S. Andrews Eve, Gosp. 217. S. Andrews day, Ep. 408. Gosp. 10. S. Nicolas,
Ep. 636. v. 7 to the 18. Gosp. 72. v. 14 to the 24. The CONCEPTION of our
Lady, Gosp. 3. S. Thomas the Apost. Ep. 516. Gosp. 275. In Cathedra S. Petri
Romae, Ep 655. gosp. 44. The Conversion of S. Paul, Ep. 315. Gosp. 54.
CANDL^NAS day, Gosp. 140. S. Matthias, Ep. 290. Gosp. 29. The ANNVNCIATION of
our Lady, Gosp. 135. S. George, Ep. 588* v. 8 to the 11. and p. 591. v. 10 to
the 13. Gosp. 262. S* Mark, Gosp. 166. In maioribus Litaniis upon S. Marks
day, Ep. 651. Gosp 170. SS. Philip. and Jacob. Gosp. 259. HOLY ROOD^ day in
May, or the Invention of the holy Cross, Epist, 528. Gosp. 222. S. Barnabas
day, Ep. 322. Gosp. 262. S. John Baptists Eve, Gosp. 134. S. John Baptists Day
called Midsomer, Gosp. 137. SS. Peter's and Paul's eu^, Ep. 296. Go. 279. SS.
Peter and Paul's day, Ep. 324. gos. 44. The Co^memoration of S. Paul, Ep. 495.
Gosp. 26. The VISITATION of our Lady, gosp. 136. S. Marie Magdalene, Gosp. 157.
S. James, Ep. 432. gosp 57. S. Dominike, Ep. 592. gosp. 175. The
TRANSFIGVRATION of our Lord, Ep. 667. Gosp. 48. S. Laurence. Ep. 486. gosp.
254. Assumption eve, gosp. 171. ASSVMPTION of our Lady, Gosp. 168. S.
Bartholomew, Ep. 456. verse. 26 to the 30. Gosp. 152. S. Lewis king of France,
Gosp. 193. The Decoll. of S. John Bapt. Gosp, 101. The NATIVITIS of our Lady,
Gosp. 3. HOLY ROODE day in September, or the Exaltation of the holy CROSS, Ep.
528. Gosp. 255. S. Matthevves eve, Gosp. 149. S. Matthevves day, Gosp. 22.
Michelmas day, Ep. 698. Gosp. 50. S. Francis, Ep. 511, Gosp. 29. S. Dionysius
Areopagita, Ep. 343. Gosp. 152. as upon Alhalovves eve. S. Luke, Ep. 484. Gosp.
166. SS. Simon and Jude, Ep. 518. Gosp. 262. Alhalovves eve. Ep. 708. Gosp.
152. ALHALOVVES day, Ep. 712. Gosp. 11. Al-^oules day, Ep. 466. Gosp. 230. S.
Martin, Gosp. 171. verse 33 to the 37. S. Clement, Ep. 531. Gosp. 70. S.
Catharine, Gosp. 71. verse 1 to the 14. which is the Gospel for holy virgins.
For Saints generally and in common.
Apostles eve, gosp. 262. For a Martyr that is a Bishop, Ep. 469. and 642.
gosp. 181. and 45. For a Martyr that is no Bishop, Epistle as upon S. Georges
day. gosp. 62. For one Martyr, Ep. 641. 662. gosp. 254. and 262. For many
Martyrs, Ep. 393. 400. 481. 626. 632. 655. 713. 734. Gosp. 11. 29. 68. 152.
172. 199. 265. For a Co^fessor that is a Bishop, Ep. 608. 615. 636. Gosp. 70.
72. 123. 171. For a Confessor that is no Bishop, Ep. 432 and 531. Gosp. 175.
193. 254. For holy Abbots, Gosp. 54. For holy Virgins Martyrs, Gosp. 36. 71.
For holy Virgins not Martyrs, Ep. 438. 488. verse. 17, to the 3 of the chapter
following. Gosp. as for holy Virgins Martyrs. For other holy women not
Virgins. Gosp. 36. For holy Widow. Ep. 578. Gosp. as for holy women not
virgins. The DEDICATION of a Church, or CHVRCH HOLYDAY. Ep. 741. Gosp. 195.
IN votiue Masses, that is, such as are said according to men's devotion for
diverse peculiar causes.
Of the B. Trinity, Ep. 493. Gosp. 263. Of the holy Ghost, Ep. 311. Gosp. 260.
Of the Passion of our Lord, Gosp. 272. Of the holy Cross, Ep. 528. Gosp. 56.
Of our B. Lady, Ep. 598. Gosp. 135. 140. 171. 272. Of the holy Angels, Ep.
708. Gosp. 218. Of the blessed Apostles Peter and Paul, Ep. 301. Gosp. 54. For
any necessity, Gosp. 117. For remission of sins, Ep. 398. Gosp. 170. For
choosing of the Pope, Epist* 607. Gosp. 260. Upon the Popes creation and
coronation day, Ep. 655. Gosp. 44. Against schism, or for any necessity of
the Church, Ep. 518. Gosp. 266. Against the Paganes, Gosp. 170. In time of
war, Gosp. 68. For peace, Gosp. 275. verse. 19 to the 24. Against the plague,
Gosp. 147. as upon Saturday in whitsun week. For the sick, Ep. 651. Gosp. 20.
For Marriage, Ep. 521. Gosp. 53.
In Masses of Requiem.
Epist. 466. 550. 725. Gosp. 230. 234. 235. 251.
AN AMPLE AND PARTICVLAR TABLE DIRECTING THE READER TO AL CATHOLIC truths,
deduced out of the holy Scriptures, and impugned by the Adversaries.
A
ABSOLVTION of a Priest. The excellency of this power above the power of
Angels and Princes. 47. 277. What is to loose and bind. 47. Abstinence. See
Fasting. Adoration of God, Latria: and adoration of creatures, Dulia. page 11.
nu. 11. pa. 321. nu. 25. pa. 332. nu. 12. p. 633. nu. 21. Adoration of the
Arc, Crucifixe, Images, Relikes, and the like. page 633. nu. 21. of Angels,
Saints, and holy persons. page 706. 737 at large. 744 marg. S. John's adoring
of the Angel, explicated. 736. 737. What is, to adore in spirit and truth,
218. Reverence to holy persons, even to the kissing of their feet, 300.
Alleluia. 735 and 736 at large. Not to be translated. ibid. The song both of
the Chruch militant and triu^phant. ibid. 734 marg. A word of marvelous joy,
and so used in the Churches service, even in the primitive Church. 736. Sung in
our country at our first conversion. ib. Sung in all Christian Nations. ib. The
Protestants had rather say, Praise ye the Lord. ib. In translating six Psalms
they have lest it out nine times. ibidem. Alms redeem sins etc. pa. 143.
marg. 173. nu. 41. They procure us patrones in heaven,
page 186. nu. 9. release of pains after our death. 317 marg. increase grace.
486 marg. Great Almesmen happy. page 353. nu. 35. pa. 486. nu. 6. 174 marg.
317 marg. Alms and hospitality to Priests and other holy men. 28. 163. marg.
186. 485. 486. 487. 511. 534. 588. 637. to Catholic prisoners. 341 marg. 600
m. See, Works. The more able, the greater must our alms be. 121 marg. When
a man is bound to give alms. 681 marg. Altars. page 638. nu. 10. Altars
sanctified by the sacrifice of Christ's body.
page 67. Altar why called table sometime. pa. 638. Dedication or consecration
of altars with Saints Relikes. 711. Amen amen doubled, what it signifies.
pa. 244. nu. 34. Amen not to be translated and ib. 234 marg. 735. 736. Angels,
Protectors of men. page 52. nu. 10. page 326. nu. 15. 679. of countries, 701.
of Chruches, ibidem. The Protestants also hold this against the Puritanes. 679.
They help us. page 604. marg. 541. S. Paul's place of the religion of Angels
explicated. page 14. nu. 18. Praying to Angels. ibid. Peace from God and the
holy Angels. 700. Nine orders of Angels. page 514. nu. 21. S. Michael patron
of the Church. 721. fighting with the dragon. ibid. Anoiling. See E. Entrem^
V^cti^. Antichrist.
page 556. 557. 558. 718. 723 at large. why so called pa. 558. He shall be one
singular man. 556. nu. 3. p. 724. He shall come near the worlds end. 557. nu.
4. His reign three years and a half. p. 71. nu. 22. 29. 123 marg. 718 marg.
711 marg. 740. He shall abolish the Mass. p. 558. suffer no worship but of him
self only. p. 557. nu. 4. Al framing letters to expnesse his name, uncertain.
724. Heretics his forerunners, specially these of our days. pa. 556. 558. 722
marg. 723. 741. The apostasy of him and his from the Cath. Church. p. 556. His
persecution of the same. 720 marg. 721. 723. 741. His attempts to dravv from
the true faith. 721. Many Antichrists, 556. The Pope can not be Antichrist. p.
554 marg. pa. 557. p. 231 marg. 721 marg. 724. 740. The Protestants make S. Leo
and S. Gregory furtherers of Antichrist. pa. 557. They place Antichrist in the Sea of Rome in S. Paul's days. p. 557. 240 marg. Not to be with the Sea of
Rome, is to be with Antichrist. p. 323. 556. nu. 3. Apostles. their name,
dignity, authority.
page 154. nu. 13. p. 37. nu. 11. p. 53. nu. 18. p. 488. Their number of
Twelve mystical. p. 94. nu. 14. p. 290 marg. Some of them more principal
Apostles. p. 492. The acts of SS. Peter and Paul in two several tables. 374.
375. They left their vviues. p. 21. nu. 14. p. 55 marg. 191 marg. p. 148. nu.
38. So did S. Philip the Deacon. 354 marg. See Priests. They vowed poverty.
55. nu. 27. p. 481. They made the Creed. 376. Their Creed. ibidem. Their
learning, wisdoms, constancy, after they received the holy Ghost. 299. m.
Their honor and dread among the first Christians. 300 and 301 marg. The
Apostles precepts. 336 ma* 440. Apostolical traditions. See, Tradition. The
style of Apostolical salutation. 384. Heretics usurp it to seem Apostles.
ibid* To be saluted only of them gives grace * 421 marg. The Popes office is
called his Apostleship. pa. 520. The Apostles of diverse countries. 154. nu. 13.
Their glory in Heaven that convert souls. 471. 529. m. 548 m. S. Augustine
our Apostle. 432 marg.
B
BAbylon,
what it signifies. 725 marg. 728 and 729 marg. 730. 732. Baptism heals
the soul.
pa. 231. nu. 2. takes away sin. 357. marg. it justifies. page 395 marg. p.
397. nu. 3 and marg. Necessary to salvation except some cases. p. 89. 224. nu.
5. Baptism of infants necessary. p. 395. nu* 12. p. 440 nu. 14. The effects
thereof and of Confirmation differ page 313 nu. 17. Exorcismes and other
ceremonies of Baptism pa. 107. nu. 34 p. 314. nu. 38. page 661. nu. 21.
Ephetha. 107 Abrenuntio. 661. The character thereof pa. 471 nu. 22 Baptism
received of Heretics and Schismatikes p. 661. nu. 21. John's baptism inferior
to Christ's. pa. 8. nu. 11. p 87 marg. p. 89. nu. 8 p. 224 nu. 3^. p. 143 marg.
2^7 marg. 289 marg 347 marg The Protestants make them equal: and why. 8. nu.
11. Names given in baptism, and what manner of names. pa. 139. nu. 63.
Whether Christ him self baptized. 225 mar. Figures of Baptism. 231. 245 marg.
225 marg. 661. The sending of the holy Ghost on vvhitsunday, called baptism
289 marg. Beatitudes eight. page* 11. marg. Beza makes God author of sin. p.
17. 266. controuleth the Evangelists. pa. 139. 144 marg. 201. marg. 205. 314.
imagines according to his sansie corruptions of the Greek text. 27 See the
preface. He translateth for Christ's soul in hell his carcas in the grave. 296.
Bishops.
their spiritual power. p. 53. nu. 18 pa ^88. to punish Heretics. ibid.
Calvin confesses the said power ib. Their consistories 739. They must be
obeyed pa. 43 nu 9 pa. 322 marg. ^98. marg. (See CHVRCH.) honored and feared.
301 marg. their blessing. p. 27. p. 55. p. 616. They may deal in vvorldly
affairs, and when* page 177. 589. Superior to Priests and distinct in office.
166 marg. page 312. nu. 17. 332 marg page 528. page 596. though the names of
Bishop and Priest were at the first indifferently used. 352 marg. They only
can consecrate Bishops, Priests, etc pa. 596. nu. 5. p. 332 marg. Bishoping
why so called. page 314. Bishops visitations 335 marg. Many vvorthie Bishops
that can not preach. 582. Special virtues required in a Bishop. 703 Blessing
of creatures effectual and operative pa. 79.
233 marg. 109. 163 marg. 575 576. Blessing the table. page 575. Blessing a
preeminence of the better person. p. 5^5 616 Bishops and Priests belssing ibid
The fathers and mothers blessing pa 616. nu. 6. Blessing with the sign of the
Cross, pa. 213. 576. Christ blessed the children, 113 mar. and his Apostles.
275 marg.
C
CAluins blasphemy against the divinity of Christ. page 219 nu. ^ p. 250.
Against Christ's own merits page 529. 708. 605 marg. Against the saints in
heaven. pa. 187. that God is author of sin pa. 37. Concerning Christ's
suffering the pains of the damned and that he was abandoned of his father. 83
130 marg. Against remission of sins. 612 marg. 613* Caluinisme tends to the
abomination of desolation 124. Canonical hours pa. 320 page 296 marg. 55^
marg. They answer to the time of Christ's Pas^^ion and agonies page* 76 marg.
78. 80* 81* 82. 83. page 190 ma. See Prayer. Catholic. This name discerns
true believers from Heretics it is the surname of true Christians By this
name. Heretics them selves understand them of the Roman faith. pa. 324. S.
Augustines high estimation of this name* ibid. The Protestants mock at this
name page 324. So did the Donatistes. ibid. Some leave it out in the Creed,
page 324. Some in the titles of the Catholic Epistles. page 641. The Catholic
Epistles why so called. ib. and 377. Catholic terms and speeches 584. 585.
588. To have Catholic parents is a great blessing 587. Catholic Church. See
Church. Catholic faith. See faith. The Catholic faith is taken from countries
for sin. 703 The Catholic simple man is sufficiently learned. 169. 177. 680.
Catholic men's obedience to their Pastors 322 m. to Councels. 339 Catholic
assemblies to Gods service in time of persecution. See persecution. Censures of
the Church. See Ecclesiastical. Ceremonies used in the Church by Christ's
example.
pa. 247. External elements in the Sacraments pa. 506. S. Augustines estimation
of the Catho. Churches ceremonies. page 506. he is falsely alleged against
them. ibid. They are not burdenous, but svveete and to edification. p. 506.
They are neither Heathenish nor Iudacial. page 506. 507. The Apostles borovved
some ceremonios of the Jews law. 677. nu. 14. Charity the greatest virtue,
and more principal in our justification then faith. 457. See Justification. How
faith works by charity. 510. Chaste or single life, Angelical. pa. 64 more
apt for the service of God. page 142. nu. 38. pa. 439. nu. 5. page 440. nu. 32.
See Priests. Holy Orders. Monastical life. It is not impossible. page 55. nu.
11. pa. 439. nu. 7. The Protestants complain they have not the gift. pa. 439.
nu. 7. page 571. 597. Al may that vvil. page 55. nu. 11. p. 439. nu. 7.
Chastity of mind also is required. 656 mar. The Chastity of Virgins,
Widow, married folk, differ in merit and dignity. page 37. nu. 8. CHRIST
a Priest as he is man. See Priest. his descending into Hell. See Hell. He is the
only Mediator. See Saints. How he makes now intercession for us. 615. marg.
Following of Christ diuersely. 151. 163 m and 165. Christ and Messiah and
Anointed, al one. 218 marg. His marvelous grace in preaching. 147. m. The name
of CHRISTIANS. p. 323. 324. True Christian liberty. See Gospel. CHVRCH the
Spouse of Christ, her other titles and prerogatives page 572. Christ's exceeding
love and benefits tovvard her. page 522. The marvelous union between them.
455 m. She was builded of Christ's side. 273. gathered of al nations page 85.
Vpholden by his continual protection. 39. 40 m. 703. Catholic or universal. 69
marg. page 213. page 324. 572. 96. marg. 212 marg. 679. 382. marg. 536. marg.
The principal creature. page 522. What this article signifies, I believe the
Catholic Church. page 572. 227 marg. It is more blindness not to see the
Church, then not to believe in Christ. pa. 477. Heretics blinder then the
Jews. ib. The unity thereof. page 456. 501. nu. 9. pa. 519. 447. nu. 17.
Christ prayed for the unity thereof. 266. ma. His coat without seame a figure
thereof. 272. marg. often commended. 658 marg. 419. marg. See Schism. The
Protestants at the first avoided the name of Church, and thrust it out of the
Bible. page 521. 522 marg. It can never fail not err. page 11. nu. 23. page
70. 85. 192. 238. nu. 68. page 261. 264 marg. 266. 267. 522. 523. 555. 572.
573* 721. 740. 303. m. 536. marg. The Protestants blasphemy concerning the
Churches apostasy and revolt from God. page 555. nu. 3. Christ without his
Church as the head without a body. 514. marg. Alvvaies visible, page 14. 290
marg. 295 marg. 296. 298 marg. 323. 555. 556. 572. 573. 701. Elias words make
nothing to the contrary, page 411. The state thereof in Antichrists time. 721.
Small in the beginning and growing great afterward. page 38. nu. 32. pa. 71,
nu. 14. page 97. nu. 27. 31. 32. page 150. nu. 6. 7. 10. p. 213. nu. 46. page
175 marg. 178 marg. 295 marg. 296. 298 marg. 316. ma. 536. marg. Her laws,
customs, and Governors must be obeyed. p. 43. nu. 9. p. 51. marg. p. 53. 336.
marg. 337. nu. 20. 450. nu. 2. 16. p. 471. nu. 24. p. 480. 550. 562. nu. 14. p.
639. 262. marg, She only has the true sense of Scriptures. page 477. 429.
marg. She judges al, and is judged of none. p. 429. She judges between
canonical Scriptures and not canonical. p. 499. which are Sacraments, which
not. 258. 259. She consists of good and bad. p. 9. nu. 12. p. 37. marg 38. 62
marg. 64. 74. 262 marg. not without vvrinkle in this life. p. 522. nu. 35. The
seuenfold candlestick in the Apocalypse. 699 marg. The woman clothed with the
sun, whom the dragon persecuteth. 720 marg. The wife of the Lamb. 734. The
camp of Saints. 741. The true Church is proved by succession. page 228. 520.
303 m. Christ left many things to be taught by the Church. 265. 717 marg. The
custom of the Church is a good answer against al wranglers 450. Out of the
Church no salvation. p. 522. 676. p. 573. al blindness and lack of
understanding. 95 marg. no prayer auailable. 262 m. Christ head of the Church
in a most excellent sort. 514. 515. The B. of Rome the ministerial head. 515.
No temporal prince can be head 47. 64. 639. nu. 17. pa. 659. No woman. 280.
463. The Church, that is, the Prelates and chief Pastors of the Church. 51
marg. 701 m. To contemn their words, is to contemn Christ. 262 marg. The
Churches order of divine service in reading the Scriptures, and that it is
according to the primitive Church. 268. in 288. 289 m. 382. 641. 698. See the
table of Epistles and Gospels at the end of the book. Church milita^t
resembles the triumphant in heaven 707 m. and nu. 8. 736. The triumphant
Church (called the new city of Jerusalem) and the state and glory thereof.
741. 742. 743. 635 marg. Material churches. The building of them pa. 158.
Dedication of churches, 250. Cost in adorning them p. 78. nu. 8. 10. p. 106 nu.
11. p. 128. 256. God will be honored in them rather then else where p. 309. 471.
nu. 11. p. 254 marg. How he dwells not in material temples. 309. 343 marg.
Not to be profaned. p. 59 m. 118. 222. Our parents, and other necessities of
poor men are sometime to be preferred before the adorning of Churches. 106.
92. nu. 25. Clergy. The name. p. 665. their difference from the Laity. ib.
nu. 3. The manner and dignity of their calling. p. 330. nu. 4. p. 352 marg.
Degrees of superiority among them selves and over other. p. 57 marg. 58. nu.
28. p. 206. nu. 24. p. 472. 492. 665. Their good life much edifieth. p. 14. nu.
17. their exemption and privileges. p. 50. 416. They may not exercise holy
functions for filthy lucre. 664 marg. Commandments,
possible to be kept. p. 30. 138. nu. 6. p 169. 260 marg. 682 nu 22 p. 686. 400
marg 415 marg. Keeping the commandments profitable, and necessary to
salvation. 14. nu. 20. p. 440. nu. 19. p. 645. 54 marg. 114 marg 191. m. 725 m.
They differ from Counsels. 114 marg. 191 marg. By keeping of them man is
justified. 138. 400 marg. Commandments of men, what they are, and that they
make nothing against the Apostles and Churches traditions. 406. See Tradition.
Heretical laws and doctrines are commandments of men. 43. nu. 9. p. 106.
Communion. The protestants Communion. p. 451. 452. 453. 454. They imitate not
in the same, Christ's institution. ib. p. 451. much less the Apostles
traditions. p. 454. Coming to the Communion against our conscience 442. They
call it improperly the Communion. p. 452. and the supper of the Lord. p. 451.
nu. 20. Their communion bread profane. p. 453 n 29. Caluins bread 228. It is
the very table and cup of Devils p 448. and is accordingly to be abhorred.
ibid. Community of life and goods in the first Christians, used now of the
religious only. p. 296. not a commandment, but a counsel only. ibidem.
Concupiscence after Baptism is of it self no sin without consent.
p. 397. 399. 643. 682. It moves to sin. 642. mar. How the Apostle calls
it sin. page 397. It makes not all the actions of a just man, sins. p. 399.
nu. 25. Confession in particular.
p. 8. nu. 6. p. 89. 276. 348 m. Secret or auricular confession. p. 277. to a
priest. 190. 277. 653. of al mortal sins. 653. before the receiving of the B.
Sacrament. 453. The English Ministers hear confessions. and absolve, against
their own doctrine. page 277. See Penance. Confessing of Christ, and his
religion, highly esteemed. 27. 702. m. See Faith. They that dare not confess
and profess the Cath. religion, to whom they are like. 255 marg. To deny that
thou art a Catholic, is to deny Christ. 269. Confirmation other wise called
Bishoping.
page 314. It is a Sacrament. page 313. The grace and effect thereof. 241 m.
313. nu. 17. p. 514 marg. The old and new heresies against this Sacrament. page
313. Chrisme or holy oil in confirmation. ib. Conscience. Doing against our
conscience. p. 83. 109. 131. nu. 15. Horror of conscience for sheding innocent
blood. 83. 131. nu. 15. Continency. See Chastity. Examples of notable persons
that lived continently from vviues, 596. The continency of married folk for
prayer sake. page 439. for the more worthy receiving of the B. Sacrament. p.
463. Perpetual co^tinencie of man ad wife. p. 439. 440. Contrition. 483. See,
Penance. Corporals for the B. Sacrament. p. 84. Councels. of what persons they
consist. p. 336. They represe^t the whole Church. ibid. Peter and his
successors preside^ts in Councels. p. 337. Councels of no force with out their
confirmation. p. 337. Controversies in religion to be decided by Councils. p.
336. They have the assistance of the holy Ghost. p. 337. 338. 138. nu. 3. 263.
nu. 27. p. 265. 266. 388 marg. of Christ. 51 marg. 53. This assistance takes
not away due examination of matters and disputation. page 138. nu. 3. p. 338.
Al good Christians rest upon their determination. p. 339. How the ancient
fathers esteem of general Councels. p. 338. The decrees of Councils are
diligently to be put in execution. 336. and 339 marg. Heretics only blaspheme
them, and vvil not be tried by them. page 336. nu. 1. 338. 339. How later
Councels alter the former. p. 337. nu. 13. 20. Heretical or Schismatical
synodes p. 53. nu. 20. 339. Counsels Euangelical. Things not commanded as
necessary, but counseiled as the better. p. 55. nu. 14. 21. p. 296. nu. 44. p.
440. tending to perfection, followed by religious men. p. 55. 114 m. See
Works of supererogation. Religious. CROSS.
The honor of the holy Cross. p. 273. 622. Called the sign of the son of
man. p. 69 m. The sign of the Cross in blessing. p. 213. 576. In Sacraments,
and other halovved creatures, ibid, Why in our forehead. 213. 712 marg. 511
marg. The Crucifixe or Roode with Marie and John. pa. 337. The virtue of the
sign of the Cross. 112. nu. 38. p. 577. The appearing thereof at the later
day, shall no less confound the Caluinistes then the Jews, page 69 marg.
D
Days, distinction of days. 418. one day more sanctified then an other. See
Feasts and Festiuities. The week days called feriae, not by their prosane
names. 210. and 211 marg. 701. Deacons. The election of the 7 Deacons. 304.
305. their office. ibid. See Orders. Devotion. uttered by external signs. 23.
marg. 93 m. 198. 195. 219. nu. 14. page 530. 652. 116. marg. See Pilgrimage.
God is served and adored in spirit, notvvithstanding external devotion. 384,
228. Devotion falsely of the Protestants called superstition. 343. marg. 344.
Devotion tovvard Relikes and holy things, a token of greater faith. 23. marg.
384. Holy vvomens devotion. 132. 162. Marie Magdelens devotion. 253. marg.
Zachaeus devotion tovvard Christ, 193. 195. Devotion to see and to be near to
the B. Sacrament. 195. Kneeling at Verbum caro factum est, and, Et homofactus
est. etc. 216. 219. Doctors of the Church. page 232. nu. 34. We must have
regard to their doctrine. page 636. marg. 638. S. Augustines estimation of the
holy Doctors, page 638. nu. 7. Their aureola or crown in heaven. page 534.
nu. 1. page 665. The Heretics contempt of them. 490. See Heretics. Dulia. See
Adoration.
E
ECclesiastical censures, page 47. 433. nu. 21. page 434. See Excommunication.
Ecclesiastical power and jurisdiction. page 47. 222. 488. 493 marg. See Bishop.
Clergy. Elias yet alive and shall be the precursor of Christ's second coming.
page 30. 50. 112. 719. Enoch also yet lives. 630. and shall preach in
Antichrists time with Elias. 719. Eremites why so called. page 8. their
profession and life. ib commended by the example of Elias, S. John Baptist, and
Christ him self, page 8. 112. 10. 30. 40. 90. 137 marg. 200 marg. Innumerable
Eremites and Monks in the primitive Church. page 40. See Monks and Monastical
life. Excommunication, a spiritual punishment. page 434. nu. 5. page 473. most
terrible page 53. 247. nu. 22. page 303. 434. 566. When and where to be
executed. pa. 488. Excommunicate persons to be avoided. page 435. 562. The
Heretics use a certain ridiculous excommunication. page 247. Extreme unction,
a Sacrament. 506. 652. The preparatiue to this Sacrament. 101. marg.
F
FAith. See Justification, works. Faith only does not justify.
page 19. 25. nu. 28. 54. marg. 64. nu. 11. 40. page 42 m 67. 74. nu. 1. 42.
pa. 67. 88. marg. 118. and 119 marg. 120 marg. page 132. 138. nu. 6. page 397.
504. 611. nu. 9. pa. 633. 157 marg. 178 ma. 230 marg. 243. 663. 679. 681 marg.
682. 703 marg. 725. ma. 319 marg. 341. marg. 362. marg. 158. 169. nu. 28. page
263. 385. 388. nu. 26. page 456. marg. 457 marg. 483. marg. 517. and 524 marg.
551 marg. 564. marg. S. Augustines whole book de fide and operibus, against
only faith. 646. Only faith an old heresy. page 314. nu. 18. page 379. 646.
654. S. James calls such Heretics, vain men, and compares the^ to devils.
645. m. S. Paul's doctrine concerning faith and good works. 378. He often
joins faith and charity. 587 marg. 600 marg. His words of faith,
misconstrued by old Heretics and new. page 379. 389. 390. other Scriptures
falsely alleged for faith only. 100. 188 marg. The Protestants special faith
or vain security of salvation. page 403. 444. 445 marg. p. 632. page 393. nu.
24. p. 173 marg. 663. 684. 410 marg. 531. marg. See Salvation. The 7 Catholic
Epistles written against the heresy of only faith. page 379. 640. 646. 674.
Why faith is so often named in the case of justification. 502. See
Justification. In what sense some fathers say, Only faith, page 646. How it
is said, Believe only. page 100. 161. marg. What manner of faith does justify.
page 334. marg. 385. 393. 509. 632. nu. 1. 6. page 646. nu. 24. page 389 m. 502
m. Faith may be had and lost again, which the Protestants deny. 159. 410.
marg. 565. marg. 606. ma. So may grace and charity. 702. The Apostles analogy
or prescript rule of faith. page 413. 612. To hold fast the first received
says of our Apostles and fathers. p. 37. nu. 25. p. 397. 423. nu. 17. p* 492.
496. nu 8. p. 584. 587. 591 to. 678 m. 689. ma. and. nu. 5. 10. 464 marg. 489
m. 495 m. 502 m. 636 m. External profession of every point and article of
faith. p. 27. 28. nu. 37. pa. 109. nu. 35. 36. p. 176. 409. 630. nu. 34.
Neuters or indifferent men, of no faith. pa. 33. 706. One man's faith obtains
for an other. 22 marg. 150. nu. 20. The more devotion the greater faith. See
Devotion. To believe without sensible argument or reason, is a more blessed
thing. 275 marg. 382 marg. Fastes or Fasting.
An act of religion. p. 135 marg. 142. Meritorious. page 43. 466. A work of
justice. p. 15 marg. The force thereof. 111 marg. Prescript days of fasting.
43. 330. 507. Imber days. p. 25. nu. 38. p. 154. nu. 12. p. 330. Aerius the
Heretic. p. 330. Fasting from certain kinds of meats. p. 43. nu. 11. 18.
page 106. 135 marg. 330. nu. 3. p. 417. 418. 574. 575. 582. nu. 23. S. John
Baptist and the Nazarates. 135 marg. Scriptures grossly abused by the
protestants against the Churches fastes. p. 43. 106. 417. 418. 441. 442. 540.
541. 573. m. 574. marg. and nu. 3. p. 575. 596. m. Heretical fasting. p. 142.
nu. 37. pa. 541. 574. The Lent fast, and the origin thereof. page 10. 90, nu.
12. It is sin not to fast the lent. p. 10. It is an Apostolical tradition.
ibidem, and 145 marg. It is the imitation of our Saviors fasting. p. 10. By
keeping thereof, true Christians (says S. Aug.) are known from infidels.
ibid. The Doctors sermons of Lent fast. ib. Public fastes. 17. The Churches
fastes foresignified by Christ him self. 23 mar. S. John Baptists and his
Disciples fasting. 24. Fear. Many kinds of fear. 685. The iustent men do
fear. 685. See in F special faith. and the word. Salvation. Servile fear not
il, though not sufficient. 685. 362 marg. fear of hell profitable. 173 marg.
Feasts or festiual days.
page 7. nu. 16. page 250. nu. 22. p. 295. 335. 507. 638. 668. 700.
prefigurated by the Jews Feasts 239. marg. Scriptures grossly abused by the
Protestants against the Churches Festiuities and Holidaies, pa. 418. 507. 540.
Easter, vvhit-suntide. 295. 353. 467 marg. 507. 700. Sunday. 353. 467 marg.
507. 700. 250. 211 marg. called dies Dominica, because of our Lords
resurrctio^. 274 m. 700. 701. Greater grace given upon these solemn days.
701. Free vvil. page 32 marg. 47. 55. nu. 11. page 58. nu. 16. page 72. marg.
74. nu. 34. page 142. 169. nu. 30. page 219. 236. 370. 387. nu. page 399. nu.
15. 19. page 406. 407. nu. 21. page 409. 466. 477. 482. 530. 568. nu. 4. page
590. 650. nu. 8. 179 marg. 704. 706 marg. 509 marg. 589 marg. Man's free vvil
works with Gods grace. 477. 464 marg. 680 marg. 329 ma. 466. 519 m. 649 m.
650. God and his grace force no man. page 58. nu. 16. page 236. nu. 44. 400
marg. Gods grace makes man's vvil more free. 243 marg. 706 m. Predestination,
reprobation, concupiscence, take not away free vvil. page 370. 399. 406. 407.
329 marg. 404 marg. 509 marg. The Jews blindness and reprobation was through
their own free vvil. 179 marg. 255 marg. 329. marg. 372 marg. 405 marg. So
was their betraying and crucifying of Christ, and Judas treason. 296. the
refusing of the Gospel when it is preached. 408. marg.
G
GOD, not author of sin. page 17. 36 marg. 37. 97. 142. nu. 34. page 296. nu.
23. page 385. 387. nu. 4. page 390. 406. 412. 643. 188 marg. 255 ma. 704. 730
marg. 404 marg. 642 marg. See Reprobation. Free vvil. The meaning of those
places that sound as though God were author of sin. 37. 97. 255 marg. 296.
730 marg. 308 marg. 390. 554 marg. How the death of Christ was by Gods
determination. 296. 300. marg. Gospel. It is not only the written word. page
109. nu. 35. page 384. 486. 549 m. See Tradition. The preeminence of the new
Testament. 477. 615. 618. 620. 623. The true liberty of the Gospel. 477. 508.
510. 566. nu. 9. page 643. 659. nu. 16. page 396 and 398. m. He suffers for
the Gospel, that suffers for any article of the Catholic faith. 109. Grace.
See Free vvil. God offers his grace, and man may refuse it. 706. 408 m. 519.
m. 635 m. To consent thereunto is also by grace. ib. 589. mar. The valor of
merits proceeds of Gods grace. See Merits. A man may fall from grace once
had. 702. Grace or gifts called gratis data, 455 marg. The Greek text
corrupted. c* 84. See the Preface.
H
HAlovving or sanctifying of creatures. page 576. The force of the same. 577.
holy places. page 49. 309. 667 marg. See Pilgrimage. Church. The holy land.
page 50. 309. 577. the holy Mount. 667 marg. holy bread. pa. 576. holy water.
page 576. Holidaies. See Feasts. Holy things not to be profaned. See
Sacrilege. Hell, taken sometime for Limbus Patrum. 296. Christ in soul
descended into Hell. 187. 296. 518 marg. 661. to deliver thence the fathers and
just men of the old Testament. 187. The Caluinists deny this article. 83. 661.
S. Augustine calls them Infidels that deny it. 661. 294 marg. Their heretical
translation for that purpose. 296. Fear of Hell profitable. 173 marg. 362 marg.
Henoch. See Enoch Heretics. Who is an Heretic. page 599. Marks to knov
the^. p. 19. 353. 566. 591. 684. Going out of the Cath. Church. page 337. 519.
520. 574. nu. 1. page 599. 189 marg. 678 marg. 679. 675. Diverse names of Sects
and Sectaries. 323. 648. Nicolaites a pattern of them. 704. Running not sent.
61. 154. nu. 13. page 250. 330. nu. 2. page 409. 496. nu. 1. page 609. nu. 4.
248 marg. 489 marg. Their dissension. page 31. 32. marg. 67. 94. 339. nu. 37.
page 532. Preaching otherwise and contrary to the faith received. 455 marg.
496. 497. 565. 582 marg. Hypocrisy and svveete words. 70. 154. nu. 26. page
384. nu. 7. page 490. 591. nu. 6. 9. p. 593. 669 marg. 716. 421 marg. 489.
marg. Vanity in preaching, and vain glory. 154. Preaching licentiousnes and
liberty. 669 marg. 670 marg. 704. Meretricious and painted eloquence. 582. nu.
17. p. 539 m. Teaching new doctrine. 565. 689. 636 marg. New terms and
speeches. 584. 585. Vaunting great knowledge specially of the Scriptures. 154.
232. 488. nu. 4. page 566. 585. Their ignorance. ib. and page 121. nu. 24. page
670 marg. 695. Boasting of the spirit. 684. Contempt of Councels and fathers.
page 338. 339. 499. 585. nu. 20. page 625. Corrupting of Scriptures. 475. 478.
Denying the books of Scriptures and Doctors. page 645. nu. 14. page 345. nu
34. Controuling of the very text of Scripture, and the sacred vvriters thereof.
pa. 139. 205. 314. nu. 27. page 144 marg. Their foul shifts and wrangling to
avoid the evidence of Scriptures. 219. 277. 672. 580. 581. 613. nu. 10. page
687. 313. Slaundering the Church. page 237. nu. 53. Hatred of the Sea of Rome.
423. Acknowledging no judge of controversies. p. 472. 499. Despising of Rulers,
specially Ecclesiastical. 693 and 694 marg. Lack of faith. 261. 492. 319 mar.
Mutabilitie in faith and inconstancy, page 471. 591. nu. 13. Voluptuousnes.
page 423. 693 marg. Several and secret conuenticles. page 71. 96 m. 213. 189 m.
695. Synodes. 53 nu. 20. page 339. Their Clergy or Ecclesiastical orders. p.
571. How Heresies profit the Church. 450. 680. Their many faithes. 520. many
analogies and rules of faith. 414. Their doctrine, fables. 565. They come to
naught, though supported a while by never so mighty Princes. 303 mar. Their
marks agree to the Protestants. 599. They may be forced to the Cath. faith. p.
182. They may be punished by death. p. 166. nu. 53. 731. nu. 6. p. 364 m. 626
m. To avoid their books, sermons service. 94. 599. Not to marie with them.
481. mar. Not to communicate with them. 598. marg. 599. 689. 690. The examples
of S. John, S. Polycarpe and other Apostolic men. 690. It is to dony Christ.
27. nu. 32. It is damnable. 704. When and wherein it is tolerable to converse
with them. 689. Their books to be burnt. page 350. They are judged already.
224. Who are easily seduced by them. 716. Vvome^. 591. Women great promotours
of heresy. 568. Zeal against Heretics 497. 690. 703. 704. Arch-heretikes
signified by the star that sell from heaven. 715. m. Simo^ Magus the father of
them al. p. 314. nu. 18. Their king, Abaddon. that is, destroier, 715. They are
resembled to Cain, Balaam, Core. 695. 704. to the Devil him self. 244 marg. Al,
the foreru^ners of Antichrist. p. 123. 124. 240 marg. 556. 558. 679. 741.
Falseprophets, false christ's, lying masters, foretold in the new Testament.
119 marg. 68 and 69 and 669 marg. Many masters. 648. Many antichrists. 679,
nu. 18. Ravening wolves. 19. 353. Thieves not entering by the door. 248 m.
250. Prophesied of, and lively described by S. Paul, S. Peter, S. Jude, etc.
352. 573. 574. 669. 670. 672. 693. locustes. 715. The causes that men fall to
heresy. 565. mar. 583. Heaven, shut until the Passion of Christ. p. 9. nu. 16.
p. 621. marg. p. 633. See Limbus patrum. Differences of rewards and glory in
heaven. p. 37. 58. 430. 465. marg. 534. nu. 1. 259. marg. See Merits, Works,
Revvard. Hospitality toward the afflicted for religion. 27 marg. 28. nu. 41.
505 marg. See Alms. What a heinous sault it is, not to receive and harbor
Catholic Preachers and Priests. 163. marg.
I
JESUS, in English, Savior. 4 marg. This name is to be adored and reverenced.
530. It works miracles. 112. 299* marg. The force thereof against Devils.
ibid. and 577. Answers to the sophistical arguments used by heretics against
the reverence done to this name. 530. By irreuerence thereunto, they prepare
the way to Antichrist. 723. Idols in all the Bible, signify the false Gods of
the Pagans. 687, 383 mar. The Caluinistes applying the word against sacred
Images, are condemned long since by the 2 Council of Nice. 687. See Images.
They are ashamed of their translating, image, for idol. ibid. Heresies are the
idols of the new Testament. page 448. Images.
345. 623. 687. 688. They have Gods own warrant. 623. 688. Their difference
from idols. 687. 688. How they are adored. 530. 633. Their antiquity. 24.
688. Their fruit and commodity. 345. 688. Images of the B. Trinity and of
Angels. 345. Imagebreakers old condemned Heretics by the 2 Nicene Council.
687. 688. They are accursed by the same Council, that apply the places of
Scripture that speak of the Pagans Idols, against sacred images. 687. Miracles
wrought by the image of Christ. p. 24. The abolishing of Christ's image, a
preparation to set up the image of Antichrist. 723. The honor of Christ's image
is the honor of Christ him self. 723. Indulgences. See Pardons. Justification,
or to be justified, what it signifies. 387. nu. 13. The first and second
justification. 387. The first justification, of mere grace without works.
392. 409. 412. nu. 32. 516. 389. marg. Justification by works, page 16. 138.
387. page 645. 646. 647. 682. 736. Not by faith only. See faith. What works
justify not. page 390. nu. 20. 28. p. 392. 411. 632. nu. 6. 633. 499. marg.
Justification attributed to hope, charity, etc. 402. 633. nu. 33. Charity the
principal virtue in justification. 509. 566. How the Protestants admit
charity and good works to justification. 509. Why it is so often attributed
to says. 394. 632. 502* marg. 606. marg. S. Paul's meaning when he commends
faith. 633. The justice of faith. 408. True inherent justice, not imputative.
14. 138. 139. 387. 390. 394. marg. 395. nu. 5. page 427. nu. 30. page 511. 513*
marg. 517. mar. 519. mar. 524* marg. 543. 682. 398 marg. How it is said, None
just. 390. How it is said, Reputed to justice. 391* marg. Increase of justice.
744 marg. 396 marg. 550 marg. How it is called Gods justice. 383 marg. 390 nu.
22. page 480. 481. 531. How Christ is our justice. 427. The Protestants avoid
the word, Iustifications. 138. nu. 6. p. 736. nu. 8. The justice of Moses
Law, what, 408 marg.
L
Our B. LADY without sin. 94. 395. 676.
Her perpetual virginity. 4. 5. nu. 25. She vowed virginity. 138. Her life,
death, Assumption. page 291. Her blessedness. 171 marg. Her festiuities. 291.
Her excellency, titles, prerogatives. 138. 139. 173. 221. 273. 291. 292. 171*
marg. Her honor. 139. 291. 292. She is our Advocate. 292. 679. our hope. 292.
548. marg. The meaning of the terms and titles given unto her. 292. God and
our Lady save us. 337. The often saying of the Aue Marie. 138. The ancient
fathers used the same. 291. 292. Holy Simeon prophesied of her sorrows. 145.
She was alvvaies partaker of sorrows with Christ. ibidem. 272 marg. full of
deep contemplations. 142. The meaning of Christ's speeches unto her that may
seem hard. 221. nu. 4. and 5. The Protestants keep no Holiday of her. 191.
They keep not the day of her death, as they do of all other chief Saints in
the new Church of England. ibidem. They are not of those generations that she
prophesied should call her blessed. 136 marg. They derogate from her honor.
138. 295. Lay men must not judge of their Pastors, of the sense of Scriptures,
of questions in religion. page 344. They must receive the Sacraments etc. not
at their own hand, but of their Clergy and Pastors. 40. nu. 19. 42. marg. See
Priests. Clergy. Limbus patrum,
or Abraham's bosom. 186. marg. 187. 296. 633. 708 marg. 621. mar. A third
place. 162. 708 marg. The just men of the old Testament were not in heaven til
Christ's Ascension. 186. Christ descended into Hell, to deliver them. 187. See
Hell Heaven.
M
MAchabees Canonical Scripture, 138. See p. 250. MARIE See our B. Lady. L.
Marriage a Sacrament. 55. nu. 6. p. 187. nu. 18. p. 221. nu. 2. p. 523.
Indissoluble, both parties living. 14. 55. 113 marg. 116. 187. 221. 397. marg.
440. and not lawful after divorce. ibidem. Honored by Christ's presence. p.
221. Perfect and best without carnal copulation. 4. nu. 16. See Chastity.
Continency. How it is honorable in all. 637. Inferior to virginity and widow
hod. 4. 438. marg. 439 marg. 440. See Chastity. Marriage of Priests and
votaries unlawful. See Priests Vovv. Old heresies against Marriage. 574.
Catholics falsely charged with the same. 574. 575. They esteem of marriage
more then the Protestants. 523. Martyrs, true and false p 13. p 457. No true
Martyrdom out of the Cathol. Church. p. 457. Martyrdom a most acceptable
sacrifice. 592. Their reward, and glory. 702 and 713 marg. How they cry for
revenge. 712. Their chereful and constant countenance before the persecutors.
305 marg. Their comfort at the very time of death and torments. 309 marg.
MASS.
See Sacrifice. The word Mass. 447. The Liturgy or Mass of the Apostles.
330. of the Greek fathers. ibidem. It is agreeable to Christ's institution. 451.
452. 453. to the Apostles tradition, 454. to S. Paul concerning the prayers and
petitions therein. 567. Kyrie eleison. 463. Gloria in excelsis. page 140 inner
marg. Sanctus thrice repeated. 707 and 708. Hosanna. 61. Sursum corda. 463. The
Canon. 267. The Pater noster. 567. Agnus Dei. 217 inner marg. 453 nu. 29.
Kissing the Pax. 423. Domine no^ sum dignus. 21. 453. nu. 29. Communio. 452.
How Antichrist and his Ministers shall abolish the Mass. 71. 124. nu. 14. page
558. Mediator.
See Saints. How Christ is the only mediator. 568. Merit and Meritorious.
72 marg. It has corresponde^ce and relation to merces, hire, or revvard. 13.
16. 112 marg. 430. 719 mar. 744 marg. 543 marg. Both the meaning and word are
in the scriptures. 197 m. 198. 430. 639 m. 537 m. 705 m. 553 m. Vvhe^ce the
merit of works rises. 72 marg. 402. 411. 430. 594. 470. Difference of
merits. 58. 37. 486. 430. 193 m. We merit not our first justification. See
Justification. To be worthy, and to merit, is al one. 198. 197 m. 705. marg.
537 marg. 553 mar. The time of meriting is in this life only. 245 m. See
works. The Protestants avoid the word merit. 639. The Caluinists deny
Christ's own merits 529. 708 m. Miracles,
necessary to cofirme new doctrine. 27. nu. 1. p. 263. nu. 24. p. 298. nu. 82.
p. 492. nu. 12. True miracles only in the Cath. Church. 50. nu. 19. 20. p. 124.
nu. 22. When Heretics may work true miracles. p. 112. nu. 38. Forged or
lying miracles. 7^. nu. 84. p. 559. nu. 9. p. 722 marg. Miracles wrought by
application of creatures, by the name of JESUS, of the Apostles and other holy
men, by Saints and their relikes, S. Peter's shadovv, S. Paul's napkin. 112.
104. nu. 13 231. 261 298. 304. 312. 326. 350. 372. By touching Christ and
whatsoever belonged to him. 93 marg. 106. 108. Miracles in one place and at
one time more then in other. 147. 231. 456 marg. Peculiar to certain
countries. 370 m. 372. The Protestants as faithles to believe such miracles, as
the old Pagans. 261. They attribute them to the Devil as the heathen did. p. 24
in marg. They pretend Pharisaically Gods honor in derogating from the miracles
of Saints. 246 marg. The gift of miracles in the Church for edification. 132.
Christ's miracles significatiue. 247 m. Monks and Monastical life. Whether
they should work with their hands. 561. 562. They were shaven in the
primitive Church: and Nuns clipped of their hear, 562. See Exemites.
Religious.
N
NAmes of CHRISTIANS. 323. of the authors of sects. ibid. of the first
instituters of several religious orders. ibidem. Neuters. 33. 706. Novelties of
words and phrases. 584. not al new that are not in Scriptures, ibid. How they
are to be tried novelties of words. ibid. Numbers mystical. 94. 700. The
Protestants rashness in condemning numbers of prayers, fastes, Masses etc. 700.
O
ORiginal sin. See Sin. Orders.
The three holy orders bound to chastity. 571. Bigami excluded from holy
orders. 570. 579. 596. Al seven orders have been from the Apostles time. 572.
The institution and office of Deacons. 305. Holy orders is a Sacrament. 577.
instituted by Christ at his last supper. 204. 452. given by imposition of
hands. 330. 332. 577. 586 marg. by a Bishop not by the peoples voices. 332. It
gives grace. 586 marg. none to be admitted without good examination. 579
marg. Prayer and fasting at the time of giving holy Orders. 154. 332. marg. See
Imber days. Oaths that are unlawful, must not be kept. page 38 marg. 361.
P
PArdons or indulgences grounded upon Christ's own words. 474. upon his
example.
210. 474. upon his merits, and the mutual satisfaction of one for an other.
page 538. practiced by S. Paul. 473. 474. by the holy Bishops of the primitive
Church. 474. A pardon is only a remission of temporal punishment due for sin.
473. 474. 475. Why pardons more common now then in old time, ibid. to whom
this authority of pardoning pertains. 47. nu. 19. page 473. 474. 475. 538.
Al pardons are given in the virtue and name of Christ. 474. Parents. The duty
tovvard them. 142. 106. Carnal parents and friends in what cases less
esteemed. 159 marg. 176 mar. 181 marg. duty tovvard our spiritual parents. 600
marg. See Priests. Penance, is perfect repentance,
that is, not only amendeme^t of life, but implying also confession, sorrowful
contrition, and paineful satisfaction. page 8. 30. 167 marg. That the Greek
(...) and (...) signify this penance. p. ^. 30. 171 marg 177 marg. 716 marg.
492 m. S John Baptist first, then Christ, and his Apostles preached penance. 7.
8. 88 marg 143 marg. 295 marg. 352 marg. 366 marg. S. John Baptists penance. 8.
156 marg. Marie Magdalens penance. 157 marg. The great penance in the primitive
Church. 475. 492 marg. The old Canonical discipline. ib. S. Paul's chastening
of his body by penance. 444. Temporal pain remains due, when the sin is
remitted. 635. Satisfaction or works of Penance. page 8. nu. 8. 143 marg. 195.
314. 454. 473. 482. 630. 645. nu. ^3. 717 marg. They derogat nothing from
Christ's satisfaction, but are requisite because of the same. 402. 473. 538.
611. The body chastised by penance, is a grateful sacrifice to God. 413. The
Sacrament of Penance. handled at large. 276. The necessity thereof, as of
Baptism. page 277. it is secunda tabula post naufragium. 277. The contempt
thereof a sin against the holy Ghost. 33. nu. 31. The parts thereof,
Contrition, Confession, Satisfaction. 276. What is Contrition. 483. 294 marg.
Luthers heresy of Contrition. 483. It works salvation. ibidem. We are bound
to confess. 276. See Confession. Al sins may be remitted by this Sacrament.
613. 629. It is the old heresy of the Nouatians to deny that Confession to a
Priest is necessary, and his Absolution 276. 277. See Absolution. Priests.
Gods wonderful mercy toward penitent sinners. 183 marg. Penance before
Baptism. 295 marg. Perfection double: one in this life, an other in the life
to come. 532. The state of perfection. See Monastical life. Religious.
Permission of some things that are not allowed or approved. 116. Toleration of
the evil. 256. Persecution. Catholic men's comfort in persecution. 26 marg.
154. 163 m. 202 m. 663. nu. 17. page 702 m. 723. nu. 7. Their secret assembling
in persecution. 71. Their praise in whose houses such Assemblies are kept. 325
marg. 342 marg. 421 marg. There shall be great persecution of Catholic men
tovvard the end of the world. 122. and 199. marg. 727 marg. Constancy in
persecution necessary. ibidem. marg. 706. highly commended. 702. marg. 723. To
look back upon their losses, is dangerous, 166. To forsake al rather then the
Cathol. faith is necessary. 181 and 182 m. The better men most afflicted in
this life. 663. The Church persecuted by Heretics, and co^trariewise. 505 m.
Fleeing in time of persecution. 325 marg. wise euasions to escape dangers, by
S. Paul's example. 358. nu. 25. 359 mar. 341. nu. 37. page 364 marg. Not to
forsake our Pastors emprisoned. 529 marg. Happy Gailers that show mercy to
their Catho. prisoners. 341 marg. The courtesy of heathen officers in this
case. 359 m. To consent by any means to the persecution of such, is a great
offense. 357 marg. Persecution an occasion of much good. 310 marg. The Church
increased by persecution. 316 marg. Peter.
Cephas, Rock, al one. 218 marg. 44. 47. 216. Christ by giving him this name,
designed him before hand to be the rock and foundation of his Church. ibidem.
47. nu. 18. p. 79. nu. 75. He promises to build his Church upon him, that is,
his person, 46. 47. at large. He prays that his faith shall not fail. 206.
The Church was builded upon him, and he receives the Primacie. 279. 516. nu.
20. page 654. Upon him, not upon his faith only or confession. 45. 46. 47.
Peter's manifold dignity and preeminence, 27. 40. 50. 52. nu. 1. p. 94. 128.
131 m. 150. 154. 161 m. 206. nu. 31. 224 m. 497. 500. nu. 7. p. 278 m. 326.
442. m. S. Paul submits his doctrine to his approbation. 499. The keys
given to him, and what authority is signified by them. 47. His authority to
bind and loose. 47. He does practice his primacie. 292. 293. 303. marg. 337.
499. 501. nu. 9. page 654. His successors the Bishops of Rome have the same
primacie and authority. 45. nu. 17. p. 46. 47. 206. 280. 337. 499. 501. By the
Rock is signified not only Peter's person, but his Chair and See, the Church
of Rome. 46. 47. He breaks the Churches unity, that forsakes this See or
Chair. 501. 520. Christ is the Rock, foundation, and head of the Church on
way, Peter an other way. 46. 514. 515. 516. Peter's ship signifies the Church.
150. He governs and protecteth the Church continually. 304. 668. The
Protestants and Puritans disagree about his preeminence or primacie, 280 marg.
They denied it before, and now confess it. 280 marg. They derogate from Peter
as much as is possible. 501. Beza thinks the Greek text of the scripture
falsified in favor of Peter's primacie. 27. Their folish arguments against
Peter's primacie. 312. 421 m. 501. Their impudent assertion that he was never at
Rome. 422. 500. 665. For this purpose only, they deny that Babylon signifies
Rome. 665. Their wrangling about the time of his being there. 665. Their folish
and greatest reason against his being there. 421 marg. 422. He and S. Paul
planted the Church at Rome. 288. 500. 383 marg. 421 mar. 370. He wrote from
Rome. 665. He was crucified there, 280. A table of S. Peter's Acts 374.
Pilgrimage page 6. 311 marg.
to the holy land in the primitive Church. 49. to the holy Sepulcher. 85. to
the memories of Saints. 231. The devotion of Pilgrims and the manner of their
devotion in holy places. 158. nu. 44. page 85. See Relikes. Pope. The
succession of Popes,
is an argument used by the Fathers, against Heretics. 520. Popes 33 Martyrs.
page 654. and page 556. Their room and dignity called an Apostleship, 520.
Their supremacy. 280. 515. 572. The practice thereof by S. Leo the great. and
S. Gregory the great. 280. How they refused the name of universal Bishop.
280. The Council of Chalcedon called the Pope universal Bishop 280. They write
them selves, Seruos seruorum Dei. 280. He is the ministerial head of the Church
under Christ 515. S. Peter's successor. 280. 520. Not to communicate with him,
is to be against Christ or with Antichrist. 33. nu. 30. See Antichrist. The
Pope can not be Antichrist. 71. nu. 22. 29. page 231 marg. 554 marg. See
Antichrist. He may err personally, not iudicially. 206. 253. 266. nu. 13. page
388 m. p. 502. nu. 11. We may not respect the Popes person, but the privileges
of his office. 66. 67. 206. The privileges and dignities of his office. See
Roman Church, and Peter. Prayer. See Canonical hours. Long prayer not
forbidden. page 16. nu. 7. To pray always. 190 marg. The Churches collectes
breife. 16. nu. 7. Service and prayer in the Latin tongue, much better then in
the vulgar. 461. at large. S. Augustine our Apostle brought us the service in
the Latin tongue. 461. It was always in Latin through out the west Church.
463. Our people at their first conversion sang Alleluia, not, praise ye the
Lord. 463. Sursum corda. Kyrie eleison. ibidem. See Mass. The peoples private
prayers in Latin. 462. It is not necessary that they understand either
public or private prayers. 461. 463. They understand them not being in the
English tongue, neither are they any thing the more edified. 461. 463. Their
inte^tion and devotion is as great, and acceptable in the one, as in the other.
462. 463. 43. hu. 8. page 61. They are edified and take profit of the Priests
fu^ctions, though they neither hear nor see what he does 134. and 135 m. They
are taught the meaning of ceremonies and service, and do know them perfectly
in all Cath. countries. 461. 462. Latin prayers are and may be translated. 462.
S. Paul's place falsely alleged against the latin service or prayer,
explicated at large: and that he speaks of no such thing, much less against
it. 460. 461. 462. 493. An other objection answered, and what it is to pray
with the lips only. 43. number. 8. Faith in prayer. 643. What is to pray
without intermission. 382 marg. 551 marg. Our Lords prayer or the Pater
noster. 15. 170. It is the first and last in all the Churches prayers, and said
most often. The Aue Maria. See L. our B. Lady. Prayer for the dead. 361. 480.
687. The Saducees seem to have denied it 361. Aerius an old condemned Heretic
denied it. Other men's prayers and intercessions for us. 150. 420 marg. Praying
one for an other is of great force. 420 marg. 543. To pray for our persecutors.
209. nu. 34. Public prayers more auailable then private. page 471. The Priests
prayers more auailable. page 610. At the time of prayer specially, God sends
comfortable visitations. 319 marg. Preachers that preach well, must live
accordingly. 104 marg. 112 marg. 386. marg. Catholic preachers in time of
persecution, what is their comfort. 547. Predestination and reprobation
declared at large. page 406. 407. They consist with free vvil. 370. 403. 406.
407. The mystery of predestination and reprobatio^ is humbly to be reuere^ced,
not curiously searched. 402. 403. 407. nu. 20. 21. 412. No man must by occasion
thereof be reachlesse and desperate in neglecting his salvation. 403. 406. 359
marg. Good works must concur with Gods predestination. 668. What and how
far we may and should learn herein. 403. 412. Heretical and presumptuous
books of Predestination. 407. 412. Priest. The name in all languages almost the
same. 333. heretically changed into Elder. ibidem. The word Senior, Ancient,
in the vulgar Latin translation, is alvvaies in the Greek, Presbyter, Priest.
334 marg. 664. 351 marg. His office and vocation. 609. 610. His dignity. 609.
They are called Angels. 701. They are coadiutors with, and under Christ, and
work in his name 92. 190. 444. 474. 480. 482. 429 marg. Their authority to
remit sins. 21* 24. 53. nu. 18. p. 92. 151. 162 m 190. 276. 480. 252 marg.
The Protestants carpe at this authority, as the Jews did at Christ for the
same. 158 marg. They (and not lay men) are the dispensers of Christ's mysteries.
40. nu. 19. 42 marg. page 109. nu. 6. page 321. nu. 40. page 463. nu. 34. page
4^0. He that despises them, despises Christ. 167 ma. The honor of Priesthod.
67. 89 marg. 360. 578 m. Preeminence before other. 571. nu. 4 page 616. 566.
nu. 20. page 484 marg. Hospitality and alms tovvard them. 163. marg. 533
marg. See Alms. Hospitality. The Protestants make it an odious and reprochful
name. 67. nu. 13. page 130. They avoid the word in their English translations
of the new Testament. 333. Their perpetual continency requisite. 138. 570.
nu. 2. page 579. 580. 589. nu. 4. 596. 437 marg. 569 marg. Marriage of Priests
unlawful. 21. 570. at large. 575. contrary to the ancient Canons. 571. to
the Council of Nice. 570. None ever lawfully married after holy orders. 21. 570.
Paphnutius and the Nicene Council concerning this matter. 21. 570. Married men
being made Priests, must no more company with their vviues: and that
according to the example of the Apostles. 21. 290 marg. 444. nu. 5. according
to the custom of the primitive Church. 570. 571. The Church may annexe
perpetual chastity to holy orders. 580. nu. 4. in the marg. The forbidding of
such persons to marie, is no condemnation of Marriage. 575. Iouinians old
heresy could never induce any one Priest. to marie. 582. Vigilantius and his
followers much like to the Protestants in this point. 570. See Vovv. Priests
crowns. 665. Priests garments. 701. Priests some properly so called, some
improperly. 740. Al Christians are no more Priests, then they are also kings,
that is, improperly: 657 marg. 700. 709. Their spiritual hosts. 658. CHRIST'S
Priesthod and the excellency thereof. 609. 610. 615. 616. 617. 618. 131. A
Priest as he is man, not as he is God. 610. The Caluinists, either Arrians, or
ignorant, in auouching the contrary. ibid. His Priesthod eternal, and how.
131. 617. 618. 619. and nu. 3. in marg. He concurreth still in all priestly
actions, and is the principal worker. 619 marg. He is not the only Priest of
the new Testament. 609. 618. Many Priests of the new Testament properly and
peculiarly so called, and their Priesthod external, not only spiritual, 609.
616. 617. 618. 619. Princes, how and wherein to be obeyed. 64. 121. 197 marg.
415. 416. 658. 659. They may not usurp Ecclesiastical functions. 64. 403. 609.
nu. 1. page 639. They have no more right of supremacy in spiritual causes,
then Heathen Princes. 659. Christ and his Apostles charged with disobedience
to Princes. 658 nu. 13. Peter and John disobeied the Magistrates commanding
them not to preach in the name of JESUS. 299 marg. So must Catholic preachers.
ib. In things lavvful not to obey them, is a mortal sin. 415. Heretical
tumultes and disobedience against their Princes. 28. 488. Heresies against rule
and superiority. 416. 659. nu. 16. and 18. The obedience of Catholics in all
temporal causes. 416. The deadly sins of Princes and superiors exempt not the
subjects from their obedience, as the Vvi^^fistes teach. 659. Princes the^
selves must obey and be subject in matters of says and religion. 639. Al are
under Peter and his successors. 279. 280. 364 m. Their election and creation
far inferior to Gods institution of the spiritual Magistrate. 658. The
temporal Magistrate is called, an humane creature, and why. 658. nu. 13.
Praying for kings and Princes, namely in the Mass. 566. marg. 567. Procession
on Palme-Sunday. 61. Prosperity no sign of the true religion. 13. marg.
Protestants. See Heretics. Purgatory. 12. marg. page 34. 94. nu. 29.
page 121. nu. 24. page 187. 430. 431. 645. nu. 13. page 661. None not
perfectly cleansed, can enter into heaven. 743. marg. Purgatory fire passes
all the pains of this life. 431. The same is released by the prayers of the
living. 317. A third place. 162. 708 marg. The Scripture abused against
Purgatory, ansvvered. 726. See Prayer, Sacrifice for the dead.
R
REconciliation to the Cathol. Church. 14. nu. 24. p. 471. nu. 5. (...)
^chisme. Religion. Men of no religion, ^uters, Atheistes. 33. Most happy that
suffer any loss for religion. 114. m. 116. They that forsake their religion to
save their lands, are like Esau* 635. marg. See Persecution. Religious life.
561. Their profession is according to Christ's counsel, and the Apostles
example. 55. 151. 191 marg. 296. nu. 44. to the Saints of the primitive
Church. 410 marg. 296. Vigila^tius heresy against such as forsook al for
Christ, 420 marg. Diverse Religions, of Dominicans, Franciscans etc. are not
diverse Sects. 323. Their diverse rules and imitation of diverse holy men, is the
imitation of Christ him self, 531 marg. 547. Their living in common,
Apostolical. 296. Their rising in the night to pray. 79. nu. 41. Their
blessing. 55. The contemplative life preferred before the active by our Savior
him self, in the persons of Marie and Martha. 169. Both alvvaies in the Chruch.
ibid. See Monks and Monastical life. Eremities. Relikes.
The touching of Relikes, their virtue, miracles. 23 m. 24. 100. 133. 309. 312.
326. 350. 372. 577. 622. The touching of Christ's person or whatsoever belonged
to him. 93 m. The hemme of Christ's garment. 23 m. 24. 40 marg. 100. His
sepulcher. 85. 622. Mount Thabor and all the holy land. 49. 577 his holy Cross.
See Cross. S. Peter's shadow. 261. nu. 12 302. 304. his chains. 326. S. Paul's
napkins, or the napkins that had touched his body. 350. His chains. 61. nu.
12. 372. His blessing and virtue in the i will Malta. 372. His prison and other
memories there. 370 marg. The Relikes of S. John Baptist, Elias, Abdias. 40. S.
Steuens Relikes. 309. 312. S. Augustine of Relikes. 309. 312. S. Chrysostom.
261. 350. S. Hierom. 85. 133. 622. S. Gregory. 372. nu. 20. The greater virtue
of Relikes, the more is the honor of Christ. 261. 350. 246 marg. Saints
Relikes of greater force after their death. 350. Eliseus body. 4. Reg. 13.
Miraculous reseruatio^ of Relikes from putiefaction. 622. Relikes reserved in
the old Testament. 622. Vigila^tius heresy against Relikes, condemned of old,
and refuted by S. Hierom. 133. 350. nu. 12. The devotion of the old Christians
tovvard Relikes. 40. 372. 622. 274 marg. The devotion tovvard Christ's body
when it was dead. 131. 132. The Pagans abused holy Relikes, as the
Protestants do now. 40. Translation of Relikes. 133. 631 marg. 307.
Reprobation. at large. 405. 406. Sin is alvvaies the cause thereof. ib. 127
mar. It takes not away free vvil. 406. 707. How God raised Pharao. 406. 407.
How he is said to indurat. ib. to give up into a reprobat sense. 383 marg.
385. nu. 26. page 308 marg. See God. Free vvil. Predestination. Restitution of
goods il gotten. 195. Revvard.
Differences of rewards in heaven. 37. 193 marg. See heaven. Respect of
revvard. 16. nu. 4. page 55. nu. 27 page 631 marg. 181 marg. 706 marg. Revvard,
what it signifies. 430. Reward for relieuing Catholic prisoners. 27 m. 28.
nu. 21. 587 m. 588. for visiting them in prison. 587 m. for confessing of
Christ openly. 27. for all works of mercy. 181 m. for forsaking and losing
ought, for Gods sake. 116. 191 marg. 202. m. Rome called Babylon,
and why. 654. 665. 730. 731. The Church there, never called Babylon. 654.
665. 731. The Protestants sometime will not have Babylon to signify Rome. 665.
730. Their malice in expounding the 7 hills, of Rome, when the Angel him self
expounds it otherwise. 731. The commendation of the Church of Rome, and the
faith thereof. 381. 384. The Gospel transported from Jerusalem thither. 287.
348 marg. The Roman faith and the Catholic faith al one. 384. The Privilege
of that See, not to err. 66. 67. 206. 250. nu. 3. Gods providence toward the
same, more then to al other states. 370. 556. That See is the rock of the
Church, and S. Peter's chair, and See Apostolic. 46. 47. 67. It stands
immovable against all Turks, Tyrants, Heretics, Schismatikes. 556. Princes
and Emperors stand in awe thereof. 364 marg. The ancient fathers of al
Countries sought unto it for resolution of doubts. 206. So ought al true
preachers. 499. Heretics only refuse so to do. 499. They hate this See. 423.
They bark about it in vain. 47. They place Antichrist there in S. Paul's
time. 557. The great Apostasy which S. Paul speaks of 2 These. 2 shall be
from this See of Rome. 556. The Romans devotion in visiting the Churches and
Martyrs Relikes in their Stations and Pilgrimages, is a sign of greater faith.
384.
S
SAcraments.
seven. 506. 259. See Confirmation. Penance. Orders. Marriage Extreme unction.
Few and easy in respect of the Jews Sacraments. 506. More effectual and
beneficial. ibidem. 446. 623. 619 marg. 627. 228. External elements in the
same, not burdenous, not Iudaical, nor Heathenish. 506. 228. Christ used
external elements. 247. what is to adore in spirit. 228. S. Augustine falsely
alleged for two Sacraments only. 506. Grace is given in and by the
Sacraments, 224. 228. 276. 313. 357 marg. 393. 39^ marg. 504. 577. 586 marg.
598 marg. 523. 627. 652. 653. 262 marg. 586 marg. They flovved out of Christ's
side, and thence have their virtue. 273. Contempt of the Sacraments damnable.
157 marg. 321. 316 marg. We may not the less esteem the Sacraments because
of the ministers of them. page 4. nu. 3. page 89. nu. 9. The Sacraments first
to be called for in sickness. 92. The B. SACRAMENT of the altar. 236.
The great mystery, and institution thereof by our Savior. 78. 79. 125. 128.
201. 204. 449. 451. The Catholics imitate Christ's institution thereof and the
Apostles traditon, the Protestants do not. 451. 452. 454. The Protestants have
taken away the B. Sacrament altogether. 452. 237. nu. 58. The real presence.
78. 79. 128. 204. 205. 236. 237. nu. 55. page 238. 291. 446. nu. 16. page 447.
453. 624. 628. 466 m. The Gospel so plain for the real presence, the Beza
controuleth it. 205. 201 marg. Transubstantiation. 79. 128. 238. nu. 66. page
220 marg. Christ's miraculous and supernatural dealing with his body many
ways, and that it is not to be measured by sense and natural reason. 40. nu.
26. page 49. nu. 2. page 55. nu. 26. p. 121. nu. 24. page 132. 148. 236. nu.
52. page 238. 275. 276. 315 marg. 540. 632. Faith necessary in this Sacrament.
128. The Protestants judge thereof by sense and reason. 238. They are like the
gross Capharnaites. 238. To ask, how it may be, is a Jewish word. 238.
Their scoffing at it. 38. nu. 55. page 83. 103. nu. 3. 129 marg. The real
presence is by consecration. 79. 128. 446. not by receiving, or in the
receiving only ibidem. and 452. The Heretics arguments ansvvered. 124 and 254
marg. Adoration of the B. Sacrament. p. 6. 21. nu. 8. page 453. 604. The honor
thereof by solemn processions. 61. by costly altars, chalices, ornaments. 78.
128. by clean corporals. 84. by many other means. 453. 116 marg. The Angels
are present. 707. nu. 8. It sanctifies the altar. 67. 309. nu. 33. It is the
supersubstantial and daily bread, specially desired in the PATER NOSTER. 15.
16. The preemine^ces thereof above Manna. 236. The wonderful effects thereof
in the receivers. 237. 447. In what sense it is called sometime a figure. 79.
nu. 26. How it is both a figure and yet the thing it self. 205. 604. How it is
called bread after the consecration, 79. 236. Whether S. Paul saying, the
supper of our Lord, mean the B. Sacrament. 451. Receiving in one kind. 57 and
125 marg. 213. 236. 237 at large. The authority of Scriptures and primitive
Church for the same. 237. 295 marg 351 marg. It is indifferent, in one or both
kinds, according to the Churches ordinance. 237. 259. The causes why the
Church appointed one kind. 237. The whole grace in one kind, and therefore the
people not defrauded. 237. The Heretics arguments answered ibid. and 125 marg.
Priests saying Mass, must receive both kinds. 237. The purity and
preparation required to the worthy receiving thereof. 222. 258. 453. nu. 27.
28. 29. Confession of every mortal sin, necessary before we receive. 453.
Evil men receive the true body and blood, though unworthily. 453. The danger
and punishment of unworthy receiving. 453. nu. 27. page 454. nu. 30. 31. page
449 marg. It is both a Sacrament and a Sacrifice, and why. 78. 184. The
SACRIFICE of the altar. 21. nu. 4. 204 and 447 and 616. 617. 623. 627. 628 at
large. 228. nu. 23. 332. nu. 12. 638. Christ sacrificed his body and blood at
his last supper. 79. nu. 28. 204. 205. The sacrifice of the altar is the self
same that was upon the Cross. 624. 628. Christ is often offered,
and in many places. 628. It is a commemoratiue sacrifice, yet a true
sacrifice. 205. It succeeded in the place of all the sacrifices of the old Law.
447. number. 21. 617. 628. Christ did not take away al sacrifice by the new
Testament, but change them into a better. 617. 623. 628. The external religion
of the new Testament is principally in the Sacrifice of the altar. 205. Christ's
eternal priesthod consists in this sacrifice. 617. The fathers call it, the
unbloody sacrifice. 625. they call it the Mass. 447. Why it is called the
Eucharist. 638. The general redemption upon the Cross, particularly applied in
this sacrifice. 629. The Caluinists argument against this sacrifice, makes no
less against the sacrifices of Moses. 624. 205. nu. 19. Their argument
against Christ's body often offered and in many places, was answered by the
fathers long ago. 628. It is offered to God only. 332. in the memory and
honor of Saints. 332. 454. 726. for the living and the dead. 454. 447. nu.
21. page 726. See Mass. Sacrilege. Taking away of holy things or profaning
them. 303. 222. 92 n. 25. In what cases holy Jewels and ornaments may be
broken and otherwise employed. 78. nu. 10. page 92. nu. 25. Saints know our
doings and hearts,
and hear our prayers. 64. 184. 186. m. 187. 428. 457. m. They are as Angels.
198. They may be present with the living. 49. 110. m. at their own to^bes and
momuments. 711. Praying to Saints, and that they pray for us. 380 m. 186. 304.
471. 668 at large. 679. 709. 711. 717. 309. m. They are our mediators an
advocates without any derogatio^ to Christ. 471. 568. 678. 679. 714 m. How
Christ is our only Mediator and only Advocate. 568. 678. 679. The conclusion of
al prayers is, Per Christum Dominum nostrum. 265 marg. The Protestants
arguments ansvvered. 409. 607. 608. 611. nu. 9. 568. 678. Vigilantius their
father and founder of this heresy refuted by S. Hierom. 711. How S. Hierom
says, that Christ and his Saints are every where. ibidem. Their Festiuities
or holidaies. 7. nu. 16. 75. m. 507. at large. 668. Their memories or
commemorations in the sacrifice of the Mass. 332. 454. 726. Canonizing of
Saints. 7. Their miracles. 33. nu. 24. See Miracles. Relikes. The great honor
of Saints, and that it is no derogation to Christ's honor. 55. nu. 28. page
350. nu. 16. page 553 marg. 577. 601. 653. 703 marg. 704. 714 marg. 720 marg.
742 marg. They are patrones of men and countries. 404. They are called
saviors, redeemers, etc. without derogation to Christ. 569. 577. 653. 308
marg. our hope. 548 marg. God and our Lady save us, and the like speeches.
337. 700. To believe in Saints. 409. nu. 14. page 601. Salvation. No man sure
of his salvation but in hope. 263. 394. 402. nu. 16. page 403. 418. 433. 444.
493. 530. 393. marg. See F. The Protestants special faith. Satisfaction. See
Penance. Satisfactorie works of one for an other. 474. 485. 538. Satisfaction
enjoined. 143 m. Schism. Prefigured in the Jews Schismatical temples. 166.
227. 228. 448. in Ieroboams calves and altars. 448. in Core, Darhan, Abiron.
482. 695. contrary to the unity of the Church 456 501. nu. 9. page 519. 520.
detestable and sacrilegious. 520. The beginning of al Schisms. 426 marg. In
schism no work auailable to salvation. 14. nu. 24. page 180. 263. nu. 4.
page 457. number. 1. See Church. Schismatikes, Schismatical service and sermons to
be avoided 94. 482. 590. 225 marg. Specially the Communion. 442. 447. 448. See
Heretic and Heresy. Scandal. 112 marg 356. 386 marg. Scripture Canonical and
not Canonical discerned and judged by the Church. 499. 500. See page 2 after
the preface, S. Augustines sentences cited at large. The Scripture and Church,
Whether is elder and of more authority. 500. The Protestants deny many books
of the Scripture, because they are repugnant to their heresies. See Heretics.
They many ways corrupt the Scriptures. See Heretics. Private Fantastical
interpretation of Scriptures. 669. 672. Al Heretics and the Devil him self
allege Scriptures, but falsely. p. 5. nu. 25. p. 11. nu. 6. p. 34. 145 m. 162.
nu. 20. p. 261. 402. 14. nu. 35. 39. pa. 613. 645. 651. nu. 12. p. 646. nu. 21.
p. 682. 711. 740. Vvome^ great tatlers and talkers of Scripture. 568. Not the
great talkers and hearers thereof, but the doers are blessed. 698 m. The
Scripture is full of profound senses, 232. 508. hard to understand, 151 marg.
311 marg. 558. nu. 6. page 613. nu. 4. page 672. 673. 661. nu. 19. p. 662 marg.
740. S. Paul's epistles hard about justification by faith, and therefore
misconstrued of old and new heretics. 389. 646. 672. The Epistle to the
Romans hard concerning predestination. 404 marg. The difficulty of the
Apocalypse. 699. The Protestants count al Scriptures easy for every man to
understand by his private spirit, and therefore they reject the Doctors
expositio^s, and admit nothing but Scripture. 672. Their folish distinction
that S. Paul's epistles are not hard, but the matter he vvriteth of. ibid. The
self same scriptures, alleged by the old heretics and the Protestants, and
answered by the fathers long ago. 444. nu. 5. page 575. 646. 711. 712. The
Scripture consists in the true sense thereof, which is only in the Cath.
Church. 477. nu. 6. p. 669. nu. 20. The bare letter kills both Jew and
Heretic. 477. They search not the Scriptures deeply, but superficially. 232.
Who be the little ones that best understand the Scriptures. 30. nu. 25. p. 169.
nu. 21. The ancient fathers humility in reading and expounding the
Scriptures. 67^. 5^8. 661. nu. 19. page 699. Catholic Doctors only are right
handlers of the Scriptures. 590. The curse for adding and diminishing thereof:
and that it pertains to heretics, not to Catholic expositors. 45. The
interpretation of Scripture is called prophecy. 413 marg. when the same is
according to the rule of faith. ibid. Of the translating and reading the holy
Scriptures in the vulgar tongue, of the difficulty of them, and with what
humility they ought to be read, and of many others points concerning the
sacred Scriptures, see the Preface to the reader. The text corrupted by old
heretics. 684. 687. Scriptures have not only a literal sense, but also a
mystical and allegorical. 7. nu. 15. page 508. 607 marg. 614 marg. The
Protestants deride the mystical interpretations of the ancient Doctors. 614
marg. The people may not judge of the sense of Scriptures, or of their Pastors
expositions. 344. The comfort and profit of Christian Cathol. men in reading
and hearing the Scriptures. 344. 419 marg. 592. What they find in searching
the Scriptures. 230. Not only Scriptures. but tradition also. 622. marg. 559.
592. 279 marg. 678 marg. 717 marg. The Apostles and Churches precepts. 336
marg. See Tradition. The Churches order in reading the Scriptures in her divine
Service. See CHVRCH. Sect taken sometime in good part, but now in the evil.
373. 362 marg. Simonie. what, and why so called. 314. What a heinous sin.
ibid. nu. 22. Sin, original and actual, 395. nu. 14. 676. nu. 7. Al conceived
and borne in original sin, Christ excepted, and his B. mother. 395. No man
lives without sin. 676. nu. 8. page 16. S. Augustine excepteth our B.
Lady. ibidem. Sins mortal and venial. 14. 16. 385. 643. 676. Not God, but
the Devil is author of sin. 36 m. See God. How the Devil sinned from the
beginning. 682. Concupiscence cause of sin. 642 m. Al sin proceeds of
three special things mentioned by S. John. 677 marg. The law did not cause
sin. 395. 398 m. Mortal sin excludes grace and justice. 682. Venial sins
consist with grace and true justice. 676. Examples of venial sins. 676. How
they are taken away without any Sacrament 258. they may be forgiven after
death. 94. Al remission of sins is by the Passion of Christ. 676. Many
secundarie means and instruments of remission, by which the Passion of Christ
is applied. 676. What is meant by, Sins covered and not imputed. 392. Sins
against the holy Ghost. 33. nu. 31. Sins crying to heaven. 651. No sin but
in this life it may be remitted. the contrary is the heresy of the
Caluinists. 686. See Penance. They are worse in this point then the Nouatians.
613. What is (in S. John's Epistle) a sin to death. 687. Three degrees of
sins signified by the three dead that Christ raised to life. 100. Sin the
cause of sickness and other plagues. 132. Spirit. To adore and serve God in
spirit. 228. Boasting of the spirit. 684. Not to credit every spirit, and how
to try them. 552. The Church only has to discern spirits. 684. The
testimony of the Spirit in us. 402. Superiority and difference of degrees not
forbidden. 57 marg. 165 marg. Superstition not allowed in the Catholic Church.
344. 539 marg. The Protestants falsely call devotion, superstition. 344.
Supremacy of temporal Princes in matters Ecclesiastical, See Princes.
T
Tithes due to God and his Priests. 615. Given by the inferior to the superior.
ibid. Paid in the Law of nature and Moses. ib. How due to the Priests of
Christ's Church 616. Tongues. Prayers in an unknown tongue. See Prayers. The
14 chap. of the first to the Corinthians explicated concerning tongues. 460.
The Protestants vain boasting of tongues. 457 marg. The three principal
tongues in the title of the Cross of Christ. 271 marg. The holy Scriptures
most conveniently preserved in them. ibid. Traditions not written.
559. at large. 413. 414. 476. 612. 653. 279 marg. 353. 451. 454. 43. 106. 464
marg. 695. 591 marg. Apostolical traditions. 413. 414. 451. 476. 559. 560. 612.
464 marg. Particular traditions of the Apostles. the Lent. 12. 145 marg. the
administration of the B. Sacrament. 451. 454. a commemoration and invocation of
Saints in the Mass. ibid. prayer for the dead. ibid. and 560. mingling water
with wine. ibid. Baptizing of infantes. 559. the Apostles Creed. 560. See
other particular traditions, page 454. 559. Pater noster in the Mass. 567.
keeping of Sunday, Easter, Vvhit-sontide, etc. 43. 467 mar. How to know
Apostolical traditions. 560. 559. Ignatius book of the Apostles traditions.
ib. The fathers estimation of traditions. 559. The Protestants hatred of the
very name and suppressing the same in the text of holy Scripture. 559. 560
marg. They are called, Depositum. 414. 581 mar. descending from the Apostles by
Bishop and Bishop unto the end. 584. The Protestants can show no such
Depositum. 584. Heretics convicted by tradition. 5. 559. Jewish and heretical
traditions. 43. 106. Translation of the Bible into Greek, called Septuaginta.
633. cited of the Evangelists, and authentical in the Greek Church, ibid. The
authentical Latin translation. 633. Beza prefers it before all the rest. See
the preface. Translatours of holy Scripture must be exact and sincere. 221.
See the preface.
V
Virginity, better then Marriage, more meritorious and grateful to God, fitter
for his service. 4. 55. 440. 725 m. 356. The contrary was Iouinians old
condemned heresy. 582. Virginity cou^seled, not commanded. 55. 440. 438
marg. See Marriage. Professed virgins may not marie. See Vovv. The state of
virgins passes the rest. 725 m. Visions recorded in the Scriptures. 315. 318.
319. 368. 492. Visions have no credit with Heretics, specially with the
Protestants. 319 marg. 492. Some have been rapt to see the state of the next
life. 491 marg. Extreme unction. See Extreme. Vovv, an act of sovereign
worship. 169. Never true religion without vows and votaries. ib. The
Protestants have abandoned al vows and votaries. ib. Vow of monastical and
religious life. 169. 304. Vow of Virginity or chastity, lawful, possible etc.
55. 580. 581. 582. Young women may vovv Religion. 581. Our B. Lady vowed
virginity. 138. The daughters of Philip the Deacon were vowed virgins. 356.
The Apostles vowed poverty and professed the religious state of perfection.
page 55. nu. 21. 27. Breach of vows damnable. 304. 439. 440. It is to break
their first faith. 580. It is to go after Satan. 581. It is the highest kind
of Sacrilege. 304. It is worse then aduoutrie. 582. What virgins and widovves
the Apostle allows to marie. 440. 581. Iouinian for persuading Nuns to
marie, is called of S. Augustine. a monster: and of S. Hierom, he and his
folovvers, Christian Epicures. 582. The Protestants call Iouinians heresy,
Gods word. 582. What vows are unlawful, and not to be kept. 361. Usury not
to be used among Christians. 255. Spiritual usury in the better sense. 74. nu.
27.
W
VVidovvhod. 579 at large. This state more blessed then the state of
matrimony. 439 m. Their continual prayer and continency. 578 m. The example
of holy Anne. 141. 142. S. Ambrose and S. Augustine wrote whole books in
co^me^dation of the state of widowhod. 579. The Churches widows called
Diaconissae, and their office. 579. They must have had but one husband. ibid.
The Caluinists most absurd exposition of these words, The husband of one wife.
580. The Apostle forbids not al young widows to vow. 581. See Continency.
The word of God, is not only that which is written in the Scriptures. 548.
See Gospel. Tradition. Works meritorious of life everlasting.
17. 177. 387. 430. 593. 594. 613. 703 mar. No works of them selves, without
faith and the grace of God, are meritorious. 378. 594. Such are the works that
S. Paul excludes from justification. 378. 387. 390. 411. 385. 499 marg. We
presume not upon our own works or merits, as of our selves, but as of Gods
grace. 516 marg. 594. The Protestants make no difference between Christian men's
works done in grace, and the works of Jews and Pagans. 411. They are
injurious to Gods grace which makes vorkes meritorious. 594. The Scriptures
which they falsely allege, answered. 189. 402. We are justified by works
also, and not by faith only. 16. 643. 645 and 646 at large. 153 marg. 678 marg.
510 m. 538. m. See faith. Good works before faith, though not meritorious, yet
are preparatiues to the first justification. 320. 389 m. That every man shall be
rewarded according to his works, is a common phrase in Scripture. 47. 386
marg. 387. 430. 656 marg. 744 marg. not according to faith only or lack of
faith. 741. nu. 12. Al good works rewarded in heaven. 630 marg. 413. nu. 1.
page 587. 524 marg. 543 marg. 191 marg. Heaven is due for them according to
Gods justice. 593. 594. 613. 553 mar. They give great confidence before God.
630. 627 marg. Works may be done in respect of reward. 16. nu. 4. page 631.
marg. pa. 444. The three works of justice. 14. 15. 16. Works of mercy how
acceptable to God. 663. 317. m. 341 marg. See Alms. Works of perfection or
supererogation. 444. 485. 168 m. See C. Euangelical Counsels. Works
satisfactorie. 143 m. See faith. Justification. Merit. Revvard. Heaven
prepared for them only that deserve it by good works. 58. nu. 23. page 73
marg. Without good works a man shall be demned. 143 marg. 153 marg. 739 marg.
The book of every man's works opened in the day of judgment. 741. Vvorldly
friends. 93. 94. 176 marg.
Z
Zeal against heretics. See Heretics. in Gods cause: 706. nu. 16. page 741.
nu. 9. Zeal in religion, counted of worldly men, madness, 93. See Neuters.
Zeal and seruor to hear and follow Christ. 106. Zeal of saving souls. 150.
182. and 183 marg. 529 marg. 544 m. 651 marg. Zeal against sin. 433 mar. The
mad zeal of heretics. 342 m.
THE EXPLICATION OF CERTAIN WORDS IN THIS TRANSLATION, NOT FAMILIAR to the
vulgar reader, which might not conveniently be uttered otherwise.
A
Abstracted, Drawn away. page 642. Acquisition, Getting, purchasing. page
514. Aduent, The coming. page 69. Adulterating, Corrupting. See page 475. 478.
Agnition, knowledge or acknovvledging. p. 600. Allegory, a Mystical speech,
more thou the bare letter. page 505. See the Annot. p. 508. Amen, expounded
page 244. Anathema, expounded p. 405. Archisynagogue, expounded page 99.
Assist. page 135, signifies the Angels standing and atte^ding, alvvaies ready
to do their ministry. Assumption, p. 165, Christ's departure out of this
world by his death and Ascension. Azym^s, Unleavened bread. p. 75.
C
Calumniate, By this word is signified violent oppression by word or deed.
page 143. Catechizeth, and Catechized. p. 510. He catechizeth that teaches the
principles of the Christian faith: and they that hear and learn, are
catechized, and are therefore called often in the Annotations, Catechumens.
Character, a mark or stamp. page 7^3. Commesssations, Immoderate bankets, and
belly cheer, with vvanton riotousnes. p. 509. Condign, comparable. p. 400.
Contristate, This word signifies to make heavy and sad. page 519. Cooperate,
signifies vvorking with others, p. 401. likewise Cooperation, Cooperateurs.
Corbana, expounded page 80.
D
Depositum. p. 582. See the Annot. page 584. It may signify also, Gods graces
given us to keep, pa. 587. v. 14. Also v. 12 ibid. See the Annot. Didrael. me,
expounded page 49. D^minical day, Sunday. See Annot, p. 701. 702. Donaries,
gifts offered to God for his Temple, etc. 199.
E
Euacuated from Christ, that is, Made void and having no part with him. p.
508. The (...) of the cross euacuated, that is, made void, clean taken
away. ibidem. Euangelize, signifies such preaching of good tidinges, as
concerns the Gospel. See the preface, Eunuchs, gelded men Euro-aquilo. A
north-eastvvinde. p. 368. Exinanited, abased excedingly. p. 528.
G
Gratis, an usual word to signify, for nothing, freely, for Godamercie,
without desert.
H
Holocauste, a kind of sacrifice where al was burnt in the honor of God. p.
625. Hosts, sacrifices. p. 445.
I
Inuocated, called upon, prayed unto. p. 316. Hereof we say, Invocation of
Saints, and to invoke. Issue, good event. page 445. Justice, taken in the
new Testament, not as it is contrary to vvrong or injury, but for that
quality where of a man is just and justified. p. 391.
N
Noophyte, expounded p. 569.
P
Paraclete, expounded page 260. Parasceue, the Jews Sabboth-eue, Good friday.
p. 130. v. 43. See the Preface. Pasche, Easter, and, the Paschal Iambe. p. 201.
Pentecost, vvhitsuntide, and the space of fifte days. Prefinition, A
determination before. p. 517. Prepuce, expounded page 387. Prescience,
foreknovvledge. p. 294. Preuaricatour, transgressor: and preuarication,
tra^sgression. p. 386. 387. Loaves of Proposition, so called, because they
were proposed and for upon the table in the Temple, before God. page 31.
R
Repropitiate the sins. page 605. that is, make a roconcillation for them.
Resolution, the separation of the body and the soul, the departing out of this
life. p. 592. Resuscitate the grace, that is, Raise, quicken, renew and reviue
the grace which otherwise languisheth and decaieth. page 586.
S
Sabbatismt, A time of resting and ceasing from labors. page 607. Sacrament,
for mystery. p. 513. Sancta Sanctorum, The holies of holies, that is, the
inmost and holiest place of the Jews Temple, as it were the Chauncel. page
621. Superedified, Builded upon Christ the principal stone page 657.
T
Tetrarch, Governor or Prince of the 4 part of a country. p. 33. Thrones, an
higher order of Angles. p. 537.
V
Victims, Sacrifices. p. 308.
The faults correct thus.
Page 8. 1 Cor. 7. 2 Cor. 7. 38 Tetrach, Tetrarch. 42 fifth week, first
week. 78 If the Sacrament, In the Sacrament. 148 Matthew. 9, Matthew. 19. 188
Scandale, Scandals. 204 Ignat. ep. 5. ep. 7. Ibid. in 3 copies the Greek set
amiss. Read 213 li. 39 de consens. li. 3. 215 Eighteth year, Eighth. 238
Transubstantion, Transubstantiation. 409 Cathee. 17. Catech. 18. 440
Continency, Incontinencie. 446 (...) (...). 449 Is it not now, It is not
now. 552 Beguile v, Beguile us. 576 Eusebius li. 5. c. 2. Theodorete.

LAVS DEO.

