A REPROOF OF M. DOCT. ABBOTS DEFENSE, OF THE CATHOLIC DEFORMED BY M. W.
Perkins.

WHEREIN His sundry abuses of Gods sacred word, and most manifold mangling,
misaplying, and falsifying, the ancient Fathers sentences, be so plainly
discovered, even to the eye of every indifferent Reader, that whosoever has
any due care of his own salvation, can never hereafter give him more credit,
in matter of faith and religion.

THE FIRST PART.

Made by W.B. P. and Doct. in divinity.

As Iannes and Mambres resisted Moses, so these also resist the truth, men
corrupted in mind, reprobate concerning the faith, but they shall prosper no
further, for their folly shall be manifest to al, as theirs also was.

2. TIM. 3. verse. 8. and 9. Printed with Privilege, Anno Domini, 1608.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
GOOD CHRISTIAN READER,
I do voluntarily confess, that after I had seen M. Abbots answer to my
Epistle unto his Majesty, I was a long time unwilling to reply upon it; not for
that I esteemed it to contain any such extraordinary learning, as be too too
fondly vaunteth off (for I dare be bold to say, that in a skilful man's
judgment, there are more pregnant proofs of their new doctrine in two leaves
of M. Perkins book, then in ten of his:) but clean contrary, I find so
little substance in his work, and so great store of impertinent and vile
stuff, such superfluity of idle amplifications, so many uncivil and foul
words; that I could not think the time well bestowed, which should be spent in
so frivolous and pain an altercation. Notwithstanding being often admonished
by my friends, that diverse Protestants much commended M. Abbots discourse,
some for the style, and his cunning and confident carriage in it; others for
that they saw it thick interlaced with sundry ancient Authors sentences: and
thereby thought and gave out, that he refused not to deal with us at our own
weapons. Hereupon I resolved at length to afford it some answer, specially for
such good peoples sake, who are desirous to bolt out that truth of God, which
only can save their souls, and are not willing to be deceived with fine
tricks, nor do wittingly suffer themselves to be carried away with fair
glozing speeches, or stout brags, when they find no correspondence of sound
and well grounded matter. To give the man his due, I acknowledge that he
inditeth not amiss, if he did not defile and poison his pen with so huge a
multitude of ougly, venomous, and unsavory terms. But what account is to be
made of choice, picked, and pleasing words, when they be employed not only to
abuse and beguile simple souls, but also to disgrace the sincere verity of
Gods word? surely for the debating of controversies in religion, plain usual
speeches without painting or superfluity, have always been taken by the
learned for most decent and expedient, according to that ancient Adage: simplex
est veritatis oration, the style of truth is simple and plain. And where much
coloring and flourishing is used, there is no small suspicion of a badde cause
and fraudulent dealing. What need bad M. Abbot to fill up thirty sheets of
paper, to give answer unto one sheet and half of mine? does it not argue to
a man of understanding, that what he could not answer unto directly in few
words, he would at least cloak with long circumstances, and cast a mist
before the Readers eyes with gay glorious phrases, that he might not see and
discern the truth?

Touching his frequent disgraceful and odious terms, and most bitter railing
against the best sort of men on our side, I would gladly learn how it can
stand with Christian charity and modesty. Sure I am, that it consorteth full
evil with that sacred rule of the Apostle: 2. Tim. 2. verse. 24.
The servant of our Lord must not wrangle, but be mild toward al men, apt to
teach, patient, with modesty admonishing them that resist the truth. And S.
Peter tells us, that the natural property of a true Christian is, 1. Pet. 3.
verse. 9.
To be modest and humble, and not so much as to render evil for evil, or curse
for curse: so far off was he from encouraging any man to revile and rail at
them, who never gave him any one foul word in all their lives, yea whom he
never saw. And he further bids us to follow the example of Christ our great
master, who did not revile, when he was reviled: but has in express words
forbidden us to use any contemptuous or opprobrious speeches against our
brethren, assuring us before hand, that he Math. 5. verse. 23.
Who shall say to his Christian brother (thou fool) shall be guilty of hell fire.
This and an hundred times more to the same purpose, being set down in the
divine Scriptures against bitter and barbarous speeches; yet M. Abbot a
professed Divine, seems to take a special delight in them, and to esteem
them no small ornaments of a Divines style: otherwise he would not so often use
them. I wot well that the most mild and sweet penmen, are sometimes through
zeal of the truth, or by the overthwart dealing of their adversary, moved to
let slip now and then a hard word or two; but ordinarily, or upon every small
occasion to fall into a fit of railing, and to vomit up most rustical and
ruffianlike taunts, cannot but discover a very corrupt and venomous stomach.
In this one discourse of M. Abbots, a diligent scauenger may rake together
wel-neare a tumbrel full of them. I do entreat the gentle Reader not to be
offended with me, if I do here for verification of what I say, trouble him
with the view of some few of them. The Bishop of Rome is seldom called by his
right name, but Antichrist, Page 118. 124 146. 150. 162.
the man of sin, that harpie of Rome, filthy harlot, filthy and unnatural
strumpet, the whore of Babylon, and such like. Religious men he terms idle
lossels and filthy belly-gods, swarms of Locusts, Romish vermin, full gorged
Friars, and so forth. My self and others my brethren, False harlots,
witless sophisters, blind Doctors, abominable hypocrites, lewd caytifs, the
seed of the Devil, unclean beasts, foul mouthed dogs, like unto other swine
of his fraternity, base fugitives, false traitors, the villainy of our
profession, and innumerable others; which cannot but convince and demonstrate
M. Abbot to be one of them, whom the spirit of God has lively described, when
he wrote: Romans 3. verse. 13.
Their throat is an open sepulcher, with their tongues they deal deceitfully,
the venim of serpents is under their lips, their mouth is full of malediction
and bitterness, their feet swift to shed blood, destruction and infelicity
is in their ways, and the way of peace they have not known, there is no fear
of God before their eyes. And if M. Abbot scorn to be advised by me his
adversary to forgo this rude rhetorike of brabling and scolding women, in
latin called Canina eloquentia; let him follow the grave counsel of that sage
Lawier Sr. Edward Cook, whose book ^e cites, wherein is said: In the preface
of his fifth of reports.
That controversies in religion are to be handled with all candor and charity,
and not with bitter invectiues, like men transported with fury. To end this
point, if he hold ^n that course of scurrility, he will drive me and others to
give him over in the plain field, for a foule-mouthed wrangler that deserves
no answer. Thus much by the way of the manner of his inditing.

Now to the matter of his book, which does principally consist in allegation
of Authors, and applying their sentences to his purpose. How insufficiently he
has behaved himself therein, shall be particularly discyphered (...) their
proper places: I will here only for a taste of his judgment, and sin^erity
therein, give a touch unto some general heads thereof. First, does (...) not
evidently prove great want of judgment and discretion, to allege (...)
upright witnesses in matters of controversy, such authors as are known to all the world, to be professed parties of the same side? If I should cite for
confirmation of the Catholic cause; Doct. Harding, Doct. Sanders, Doct.
Stapleton, or any other Catholic late writer; would not the unpassionate
reader take me for very simple, if I thought that any man would the sooner
believe me for their opinions, that were men (though most learned and right
honest) yet not indifferent, because they were professed advocates of the same
cause? Even so a man of any wit, cannot but marvel where M. Abbots senses
were, when he so commonly and confidently for proof of any doubt, does produce
the authority of Bale, (a late Irish Apostata Friar, whom be sometime also
calls Balaeus, to make him seem two worshipful authors, that is not worthy
to be half one) Fox, Jewel, Humphrey, Holinshed, Sr. Edward Cook, the
Magdeburgenses, Kemnitius, Illyricus, Sleidan, Hospinian, and many others open
and professed adversaries of the Catholic Roman Church, and therefore no
upright and fit witnesses against it. He without doubt may garnish his margent
with variety of quotations, that blusheth not to cite so frequently as M. Abbot
does, such partial writers. But no man (I hope) will be so foolish, as to give
credit unto any thing that is no better verified, then by the verdict of such
false witnesses. For to call one of them to give testimony is no better, then
(after our English proverb) to hid a man ask one of his fellows, whether
he be a thief or no.

Again, there is another circumstance in the citing of his late partial
authors, which makes it yet more absurd and ridiculous. For he sticks not to
produce the credit of a seely writer of this last hundred years, for
verification of a matter done more then a thousand years before he was borne.
For example, to prove that Pope Eleutherius acknowledged Lucius (King of our
Country 1400. years past) to be supreme governor in causes Ecclesiastical,
Page 26.
M. Abbot alleges Holinshed a Chronicler of our age: what a jest is this? how
knew this late writer what passed so long before his own time? was there not
any one Hystoriographer more ancient then he, neither Latin nor English, that
could tell any tidings of such a matter? And yet M. Abbot is so il advised, as
to persuade us to receive it upon his seely poor credit. Of the like stuff is
that in another place of his book, Page 60.
to wit, that Syritius Bishop of Rome (who lived about 1200. years ago) was a
noueller, and that by the worshipful verdict of Polidore Virgil: who lived
eleauen hundred years after him. What, are learned men grown so careless of
their credit, that they dare let pass to the print such doting follies, and so
gross absurdities? this may serve for a note of his oversight, in alleging
his own pew-fellowes for upright and indifferent vmpeers, and late modern
authors for the certainety of ancient matters.

Now to his citations of the more authentike approved writers, whom he does
greatly abuse in diverse and sundry fashions. The first and most gentle is, when
he does cite their words truly, but does apply them clean contrary to their
meaning. For example, in his Epistle to the Kings Majesty be approves his
Highness course for the answering of Catholic books, producing for it this
sentence out of S. Bernard: That though thereby the Heretic arise not from his
filth, yet the Church may be confirmed in her faith: M. Abbot meaning as the
sequel of his speech does import, that if thereby men of the Roman religion
will not be converted from their errors, yet the good Protestants may be
confirmed in their new faith: which is very far wide from S. Bernardes
express declaration; as elsewhere, so in that very place. For that devout
holy Father was so far off from dissuading any man from the Roman faith, that
he wishes al men to make their recourse unto the Sea of Rome, for resolution
of al doubts in faith: these be his words to Pope Innocentius. We must refer
to your Apostleship, Epist. 190.
all the scandals and perils which may fall in matter of faith specially,
because the defects of faith must be helped where faith cannot fail: for to
what other See was it ever said, Luc. 22. verse. 31.
I have prayed for thee Peter, that thy faith do not fail. See then what
Church S. Bernard would confirm in her faith, not the Protestant but the
Roman. Moreover, in that very discourse out of which M. Abbot ^icketh the
former sentence, Sermon. 66.
S. Bernard does in particular describe those Heretics, whom he persuaded to
arise from their filth, to be such as held the Church not to have been visible
for many years, but to have lain hid in corners. Item, that would not
believe, that any souls departed went to Purgatory, but either to heaven or to
hell presently; and so defrauded the dead of the prayers of the living. Also
such as would dissuade from praying to the Saints: these and such like are
those Heretics by S. Bernardes judgment, whom he would have to rise from the
dross and dregs of such erroneous opinions, and return unto the Roman
Catholic faith. Now judge with what conscience M. Abbot could cul some words
out of the same discourse, to persuade men by the countenance of S. Bernard, to
forsake praying to Saints, and for the dead, and the whole Roman religion so
strongly established by that reverend religious Father in the very same place.
This may suffice for a proof of his misapplying the Fathers sentences, wherein
he offends as often and as grievously (I think) as ever did any Christian
writer, as shall be hereafter showed.

Now to another trick of his no less shameful, which is the misconstruing of
their words: let this serve for a pattern. Against the worshipping of Images
he produces the authority of S. Gregory Bishop of Rome, Page 104.
Commending (as he fableth) the zeal of Serenus Bishop of Massilia, who could
not endure that any thing should be worshipped that is made with hands; and
tells him, that he should forbid the people the worshipping of them, etc.
Here are many foul faults: for S. Gregory did not commend but reprehend the
indiscreet zeal of that Bishop, who did break some pictures set in the
Church, because some late converted Heathens not yet well instructed in the
Christian religion, did adore them as if they had been Gods. S. Gregory
tells him plainly, That that should not be broken, which was not set up in
the Church to be adored, but only to instruct them that were ignorant.
Secondly, though S. Gregory forbid Images to be adored as Gods, yet does he
teach them to be worshipped as representations of most holy personages: which
may be seen plainly (to omit diverse other places) by his letters unto
Secundinus, L^v. 7. Epist. 53. ad Secu^d.
To whom he sent the Images of our Savior, of the blessed Virgin Mary, and of
the holy Apostles S. Peter and S. Paul; telling him first, that his petition to
have those Images, did greatly please him: for (says he) thou do love him
with all thy heart and whole intention, whose Image thou desire to have before
thine eyes, and straight after adds: I know that thou do not therefore
desire to have our Saviors Image, that thou may worship it as a God; but
for a remembrance of the Son of God, that thou may wax warm in his love,
whose Image thou do behold: and we truly do cast our selves down before
the said Image, not as before a Godhead, but we adore him whom by the Image
we remember to have been borne, or suffered, or to sit in his throne. Can any
thing be more manifest, then that S Gregory approved both the having of Images,
which be sent to his friend; and setting them in Churches for the instruction
of the unlearned; and also worshipping of them, even so farre-foorth as humbly
to kneel before them? which he himself as well practiced in his own person,
as also taught others so to do: which is all that we Catholics do defend, as
greatly condemning (as the Protestants themselves) that any Christian should
adore them as Gods, or give any Godly honor unto them. How wrongfully then did
M. Abbot allege S. Gregory's words? and how shamefully has he misconstrued
them clean besides that most holy Fathers meaning, with whom in faith and
doctrine we do fully agree?

But let us yet go one step further, more evidently to discover, how
perfidiously M. Abbot does deal with those ancient and most holy Doctors. He
is not ashamed to cite them sometimes in confirmation of those errors, the
which they do expressly confute in the very same place: take this for an assay.
Epiphanius (says he) an Eastern Bishop, Page 62.
even in the time of Hierome, acknowledges for true those words of Socrates,
that the Priests and Bishops thereof, were not forced by any law to forbear
their wives, and that many of them whiles they were Bishops, had children borne
unto them by their lawful married wives: and quoteth Epiphanius against the
59. Heresy of the Cathary; where in deed he handles that matter, but after
another manner. These he his words: Indeed the holy preaching of God, does
not since Christ's coming admit them to take holy orders, who have married
again after their first wives death, in respect of the excellent dignity of
Priesthood: and this does the Church of God observe sincerely, (but so does
not the Church of the Protestants: ergo, it is not the Church of God.) Then he
comes to our present purpose, and says: The same Church of God does not
admit and receive a man that has a wife living, and that gets children, to
be a Bishop, Priest, Deacon, or Subdeacon; but him that either abstaineth from
the company of his wife, or else lives widdower, and that specially where the
Ecclesiastical Canons be sincere and not corrupted. Hitherto Epiphanius, as
flat contrary to M. Abbots report of him as can be: for he reported, that
whiles they were Bishops they had children borne unto them, and there was no
law that forced them to for^eare their wives. Epiphanius tells us otherwise:
That the Canons of the Church (which are Ecclesiastical laws) did not suffer
any to be Bishop or Priest, that kept company with their wives. And which
makes the fault the more palbable, Epiphanius adds an objection, upon which
it seems M. Abbot grounded his assertion: But ^hou vvilt say that in some
places, Subdeacons, Deacons, and Priests, do yet get children (note by the way
that in no place how cor^upt soever, Bishops so did, as M. Abbot reports:)
but this (answers holy Epiphanius) is not according unto the Canon, but after
the mind of men, that in tract of time fainted, and so forth. Where he
proves abstinence from marriage, or continual continency, to be not only
decent for the high and holy calling of Clergy men; but also necessary for
their daily prayers, and for the sudden occasions of their sacred function:
so that finally S. Epiphanius is found to confute that directly, which M. Abbot
reports him to acknowledge for true. And if this be not most wilful corruption,
and falsification of these learned Fathers sentences, I know not what may be.

Because this is a point, that touches every Christian that has care of his
salvation so near, Page 122.
I will insist more upon it. Is not this (says M. Abbot) a horrible impiety,
that stands written in their law, our Lord God the Pope: and then doubleth
it, saying; To believe that our Lord God the Pope could not so decree, as he
has decreed, should be accounted heresy. In the Canon law (which he calls
our law) is no such horrible impiety, but in his report is a double lie. The
former is, to avouch that to stand in the law, which is only written in the
gloss; which is no law as al men know. The second and the more shameful is,
that it stands not in the gloss neither, but he belieth both the one and the
other: Extrauag. Joan. 22. cum inter, in glossa.
let any man turn to the place quoted by himself, and there toward the end,
upon the word, declaramus, he shall find only Dominum nostrum Papam, our Lord
the Pope; and the word (God) is foisted in by M. Abbot, to make up that
horrible impiety of which he speaks. As very a lie is it, which he cites out
of the Decretals of Pope Gregory, Page 119.
that (forsooth) the Pope is not a mere man: whereas the Canon has, De
translat. Episco. cap. Quanto.
Non puri hominis, sed very Dei vicem gerit, that is, The Pope is the
vicegerent or vicar, not of a mere man, but of true God: to wit of Christ, who
is both God and Man. No more truth is in that assertion of his out of venerable Bede, Page 199.
our very holy and most learned countryman: Then were the Scriptures in four
several languages, of so many several nations in this land; whereas he
signifies the plain contrary: that the Scriptures were only in the Latin
tongue among them, and that therefore many of each language learned the Latin
tongue, that they might by the help thereof understand, meditate, and study
the Scriptures: these be S. Bedes words. Lib. 1. hyst. Aug. cap. 1.
This Island at that time, did study and confess one and the same knowledge of
truth, in five sundry languages, to wit: in the English, Briton, Scottish,
Picts, and Latin tongue, which Latin by study of the Scriptures, was made
common to all the rest. Note how for to study the holy Scriptures, men of the
other four several languages were feign to learn the Latin tongue; which they
needed not to have done, if the Scriptures had been then translated into their
own mother language, as M. Abbot reports. Another notorious untruth, and
most malicious slander, does be cast out in the next precedent page, against
the blessed Bishop S. Augustine, our English Apostle: Page 198.
That (forsooth) because he could not get the Britons to obey him, he
therefore provoked Ethelbert King of Kent, (a very good Christian) to procure
the death of two thousand Monks of Bangor, besides many other more innocent
men; whereas that holy Religious Father, was dead and buried many years before
that slaughter happened: which was also committed, not by Ethelbert King of Kent,
Beda lib. 2. hyst. cap. 2.
but by Ethelfride a Pagan Prince of the North parts, and that not for any
quarrel of religion neither, but to enlarge his Dominions, and to be revenged
on his enemies. Neither can M. Abbot or any other Protestant, produce one
ancient and approved author, to justify that S. Augustine was any way
accessory to that wicked fact; but is glad to shroude himself under the
shrubbe of an old namelesse Cronicle, (and therefore Apocryphal) cited by the
Arch-lier, and late partial writer Jewel: fit witnesses for such a palbable and
spiteful slander.

But if I would stand here to make a Catalogue of M. Abbots corruptions,
falsifications, and other odd tricks, which he uses in alleageing of the
Fathers, and other approved authors; I should reduce the greatest part of his
book to this place, which chiefly consists in such paltry shifts, and
unchristianlike dealing: this that I have here declared, cannot but suffice to
discredit him with all indifferent men. For if he has wittingly misreported
such worthy authors, of purpose to beguile his credulous reader, as it is most
like (for he will not be taken for a man that cites the Fathers by hearsay,
without looking in^o their works) then he has a most seared and corrupt
conscience, unworthy the name of a Divine, and walking alive is dead in
conscience, and consequently in credit with all men that love the truth:
Sapient. 1. verse. 11.
For the tongue that lies, kills the soul. But let us suppose the most that
may be said in his favor, that he has not wittingly and of purpose to deceive
the simple, cited the holy Fathers sentences wrongfully, but taking them up
upon the credit of some other of his companions, without looking into the
Doctors own works, whether they were true or no, and being deceived himself,
does afterward beguile others: this I say being of courtesy admitted, which
is the best excuse that can be truly made for him; yet no mean wise man can
ever hereafter trust him, that so confidently without any qualification,
auerreth such false tales: for his untruths are so plain and palbable, that
you need no more, but compare his reports with the authors words, and at the
first sight any mean scholar shall find his cosenage and deceit.

I come now unto the last kind of abuse, that M. Abbot offers unto the
sacred senate of those most renowned ancient Fathers, wherein he does more
ingeniously, discover and lay open the right humor of a true Protestant: which
is to deny their authority flatly, to control and censure them as simple men,
to accuse them of error and falsehood; yea and finally, to prefer old rotten
Heretics opinions before the best of them. To begin with Eusebius Bishop of
Caesarea a most famous Hystoriographer, that lived in the days of Constantine
the great, because he does more mannerly reprehend him, and says: Page 177.
That we must give him leave, to censure Eusebius of an injuditious and
presumed explication of Constantines mind and purpose. Truly I see no cause
why we should give him any such leave: for who can be so simple, as to think
that M. Abbot (borne 1200. years after Constantines death) should know more of
his mind then Eusebius, who conuersed with him most familiarly, and was of his
privy Council in such affairs, and a man otherwise very learned and juditious.
Secondly, he taxes the most holy and reverend Patriarch of Constantinople S.
Chrysostom, Page 175.
for playing the orator, and enforcing that in one place for true, which in
another place he himself denies: Page 176.
and for reporting that of Constantines Son, which is much different from the
certain story. In like manner be standereth S. Augustine, Page 54.
for writing against Iouinian the Heretic, whose opinions (says M. Abbot very
audatiously) S. Augustine knew only by hearsay, and not of any certainty.
Secondly, Page 60.
Though Augustine does not break into those rude and indecent speeches against
marriage, as Hierome did; yet he was deceived where he said, that no Priests
embraced Iouinians heresy. I will omit, how they note S. Hierome (that most
virtuous, zealous, and learned Doctor) with a black cole, Page 57.
For writing with all indignation and stomach, for railing, and false doctrine;
because I make have to acquaint the reader with the most shameless pranke of
al others, which is: that they in express terms prefer the most infamous
condemned Heretics, even in the very points of their errors; before the most
juditious, learned, and sincere Doctors of the Church. Page 73.
It it manifest (says M. Abbot) that Hierome (one of the four principal
Doctors of the Latin Church) was deceived, and that Vigilantius, (a loose and
lewd Heretic) had just cause to say as he did. Again, Aerius (a damned
Arrian) spoke against prayer for the dead, Page 86.
with greater reason then Epiphanius (a most ancient, learned, and holy Greek
father) has defended it. Iouinian (a notable audatious and ignorant Heretic,
as both S. Augustine, S. Hierome, Vincent. Lyr. cap. 15. do^. rank Iouinian in
the number of pestilent Heretics.
and Vincentius Lyrinensis do testify, though by reason of his later standing
he was unknown to Epiphanius:) this Heretic I say, Did teach (as M. Abbot
reports page 56.) the doctrine of Paul in Rome, against the superstitious
conceit of the holiness of Virginity, before the holiness in Marriage: which
notwithstanding was maintained by S. Augustine and S. Hierome, with the whole
court of Rome at those days; as be him self confesses in the same place.
Does not this (to omit much more of the same kind) convince and demonstrate,
unto al unpassionate Christians of any understanding, that the poor miserable
Protestants be exceeding blindly bent unto the defense of their errors, who
seeing them most plainly condemned by the best and most learned of the primitive
Church, and pure antiquity (to which they would sometime in great confidence
seem to appeal,) had notwithstanding rather consort themselves, and follow
very base, unlearned, and wretched Heretics, and with them to band against the
invincible troops of the ancient holy Fathers, and most renowned Doctors? will
it any whit avail them to say, that those men of condemned memory, did in
their opinions better agree with the word of God, and therefore are to be
preferred before the rest, though otherwise better scholars then they? surely
nothing at al with the juditious; because this is but a scar-crow to amate the
simple. For whether were more like to understand better the sacred word of God,
either Augustine, Hierome, Epiphanius, Chrysostom, and such others, who endued
with excellent wits, and well furnished with all other kind of learning, had
most diligently studied both the old and new Testament, as by their
translations, and most learned Commentaries and explications, they have
testified to the ^orld? or Aerius, Vigilantius, or Iouinian, who have not left
any one monument of learning, wit, or honesty behind them? and Iouinian
(reputed of those three the most sufficient) was so insufficient and
unlettered, that he could not so much as indite in the Latin tongue
congruously, and so as he might be understood, Hieron. lib. 1. cont. Iouin. in
initio.
as S. Hierome proves. To finish this point, seeing that M. Abbot does not only
misapply the ancient Doctors sentences, but does also misconster, corrupt, and
falsify them; yea, does plainly and roundly deny their grave and sacred
authority, preferring the confessed and condemned errors of notorious reproved
Heretics, before their uniform and approved doctrine: they must needs
confess themselves to have been a little deceived, who took him to have
beaten the Papists with their own weapons, that is, to have brought better
testimony out of pure antiquity in favor of the Protestants opinions, then the
Catholics do for theirs; whereas in truth he handles those sacred Fathers,
even as Calvin reports the Libertine to deal with the holy Scriptures. In
instruct. aduers. Libert. cap. 9.
These loose men (says he) when we press them with the Scriptures, do not
much dissemble, that they esteem no better of them, then of fables:
notwithstanding they in the mean season do not let to use them, if they find
any place that they can wrest unto their own meaning; not that they themselves
do give any credit to it, but only that they may thereby trouble the
unlearned, and so daunt and stagger them, that they may at length the more
easily draw them to like of their errors: thus far Calvin. Even so plaieth M.
Abbot with the glorious Doctors of the Church, whom how little he regards,
does appear by his often abusing their words, by his resisting their
authority, and setting less by them, then by ignorant obscure and abject
persons: yet knowing that al sober Christians do highly esteem, and make
great account of their grave authority, as of the principal lights of Christ's
Church since the Apostles times, they do greedily catch hold of any broken
sentence of theirs, that does any way sound in favor of their heresy; not
that they themselves give any credit thereunto, but to astonish and deceive the
simple reader, and thereby to persuade him to like the better of their errors.
Thus much in general, of the abuses which M. Abbot offers unto the ancient
Fathers.

But does be behave himself more reverently toward the holy Scriptures, and
sacred word of God? one example I will give here, by which you may take a
scantling of the rest; and not to seek far, it shall be the very first in his
book: these be his words. Page 6.
This is the thing that M. Bishop labors for, seeking with Act. 13. v. 8.
Elimas the Sorcerer to pervert the straight ways of the Lord: and whereas
his Majesty has made profession to advance the honor of Christ, he would in
steed thereof draw him to advance the Idol Dan. 11. verse. 38. 2.
Mauzzin, the God of Antichrist, and to establish damnable heresies by him
privily brought in, whereby his agents and factors through Pet. 2. verse. 1.
and 3.
covetousness, with fained words do make merchandise of the souls of men,
speaking things which they ought not for filthy Tit. 1. verse. 11.
lucres sake. Here you see his text enriched, and his margent garnished with a
gay show of Gods word, and yet here is not one whole sentence of holy Scripture
to any purpose, but diverse words picked out of sundry places, and by the new
Evangelist M. Abbot made a new piece of vn-holy scripture; which pretty devise
if it should pass for current, any had matter might be graced with the
gloss of Scripture: so that the first fault committed by M. Abbot herein, is
the dismembring of Gods word, and renting of it in pieces at his pleasure, with
which pieces afterward odly and idly patched together, he makes up (as it
were) a poor beggars cloak, rather then any testimony of Scripture. Secondly,
the words hang together very untowardly, one of them not agreing with the
other: for if his Majesty should be persuaded to advance the Idol Mauzzin, the
God of Antichrist, he could not establish heresies privily brought in; for that
false God will wholly oppose himself against Christ, and not suffer any other
God besides himself to be adored: so that he will not establish heresies, which
are errors defended by them which profess Christ and do adore the true God;
neither will be privily bring in be^esies, but openly profess Idolatry, and
compel al others to do the same. Thirdly, these words are most falsely and
fondly applied to us Roman Catholic Priests: for first that false God of
Antichrist shall not be advanced by the Romans, but fought against, and foiled
by them, as it is clear in the very text. Dan. 11. verse. 30.
The Galleys and Romans shall come upon him, and he shall be strooken and turned
back.

And lastly, how il advised was M. Abbot, to charge poor seminary Priests with
covetousness, and speaking of things which they ought not for filthy lucres
sake? whereas it is manifest unto al men, women, and children almost, that they
who become such Priests, are so far off from seeking after any temporal gain
thereby, that they do willingly forgo al hope of benefices, and al other
whatsoever commodities and dignities in their country, which they might perhaps
as well attain unto as some others, if they would follow the current of the
time: Yea, they do also debar themselves of lands, legacies, annuities, and
al other profits and commodities whatsoever, which might accrue unto them, from
their parents, kinsfolks, and friends; being content to live upon Gods
providence, and that poor pittance which the impouerished estate of some few
Catholics will afford them. The Protestant Ministers, who by their profession
are capable of fat benefices, headships of houses, Deanaries, and such like
dignities and commodities, may be truly suspected to bend their studies that
way, and to maintain heresies in hope of gain and promotion: and they who
cannot be satisfied with two or three of those great livings joined together,
or with one Bishopric alone, but would have Bishoprics and Deanaries united;
such men may indeed rightly be suspected, to make merchandise of men's souls
for filthy lucres sake: but to impute covetousness unto seminary Priests, who
have debarred themselves of al preferment both spiritual and temporal, which
their Country yields to men of their profession, and can look for no other
promotion there, then a halter at Tyburne, was no less shameful then witless
impudency. Briefly, M. Abbot by tearing Gods words in pieces, and patching it
up again with his own words full il-fauouredly, and by applying it most
absurdly, is found to offer as great injury to it, as he has done unto those
holy ancient learned Fathers aforesaid; who were by the spirit of God selected
to be the principal expounders of it. So that finally, whether you regard the
handling of Scriptures or Fathers, you shall seldom light upon any Divine that
does perform it more insufficiently (shall I say) or more perfidiously:
nevertheless he sets such a brazen face on the matter; speaks so
confidently; conueieth it so cunningly; and does gild it over so artificially,
that the credulous and unwary reader would think him to be some jolly fellow,
and a rare flourishing writer. But be that will not take vain words for good
payment, nor tricks and shifts for sufficient proofs; but will weigh his
arguments well, and diligently examine his testimonies: he shall quickly discover
M. Abbots weakness, and find him to be one of the most shallow and
beggerliest writers of these days: for he like a mount-banke indeed (to
return his own words upon him) sets out for fresh and new merchandise,
the very rif-raf and refuse of other Protestant authors, and that which has
been an hundred times answered unto by the learned on our side. In him
therefore is truly verified that witty observation of S. Augustine, Lib. 1
cont. Gaud. c. 39.
uttered against the Donatist Gaudentius: Nihil assert praeter lassum and
quassum, he brings nothing that has not been already (by his own
com^^nions) wearied out, and (as it were) tired by over often using; and (...)
our party so shaken, battered, and beaten, that it cannot be but a foul
^sgrace among the learned to put into light, and to set to sale so base,
^erworne, thrid-bare, and ragged stuff.

This I hope will suffice for a preamble, to advertise the indifferent ^ader
what opinion he is to conceive and carry of M. Abbots writings, ^^e rest I
remit to the Treatise it self; desiring the juditious reader to ^^are with
those manifold difficulties, which we that live in the land have in this time
of persecution, both to compose and to print our books: which duly considered,
he will not greatly blame our slownesse, if our works come not forth so
speedily, as he may well expect, and we do greatly desire. Almighty God whose
glory we seek, and for whom we labor in the conversion and right instruction
of Christian souls, vouchsafe to send his heavenly blessing on our poor
travails, and upon al them who with good intention shall read them over.

MASTER ABBOTS EPISTLE TO HIS MAJESTY.
AMONG the manifold benefits, which the divine providence has yielded unto us,
by the happy entrance of your most sacred Majesty, to the imperial Crown of
this realm, we cannot but most especially recognize that, which we take to be
the pillar and vpholder of the rest, the preserua^n of true religion, and
continuance of the Gospel of Christ: which albeit it be a singular and
inestimable mercy of God, yet ^ere is found amongst us a vipers brood, a
malecontented Sama^an generation, which never ceasseth whining and repining
there (...), accounting this blessing of God to us, a great wrong to them,
^hilest by a Cachexie and corrupt disposition of the stomach, ^ey better
brook the Onions and Garleeke of Aegipt, then the ^anna of heaven, and bread
of Angels; and have ears more de^hted with the Mermaides notes, and enchanting
music of the ^oore of Babylon, then with the plaine-song of true religion,
di^cted by the simplicity of the word of God. Therefore, as in the ^ies of our
late most gracious Queen, they never rested working, bring this land again
under the slavery and bondage of the ^n of sin: so since your Majesty's
coming to the Crown, ^^ey have been still plotting the same; not only by
attempting ^ur Highness subjects, but also laboring in their Petitions and
^dicatory Epistles, to draw your Majesty one way or other, to ^nsort with them
in their damnable and accursed devises. And (...) Mount-bankes do set forth
base wares with magnifical and lofty words: so do they with brave terms
labor to grace a counterfeit and bastard faith, and in their supplications
have ^^unted to your Majesty of a religion, and never rest to commend a
religion; which indeed in the questioned part thereof, is no other but a
refined heresy, compounded of sundry ancient heresies, only clarified by
Schoole-tricks from the more feculent and gross parts thereof.

THE ANSWER TO M. ABBOTS EPISTLE TO HIS MAJESTY.
WILLIAM BISHOP.
THIS Epistle consisting partly upon vaunts of their own new-no-religion, but
more specially in a most bitter inuectiue against ours, may for the former part
be easily answered; because that in all his Epistle he has not produced one
seely proof of any parcel of it, but only avouches in a certain grave
Ministerial confidence, that their counterfeit superstition is the plaine-song
o^ truth, directed by the simplicity of Gods word; which when he goes about to
verify, an answer shall be given him. In the mean season we contrariwise take
their profession of faith, to be no better then a heap of ragged errors, raked
out of the dunghill of old condemned heresies, though freshly trimmed up, and
varnished over deceitfully, with the gloss of Gods word after their own
interpretation. And touching their pretended divine service, were pute it (as
worthily we may) to be a profane mingle-mangle compounded of some of the old
and some of the new, by humorous nouellers to please men in authority; that
they might there by shoulder out their betters, and shuffle in themselves
(though most unworthy) into the highest places of dignity, and best benefices
of the land. This briefly may serve for answer unto the which M. Abbot
speaks in praise of his own religion.

Now to those grievous and malicious slanders, which he pow^^h forth
abundantly against the poor Catholics. The first is, ^^at they are a vipers
brood, and a male contented Samaritan generation. ^ood words (gentle Sir) and
until you have gotten the credit of ^^other S. John Baptist (which will not be
this year) bear with us, ^^ough we cannot brook such foul words, so
wrongfully cast upon us: Let it be considered, whether those terms do not
rather fit men of your own coat and profession. Young vipers to ^^eepe into
this world, do gnaw out their dammes bellies, and to ^et the use of life to
themselves, do kill those that gave them life. ^^e not the Protestants (trow
you) such kind of creatures? did ^^ey not receive their christendom and new
birth by Catholics, ^^at were their Predecessors? and do they not by all
means seek ^^e overthrow and destruction of them, by whom they were
re^^nerated and borne anew? If the Catholics had been descen^^d from the
Protestants, and had put them down to set up them ^^lues, M. Abbots reproach
might have had some col our of truth: ^^t the contrary being so notorious, that
the Protestants issued of ^^e Catholics, and to hatch the vipers of their
venomous errors, ^^d (as much as in them lay) procure the destruction of their
An^^stors faith and religion; who can doubt, but that the Protestants ^e much
more like the vipers brood, then the Catholics be? The ^^me may be said of the
Samaritan generation, who albeit they ^^etended to be the offspring of Jacob,
Job. 4.
and to have the true vvor^^ip of God in the mount Garazin; yet were indeed
Idolators, ^^d by force and usurpation held that part of the country, which
^^as the ancient right of the Israelites: And because they could (...) quietly
possess it (as they thought) without they served the ^od of Israel also; 4.
Reg. 17.
they got some Priests of the Israelites among ^^em at the first, to reach them
their rites and ceremonies, and so ^^rued together both the God of Israel, and
each people their se^^ral Gods besides: Lo what it is to be a Samaritan
generation. ^^e not the Protestants their cosen germans, or very near kins^en?
They vaunt themselves to be lineally descended of the Apo^^les, and to serve
God most purely; but they can make no better ^^oofe of their pedigree and
lawful succession from the Apostles, ^hen the Samaritans could do of their
natural descent from Jacob: therefore they are strangers, borne of the sins
of the people, and raised out of the ashes of old rotten Heretics, that have
no right unto any rooms in the Catholic and Apostolic Church, no more then
the Assirians had unto the land of Israel. Again, being entered into possession
of the Church-liuinges by violence, did they not for fear of displeasing the
people (that might perhaps have hoised them out again) join very many rites
of the old service, with their new devises, and got not one only (a^ the
Samaritans did) but many of our Priests to instruct them in the old ceremonies;
even as the Samaritans for pure fear, served the God of Israel with their
own Idols? so that in every respect, the Protestant progeny is proved to
resemble to the life, a Samaritan generation. Now the Catholics, that have not
forcibly driven the Protestants out of their ancient country, nor taken any of
their Ministers to teach them how to serve their Lord, but succeeding lineally
the Apostles, as in place, so in doctrine and religion, can with no reason be
called a Samaritan generation; and consequently M. Abbot was foully ouer-seene,
to charge us with the imputation of such contumelies, that do in no sort touch
us, but do hitte themselves home. In which, he (that would be taken for a
great Orator) must needs confess, that he much forgot the wise counsel of
the prince of Orators Cicero, who says: Qui alterum criminis accuset, etc. He
that accuses another man of any crime, ought beforehand diligently to
consider, that be himself be not guilty of the same: for it is a gross and
intolerable impudency, to vpbraide another with that, wherein your self are
most faulty. But herein (as in many such like) M. Abbot thought it more policy
belike, to imitate those infamous Elders, who fearing to be accused truly by
chaste Susanna of their outrageous attempt, began first to burden her
wrongfully with the accusation of forged crimes: If therefore he speed no
better therein then they did, let him thank himself for his badde choice.

I omit here his manifold other spiteful terms against his Holiness, and
other inferior persons, as the ordinary flowers of his rusty rhethorike: yet I
cannot but note, that he does repeat again and again, the word (Religion)
too too scornefully for a man that makes account of any religion: and may not
let pass that incongruity, which M. Abbot (being a great Architect of words)
has committed in his own art. For in the forefront of his dedication, he
has placed such a number of base, rascal, and vile words, as must needs
seem very unfit to present unto so high a Majesty, as is the Monarke of great
Britanny: whose most civil and delicate ears, may not abide the sound of such
rude and harsh speeches: as be (for example) Vipers brood, whore, bastard,
slavery, damnable, accursed, inchaunting, whining, repining, onions, garleeke,
feculent, cachexy, and such like: a dainty mess of words no doubt, and meet
to be tendered unto so juditious a Prince, for a choice breake-fast. Page 39.
Join here unto that which M. Philpot (as he says) in great heat of spirit
answered Doct. Chadsey: Before God you are barearsed in all your religion, and
many of the same sort, wherewith his writings are besmeared; and then judge
whether they do not smell more rankly of some noisome tan-fat, then savor of
any ciuility; and whether that old Adage may not be verified in him, That which
is bredde in the bone will never out of the flesh: otherwise the study of
Philosophy in so famous an University, and chiefly the profession of Divinity,
would have weaned him from such rustical and homely terms, and have taught
him to use more ciuility in his writings, dedicated specially to so high a
Majesty. Let us proceed.

ROBERT ABBOT.
AMONGST the rest one Doctor Bishop a secular and seminary Priest, a man of
special reputation among them, and chosen to be a maine stickler in the late
contentions of the secular Priests against the Jesuits, has taken upon him to
solicit your Majesty in that behalf, and having apprehended a speech or two,
delivered from your Majesty's own mouth in the conference of Hampton Court,
would make you believe, that if you will stand unto what your self have
delivered, you must needs admit their Catacatholike tradition, to be the
Catholic and true faith. Whose Epistle to your Majesty, when I had perused and
examined (the answering of the whole book, being by authority under your
Majesty committed unto me) I could not but wonder, that the author of it durst
offer it, being so full of falsehood and childish folly, to a Prince so learned
and well able to judge thereof; but that I considered that one untruth must
uphold another, and he that has undertaken a badde cause, must use worse
means for the maintaining of it. He charge the religion established and
professed by your Highness, with heresies, impieties, blasphemies,
absurdities, and what not that malice and ignorance can devise to speak? And
this is the common style of the rest of them, who when they come to prove and
exemplify what they speak, they show themselves to be but sicophants and
hirelings to the Pope, for whose sake they must speak to gale and disgrace,
howsoever there be no truth in that they speak. And if they dare thus
impudently carry themselves in print, and to your Majesty, what dare they not
say in corners, to the intrapping and seducing of simple and unlearned men? by
which means, many of your Majesty's subjects are entangled in a misconscience
of religion, and thereby withdrawn from the true conscience of their loyalty
toward your Highness their Liege and sovereign Lord, and are made but flax
and tow for the fire of their seditious practices: who have been bold already
to tell your Majesty, that if you will not yield them what they desire, Sect.
34. of D. Bishops Epistle. Aug. in psalm.
God knows what that forcible weapon of necessity will force them unto at
length; therein verifying of themselves that which S. Augustine said of the
Donatists their Predecessors. Where they cannot by sty and wily cosenage creep
like Aspes, there with open professed violence they rage like Lions.

WILLIAM BISHOP.
THAT dissentions do sometimes fall among the best and most perfect Christians,
is not unknown unto them that be conversant in the Scriptures. In the
beginning of the Apostles government, Act. 6. ver. 1.
There arose a murmuring of the Greeks against the Hebrews, for that their
widows were despised in the daily ministry. Again, Act. 15. verse. 39.
There arose a dissension (between two principal persons S. Paul and S.
Barnabas) about the taking of John surnamed Mark into their company, so that
they departed the one from another. Such dissentions as are without the breach
of unity of faith and religion, are so incident unto the diversity of men's
different judgments, that no advised creature ought to be scandalized thereat.
If then the Priests and Jesuits did disagree about the introduction of a new
kind of discipline and government (which never lightly happens in any common
weal or company, without some jarre and contention,) what just cause has M.
Abbot or his fellows, to declaime against it? We do not strive about the
number and nature of the Sacraments, as the Lutherans and Zwinglians did and
do: we do not disagree about the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy and the whole frame
of church-gouernment, as do the Protestants and Puritans; or briefly, in any
matter of faith or religion: only the Priests found themselves grieved, because
in that matter of a new form of government to be put upon them, neither their
aduises were heard, nor their consent required, whom it did principally
concern; but al passed by the information and instigation of them (as it was
thought) who would be wholly exempted from it. At this manner of proceeding, and
at that which ensued of it, they were not a little moved: yet, seeing they
orderly sought to their Superiors for redress, and referred the whole matter
unto their determination, the dissension was but, such as has been among the
best Christians; what great matter then can they make of this? And did M. Abbot
mean (trow you) by making me a special stickler for the secular Priests, to
pick a thank at my hands, for reco^mending me thereby to his Majesty and the
state, who seem to have the Jesuits in far greater jealousy for dealing
in matters of government, then the seculars? It is not likely, because he
foorth-with falls to discommending me and my simple work, as much as may
be; wondering how I durst offer it to his Majesty, being so full of falsehood and
childish folly Is it not a far greater wonder, to see so industrious and
learned a Doctor, as M. Abbot would be reputed, to be holden one year and a
half, about the answering of one sheet and a half of such childish follies?
nay is it not a wonder of wonders, that he who takes himself able to furnish
truth with all it strength, In his epistle to the King.
should notwithstanding confess, that he may not think himself to have
attained (in this his answer to these childish follies) unto that that the
matter does require? How hang these things together? if you thought it policy
to depresse and disable my book, as in effect containing nothing but toies,
and the rublish of old walls; you should not so soon after have declared in
words, and by long labor about it rectified in deeds, that it required great
ability and long time, to be in any reasonable sort answered.

When you say that I charge the religion professed by his Majesty, with
heresies, impieties, blasphemies, etc. you in the waightier part do falsely
slander me, Page 121.
which I will prove even by your own testimony. For I say (as it may be seen
in your own book) that I will let pass their impiety, that make God the
author of al wickedness, and say nothing of their blasphemy, who touch our
Savior with doubting, if not with despair of his own salvation. In which my
speeches, I tax by the way Calvin, In the Preface unto the second part of the
reformed. Page. 124.
Beza, and some other, whom I have more fully proved else where, to teach
plainly those points of impiety and blasphemy. But how does that concern the
doctrine established and professed by his Highness, seeing that you your self
testify, that you in your Churches and Schools do determine the contrary?
you your self then are my witness, that I do not charge the doctrine
established by his Majesty, neither with impieties nor blasphemies; though
Calvin and his accomplices stand justly charge therewith. And you yourselfe,
though at the first you would seem to dislike them, yet draw very near them:
for first you are not abashed to say; Page 125.
That God takes occasion to provoke a man to do wickedly. Now to provoke,
that is, to stir up and push a man forward to commit sin, is so evil of it
self, and so contrary to Gods will and commandments, that it cannot be imputed
to God without impiety; who as S. James witnesses, Jacob. 1. verse. 13.
Tempts no man. Further, you say in the same section: That the burden of Gods
wrath lay so beauy upon Christ our redeemer, that it pressed him even to the
gates of hell; and his estate for present feeling, was as if God had abhorred
his soul. Page 127.
Again, Christ according to his present feeling said; my GOD, my GOD, why have
thou forsaken me: which words signify, that our Savior both thought, said,
and felt, that his heavenly father for the time had forsaken him, and did
abhor his soul; which, if it be not blasphemy, I know not what blasphemy is.
For God does not withdraw his love and liking from any man that he once loved,
and does not abhor his soul, unless that man do first forsake God, and
commit some offense against his divine Majesty, as all divines agree: but to
imagine that our Savior committed any offense against his heavenly Father (as
impious Calvin does insinuate) is flat blasphemy against his immaculate purity,
In c. 27. Mat.
and against the holy Scriptures, that do testify Hebr. 7. verse. 26.
Our high Priest to be holy, innocent, impolluted, segregated from sinners,
higher then the heavens, etc. That had no necessity to offer for his own
sins. How therefore could his heavenly Father abhor his soul? or how could
he be so evil persuaded of so good a Father? God indeed to show the rigor of
his justice against our sins, for which Christ suffered, and the better to
declare Christ's invincible fortitude, and most fervent love toward us; was
content not to yield unto Christ's humanity upon the cross, so much as the
ordinary inward comfort, which he affords unto all that suffer for his names
sake: and that only did Christ in the name of his humanity express, where he
said; My GOD, my GOD, why have thou forsaken me, and do not afford me so
much as that inward consolation which thou grantest to others? But he was at
the very same instant most assured, that even then God did love him more
ardently (if it were possible) then at any time in his whole life before;
because that then he did for his sake, according to his heavenly decree, and to
satisfy his vvil and pleasure, suffer the greatest sorrows that the nature of
man could sustain, and that without any kind of extraordinary or ordinary
help, comfort or consolation: but of this I have spoken more in the Preface
before alleged.

Here I am only to note how M. Abbot slandereth me in this place, with that
whereof he himself clears me afterward in his book: Let us go on with
his reproaches. He says; That we be but sicophants, and hirelings to the Pope,
for whose sake we must gale and disgrace, howsoever there be no truth in that
we speak. How proves he this? is it not the part of a notable sicophant
indeed, to vpbraide a whole order of men with so great crimes, without any
proof at al? How many learned Catholic writers be there in the world, that
never received one penny from the Popes holiness, no nor never so much as saw
him, or had any particular dealings with him? what they do out of their duty
toward God, and of zeal to his sacred truth, that M. Abbot would have seely
souls to believe, to be done only of constraint and fear, or for some hope of
worldly gain. Perge mentiri; go on Sir with your tale: By which means (says
he) many of your subjects are entangled in a misconscience of religion, and
thereby drawn from their true loialty, and prepared for seditious practices:
so says he both simply and falsely, without any color of proof. But we say,
that by the Catholic doctrine, al subjects consciences are rightly informed in
the ways of God, and thereby instructed to be true and faithful to their
Princes, and to hate al such practices, as tend to the perturbation of the
weal public. Yea, we do more forcibly and effectually by the Catholic
doctrine move al subjects unto dutiful obedience, then the Protestants do:
Calvin. lib. 4. Instit. ca. 10. number. 5. Perkins reformed catholic, page 157.
for they hold, that Christian liberty allows al men the free use of al
things indifferent, and that such things may not be made necessary in
conscience; so that if the Prince go about to restrain his subjects of that
liberty, they are not bound to obey him: whereas we al maintain, that al men
are bound in conscience to obey al such just laws of Princes, as are not
directly against the law of God: our doctrine therefore, does far excel the
Protestants, in the matter of true loialty.

And to answer here by the way, to that odious argument of theirs; That the
Papists (forsooth) are but half subjects, because in matters of religion they
are not ruled by their King and his laws, but do depend upon the Pope: I say,
that if al they, who in matters of faith and salvation, do not take their
temporal Prince to be their supreme governor, should be esteemed but half
subjects: then the mighty Monarkes of France and Spain, and al other Catholic
Kings or Princes of the world, have not any one whole subject; for none of
their people acknowledge them for chief co^manders in Ecclesiastical causes:
then also for a thousand years together, our former Kings were wholly
destitute of true and loial subjects; for they depended no less then we do
upon the Bishop of Rome, for declaration and decision of spiritual affairs, as
it is very particularly demonstrated, in that learned answer unto Sr. Edward
Cooks fifth book of reports. Briefly, if this their reason were good, the
Apostles and all the first and best Christians were but half subjects: for in
matters of faith not one of them would be ruled by the Roman Emperors, or
other their temporal Princes; but did al acknowledge and confess some other
supreme governor in those spiritual cases: wherefore, they must either allow
us to be perfect loial subjects, notwithstanding our dependence upon the Popes
holiness in causes Ecclesiastical, or else condemn as disloial, all the best
Christian subjects that ever were even since Christ's own days. And thus
much may serve for this place, to show that they are to be reputed whole
subjects, and that of the best mark, who do give unto Math. 22. verse. 21.
Caesar, that which is Caesar's, reserving nevertheless unto God and his Vicar,
that which to him appertains.

I return to M. Abbots accusations: They have been bold already (says he) to
tell your Majesty, that if you will not yield them what they desire, God knows
what that forcible weapon of necessity, will drive them to at length, meaning
(as he expounds it) that if we could not get what we desire by vviles like
Aspes, we would like raging Lions seek it by open violence. These words of M.
Abbots makes me remember that worthy saying of a grave wise author. Sr. Thomas
Moore.
Take away lying and railing from Heretics, and you shall leave them little or
nothing. This one little sentence of mine, whereon he makes a whole discourse a
part, and does glance and girde at it very often elsewhere, (thinking to have
gotten thereby a great advantage against al Catholics) he could not propose to
his Majesty without a lease of lies. The first is, that he avouches my only
fear and conjecture, to be the constant opinion of al Catholics; they have
been bold says he, when he cites my only words vvriting in mine own
name: wherefore he does open wrong to others, to impute that to them whereunto
they were not accessory; if there be any oversight committed in it, it is mine
alone, and not any other bodies. M. Abbots second untruth, is couched in these
words: If your Majesty will not yield them what they desire, which are far
wide from that which I wrote: for I said not, if we may not have what we
desire (which were not only a tolleration, but a perfect restitution of the
Catholic faith) but if poor innocent Catholics, should for their conscience
sake only be stripped of al their goods, deprived of their liberty, and live
always in deep disgrace, and eminent danger of their lives, without any hope
of amendment; that then at length God knows what necessity may drive them
unto: this you see is far different, from that which M. Abbot relates.

Now to the third and most spiteful lie of all the rest: that if they may not
obtain what they desire by fair means, then they will with fire and sword
enforce it; which I neither said nor thought, as God the searcher of al hearts
does best know: I only signified a far off, and that under these doubtful
terms (God knows,) that it was not unlike (considering the frailty of man's
corrupt nature) but that such extreme usage, might perhaps provoke and stir
up some impatient and fiery spirits, to undergo some certain attempt against
some of them, whom they took to be the principal procurers of their misery;
which other good Catholics would be right sorry to see, and might peradventure
greatly rue. This being the uttermost of my meaning, and my words in
reasonable construction not importing any thing more, was it not the part of a
venomous spider, to suck so pestilent poison out of it? That vulgar proverb to
which I alluded: Durum telum necessitas, or as it is in English, Necessity
has no law, is approved of al men: and the prudent Politician has observed,
that Patientia laesa vertitur in furorem; Patience to much pressed does turn
into fury. Out of which and the like Axioms of the wise, and over frequent
putting them in practice by the unwise; a man of small providence might, if not
easily foresee, yet greatly suspect and fear, least such urgent extreamitie
without any hope of redress, would make some evil mortified men, forget
their duty to both God and man, and run headlong into some mischief. On the
other side, al men that do treat of the method of persuasion, do instruct
him that is to deal in that kind, to propose as well the inconveniences that
may ensue, if that be not done which he exhorts unto, as the commodities
that will arise of the doing of it; and when this is performed in decent
terms and dutiful manner, none but wrangling cauillers can take any exception
against it: Now, further to rack and wrest it into so odious a sense, as M.
Abbot does, must needs convince him to be a very virulent calumniator. Let us
put the case, that those sage Counselors, who advised King Roboam to deal
more graciously with his people, then his Father had done before him, should
after they had used other reasons to persuade him thereunto, have added this to
move him the sooner to condescend to his subjects suit: That if he did then
refuse to grant that their earnest request, God knows what they might
thereupon be moved to do; had they been worthy to be styled false traitors
for their labor, if out of their fear of future mishaps, they had put their
Prince in mind of them beforehand, that he might being so warned the better
prevent and avoid them? Sure I am, that the holy Ghost does commend them for
wise and faithful Counselors, and prefers them far before those other,
who encouraged the King to deal more hardly with his people, then ever his
Predecessor had done before him: yet their words recorded in the sacred Text,
seem not so respective as mine are; for they willed their Sovereign, 3. Reg.
12. verse. 7.
To obey the voice of his subjects, and to serve them, and then they would
serve him; signifying A contrario sensu, that if he did not yield unto their
suit, they would serve him no longer: so that the ordinary method of
persuasion approved by all the learned, fenced also and fortified with the
president of so worthy wise men, commended in holy Scripture, will serve (I
hope) for this time, to shelter me from the tempestuous tongue of M. Abbot. I
vvil hereafter in the proper place, make answer particularly to al his
exaggerations, outcries, and inferences thereupon; because he almost in every
part of his discourse, is twanging upon this string: If I had ouer-reached in
any point of duty, I may be well assured, that I should have most often heard of
it; he tosseth and tumbleth those few temperate words of mine so busily and
spitefully; which if they be compared unto the plain and round speeches, which
the pillars of their Gospel do chaunt and sound out in that kind, are not so
much as flea-bitings. Hear some of their sentences and then judge.

Their ringleader Luther defines in express terms: Luther. ad Elect.
Saxon. and Lantgra. tom. 6. fol. 602.
That it is the duty of a subject, to rise in arms against his Sovereign in
defense of their religion: Yea, That they do grievously offend, and tempt God,
if in that his cause, they use not their weapons when they may: and this to
have been the resolute opinion of other learned Lutherans, their own
Hystoriographer John Sleidan has recorded. Sleidan. l. 22. hyst. fol. 345. Li.
4. Epistolaru^ Zwing. and Oecolamp. page 868. and 869.
With Luther in that point agrees Zwinglius, another of their great Rabbines,
affirming; That if the Emperor or any other Prince oppress the Gospel, the
people ought to resist them: which if they do not, but suffer the Prince to
foil the Gospel, they thereby become as guilty of that heinous crime, as the
oppressors themselves. John Calvin surpasses the rest: for he declares,
Calvin. in cap. 6. Dan. v. 22. and 25.
Al Kings that go about to suppress the Gospel, to rebel and rise against
God, and thereby to deprive themselves of al Kingly authority; Yea, to be
unworthy the name of men: and that their subjects ought rather to spit in their
faces, then to obey them. I let pass for breuities sake, what Goodman and the
English brethren at Geneua decreed, concerning rebelling against our Queen
Mary of happy memory: and what Knoxe and Buchanan, preached, taught, and
practiced against another blessed Queen Mary of Scotland. But M. Jewels
opinion in this case, is worthy to be chronicled; who living under a Prince of
his own religion, yet to make it evident to the world what the Protestants
constant opinion thereof is, does deliver; In the first part of his defense,
pa. 16. and 17.
That subjects indeed are bound to obey their Princes, how be it not in all
things, but so far as Gods glory is not touched: wherefore, the Noble men of
Scotland (that were then up in arms against his Majesty's mother) had learned
of S. Peter, that it is better to obey God then man. Further, the Queen of
Scotland was obeyed of her subjects, as far as it is convenient for Gods
people to obey their Prince: which was by force of arms for the Gospel to
cast her into prison, and to deprive her of her Princely crown and dignity.
These then being both the common doctrine and practice of Protestants, (which
M. Abbot could not be ignorant off) with what face could he keep such ado
about those few words of mine, that do neither teach, commend, nor allow of
any violence offered to their Prince, no not in defense of men's own goods,
liberties, and lives; but only to prevent al danger, do put his Majesty in
mind of the old proverb: Durum telum necessitas, and refer it unto his
Majesty's provident wisdom, to consider what may follow there of? and thus
much of that matter, the sentence of S. Augustine shall be examined hereafter.

ROBERT ABBOT.
SOME effect whereof your Majesty has seen, in that barbarous and
Scithian-like attempt, lately made for the destruction of your Highness person
and blood, and perpetual subversion and overthrow of the whole realm: which as
it differs from the practice of al ancient Christians, and Christian Churches
(which undoubtedly were of God) so it plainly declares, that that doctrine
which professes not a lawfulness only, but a merit in such attempts, is
undoubtedly of the Devil and not of God. The brochers of which monstrous and
unnatural villainies, as they have long time lived in exercise of that malice;
so still will make it to appear, that they are not yet disgorged of the poison
of it. Whereof since they have given so great an argument, and assurance, by
abusing your Majesty's lenity and patience toward them, when laws might more
severely have proceeded against them; our prayer to God is, that your Majesty
may from hence-foorth, take these things so far to heart, as shall be needful
for the safety of your Roial person, your posterity and realm. And as for us,
true it is, that our jelousie over the souls of your subjects, and grief to
see them so seduced and beguiled, has long made us say out of the Apostles
affection, as he did of the false Apostles: Galat. 5. verse. 12.
Would to God they were even cut off that trouble you; being well assured, that
their advantages gotten by your Majesty's patience toward them, would in
the end be a disadvantage to your self. But yet we could not but subscribe, to
your Majesty's most religious and Princely care, first to give them instruction
and satisfaction, to try whither receiving answer to those things which to
your Majesty they have alleged, they would be reclaimed from that headstrong
presumption, which hitherto has so mightily possessed them: wherein if they
by their intolerable trecheries, have altered your Majesty's intent of favor
unto them, and the state conceive just cause, with all severity and rigor to
proceed immediately against them; the guilt lies upon themselves, and they
must confess, that they themselves have drawn the sword, to be imbrued in
their own blood.

WILLIAM BISHOP.
TOUCHING that detestable enterprise, projected by some few green heads, who
at their death made profession of the Catholic religion (though the chiefest
of them as I verily think, had not lived Catholics three years before they
entered into this conspiracy, but conuersed among Protestants, of whom they
might have learned that wicked lesson:) I do humbly and earnestly request al
discreet Protestants (as they fear Christ's just judgments) not to suffer
themselves to be further estranged from other Catholics, that were altogether
innocent of it, then Christian charity, and humane equity will give them good
leave. First, then touching our religion (which M. Abbot most unjustly would
have to stand charged with this most unchristian plot; for God be thanked it
never proceeded to the hurt of any man's little finger,) it does more roundly
and absolutely condemn such bloody conspiracies, then the Protestants Gospel
does by an hundred degrees; for their chief Doctors do seem not much to
dislike of it, as you have heard before: but we do detest and abhor it, as
both highly offensive to God, and very hateful to man. But the conspiratours
with their accomplices, having suffered for it most painful and shameful death,
and loss of al their lands and goods: what reason or conscience is it, that
the guilt and obloquy thereof, should be extended and cast upon others, who
are wholly guiltless and free from al priuity or approving of it? the holy
Ghost says: Eccles. 27. verse. 3.
Conteritur cum delinquente delictum; the offense is wiped away and
extinguished, when the offendour is put to death and consumed. Again; Ezech.
18. verse. 20.
Anima que peccauerit, etc. The man who has offended shall die: The Son shall
not carry the iniquity of his Father, nor the Father of the Son, but the
justice of a just man shall be to himself, and the impiety of the ungodly shall
be upon him self, and not lie upon another. This being the decree of God,
with what countenance can they that take upon them to be Gods Ministers,
impute the crime of those delinquents unto al men of the same religion, without
any further proof of their fault therein? That holy Patriarch Abraham, when he
heard that God purposed to destroy Genes. 18. verse. 24.
Sodom and Gomorrha with fire and brimstone, for their stinking and
abominable sins, thought it yet a duty of humanity, to entreat for
creatures of his own kind, though they were never so badde, and out of
natural compassion, began to sue for their pardon; obtaining at length, that
if there had been but ten just and innocent men in five cities and great
towns, all the rest should for their sakes have been pardoned. Do not they
then show themselves no kind children of Abraham (the Father of al true
believers,) nor to have any Christian compassion or good nature in them, who
are so far off from suing out the offenders pardon, for the sakes of many
harmless persons, that they would clean contrary, have thousands of
innocents destroyed for the trespass of some dozen of delinquents? and if this
will not serve to purge and cleanse their festred stomachs, of that evil
affection with which their preachers have infected them, I then do most
heartily request them, to suppose for a season, the case to be their own; and
then to tell me, whether they would think it reason, that they should be taken
for accessory to al treasons committed by men of their own religion. And to
omit al other rebellions raised at home and abroad by Protestants (which are
exceeding many,) would they have our Sovereign Lord KING JAMES, repute and
esteem al Ministers and their disciples to be disloial unto him and traitors,
Dangerous positions.
because the Ministers in Scotland with their followers rebelled against him,
and by force of arms compelled him to yield unto their wills; or because that
the Earl Gowry with his brother and family (almost earnest Gospellers) did
actually attempt, traitorously to have murdered his Majesty's most sacred
person, that therefore he should hate al men of the same religion, and repute
them for traitors? I am well assured they will say no, and plead that ^it were no
reason nor justice, to punish them that never meant his Majesty any harm, for
the fault of others; and that in all religions there be some badde, for whose
wickedness the good of the same religion ought not to be oppressed: if they
would thus plead, if the case were their own, they should in Christian
equity admit the like plea for us. But the simple people are (by their
preachers and others) made to believe, that al Papists were privy to that
conspiracy, or at least would have been glad of it, if it had succeeded and
taken place: they are very simple indeed, that suffer them selves to be so
persuaded.

For answer unto the later surmise: If it had taken effect, it had blown up
as well Catholics as Protestants, and that in great numbers; who the first day
of the Parliament, are wont to press into that place to hear his Majesty's
speech: wherefore, Catholics could not have been glad of that, which should
have devoured so many of their own profession. Again, suppose all the
Parliament had been blown up (which God of his great goodness prevented)
how much the nearer had the Catholics been to have obtained the establishme^t
of their religion, the body of the realm being against them, and would for
that bloody and barbarous act, have hated them much more then ever before it
did? so that it has no probability, that the wiser sort of Catholics would
have been glad, that that should have been brought to pass, which would have
proved so hurtful to so many of them, without any certainty to have benefited
the rest. This therefore is only a malicious and odious surmise, put upon them
by their backe-friends at pleasure. To the other point which is of very great
moment (if is were any way probable) I answer; that all the circumstances of
the matter, do fully clear and acquit al other Catholics of that crime: for
first the whole process of the offenders, is set out in print by his
Highness authority, where twelve or thirteen persons only, are proved to have
been privy, consenting, and accessory to it; who were al and every one of
them, bound by oath and Sacrament not to communicate or utter the same to any
other: so that al others being kept from so much as the knowledge of it, how
could they be consenting to that they knew not? Secondly, his Majesty both by
public speech in the Parliament, and by proclamation in the country did
declare; that there were many Catholics innocent of this treason, yea some of
them as forwardly to discover and apprehend the offenders, as any other
subjects: these be his Highness one speeches, which are very memorable in a
Proclamation of the 7. of Nouemb. 1603. Although we are by good experience, so
well persuaded of the loialty of diverse of our subjects (though not professing
true religion) that they do as much abhor this detestable conspiracy, as our
selves; and will be ready to do their best endeauours (though with exspence of
their blood) to suppress al attempts against our safty, etc. where also his
Majesty out of his Princely equity commanded, that the innocent should not be
wrongfully vexed about it. Thirdly, that most vigilant and prudent Counselor,
the right Honorable Earl of Salisbury now Lord Treasurer, (who was like to
look as far into this plot as any other) in his eloquent discourse printed,
does not only free other Catholics from that conspiracy; but also yields a
very probable argument therefore, to wit: That the conspirators rising in a
country where many of their religion are thought to dwell none (excepting some
few of their own servants and kinsmen) would aid or assist them; Yea, many
sent their men and armor to pursue and apprehend them, which was a manifest
proof that they abhorred from that practice: for in any ordinary quarrel, the
meanest of half a dozen of them might quickly have found many more to have
taken his part, then al they could get together to assist them in that hateful
enterprise. This might be yet further fortified if need were, by the testimony
of Sr. Edward Cook (now chief Justice of the common pleas, then Attorney
general) who in his plea against the delinquents, delivers the very same
observation; That none of their religion would take part with them therein. Al
which, proceeding from such principal persons; who were, as of best
intelligence in those affairs, so nothing partial in favoring that religion:
how then can any man of mean understanding be yet holden in that gross error,
that al Catholics were consenting, or any way privy to that powder treason?
And if al Protestants that conceive so uncharitable an opinion of their poor
afflicted countrymen, be to blame; how much more are those preachers to be
condemned, who (notwithstanding the public notice thereof given out in print,
of which they could not be ignorant) have ever since, and do not yet cease,
to cry out, infame, and slander al Catholics with that heinous crime? If they
were Gods true servants, they would rather persuade to mercy, th^n to
justice; because God does exalt mercy above justice: but to cry out against
harmless subjects, that they may be cruelly handled for other men's faults,
has no color of either mercy or justice, but does convince them of invincible
malice, the peculiar property of the evil spirit and his Ministers.

Now to M. Abbot, one of their principal proctors for blood as it seems. He
forsooth (Out of the Apostles affection) wishes, that his Majesty would give
order, that Catholic Priests at the least might be even cut in pieces:
assuring his Majesty and the state, that if they with all rigor and severity
proceed immediately against them, the guilt shall ly upon themselves; because
they have drawn the sword to be imbrued in their own blood. What a
bloodthirsty Minister have we here? what? because some rash unadvised
Catholics, (who were for the greater part, much decayed in their estates) have
deserved the sword, may al of the same religion how innocent soever of that
fact, be therefore cut in piece? make ye no difference between the just and
the unjust? must not the sword of justice be put up into the scabberd, when
the unjust and trespassers are punished? No says M. Abbot, it must not so be;
for being once justly drawn, he that draws it may lawfully lay about him,
and strike as well on the left hand as on the right, it makes no matter whom he
kill and slay, so he be of the same religion: for the guilt of al shall be laid
upon them, that first caused the sword to be drawn, and not upon him that
strikes. Did ever any Christian man hear such a wicked sentence? can any thing
be more unjust, cruel, and barbarous? what greater indignity could he have
offered unto that charitable vessel of election S. Paul, then to make him
patron of this his most detestable doctrine? who was so far off, from
desiring any evil man's death, that rather he wished to die himself for his
greatest enemies, then to have any of them killed: Romans 9. verse. 3.
Optabam anathema esse a Christo pro fratribus meis; and these words of his
cited by M. Abbot, are far from that sense, that he would wrest and wring out
of them. Indeed the Manichaean Heretic Faustus, did take them even as M.
Abbot does, that you may know how well one Heretic consorteth with another; to
whom S. Augustine answered 1200. Lib. 10. cont. Faustu^. c. 22.
years ago thus: The Apostle seems to have wished il unto the Jews, that
went about to persuade the Galathians to circumcision, when he said; I would
they were even cut off that trouble you; but if thou did well consider the
person that wrote it, thou would understand that he rather wished them well,
by a most elegant ambiguity of the word (abscissi) cut off or gelded: for there
be Eunuchs, who have cut and gelded themselves for the Kingdom of heaven;
which (says that learned Doctor) Faustus would have perceived and tasted, if
unto the word of God he had brought a Godly pal^te or taste: so that the true
meaning of S. Paul's words are, that he would have them that persuaded the
faithful to be circumcised, not only to be circumcised themselves, but also to
be abscided, that is, to be gelded; and that not carnally neither, as S.
Augustine there expounds it, but spiritually, that is, to live continently al
their life time, the better to serve in the ministry; of the Gospel If M.
Abbot out of his Apostolical affection do vvish that to Catholic Priests, he
has his desire; for they do profess perpetual chastity, the more
conveniently to serve God in that calling: but if he mean thereby to incense
his Majesty, to imbrue his sword in their blood, as the course of his words
do too plainly import, he was as far vvide from the right meaning of S.
Paul's holy words, as he differs from him in spirit and affection: And there
fore too too presumptuously does he rank himself in affection with that most
zealous Apostle S. Paul. What do you speak out of the Apostles affection?
bate me an ace I pray you modest Sir; the best man that lives at this day, yea
that ever lived since the Apostles time, would have been foully ashamed to
have compared himself with S. Paul in zeal and affection. But our graceless
Ministers, that have no spark of true zeal in them, blush not to equal
themselves herein, with the most zealous of Christ's peerlesse Apostles; which
must needs move al discreet Christians, to debase and humble them as much as
may be, if not upon conscience for love of the truth, yet to fulfill that decree
of our Savior Christ: Luc. 18. verse. 14.
He that exalts himself shall be humbled. Now to the last part of this
Epistle.

ROBERT ABBOT.
YET the course by your Highness intended, has still most necessary use for
the discovering of the impudency of these petitioners, for the gaining of such
as may be gained to the acknowledgment of Gods truth: And that as Bernard in
Cant.
S. Bernard says, though the Heretic arise not from his filth, yet the Church
may be confirmed in the faith. To a part of which business, since it has
pleased them to whom your Majesty has committed the care thereof, to call me
the meanest of many other, albeit by reason of some infirmity in my eyes, I
have not yet been able to perform the whole that was assigned unto me; yet
for the time, to give some part of satisfaction to many of your Majesty's
subjects, whom it has much moved to see the state of our Church with
calumnious libels so traduced and slandered, I have published this answer to
Doct. Bishops Epistle, therein carrying my self faithfully and uprightly, as
to God and my Prince, though my ability be not such, as that I may think my
self to have attained to that, that the matter does require. But that which
my small talent will yield, in all humble duty I tender to your Majesty's most
gracious and Princely favor, hoping that your Highness acceptance of these
endeavors, shall stir up those that are of greater gifts, to yield greater
helps, for the upholding and further building of the Church of Christ. The Lord
preserve your most excellent Majesty, and as he has hitherto done, so
continue still to discover and bring to naught, the devises and counsels of them
that imagine evil against you: and as of his infinite mercy he has implanted
in your Majesty the knowledge and love of his true religion; so go forward
with his good work, to water that which he has planted, that it may bring
forth plentiful fruit to the public advancement of the glory of God, and the
private comfort of your own soul at the day of Jesus Christ.

Your Majesty's most loyal and dutiful subject. ROBERT ABBOT.

WILLIAM BISHOP.
THAT his most excellent Majesty, desires to have al his liege people fully
satisfied in these weighty matters of their eternal salvation, he is therefore
highly to be honored, reverenced, and beloved: but that there is no better
order taken for the due execution of it, then to employ the pens of such
railing vvriters, we are right heartily sorry. Our vehement desire and most
humble suit, has been and is unto his gracious Hihgnesse, that a public
conference upon equal conditions might be granted us; where men being brought
face to face will be made to blush if they speak not directly and soundly to
the purpose, and where they shall not be suffered to shift off matters, as they
do absent by writing. In the mean season we wish very greatly, and earnestly
request them to whom his Majesty has committed this care for answering our
books, that they would vouchsafe to match us somewhat more euenly, and not to
appoint a great cracking sower of words, to cope with them that seek to cut
off al superfl^ity and ornaments of words, and to furnish their work only
with arguments. In deed, if there were nothing in my writings but childish
toies, as M. Abbot reports; then he without doubt was a fit man to give it the
answer: but if there lie more marrow and pith hidden in it then one at the
first sight would perhaps suppose, then surely it does require a man of more
substance then he, though of lesser show.

I have in my Preface declared, how much these few words of S. Bernard (cited
by M. Abbot) be abused. That blessed devout Father, wished al Protestants and
their like (whom he in that very discourse defines to be Heretics) to rise
from the filth of their own errors and evil life, and to return to the
Catholic Roman Church; the faith whereof he in all his lifetime embraced, and
by all means possible confirmed. I reserved to this place for the affinity of
proper applying, the other two sentences taken out of S. Augustine; the former
is set in the forefront of his book, and is rehearsed again in the latter
end: Eorum dicta contraria, etc. If I would refel their sayings against us, so
often as they impudently resolve not to care what they say, so that they speak
(in what sort soever) against our positions, it would grow unto an infinite
piece of work. This sentence of S. Augustine is pronounced against Infidels,
who did not believe at al in Christ, nor profess the Christian faith; as
appears both by the general scope of those books of the city of God, Lib.
2. de ci^itat. cap. 2.
which are written against the Heathens, and more particularly by the third
chapter of the same second book by him cited. Now with what countenance and
congruity, could M. Abbot cite that against us Christians, which he knew right
well not to concern them any thing at al, at least in S. Augustines meaning?
M. Abbot thought (belike) to win no small reputation of great reading, and
good remembrance of the ancient Doctors works: but alleging them as he
commonly does, clean besides the holy Fathers intention, he shall (I ween)
pick very small thanks of any juditious reader for his labor, but be esteemed
rather for one that is somewhat pretily ouer-seene, then any whit well seen
in their learned writings.

Now to the other sentence of S. Augustine, which he pronounces against the
Donatists (our Predecessors, if al be true that M. Abbot says:) where they
cannot by fly and wily cosenage creep like Aspes, In psalm.
there with open professed violence they rage like Lions. Note that M. Abbot
cited this place even as that of S. Bernard, in general, not quoting
particularly where, there being above 200. discourses of S. Augustines upon the
Psalms: the cause was, that he knew well that it did make nothing for his
purpose. The Donatists were divided among themselves into three principal
sects, called Donatists, Rogatists, and Maximianists: Now, the Donatists being
the strongest part, and the head of the others, would in a certain city
thrust out their younger brethren the Maximianists: and not knowing how
otherwise to compass it, because of the temporal Magistrate who favored
neither party greatly, but was rather Catholic; the Donatists finally resolved
to plead, that the Maximianists were Heretics, and therefore by the Imperial
laws then and there in force, not to enjoy any spiritual liuinges; using this
crafty trick of cosenage against their near kinsmen the Maximianists, for
which S. Augustine resembles them to Aspes. Now against the Catholics in
their coasts, they did rore and rage like Lions. Then does that holy Father
show, How the Lions teeth were to be broken in their own mouths: for if
(says he) the Maximianists because they were Heretics, were not capable of
any Church liuinges; much less were the Donatists who were the greater
Heretics of the two, and against whom more specially the Imperial laws were
enacted. Hence it is easy to be seen, how this sentence might be applied unto
the Lutherans, that in some places of Germany, hoise out their younger
brethren the Caluinists as Heretics: and also to the Protestants in England,
who deal in l^ke manner with the Puritans; carrying themselves like Aspes
more wilely toward them, pretending only to censure and chastise them, under
color of Ecclesiastical uniformity among themselves: but proceeding against
the Catholics Lion-like, with open professed violence. But how this may be
cast upon the Catholics, no man can see (I trow) unless it be M. Abbot with
his spiteful soar eyes: so that finally, few men can be found to match M.
Abbot, in the untoward and il favored applying of the Fathers sentences, which
has been also before declared. And because he both here and often afterward
calls us Donatists, and the Donatists our Predecessors, I will here once for all, show who be true natural Donatists, and that out of S. Augustine and
Optatus; both very renowned Bishops, both most learned and sincere vvitnesses,
that lived also in the midst of the Donatists when they most flourished.

August. ad Quod-vult.
These then were the Donatists chiefest heresies: First, That the true Church of
Christ was perished all the world over, saving in some coasts of Afric, where
their doctrine was current. Secondly, They rebaptised Catholics that fell into
their sect. Thirdly, They held not the faith of the blessed Trinity entire and
whole, but some of them taught like Arrians, the Son to be less then the
Father: but as S. Augustine notes, this was not marked of their followers.
Fourthly, They were soon divided among themselves into three principal sects,
Donatists, Rogatists, and Maximianists. There were also amongst them many
frantike furious fellows called Circumcelliones; August. Epistola. 50.
who rouing up and down in troops, committed many outrages, set fire on
Catholic Churches, tormented Priests, abused most impiously the blessed
Sacrament of Christ's body reserved in the Churches, Optat. lib. 2. co^t.
Parmeni. Aug. Epist, 119. cap. 18.
cast the boxes of holy Oiles out of the Church windows, that they might be
broken, and the holy Oiles trodden under feet. Finally, The Donatists devised
a new kind of Psalms, to be song before their divine service and sermons.
These be the special points of the Donatists errors, and erroneous practices,
as they witness who best knew them, and were least like of any men to belie
them, S. Augustine I say, and Optaetus Bishop of Mileuitane; both very sound
authors, of singular same and credit. Now let any man of wit judge, whether
the Catholics or Protestants do most resemble them; yea, who can deny, but
that the Protestants do almost in every point follow them at the heels? For
first, the Protestants teach even as they did, that Christ's visible Church was
perished (for the invisible Church the Donatists held, could not perish as S.
Augustine witnesses) for 900. Aug. in psalm. 101. cap. 2.
years at the least all the world over, and is even now wholly decayed in all
other parts of the world, saving where their doctrine is embraced: and this was
the maine point of the Donatists heresy. Secondly, though all the Protestants
do not rebaptise, yet one part of them (to wit the Anabaptists) do use it.
For the Protestants be divided into Lutherans, Sacramentaries, and Anabaptists,
(to omit Trinitarians and Arrians,) even as the Donatists were into Donatists,
Rogatists, and Maximianists. Thirdly, diverse of their principal teachers, as
Melancthon, Calvin, and many others, do corrupt the sound doctrine of the most
sacred Trinity, as I have showed in the Preface of the second part of the
Reformation of a deformed Catholic; though the common sort of them, do not
greatly observe it. Fourthly, for plucking down of Churches, abusing the most
blessed Sacrament, holy Oiles, and al holy ornaments that belonged to the
Catholics Churches, the Protestants are not behind, but go far beyond the
Donatists. Lastly, they have also compounded and framed a new kind of Psalms,
called Geneua Psalms, to be song before their sermons. See M. Abbot how
jointly the Donatists and Protestants walk as it were hand in hand together:
show not your self therefore, so undutiful a child to your natural parents,
as not to acknowledge them for such; for you are even as like unto them in the
face and whole feature of both doctrine and manners, as if you had been spit
out of their mouths. Do not for very shame hit us in the teeth any more with
the Donatists, before you have by as sound vvitnesses, proved us to participate
with them in the proper qualities of their profession. To be wily like Aspes,
and to rage like Lions, are not the peculiar recognizances and badges of their
sect; but may agree unto many others, and perhaps to few other more truly then
to Protestants: who when they be under, as they have been in England, and are
now in the greatest Kingdoms of Europe, they are as wily as Foxes, the
greatest commenders of clemency that may be; no man is then to be punished for
his conscience, specially they that seek after nothing but reformation of men's
manners, and the purity of the Gospel: but when they are gotten up, and sit at
the stern of government, the case is clean altered, they become then as
fierce as Lions. Our Fathers were beguiled by their vvilinesse, we feel their
open professed violence; and were it not for the moderation of the chief
Pilot, and some others in authority, I fear the world should quickly
perceive, how Lion-like they would rage: thus much by the way, to discover how
impertinently and untruly, M. Abbot does cite the ancient Doctors sentences. If
he thought their words proper for his purpose, though they used them not in
the same sense as he does, he might well have used the like words; but he ought
in no case to add the Fathers authority, when they meant no such matter as he
cites their words for. But what will you? necessity has no law: either he
must have omitted their authority, and so have put forth a lean, barren, and
penurious piece of work, not worth the looking on; or else so use and abuse
their words, as he does. For in their true meaning, they vvil afford neither
him nor any Protestant any favor or defense at al.

To draw now to the conclusion of his Epistle: I have not with any calumnious
libel, traduced and slandered the Protestants doctrine, but have out of my duty
toward Gods truth, and love of my dear country-mens salvation, very truly,
and in as fair sort as I could, set down the errors of their devises; that
the well minded amongst them, may by the help of Gods grace the better perceive
them, beware of them, and fly from them in time, least they draw them along
with them, into everlasting damnation. Which my dutiful endeauours, if the
enemies of truth do calumniate, and load with opprobrious lies and slanders,
I must take it patiently, and comfort my self with these sacred words of our
sweet Savior: Math. 5. v. 11. and 12.
Blessed be you when they shall revile you, and persecute you, and speak all that is naught against you, untruly for my sake; be glad and rejoice, for your
reward is very great in heaven: for so they persecuted the Prophets that were
before you. Now whereas M. Abbot says in his own commendation, that he
carries himself in this work of his, faithfully and uprightly as to God and
his Prince: I am sorry to see him make so slender reckoning both of his faith
to God, and fealty to his Prince; for by this that has been already said, and
much more by that which follows shall it appear, that he makes no conscience
to dally with Gods word, and to mangle it most pitifully; to abuse the holy
Fathers sentences by all manner of means, that any graceless creature can do;
to cast most wrongfully al kind of contumelies, taunts, and slanders upon
Catholics, that he could devise; and finally to incense his most excellent
Majesty, to bathe his sword in the blood of innocents: This may be
peradventure, to behave himself like a true Minister of the new Gospel. But if
he call this faithful and upright carriage, as to God and his Prince; as I am
sure he can look for no reward of God for such leude behavior, who cannot be
deceived: so I doubt not, but if his Majesty's leisure would permit him to
peruse M. Abbots railing and unlearned writings, pestred with innumerable of
palpable untruths, he should thereby pick small thanks at his Highness
hands. Thus vvishing (no less then any Protestant whosoever) perfect
knowledge of Gods truth unto his Majesty, and grace from heaven to embrace,
maintain, and defend it, with al happiness unto his Highness reign over
us: I end my answer unto M. Abbots Epistle dedicatory.

MASTER ABBOTS PREFACE TO THE READER.
LET it be no offense to thee good Christian Reader, that for the present I
give an answer to a Dedicatory Epistle, in steed of an answer to a whole
book: it was now in January last past, a full year since Doct. Bishops book
was sent unto me, by the most reverend Father in God the Lord Archbishop of
Canterbury his Grace, my very good Lord, with direction to use the best
expedition that I could for the answer of it; it found me at that time under
the Surgeons hands, of a grievous infirmity in mine eyes, by means whereof
for some good space, and indeed longer then I expected, I was hindered from
ableness to intend in any convenient sort, to any such important work. But
taking the soonest and best opportunity that I could, after that I had gone over
some good part of the book, to furnish my self with such matter as should
serve for confutation of it; at length about the beginning of July, being
desirous to bring somewhat to effect, I addressed my self with all instant
endeavor, to give answer to the Epistle Dedicatory to the Kings most
excellent Majesty: which as I accounted the principal matter in the book; so I
held it my duty, to use very special care for the repulsing of those calumnies
and slanders, which the author has gathered and contrived into it: which being
finished at Michaelmasse, has been since thought fit to be published for the
time, til the rest of the work (wherein as time has served, I have hitherto
further proceeded) may fully be performed.

THE ANSWER TO M. ABBOTS PREFACE TO THE READER.
WILLIAM BISHOP.
COURTEOUS Reader, I would have let pass this narration as impertinent, had it
been somewhat more probable: but because it discovers and sets forth the
humor of the man, it is worth the noting. I bear with that inco^gruity; It
was now in January last past: if it were now which designeth the time present,
how was it in January then past? but I take his meaning, that it was in
January past before he had seen my book; which though he say not directly,
but that my book was then sent to him, yet he would have his reader take it
so, that he might thereby and by that which follows, gather what expedition
he had used in the answering of it; wherein he gives him vvrong to understand.
For two months before that, the book was common to be had, and great
communication about the answering of it, in the place of his abode: and either
he or one of his name, had in short marginal notes assaied to give answer unto
many points of the same epistle, by that very January. But admit that he saw
not the book before, why did he not then go in hand with it, having received
straight commandment from so high a personage, to use al expedition for the
answering of it? Forsooth the Barber-surgeon having his soar eyes in cure,
would not give him leave to do it. Is it likely that the L. Archbishop was so
evil informed of his estate, that he would require him to make a speedy answer
to a book, before he knew that he was in case to read it? But his Lordships
letters perhaps, found M. Abbot (according unto the season of the year)
frozen, and could not as then work in him any great resolution to answer:
but the spring following, began to revive his drowsy spirits, and in July
when the heat of Summer had thoroughly warmed him, then ^^e, his affection to
answer was so fervent, and his disposition so fiery, that he bestirred
himself beyond al measure; dispatching within three months, not only this
book of thirty sheets of paper, but preparing also woofe and warpe (as he
speaks) for three hundredth more. Surely this were wonderful celerity, if we
might be so bold as to believe him; but until he make better proof of his
fidelity, he must pardon us if in have we give not credit unto him. For who
can persuade himself, that M. Abbot being injoined to use such expedition in
answering, would have stayed one year and a half before he published his
answer unto one sheet and half of paper, (for my Epistle contains no more)
if he could have sooner compassed it? and who knows not that a dedicatory
Epistle (where matters are summarily touched only) is none of the hardest
parts of the book to be answered? But the man meaning in this Preface to
commend himself above the skies, saw that it was necessary to remove this
stumbling block out of the way, and before hand to excuse his extreme
slownesse; that it might not seem strange, how so admirable quick a penman,
should be holden occupied so long time about so little.

I may not omit to note that, which now three times M. Abbot has repeated, to
wit: That the answering of my book was committed ^o him from great authority;
wherein he seems (by his often rei^erating of it) to take no small pride,
that such a charge should be ^ssigned him from so high a personage. But good
Sir, if my book be nothing else but A fardle of baggage, and rotten stuff (as
you ^earme it,) it must needs redound rather to your shame, to be ^hought a
fit man to give it answer. For as every man knows, (...) bald beggarly
scholar is the meetest match to deal with a fardle of baggage. But if there
be more in my book, then you sometimes would have people to believe; they that
have a good opinion of it may hap to think, that those grave wisemen in high
authority, foresaw that it would hardly be answered, by laying nakedly
testimony of Scripture and Fathers, to testimony, and reason to reason:
wherefore, they thought it best policy, to make choice of some jolly
smooth-tongued discourser, that might with a ^ufling multitude of fair
pleasing words, carry his reader quite from the matter, and then blinding him
with some colorable show of learning, l^^de him into error. Proceed.

ROBERT ABBOT.
NOw the Treatise against which M. Bishop writes, is commonly known and
entitled A reformed Catholic, etc. written by one M. Perkins (since
deceassed) a man of very commendable quality, and well deserving for his great
travail and pains for the furtherance of true religion, and edifying of the
Church. Against this book M. Bishop so bends himself in his dedicatory
Epistle, as that with all he traduceth the whole doctrine of our Church, and
with such motives and reasons as a badde cause will afford him, plaieth the part
of Symmachus the Pagan, Laboring under the name of antiquity, Symmach. relat.
ad Imp. Ambr. epistolarum, lib. 5.
to bring in Idolatry, and to persuade his Majesty, that that is Catholic
religion, which indeed is nothing else but error and superstition. In the due
examination whereof, waighing well the sundry and slippery foundations whereupon
he builds, I presume (gentle reader) that thou will be of my mind, that he
did not think hereby to prevail any whit with his most excellent Majesty, but
only used the pretense of this dedication, to credit his book with them, who
he knew would take all that he said hand over head, upon his own bare word.
Surely if he had not presumed of very wel-willing and friendly readers, he
would never have dreamed to gain any credit by writing in this sort. What his
Epistle is, thou may here see: concerning the rest as yet I will not say much,
only I advertise thee, and do assure thee, that if thou did like of M.
Perkins book before, thou have no cause by M. Bishop to dislike of it now.
Thou shall see it assaulted with ignorance, with impudency, with untruth, and
falsehood, with gross and palpable heresy: and that which he commends, to be
the marrow and pith of many large volumes, thou shall find to be nothing else,
but a fardle of baggage and rotten stuff. For some taste thereof, let me
entreat thee to take well in worth for the time, this answer to his Epistle:
for the rest to have me excused as yet, both in respect of that weakness
whereby I have been so long withholden from the following of this work, as
also for the care I have, as well to give thee full satisfaction in the questions
here discussed, as to stop the adversaries mouth, that he may have nothing
further to reply. I have propounded to my self the rule of Tertullian, in such
businesses always to be observed: Decet veritatem totis vti viribus, non vt
laborantem; truth is to use it whole strength, and not to fare as if it had
much a do to defend it self. I am loath therefore to come hastily into the
field, and with mine own sword only to make an uncertain fight, but to take
convenient time to leuy such troops and bands ^as that I may not need to
doubt of the victory: and it may appear unto thee, that notwithstanding the
crakes and brags of these Romish sicophants, yet the truth is, 2. Reg. 6. verse.
16.
That they that are with us, are more then they that are against us.

WILLIAM BISHOP.
THIS Section comprehends a praise of M. Perkins, a dispraise of me, and a
commendation of himself. In praising of M. Perkins he is short and modest; let
it therefore pass, that I may come to answer for my self. First he says
against me, that I would persuade his Majesty, that that religion is Catholic,
which in deed is nothing else but errors. Is not this to speak idly and
vainly, so to say without any proof? unless we must take that for a proof
which follows (which is a most evident falsehood, even by his own
confession,) these be his words here: I presume gentle reader, that thou will
be of my mind, that he did not think hereby to prevail any whit with his
Majesty, but only used this dedication to credit his book withal. How knows
M. Abbot what I thought? S. Paul says, 1. Cor. 2. verse. 11.
What man knows the secret things of a man, but the spirit of a man that is
within him? God only is the searcher of men's hearts: but M. Abbot (perhaps) by
some divine revelation, or by the spirit of prophecy diued into the depth of my
secret thoughts, and by a very rare light of his pearcing wit, espied that
which was not there. If it had been so, he should at least have kept better
his own counsel, and not like a blabbe and lying Prophet, have afterward
uttered and proved the flat contrary, as he does in these words: And that he
thought so indeed, Page 4.
viz. by offering his book to his Majesty, to perform some great exploit with
him, appears by his own words, etc. where he declares, that he was of
opinion then, and that moved thereunto by good reason, that I thought to
prevail much with his Majesty, by dedicating my book unto him: and yet he
does here bear his reader in hand, that I my self had no hope at al, of any
good to be done thereby: so that if the reader will be of his mind, he must
think here one thing, there another; now this, then that; and finally he
knows not what. Is there any credit to be given to a man that tells such
contrary tales? he that fights so fondly against himself, is he like to do
another man any great harm? surely no, unless it be with some ignorant or
credulous people, that either mark not what he says, or lack judgment to
discern how il he agrees with himself, and how weakly he proves that which
he says against his adversary.

M. Abbot goes on, deeply dispraising my poor labors, pretending them to be
nothing else but a fardle of baggage and rotten stuff. God be thanked his
word is no Gospel, nor his mouth any just measure of truth; and I take it for
no disparagement to my work, to be reprehended without any disproofe, by so
badde a tongued worke-man. But good Sir, how could so small a fardle of baggage
and rotten stuff, hold you (that would be reputed so quiver, nimble, and
quick in inditing) occupied two or three years? let any man of understanding
judge how handsomely these things hang together.

Well let us come to the third point, which consists in the praises of his
own ability: he takes good respite to answer (he says) because he will both
give the reader full satisfaction in the questions here discussed, and also
stop the adversaries mouth, that he may have nothing to reply. A strong faith
of himself does well; but O craking impudency, and impudent craking! Do you
think your self able to give your reader so full satisfaction? that requires
perdy not only full knowledge of those questions, and most exquisite explication
of them: but also wonderful good luck to meet with such a ready and
tractable reader, as vvil be fully satisfied thereby. But be it so, that you
may chance to give some sleepy seely ouer-wel-willing reader, full satisfaction:
with what countenance can you say, that you will so stop your adversaries
mouth, that he may have nothing further to reply? did ever any man of the best
gifts write so absolutely, that he left not some one occasion or another unto
his adversary, to take exceptions against him? But M. Abbot (by the verdict of
the wiseman himself) will surpass all that ever set pen to paper, since
Christ's time; and prove so provident and powerful a composer, that he will not
leave any man one word further to reply upon him: whereas in truth the most
that he produces, is indeed such baggage stuff, and has been already
confuted both in Latin and English, so often over and over, that if any modesty
were in him, he would have been ashamed to make so great crakes of such
refuse, ouerworne, and forlorn ware.

But brag on, and seeing you have begun to play the mount-banke, hold on
hardly. Have you propo^nded Tertullians rule to your self, and do you mean
duly to observe it? shall the truth be set out by you with it whole strength?
yes marry shall it, what else? then surely do you not only match the Apostle S.
Paul in affection, but do also go far beyond him in skill and knowledge. He
says of himself and other Apostles: 1. Cor. 13.
Ex part cognoscimus, etc. We have not full and perfect knowledge whiles we
live on earth, but know things in part. And if the principal peers of the
Church, confessed themselves not to have the full knowledge of the truth, how
dares this pigmee (and dwarf in divinity, if he be compared to them) avouch
that the truth by his means shall be furnished with it whole strength? If it be
an uncivil part, for any man to commend himself without urgent necessity; and
intolerable arrogance for a Christian (whose greatest jewel is humility) to
rank himself with the best learned in antiquity: then surely so braggingly
to undertake that, which the Apostle teaches not to ly in the power of the
most sufficient among Christians, must needs be unspeakable impudency. The
Heathen Orator Cicero (who was vainglorious enough) could yet see by the
light of nature, that it was a shameful part for any man to brag of himself,
specially in that which is false, and by imitating the vainglorious soldier,
to make himself a mocking-stock to al hearers. That M. Abbot might put us in
mind, of that craking captain Thraso (whom he meant to imitate) he says
further; that he will leuy such troops and hands, as that he need not to doubt
of the victory. Now to uphold him in his humor, one should say: Even so was
wont to do, that most valiant and politic warrior Pirrhus, the renowned King
of the Epirots. But I am no flatterer either by profession or natural
inclination, and he seems to take it for a grace to be shameless:
wherefore, it booteth not to go about to make him blush, or else I could
advertise him, that these bragges of his do not only exceed al measure, but
do also expressly repugne against his own confession, in his Epistle to his
Majesty; for there he acknowledges his ability not to be such, as that he
might think himself to have attained to that, that the matter does require:
which (considering what he says here) seems to have been spoken only for
manners sake to his Majesty. For here he vaunteth (as you see) that he will
furnish truth with it whole strength, and give so full satisfaction, that the
adversary shall not have a word further to reply. Good Sir, if you can boast of
your own doings so exceedingly without blushing, yet in discretion you should
have been more wary, then to have lied so grossly, that every child almost may
convince you of it, even by your own test^mony. You had forgotten belike the
proverb, Mendacem oportet esse memorem, A liar had need of a good memory; or
else you would never have let such contrary tales slip out of your pen.

Well, to stay the credulous readers, that they be not over hasty in giving
credit to such unreasonable and vain vaunts, I will put them in mind of this
worthy observation of the most prudent King Solomon: Proverb. 26. verse. 12.
Have thou seen a man wise in his own conceit, a fool shall have greater hope
then he: that is, own that takes himself for very simple, shall be able to
perform much more, then he that esteems himself to be so highly wise. The
waters be not there deepest where the stream runs with greatest noise; and
as our English proverb is, The greatest barkers be not the soarest biters:
Even so among many Protestant vvriters, I have seldom seen any that promises
more or performs less, then M. Abbot. He floateth inflanting words, but he
is one of the shallowest for substance of matter, that ever I read. He
alleges diverse ancient Authors I grant, but for the most part very
impertinently; many also of them most corruptly and falsely: so that nothing is
more absurd and notoriously false, then this his conclusion; More of the
ancient writers be for us then against us. For not only the Romish sicophants
(as of his accustomed modesty he terms us) but the most learned of their
own side, both domestical and foreign, do confess (compelled by evident
force of truth) that the ancient Fathers for most points in controversy, do
teach the very same doctrine that we now do. T^act. 1. Sect. 3.
See the Protestant Apollogy of the Roman Church, where this is particularly
verified: yet M. Abbot that sticks at nothing, would feign bear the
unlearned in hand, that the old Doctors favor much their new learning; but til
he do produce their testimonies more sincerely, and to better purpose then he
yet has done, few but fools can believe him: for hitherto (as has been
already showed) he has not cited any one sentence, either of ancient Father,
or of holy Scripture, that was to the purpose. Wherefore, the discreet reader
has just cause (notwithstanding his vain bragges) to think no better of the
rest of his book, until he shall see the contrary well verified: for in deed he
shall find them to be but counterfaite, dismembered, and misapplied sentences,
used as men do scar-crowes in a field of corn, to amate and fright the
unskillful.

That which follows consisting of the like crakes of their valor and our
weakness, needs no further refutation: They have been hitherto so far off
from driving us out of the field as he craketh, that we having by all manner of
means, endeavored to bring them once out into the field to a public
disputation, as it were to a ranged battle to try the matter, could never
obtain it; they using all the shifts that they could possibly devise, to hold
us from it. And whereas he finally presumes, that he shall be no longer in
giving answer to my book, then the book was in making; his presumption is
very vain and frivolous: for that book was made in half a year, as God he
knows, and many honest men can witness, if time served to produce them: and
the book being of five and twenty sheets, he was holden occupied one year
and a half, with answering unto the first sheet and half of it; and since,
another year and half is past before his so worthy vvebbe be perfited. The
malignant humor that before troubled this jolly vvebsters eyes, is since
(belike) fallen down into his legs, so that he cannot bestirre himself so
speedily, as in the heat of his spirit he presumed; yet before this could be
printed, his whole work came forth.

Robert Abbot. A view of M. Bishops Epistle dedicatory to the Kings most
excellent Majesty.
VIVAT REX

Anno 1608

Laus Deo, Pax viuis, Requies defunctis.

GOD SAVE THE KING.


William Bishop. TO THE MOST PVISANT, PRVDENT, AND RENOWNED PRINCE, JAMES THE
FIRST, BY THE GRACE OF GOD KING OF ENGLAND, SCOTland, France, and Ireland,
defender of the faith, etc.
decorative border around drop-cap 'M' * DIEV ET MON DROIT.

MOST gracious and dread Sovereign. Albeit my slender skill cannot afford any
discourse worthy the view of your excellency, neither my deadded and daily
interrupted and persecuted and persecuted studies, will give me leave to
accomplish that little, which otherwise I might undertake and perform: yet
being emboldned both by your high clemency, and gracious favor ever showed to
al good litterature, specially concerning Divinity, and also urged by mine own
bounden duty, and particular affection, I presume to present unto your
Highness this short ensuing Treatise. For your exceeding clemency, mildness,
and rare modesty, in the most eminent estate of so mighty a Monarke; as it
cannot but win unto you great love, in the hearts of al considerate subjects:
so on the other side does it encourage them, confidently to open their minds,
and in dutiful manner to unfold themselves unto their so loving and affable a
Sovereign. And whereas (to the no vulgar praise of your Majesty's piety) you
have made open and often profession of your vigilance, and care to advance the
divine honor of our Savior Christ, and his most sacred religion; what
faithful Christian should stagger, or fear to lay open and deliver publicly,
that which he assures himself to be very expedient, necessary, and agreeable
toward the furnishing of so heavenly a work? Moreover, if I your Majesty's
poor subject, have by study at home, and travail abroad, attained unto any
small talent of learning and knowledge: to whom is the use and fruit thereof
more due, then unto my gracious and withal so learned a Liege? Finally, for a
proof of my sincerity, affection, and dutiful love toward your Majesty, this
may I justly say, that in time of uncertain fortune (when friends are most
certainly tried) I both suffered disgrace and hinderance for it, being styled
in print A Scotist in faction; therein further employing my pen in a twofold
discourse (which I hope has been presented to the view of your Majesty:) the
one containing a defense of your Highness honor; the other of your Title and
interest of the Crown of England. And if then my zeal and love of truth, and
obligation to your Majesty, drewme out of the compass of mine own profession,
to treat of law causes: I trust your benign grace will now license me, out of
the same fountain of feruency and like zeal unto Gods truth, no less
respecting your Majesty's eternal honor and heavenly inheritance, some thing
to say in matters of Divinity; having been the best part of my study for more
then thrice seven years.

ROBERT ABBOT.
IT were a thing worthy to be known, what was the drift of M. Bishop, and
the mark vvhereat he aimed in the dedication of this his book to the Kings
Highness. When I look to those goodly insinuations, whereby he seems
desirous to wind himself into the good opinion of his Majesty, and consider
the motives and reasons which he pleads merely for himself, and the rest of
his faction and conspiracy; me thinks his intent should be according to his
pretense, to gain some favor at his Majesty's hands for tolleration of the
Romish Idolatry and superstition, that without contradiction of laws they may
freely, if not exercise, yet profess and follow the same. But when on the
other side, I consider his exceptions and allegations against his Majesty's
proceedinges, and against the Gospel of Christ and his true religion embraced
by his Majesty, and by laws publicly established among us, I grow to another
conceit: that surely he propounded some other matter to himself, then the
obtaining of that which he seems so earnestly to contend for. For having to
do with a juditious and learned Prince, who is well able (God be thanked)
rightly to censure what he writes; without doubt, if he had made this his
project to compass the obtaining of his request, he would have dealt
sincerely, and faithfully; he would have forborne our church; al unjust and
slanderous imputations; he would not have sought, by apparent untruth and
falsehood, to justify his badde cause; he would have had care so to carry
himself, that his Majesty seeing nothing but true and plain dealing, might
conceive what is amiss, to have proceeded only from simplicity of error, not
from any obstinate and wilful malice against the truth. But he has taken a
far other course, and seeks very leudly, by lies and tales to abuse the
Kings most excellent Majesty; by pretending antiquity for those things which
by antiquity were condemned; by fathering their own bastards upon the fathers;
by wresting and forcing their sayings to that which they never thought; yea,
when sometimes in the very places which he alleges, they have taught the
contrary, by deprauing our religion with odious consequences, of heresies,
impieties, blasphemies, whereof notwithstanding I make no doubt, but he
himself in his own conscience does acquit us. Whereby it may seem, that
howsoever he were willing to put his request to the adventure, yet being
himself without al hope or opinion of success in it, his special respect was,
to lengthen the expectation of his Catacatholike followers, that they might not
utterly despair of that, with the hope whereof they have so long deluded
them: to settle them in those heresies and irreligions, whereunto they have so
long inured them; to continue them pressed and ready to those intents and
purposes, vvhereto they think they may hereafter have occasion to use them; to
provide by these means with Demetrius, that his and his fellows craft and
occupation might be maintained, which was now in jeopardy to grow utterly to
decay; and lastly, to add some grace to his book, the better to serve al
turns, vvhiles it should carry the name to be dedicated to the King: no man
imagining (the case standing as it does) that he would presume to offer it to
his Majesty, but that doubtless he thought some exploit to be performed by him
therein, and that he thought so indeed, appears by his own words in the
Preface to the reader, etc.

WILLIAM BISHOP.
THIS preamble of M. Abbot, puts me in mind of that worthy observation of the
most juditious Doctor S. Augustine, who speaking of such like companions,
Co^t. Parmen. lib. 2. cap. 3.
says: They do grope like blind men even at noonday, as if it were at
midnight; which is the property of Heretics, who cannot see that which is
most clear, and set before the eyes of al men. What could be more plainly set
down, then that which I did humbly request of his Majesty? and the reasons
that induced me to present my book unto his Highness, are there also
delivered so distinctly, and with such perspicuity, that no man (excepting
them whom that prudent father notes for very blind, or most vvilfully bent to
cauil) could choose but see them: yea, M. Abbot himself cannot but confess,
that when he considered of them, he was moved to think that I intended thereby
to gain some favor at his Majesty's hands for our party. Notwithstanding
that al men may perceive how he delights in wrangling, he will needs argue
against that, which is as clear as the light at noone day; and bear his
credulous reader in hand, that he must not believe that which he sees set
before his eyes to behold, but imagine with him some other hidden matter: this
is a far more grievous malady of the eyes, then that whereof he complains
in his Preface. Physicians tell us of a perilous eie-soare called in Latin
Fascinatio, Englished the Eie-biting: it appears most, when from a cancred
stomach boiling with malice, certain venomous vapors ascend into the eyes,
and flowing from them do infect young and tender things, whereof the Poet
speaks: Nescio quis teneros oculus mihi fascinat agnos; I wot not what
biting eye has blasted my tender lambs. This contagious eie-malady, is to our
purpose described more properly in the book of Wisdom: Fascinatio
malignitatis obscurat bona; The eie-biting of a malignant and envious man does
obscure and deprave good things, causing simple souls through his subtle
conueiance, to take them far otherwise then they were meant: this lo is the
true disease of M. Abbots eyes, which he discovers al his book over. Here he
does pervert my plain meaning, by his counterfeit imaginations; and with his
false surmises, endeavors so to dazel his readers understanding, that he
should even doubt of that which he beholds with his eyes.

The manifold causes that moved me to tender my book to his Majesty, are
clearly set down in my Epistle; there any man that will may see them. The
reasons that gave me hope of doing some good thereby, may be gathered also
thence: as his Majesty's wisdom, that could not but foresee that by a
tolleration, great contentment would grow to many, and be a strong band to
increase their dutiful affection, unto al other his Majesty's proceedinges; his
clemency and most forward natural disposition to pleasure al men, not
delighting in the oppression and undoing of his subjects; the good deserts of
Catholics, both toward his most blessed Mother of sacred memory, and
toward his own just Title; the constant fame that was blown far and
near, of his future moderation in matters of religion; the expectation of
foreign Princes his dear Allies: these I say, and diverse other important
motives, could not but give great hope of some better course to be taken in
those matters of religion, then had been in former time. And great reason it
was that I, who had been to my small power a favorer of his rightful claim
to the crown, should be as forward to do what in me lay, to win his
Majesty to deal favorably with them, that so willingly honored, loved, and
followed him. All this notwithstanding, M. Abbot (if his aim fail him not)
vvil persuade his reader, that I had no hope of prevailing: First, Because of
my allegations against the Gospel of Christ, and his true religion embraced by
his Majesty. Which reason of his is not worth a rush: for the former part of my
Epistle is, to persuade his Majesty to embrace the true, ancient, Catholic
Roman religion, which al his most roial progenitors did love and maintain.
Now to perform that, I must needs speak against the new and false exposition
of the Gospel, broached by the runnegate Friar Martin Luther; and also further
say what was fitting, in commendation of the old religion: that his Highness
considering more maturely of that high and grave matter, comparing the
antiquity, piety, and purity of the Catholic, with the nouelty, corruption,
and ungodliness of the Protestant, might the sooner be induced to embrace the
Catholic. Besides, knowing that the hearts of Princes are in Gods hands, to be
dispose^ off at his good pleasure, we may never be out of hope of any man so
long as he lives: so that my allegations against the religion embraced of his
Majesty, and established with laws, was no sufficient reason, to move any man
to think that I was out of al hope of prevailing with his Majesty. Did not
sundry of the ancient Christian Doctors, present unto some of the Roman
Emperors (then Heathens) Apollogies and Defenses, even of that religion which
they then greatly persecuted? Did not S. Hillary that glorious light of the
French nation, (to omit al others) dedicate his book written against the
Arrians, even unto Constantius the Emperor, who was a most earnest defendor of
the Arrian heresy? and were they trow you, out of al hope of doing any good,
because of their exceptions and allegations against those Emperors proceedings,
and the religion established by their imperial laws? nothing less. Nay they
were therefore much respected of the same Emperors, and had great favor
showed them, for those their zealous endeavors: wherefore this reason of M.
Abbot is of no moment.

And less worth be his lies that follow; That I deal not sincerely and
faithfully, but seek to abuse his Majesty. The good man if he were so wise
as he should be, would forbear such injurious words, unless he did withal
show some particulars, wherein I commit some such faults as he speaks off;
otherwise he must be content to be accounted rather a slanderous brabler, then
a discreet disputer. He says also, that we father our bastards upon the
Fathers, and powers forth after his rude manner, many lavish foul words upon
us: but because he goes not about to prove any one of them to be true, he
needs no other confutation then a bare denial. I wish very heartily good Sir,
that you could and would obtain of his Majesty, that we both might freely
appear in person before his Highness, there to justify whether of us has
sought by lies to abuse his Majesty, and by pretending antiquity for those
things, which by antiquity were condemned.

Now, what other answer shall I make unto this audatious assertion of his that
follows; (That I in my own conscience acquit their religion of heresy,
impiety, and blasphemy) then that of the Roman Orator, which fitteth well such
brazen fore-heades? He that has once passed the bounds of modesty, cares not
to become exceeding impudent. For who has made M. Abbot so privy to the
secrets of my conscience? If their religion be not acquitted and cleared of
those imputations, before I in my conscience purge it of them, no doubt but it
must always stand justly charged with them: see the Preface unto the second
part of the reformed Catholic, wherein I have delivered mine opinion of their
religion concerning those points.

M. Abbot having (as he thinks) soundly proved, that howsoever I was vvilling
to put my request to adventure, yet I my self was without al hope of
success: he then diuineth and deuiseth, what I respected in that my
dedication. The first thing (says he) was to lengthen the exspectation of
Catholics. If he mean, that I endeavored to encourage them to persevere
constant in their religious courses, he is not deceived: for though the Epistle
were principally meant and directed to his Majesty's good; yet consequently it
may redound unto the benefit of others. Marry if he think, that Catholics do
continue firm in their faith upon hope only of the Princes favor, he is foully
deceived; for they have learned this lesson of S. Peter: Act 5. v. 29.
That we must obey God rather then men: and that of David; Psalm. 117. verse. 8.
That it is better to trust in God then in Princes. God (we know) of his
inestimable mercy and goodness, and by his almighty power, can when he please,
restore the Catholic religion in our country: in the mean season we are
content to bear Christ's cross patiently, and to follow him rather then to
depend upon the pleasure of mortal men. As for other practices, which he
faineth to have been my second respect, besides the diligent and devout
exercise of Gods true religion, we allow of none; much less do we prepare
any man's mind thereto. Thirdly, touching mine and my fellows craft and
occupation, by which he means the holy exercise of Priestly functions, it was
not at any time (since they began to persecute our religion) in less
jeopardy to grow to decay, then at that time; for in that first year of his
Majesty's reign (when my book was compiled) more were converted to our
religion, then in any other year since I can remember: which also was so
notorious to al Protestants, and so much spoken off throughout al England, that
M. Abbot must needs confess himself to be either of simple intelligence, or
rather of so scared and corrupt a conscience, that he passes not how palpably
he fableth. Lastly, what grace could the dedication of my book to his Majesty
give it, if it be such a foolish babble as you make it? wherefore, your surmises
about my drift of addressing my book unto the Kings Highness, are vain and
false.

But what is that that follows? it seems very strange, and to have leaped
out of his pen unadvisedly: Doubtless (says M. Abbot) he thought some
exploite to be performed by him, by offering his book to his Majesty; and that
we may be sure, that M. Abbot speaks not this in other men's names without his
own consent thereunto, he adds: And that he thought so indeed, appears by
his own words in the Preface. What Sir, did I think in deed to perform
some exploite with his Majesty, by dedicating my book to him? then are you a
very cosoner, to go about to persuade your reader to the contrary: might not
you have better spared this silly and senseless discourse, of my being out of
al hope to prevail ought with his Majesty, then after you have made it, to
overthrow it your self in the very same side of a leaf? durst you in so short
a space, set down propositions so contrary the one to the other, as these be?
First, He himself was without al hope or opinion of success, in his request
to his Majesty: And again, He thought in deed to perform some exploit, (that
is, to prevail maruailous much with his Majesty) by it. If any man had a jade,
that did enterfeere and cut his pasternes so pitifully, as this man crosses
himself in his own assertions, I am sure he would quickly cast him off, for
fear of a foul fall: so I hope every advised reader will take heed how he
believe him, that does not believe himself, or else does luculently belie
himself; for if he had believed himself when he said, that I indeed thought
to do much good with his Majesty, by dedicating my book to him, he would
never so idly have gone about, to prove that I my self had no hope of success
in it: But let us yet hear more of his worthy tale.

ROBERT ABBOT.
AND that he thought so indeed, appears by his own words in the Preface to
the reader, commending this Treatise unto him, in these terms; He shall find
herein, the marrow and pith of many large volumes, contracted and drawn into a
narrow room. By his own conceit therefore, he has sent us the strength of
their strength, the choice of their learning, the flower of their arguments: so
that this book is (as it were) a Goliath, out of the host of the Philistines,
sent to defy the host of Israel, and to require a combatant, at one fight to
try the matter; presuming that in all Israel is not a man to be found, that dare
undertake to answer the challe^ge. Whereby appears, that it is but for
fashion sake, that he speaks so modestly in the beginning of his Epistle,
excusing his slender skill, and complaining that his dead and daily interrupted
and persecuted studies, vvil not give him leave to accomplish that little,
which otherwise he might undertake and perform: surely he neither vvanted skill
nor leisure as it seems, that could thus gather the marrow and pith of so
many large volumes. As for his studies, if he vvil confess the truth he must
acknowledge, that they have been more interrupted by their contentions with
the Jesuits, then persecuted by us: albeit great reason it is, that he and his
fellows should be persecuted (if he vvil so term it) by restraint of body,
that abuse their liberty when they are abroad, to the persecuting and
destroying of other men's souls, withdrawing them from the service of Jesus
Christ, and by their illusions, and enchantments, bewitching them to dote upon
Antichrist, extinguishing in them the true conscience of allegiance to their
Prince, and preparing them to the execution of their seditious and traitorous
designements, as has in some part appeared to his Majesty already, and I doubt
not, but some further experience vvil make it further to appear.

WILLIAM BISHOP.
I Was bold in my Preface (according to the common custom of writers) to
commend my book to the reader, that he might the more willingly read it over
with diligence; and I showed before what I meant when I said: That he should
there find the marrow and pith of many volumes, drawn into a narrow room.
For whereas diverse men, have set out whole volumes of one only controversy,
some of the supremacy, others of the blessed Sacrament, diverse men of sundry
questions; in my book should be treated of many great controversies, and the
principal arguments of those matters comprised in them: for on the Protestants
side, M. Perkins (as I there said) had collected their choice arguments, which
al were related in my book, besides their answers; and some of the best
(according to my slender choice and skill) proposed in defense and favor of the
Catholic party. Wherefore, I did not much exceed when I said; that the sum
and substance of many large books, should be contracted into that small one of
mine, meaning as well of the Protestant authors as of the Catholic: wherefore
M. Abbots amplification of it, is both idle and false; for I sent them as well
the cream of their own arguments, as the flower of ours. Neither did I
challenge any man as he fableth, much less did I like Goliath defy the host
of Israel: but do only give answer to an Ismaelite, who counterfaiting the
Israelite, does take upon him to reform them that are better informed then
himself. There being then no just cause, why M. Abbot should use these
superfluous words, will you give me leave to aim at this vainglorious man's
meaning? In this resembling of his adversary to Goliath, would he not thereby
(think you) have his reader imagine, that he as another David was chosen out
of the host of Israel, to encounter with this great Goliath? And what marvel,
though he that durst equal himself to S. Paul for zeal and affection, and for all sufficiency in knowledge, does exalt himself above al men? taking also upon
him not to be ignorant of men's secret intentions, nor of what shall happen
hereafter, might moreover desire to be reputed another David, chosen to defend
the people of God against the Philistines. M. Abbots style and title then, in
true Herauldry may be this: another David for valor and resolution; a second
Paul for fervor in devotion; a Peerlesse disputer, that will not leave his
adversary one word to reply; a Prophet, that can diue into the depth of another
man's breast, and fore-tel what is to come; in a word a vain craking jangler,
and a notorious lier: witness every leaf, and almost every line in his book.

Is not that which follows a strange tale? That my studies have been more
interrupted by contention with the Jesuits, then persecuted by the
Protestants, whereas they have been rather furthered, then hindered by those
disputes between the Jesuits and us, about the government of the Church;
which gave us great occasion, to look better into that noble knowledge of the
Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, then ever we did before. And as in times past we had
willingly reaped no small commodity, both in their well ordered schools, and
out of their very learned vvriters: even so now upon this new occasion, we
were by them almost compelled to take a deeper insight of the Canons of the
Church, and to be far better acquainted with the managing of those spiritual
matters. Wherefore the Jesuits did rather advance our studies, then any way
persecute them: whereas on the other side, the Protestants vvil suffer us to
rest in no place, where we may study, and further do seek by all the ways
that the wit of man can devise, how to deprive us of al means to maintain our
studies: with what face then could this man say, that our studies were more
interrupted by the Jesuits, then by them? He adds, that they well deserve
persecution, that destroy men's souls, extinguish the true conscience of
allegiance, etc. which is true, but concerns themselves more then us: for
rather Protestants then Catholics be such, as I have heretofore in sundry
places proved; and therefore do not stand upon it here, where he only
affirms it after his manner without any proof.

ROBERT ABBOT.
NOw it is well in the mean time, that he acknowledges in his Majesty,
exceeding clemency, mildness, modesty, loving and affable disposition,
singular ornaments of a Prince, and wherein is a special token of a King whom
the Lord has chosen: but his threatening words toward the end of his Epistle
do presage, that hereafter they will alter this style, and cry out as they did
in the days of our Queen deceassed, of cruelty, tyranny, extremity of
persecution, and martirdomes, when by their disloial and sedi^ious courses,
they have drawn from his Majesty greater severity, and sharpness of
executions, then his Princely nature is of it self inclined unto: then shall
this acknowledgment of his be an vpbraiding of them, that they themselves have
made the rod, wherewith they are scourged; that his Majesty has been kind
and lo^ing to them, but they have been unkind and cruel to themselves.

WILLIAM BISHOP.
WE are most vvilling to acknowledge al Gods gifts in his Majesty and to extol
them to the uttermost of our power, that his Highness may thereby both see our
dutiful affection toward him, and be the oftener moved to thank and serve
God therefore, Jacob. 1. verse. 16.
From whom descend al good and perfect gifts. We do (notwithstanding the great
severity of his laws against us) continue still in the same mind, that his
Majesty is of his own natural disposition, very mild and clement; yet by
following over much other men's bitter and violent counsels, is too too much
drawn from the goodness of his own nature and disposition. And although it
be a maruailous precious ornament in a Prince, to be so humane and clement, yet
many have been excellent therein, whom the Lord did not choose for his. The
Emperors Traian, Marcus Aurelius, and Antoninus Pius, were of a most
courteous, mild, and moderate disposition; yet being Heathens, and following
the course of their Predecessors laws, were not altogether free from the
spilling of some innocent blood of the Christians. But let us allow clemency to
be one of the richest jewels in a Princes Diadem: who then is to be accounted
a more true hearted and loial subject, either I that endeavored earnestly to
persuade my Prince, to keep, cherish, and increase that precious gift of
clemency in him, which does so highly adorn his roial Majesty; or he that
emploieth his whole wit, art, and skill, to deprive his Highness of the glory
of those gracious gifts, and to incense him to al rigor and severity? If any
men of our religion, by seditious and disloial behavior shall deserve severity,
let them be severely punished: and if any be found so unreasonable as to cry
out against it, vpbraide them hardly with that their folly. But if for our
religion only, without any other offense to his Majesty, or to the state, we be
extreme rigorously dealt vvithal, or that innocent Catholics be unjustly
oppressed for the faults of others; then they must give us leave to call things
by their right names, and so to speak of them as they shall deserve: for the
Prophet does hold them accursed, that do call light, darkness; and good,
evil: al things by men of truth are to be called by their true names. If his
Majesty would follow M. Abbots gentle advise, and embrue his sword in the
harmless blood of Catholics, he were like to get a good name, and to
purchase to himself a great renown all the world over in short space. Now
that which follows in M. Abbot is such a proper piece of stuff, that with the
alteration of a few words, it may be turned more truly against themselves,
then he has spoken it against us: thus then it goes with a very small exchange
of some words.

R. ABBOT and W. BISHOP.
BUT his clemency and kindness, albeit it be an encouragment to good and
faithful subjects in dutiful manner to unfold unto his Majesty their just
grieuances and requests; yet ought it not to embolden evil affected persons,
with calumnious libels to interrupt the peaceable course of his Majesty's
government, ( as M. Abbot does by egging him on to the spilling of innocent
blood) and to seek according to their dronken humors and fancies, the
alteration of the estate, and the admittance of those things, the building
whereof they themselves know not how to settle upon any sure ground. And this
is the thing that ( M. Bishop
M. Abbot) labors for, seeking with Elimas the sorcerer, Act. 13. verse. 10.
To pervert the straight ways of the Lord. And whereas his Majesty has made
open and often profession, of his vigilance and care to advance the divine
honor of our Savior Christ, and his most sacred religion: he would in steed
thereof, draw him ( to advance
to prepare the way to) the Idol Dan. 11.
Mazzin, the God of Antichrist, and to establish damnable heresies (by his
Ministers first) privily brought in, ( and now openly defended by him
;) whereby they his agents and factours, 2. Pet. 2. verse. 1. and 3.
Through covetousness, with fained words do make merchandise of the souls
of men, speaking things which they ought not, for filthy lucres sake: And this
he does, under color of delivering what he assures himself to be expedient,
toward the furnishing and setting forward of so heavenly a work. But it is
not enough that he assures himself so, unless he could by good ground assure
his Majesty also of that which he labors to persuade, which he has not done
nor in deed can do; and therefore as touching his furnishing and setting
forward of this work, we answer him as the Princes and Fathers of Judah and
Benjamin, answered their undermining adversaries: 1. Esdr. 4, 3.
It is not for you, but for us to build the house unto our God. You Samaritans
( you Papists
you Protestants) are mungrels, taking upon you to serve the Lord, and with all
do serve the Idols ( 2. Reg. 17.
of your own brains,) neglecting the ordinances and commandments of the
Lord, by which this house is to be builded; (yea teaching them to be impossible
to be kept,) and doting upon (a new imputative justice,) and so after your old
custom
the old custom (of al Heretics) seek after strife and division: V. 34. and
40.
And therefore have no portion, nor right, nor memorial in Jerusalem (which is
the city of peace,) nor in this heavenly work and service of Jesus Christ.
Hitherto M. Abbots own words with a very little alteration as may be seen in
the margent: these therefore must needs press his adversary very sore, when
they may so easily and truly be turned against himself.

W. BISHOP.
Touching his mangling and perverting those texts of scripture, which he so
clowterly botcheth together in the former place of this passage, I have already
spoken in the Preface: now to them of the later connection. Because M. Abbot is
not yet allowed for an Evangelist, let us take away his own words, and then
we shall presently see how handsomely the words of holy Scripture hang
together: these they be. It is not for you, but for us to build the house to
our God, Esdra. 4. Fear the Lord, serving Idols also, 2. Reg. 17. v. 34. old
custom Ibid. 40. Having no portion, nor right, nor memorial in Jerusalem,
Nehemi. 2. verse. 20. Is not this trim stuff? what revelation has he, to
join together words that be by the holy Ghost set so far asunder? well, let
us give him leave to abuse Gods word at his pleasure, or else he will take it
whether we will or will not: but with what face can a Protestant say to the
Catholics, that it is not for you Papists, but for us Protestants to build up
houses unto God? whereas most of the Churches through al Christendom, built
to serve God in, were erected by the Catholics; and the Protestants have
rather pulled down an hundred, then built up one for Gods service: is not this
sentence then properly applied by him? That they also are rather like the
Samaritans then we, I have proved in my Preface.

Now to the last words that are most of al abused: for old custom in that
place of the second of the Kings, is not taken for ancient traditions of
either doctrine or ceremony, as M. Abbot would have it to sound; but for an
inueterate evil custom of bad life, and transgressing of Gods commandments,
for which the Israelites being often rebuked by the Prophets, would not amend:
so that those words are taken clean besides the right sense. But there
follows such a consequence, that it would procure a vomit to a weak
stomach: It is (forsooth) that because the Israelites would not leave their
old custom of evil living, therefore the Horomites, Ammatites, and Arabians
(mere strangers to them, and of other countries) should have no place, nor
right, nor memorial in Jerusalem; for to men of those countries, were these
words of Nehemias spoken by the Israelites themselves, and that above seauenty
years after the other of old custom. Did you ever see so miserable renting of
Gods word in sunder, and such paltry patching of it together again, without
any time or reason, without any likely resemblance or good coherence? Does not
this argue the man to be well seen in the Bible, or rather desperately
audatious, that dares ^o offer such violence unto the unviolable word of God?
On Sir.

ROBERT ABBOT.
INDEED it is true that he says, that whatsoever talent of learning he has
attained unto, the use and fruit thereof is due to his Majesty; but the
greater is his sin to withdraw it from him to whom it is due, being so far
engaged to the Pope, as that his Majesty cannot presume of any true and
faithful use thereof. As for the proof that he alleges, of his sincere and
dutiful affection, it is unsound. For to this purpose I may well demand, as did
Constantius the Emperor father to the great Constantine: Eusebius. de vita
Constant. lib. 1. cap. 11.
How should they be deemed faithful unto their Prince, who are found to be
perfidious and unfaithful toward God? It appears by that secret which he
utters in his Epistle toward the end, that his love is according to the
rule of Bias, if at least it were his: Sic ama, tanquam aliquando osurus; Love
so, as being perhaps in time to hate. Certain it is whatsoever he pretends,
that neither he nor his ever meant his Majesty any good, unless they could
gain him to be what they would have him to be.

WILLIAM BISHOP.
I Am so far from vvithdrawing the use and fruit of my poor talent from his
Majesty, and the service of my country (though for the obtaining of my small
talent of divinity, I have not been much beholding to either of them) that I
do daily employ it therein, to the uttermost of my power; by praying for them,
and seeking to instruct and confirm them in the true faith of Christ. The use
of my talent is due unto his Majesty I confess, being now my natural Prince
and lawful Sovereign; yet so, as almighty God (who bestowed it on me) be
principally served thereby: Neither am I so engaged unto the Popes Holiness,
but that I may as fully and faithfully serve his Majesty, as ever any true
subject did his lawful Sovereign. Our Savior made no doubt, but that a true
Israelite might give to Caesar that which belonged to Caesar, and to God that
which was his. Neither did S. Peter or S. Paul make any question, but that good
Christians might perfectly obey their Princes, and yet wholly descent from them
in matter of religion, and therein take their whole direction from strangers.
And even those Christians, that Constantius the Emperor did so commend and
love for their constancy in religion, were as far engaged to the Bishop of
Rome then, as we be now, and did no more follow the same Emperor Constantius
in matter of faith, then we Catholics do our Liege Lord King James; yea
were somewhat further of him, he being a Heathen and no Christian, as our King
is: so fit and proper commonly be M. Abbots sentences taken out of the ancient
fathers, that they serve much more naturally for our purpose, even as this does
thus applied. Eusebius. de vita Constant. lib. 1. cap. 11.
Like as that renowned Emperor Constantius, did highly esteem of those
Christians, that would not for any worldly loss or disgrace, no not to win
their own Princes love or favor, deny their religion, or falter in the
confession of it; yea further was of opinion, That they who were so fast and
faithful to their God, would also prove most trusty to their Prince, though of
a far different profession from them: Even so his Majesty, after the example
of so worthy and wise an Emperor, finding his Catholic subjects so firm in
their religion, that no temporal discredit or incommodity how great or grievous
soever, can remove them from the due confession of it, should thereupon
persuade himself, that they who are so constant and true servants unto God,
must needs also prove most loial and dutiful unto their King, albeit of
another religion. And it may in this manner also very aptly be returned upon M.
Abbot himself, whom I have before proved to abuse Gods word very miserably, to
allege the ancient Fathers sentences most perfidiously, and so to pester and
infect the world with lies: That no man (I ween) can deem him to prove
faithful to his Prince, that is found to deal so perfidiously both with God
and man.

Now to that rule of Bias, which being well understood cannot be much misliked.
For such is the uncertainty and mutability of our corrupt and frail nature,
that he whom this year we love most entirely, may the next year deserve to be
misliked of us as extremely; for of a most excellent and virtuous man, he may
become bad without measure: but of his Majesty I have always had a far
better opinion, and do daily pray to God to preserve him from al such
extremities. And howsoever it shall happen, I acknowledge my self bound, and
steadfastly purpose (God willing) to bear toward his Highness the loial heart
of a true subject, and the charitable affection of a loving Christian: neither
is there any thing in the end of my book to the contrary. That which he so
often graceth upon, is already cleared, and shall be more fully handled in due
place.

Now to that which M. Abbot here delivers for very certain, to wit: That
neither I nor any of my mind, meant his Majesty any good, unless we could
gain him to our religion; which not only to be very uncertain but also
false, I may without more ado prove, even by his own confession in the next
passage, where he says: That the secular Priests under an uncertain hope of
his Majesty's favor, acknowledged and maintained his just title to the crown
of England, and would have offered him their help at the Queens deceasse;
therefore by his own verdict, we wished and meant his Majesty much good (no
less then the crown of England) before we had gained him to be as we would
have had him: for being under an uncertain hope of his favor, (as he
vvriteth) we wished that inestimable treasure to his Majesty. Now, when his
own sayings will serve to confute himself, I may spare my further labor: I
hope that his Majesty has found (contrary to this man's fond assertion) many
good offices, of both loial subjects and affectionate servants, performed to
his Highness by men of our religion. Sure I am, that other mighty Monarks, do
employ in places of great charge, men contrary to themselves and the state in
religion, and have thereby given great contentment to others, and reaped no
small profit to themselves: Now to M. Abbots disproofe of my reason.

ROBERT ABBOT.
BUT what is the proof of that his sincerity, which he alleges? forsooth,
in time of uncertain fortune (when assured friends are most certainly
tried,) he both suffered disgrace and hinderance for his love toward his
Majesty, being styled in print A Scotist in faction; where we see that a
false merchant needs no broker: how cunningly he gloseth the matter, to make
show of great love where none was. What? was it for his Majesty's cause that
those hard fortunes, that disgrace and hinderance did befall you? nothing less:
the Jesuits (forsooth) and the secular Priests, whilst each seek superiority
over other, fall together by the ears. The Jesuits procure an Archpriest, one
that should be at their devotion, to be set over the Seculars: the Seculars
refuse to yield him subjection, and by appeal refer the matter to the Pope;
for the prosecuting of which appeal, M. Bishop with another in his company,
are sent to Rome: there by procurement of Parsons, both ^e and his fellow were
clapped up in prison, and continuing there for many weeks, were at length by the
sentence of their Protector banished England, and the one of them confined to
Lorraine, the other to France. This is now the maine tragedy of M. Bishops
misfortunes, not concerning the cause of the Kings Majesty any whit at al:
only in the managing of these matters, it came to pass according to the
proverb, that when thieves fall out, true men come by their goods; for
vvhilest every part sought, to provide the better for themselves here in
England for the time to come, the Jesuits for their advancement, labored to
entitle the Lady Infanta of Spain, to the succession of the crown of England:
but the Seculars presuming, that if the Infanta were set up they must certainly
go down, and choosing rather to adventure themselves upon uncertain hope,
then to give way to certain despair, shrouded themselves under the
acknowledgment of his Majesty's just title: not for any love to his Majesty,
but for hatred to the Jesuits, and for the preferment of themselves. For
imagining that things (upon the death of Queen Elizabeth) would grow
troublesome, and intending to make offer to his Majesty of their help
(forsooth) for the obtaining of the crown; they thought by capitulations and
conditions (his Majesty prevailing) to make al sure for their part, thinking
that the Jesuits by their traitorous practices, had set a sufficient bar
against themselves, and should be no let unto them. Hereupon they fall a
vvriting one against another, and M. Bishop is styled A Scotist in faction, and
to pick a thank with his Majesty, writes his twofold discourse, One for the
defense of his Highness honor, the other for his title to the crown of
England; a work of supererogation for his part: for his Majesty needed no
such Proctours as he, neither was the wrangling of a company of base
fugitives, sufficient to question either his Majesty's honor or his title to
the crown.

WILLIAM BISHOP.
HERE is such a tedious tale, so impertinent, so improbable, that I could
scarce endure the vvriting of it out; yet that he should not complain that any
thing is omitted, I have put it al down. That part of it concerning M.
Archpriests ordination, is wholly besides the purpose, and therefore I omit it
wholly, though it be mixed with many untruths, which would give me advantage
against him, if I were disposed to stand about them.

To the other of titles M. Abbot acknowledges, that we secular Priests stood
in defense of his Majesty's just title, against the pretensions made in behalf
of the Lady Infanta: And therefore any man of mean intelligence of the state
of those Catholic countries where we then lived, may easily conceive, that we
could not but suffer disgrace and hinderance, by standing for a Prince that was
not Catholic; especially when we wanted not others to amplify, urge, and
enforce the matter against us. But our kind friend M. Abbot says; we stood
for his Majesty not for any love to him, but for hatred of the Jesuits, and
for our own preferment. I answer, that in true Christianity when good offices
be performed, they must be interpreted well, unless there be apparent proof to
the contrary, as al good men do agree: from which general rule the Ministers
perhaps are to be excepted, and so they may (when al other reasons fail them)
aim at the secret intentions of men, and judging them after their own inward
dispositions say; though they did never so well, yet they meant not well. For
what other means has he to be privy to our inward thoughts and meaninges,
unless it be by revelation from heaven? of which when he can resolve me I
will think him worthy of a further answer: In the mean season, he must be
senseless, that will believe the secular Priests to have bin so simple, that
they expected greater preferment under his Majesty, professing and maintaining
the new religion, then they could look for under the Infanta, that would have
set up the old. For albeit the secular Priests, had not been advanced unto any
of the greater livings and dignities; yet it could not be, but that the meanest
amongst them should have had twenty times more, the state being Catholic, then
being as it now is. And if M. Abbot could not see this, I should take him
rather to be stark blind, then troubled with soar eyes: but if he saw this
well enough, and yet to blind his reader would avouch the contrary, then is he a
shameless man, and without any care of his own credit and honesty. If it be
demanded, how we Catholic Priests could persuade our selves, so much to
respect and love a Prince, that was like to do so little for us, and to employ
our pens and pains for him, that might perhaps little esteem of it. I
answer, that he being by lawful succession to be our King, our duty obliged us
to affect him. Again, for his most blessed Mothers sake, who lived and died so
virtuously, we could not but love and honor him whom she loved most tenderly.
Thirdly, the Princely endowments which God had largely powered upon his Majesty,
and specially his rare literature, did draw the hearts of al men that fancied
learning, to favor him. Fourthly, we did even then foresee, what bloody
wars and intestine garboils were like to have consumed our whole country, if
such opposition should have been made against him; and therefore thought it
better to seek his Princely favor toward our religion, and some moderate
tolleration by fair dutiful means, then to hazard any such forcible attempt.
Add hereunto, what a constant report was spread all the world over, (which
was hearkened unto by the greatest personages) that his Majesty would take no
exceptions against any man for his religion, but would suffer his subjects to
live quietly to their conscience, and not so much as debar any Catholic
(that should be found worthy) from any place of preferment under him. We having
these and many other motives of love, let any reasonable man judge, whether we
might not well even from our hearts affect his Majesty, and be pressed and ready to
do him all the service we could.

M. Abbot having nothing else to except against my dutiful endeauours, says;
That it was a work of supererogation in me, for that his Majesty needed no
such Proctour as I was: I must needs take it kindly at his hands, that he at
length agniseth, that I out of the abundance of my affection toward his
Majesty's honor and advancement, did do my good will; howbeit there was no
need of my help. I also willingly confess, that his Majesty might have had
many other, who could have performed that matter much better then my self, yet
that I was forwardly in his service, when others were content to be silent, I
hope was no token of a hollow hearted or backward subject. And whereas he
signifies, that his Majesty's title was then questioned only amongst some
base fugitives, (so he uncivilly terms his betters by many degrees) he
shows himself a mere stranger in domestical affairs; for at those days (as
al England can witness) his Majesty's title lay buried in oblivion, and few
men durst speak of it, and not a few doubted of it: a pamphet was printed
directly against it; an oath of assotiation, and an act of Parliament seemed to
have been made directly in prejudice of it. There was further a most infamous
libel published against his Majesty's most sacred Mother, and very exorbitant
railing speeches powered out against her, even out of the pulpits: the Ministers
and others, through her innocent sides wounding also her offspring, and for
hatred of her religion, obscuring and blemishing much his Majesty's interest to
our crown. Where was then this valiant muster-master, this powerable penman?
why did not he then, when there was so great need of defense, make a sally
forth, and show his valor and skill in the defense and favor of his future
Prince? the time was nor propitious, his affection was frozen, he chose then
rather with his fellow-Ministers to rail lustily at the mother, then with the
poor fugitive Papists, to write or speak in defense of their honor or title.
If you be such a seruer of times, and flatterer of men in authority; yet be not
angry I pray you with those, nor seek to traduce their dutiful endeauours, who
in doubtful fortune and in times of disgrace, showed far more true hearts, and
forward affection unto his Majesty. Can you not be content, quietly to reap
the harvest of other men's travails, unless you do also calumniate them, who
took so much pains for you? can you not be satisfied to enjoy his Majesty's
favor, for whom you would never speak a word, til it was for an advantage,
unless you seek to incense him against them, who were more fervent and
affectionate in his service? God send you more grace and better charity, and to
his Majesty more mature consideration of his faithful subjects deserts.

ROBERT ABBOT.
AND how little hold there was in these his defenses, may appear by the
example of his fellows Watson and Clarke, who took part with him in this
action, and the one of them wrote as much in the Kings defense, as M. Bishop
did; and yet when they saw upon his Majesty's entrance, that things were
likely to go otherwise then liked them, immediately they fall to conspiring and
plotting against him: the case is altered, they were not now the men that they
were before; the like is M. Bishops fidelity and love. And he himself
afterward plainly gives his Majesty to understand, that he may hope no
otherwise of him, then he has already found in them: yet here he presumes,
That since his zeal and love to his Majesty, has heretofore drawn him,
without the compass of his profession, to treat of law courses; therefore his
grace will license him, out of the like zeal unto Gods truth, to say something
in matters of divinity. But surely, if he by his law courses defended his
Majesty's cause no better, then by divinity he has defended his own; he might
very well have spared the labor, and left it to them that were fit to do it.
But this is the malapartnesse and sauciness of these base rascals and
runnegates, both Jesuits and Seculars, to thrust themselves into matters that
belong not to their profession or condition: they are tampering with causes of
Kingdoms and states: they will determine of Titles and Inheritances, of Crowns
and Scepters. This is their arrogance and presumption, assuming to themselves
as if they were able for all things; al their Geese be Swannes: not an Ass
amongst them, but is worthy to stand with the Kings Horses: not one of them (I
warrant you) but is sufficient to be a Counselor to a Prince: He lively
describes himself.
they are the only high spirited men, of great conceit, of deep reach, of
noble resolution, of most special and secret intelligence, of brave discourse,
that can tell great tales of Bombomachides Clunnistaridi sarchides, the great
Gurgustionian Emperor; even like Narcissus, so far in love with themselves,
that they are drowned in their own pride. But we know them well enough, we see
their foolery and laugh at it: when they come to trial, they are for the most
part but empty barrels; all this great noise, proves in a manner nothing but
mere wind. Only we are sorry, for that as the Heretics of old, by strange
devised words and names, stupefied and amazed simple and ignorant people, and
by that means gathered to themselves great admiration, drew many to their
heresies: so these seducers, with bold faces and big looks, and brauadoes
of prating and cogging, do make silly souls, unstable fools, but specially
women to admire them, and grow in love with them, so to be carried by them
blind-folded to their own destruction. But here we are much to observe, that
by l^w courses only, M. Bishop defended his Majesty's title to the crown; by
divinity he could say nothing: for his Master Bellarmine had taught him, that
it is but De jure humano, quod hunc aut illum babeamus Regem; It is but by the
law of man, that we have this or that man to be our King: and therefore he
argues, because the law of God is to be preferred before the law of man he
that by the law of man is to be King, unless he will be a maintainer of Popish
religion, a vassal and slave to the Pope, by the law of God he must be no King.
This is M. Bishops divinity, and by this divinity his Majesty must have been
ordered, if (for our judgment) God had suffered him to fall into their hands.
As touching his divinity otherwise, which he says has been the best part of
his study more then thrice seven years, how well he has profited therein, we
shall see by examining the particulars of this book.

WILLIAM BISHOP.
IF any firm or sound proof may be drawn from examples, I say then, that his
Majesty may better collect my fidelity by the example of more then two hundred
Priests, that have always carried themselves faithful toward his Highness;
then by the faults of two that did otherwise: but it is M. Abbots custom to
reason so loosly, and out of one or two particulars to conclude an universal,
which in moral matters argues yet far greater spite and malice; for who can
abide to hear, that for one or two men offending, al men of the same
profession should be condemned, rather then for the fidelity of hundreds, to
think well of all the rest? Whether I gave any occasion of suspicion, by those
my words upon which he so often warbleth, has been already touched, and
shall be more hereafter. Those idle, foolish, and false words of his that
follow, where he affirms without any shadow of proof; that there is not
one Seminary Priest, that does not think himself able to be a Counselor to
a King, are so far from al truth and honesty, (as al they can best witness
that know them) that I need not stand about the disproofe of them. Only I note,
that vvhiles he vvil needs out of his accustomed ciuility term us Asses, he
by craft calls himself and his fellow Ministers the Kings Horses: for with
whom should Priests be compared, but with men of the like profession? saying
then, that there is not an Ass among the Priests (as he speaks) but is
worthy to stand with the Kings Horses, he must in due proportion be understood
to signify thereby, that there is not a Priest so simple, but takes himself
worthy to stand cheek by jole with the jollier sort of Ministers, whom by
Peryphrasis he describes and discries to be the Kings Horses, and that not
without some show of reason: for they are ready to be ridden whether his
Majesty pleases, and seem to make the temporal Princes proceedings their
north pole, by which they direct the whole course of their lives and learning
But are they not made also (trow you) like to silly Asses, pressed to carry
such vvaighty burdens imposed upon their benefices, as it shall please their
good Patrons to lay and load upon them? and yet nevertheless, they will not
stick to swear very formally, that they come frankly and freely to them.
Albeit they be so quiet and commodious cattle to their good Patrons and
Benefactors, nevertheless toward others (specially toward us Catholics)
many of them be not unlike those horses described by S. John: Apocal. 9. v. 17.
and 18.
And the heads of the Horses, were as it were the heads of Lions, and from
their mouths proceeded fire, and smoke, and brimstone: so fierce and fiery
they be against poor innocent Catholics, incensing the King and state to
seek their utter subversion; and yet are they much more fatal to their own
followers: For their tails (as it is also in the said text) be like to
serpents, having heads, and in these they hurt, poisoning by their venomous
doctrine and lend conversation, the souls of al men that believe and follow
them. Thus much by occasion of M. Abbots noble comparison of Asses and Horses.

That which he speaks of strange long-footed words, invented to stupefie
the simple, is a riddle to me; our religion uses none such. As for nouelty of
words, bold faces, big looks, brauadoes, and such like, they are the proper
badges of the new Gospel, and M. Abbot does himself and his fellow Preachers
great vvrong, to impart their peculiar titles to others that deserve them not,
nor like any whit of them.

But let us leave these trifles, and come to his worthy observation and
argument thereupon: It is, That M. Bishop (forsooth) by law courses only
defended his Majesty's title to the crown, by divinity he could say nothing
for it. Had not M. Abbots spiteful soar eyes helped him to an odd insight of
my writings, he could never have spied that there, which was not to be seen in
them: for though I passed out of the limits of divinity, into some points of
law; yet divinity was my ground, which teaches that we must yield to every
one his right, and to lawful lineal successors, the liuely-hoodes, lands, and
possessions of their predecessors: his observation then was false, that I
could say nothing out of divinity for his Majesty's title to the crown. But he
will prove out of Bellarmine that most learned Cardinal, (who indeed was my
master, and master also unto many my betters some six and twenty years ago)
that I could say nothing out of divinity for his Majesty's title: For it is but
by the law of man, that we have this or that man to be our King, but by the law
of God no man is to be made King, that does not truly serve God; then the law
of God being to be preferred before the law of man, it follows, that
whosoever will not truly serve God, is not to be made King. M. Abbot should have
done well to have solued this argument (which is not unworthy the maker, and
taken as he meant it insoluble) and may happen to trouble many of his readers:
but he loves not this fight at the short sword, but to range a loofe off, and
to defend his part with foul words, rather then with any sound reasons. I
vvil help him out of the briars this once and say, that in case of free
election of a King, that argument of Cardinal Bellarmines is most sound; for no
good Christian ought to make choice of him for a King, or to yield their
consent to him, whom he knows unlikely ever to serve Jesus Christ the
Sovereign King of heaven and earth: Marry, when the Kingdom goes not by
free choice and election, but by ordinary succession; then the subjects must
accept of him whom it pleases God to give them. For our divinity teaches us,
that God sometimes gives Kings in his wrath, and not always such as will
serve him as they ought to do, which are (notwithstanding their
undutifulness to God) to be received and obeyed of their subjects dutifully in all civil causes. And although God at the first left it to the free liberty of
every country, to make choice of what kind of civil government they liked
best (whereof it proceeds, that it is by the law of man, that we have this
or that man to be our King) yet when such a succession is once established by
the law of man, and confirmed by long custom; then the law of God does bind
al men to the keeping of that just and good law of man. Thus much briefly to
show how I could very well, by the rules of our divinity defend his Majesty's
title to the crown, and to certify them that are in greater jealousy of our
obedience, then they have just cause; that we take our selves bound as well by
the laws of God as of man, to obey his Majesty, and dutifully to serve him in all temporal affairs: howbeit, we take the religion professed by his Majesty,
and his proceedings therein, not to be according to the good will and pleasure
of God; and therefore do daily pray unto the divine Majesty, to send him grace
to see and amend it, and to give us perfect patience in the mean season to
endure whatsoever shall be laid upon us, for the constant profession of his
only true and sincere religion. As for my skill either in this point, or in any
other part of divinity, I know it to be very mean in comparison of thousands
among the Catholics, and am very well content that it be put to the proof.
Only I require an indifferent reader, and one that will not take vain words
for good payment, but weigh diligently our arguments together, and try out by
seeing the places, who cites his testimony, both of holy Scriptures and ancient
Fathers, more truly and pertinently.

SECT. 2. W. BISHOP.
WHEREUNTO I may conveniently enter with that golden sentence, with which your
Majesty began the conference, etc. A love principium: conformable to this in
holy writ. Apocal. 1. verse. 8.
I am Alpha and Omega: the beginning and end, says our Lord; and applying it
to Princes, I may be bold to say, that nothing is more expedient and necessary
for Kings, nothing more honorable and of better assurance for their estate,
then that in the very beginning of their reign, they take special order, that
the supreme and most puisant Monarke of heaven and earth, be purely and
uprightly served, as well in their own examplar lives, as through their
Dominions: for of almighty God his mere bounty and great grace, they receive
and hold their Diademes and Princely Scepters; and cannot possess and enjoy
them (their mighty forces and prudent counsels notwithstanding) one day
longer, then during his divine will and pleasure. Which the wisest King
witnesses, speaking also in the person of Gods wisdom, Prouer. 8, 15.
Per me Reges regnant: By me Kings do reign: and Dan. 4.
Nabuchodonoser sometime King of Babylon, was turned out to grase with beasts
for seven years, and made to know and confess, that the highest does command
over the Kingdoms of men, and disposes of them as pleases his divine
wisdom, but I need not stand upon this point, it being so well known and
acknowledged by your Majesty.

ROBERT ABBOT.
PLVTARCH reports, that the Nobles of Lacedemon approving a speech that was
delivered by a man of evil behavior, De auditione.
caused the same to be uttered by another of honest life and conversation, that
it might carry the greater weight, when it proceeded from a man whose doings
were answerable to his words. M. Bishop has uttered a goodly speech, but it
sounds not effectually from his mouth or pen; it were fit that some other
man of other profession and comportment, should be the writer and speaker of
this matter: for he denies to his Majesty, that supreme government in causes
Ecclesiastical, whereby he should take upon him, to do that that he persuades
him; and being sworn to the Pope, he cannot but maintain those laws of his,
Distinct. 96. Si Imperator.
whereby he inhibiteth Kings and Princes to meddle with matters of religion,
and of the Church, and reserueth the same wholly to be decreed by himself and
his Prelates; and as for Princes, they must receive and practice the same
according to his order.

WILLIAM BISHOP.
HERE comes to my memory, that worthy observation of the divine Preacher:
Eccles. 13. verse. 28.
The rich man spoke, and al men held their peace, and did extol his words up
to the skies; but when a poor man spoke they said, who is this? It becomes
not a Divine (says our new gospeller) to discourse of matters of divinity, but
Princes do them bravely. To M. Abbot I answer first, that his profane story
is besides the purpose, for the Lacedaemonians took exception against that
persons speech, because his life was not answerable: but he cauilleth at my
discourse, not for default of my manners, but for other points of doctrine.
Belike he thought it not expedient, (notwithstanding his example of the
Lacedaemonians did lead him thereunto) to put men's doctrine to be tried by
their life and conversation, least their new Gospel, should by that rule be
condemned and rejected, because their Preachers and Ministers lives, be not
conformable to the precepts of Christ's Gospel. Besides, the disproportion of
this example, that is also very false which he infers against me: That I do
deny his Majesty to have authority to do that, which I persuade him to do, to
wit; to take special order, that God almighty be truly and sincerely served:
for Kings may and ought to do that, though they be not supreme governors in
causes Ecclesiastical. For albeit it belong not to them, to declare the true
sense of al questioned places of holy Scriptures; nor to determine al doubts
rising in divinity; nor briefly, to perform such other functions as are proper
to the supreme Governor of Christ's Church: yet his Majesty might have called
together the most learned of his subjects of al sides, and have heard which of
them could best have proved their doctrine, to have been most conformable to
the sacred word of God, to Apostolical traditions, to most ancient general
Councels, to the uniform consent of the most holy and best learned Doctors of
the primitive Church; and accordingly to have embraced the same himself, and
by his Princely authority to have established the same throughout al his
Dominions: It remains then evident, That his Majesty might have taken special
order, for the true service of God, notwithstanding he have not supreme
authority in Ecclesiastical causes. And most false is this assertion of M.
Abbots, that any law of the Pope does inhibite him to deal so farre-forth in
matters of religion: that Canon which he cites does only forbid
lay-Magistrates, Distinct. 96. Si Imperator.
to meddle with the ordering and judging of Priests and Clerks, and such other
Ecclesiastical officers, as do properly belong to Bishops. But that Kings
ought to meddle in matters of religion, and how farre-forth they ought, S. Leo
the first a most famous Pope, does in these memorable words declare: You must
(o Emperor) without doubt know, Epist. 75. ad Leo. August.
that Kingly power is given to you, not only for the rule of the world, but is
principally bestowed upon you, for the defense and aid of the Church; that by
suppressing wicked attempts, you may both defend that which is established, and
also pacify those things which are troubled. But of this point I shall have
occasion presently to speak more at large. It follows.

ROBERT ABBOT.
AS touching the reason also which he alleges, why Princes should take
special order that God be rightly served, Because of his mere bounty and
grace, they receive and hold their Diademes and Princely Scepters: The Pope
denies that they hold the same immediately from God, but are to receive them
by his mediation and approbation, and no longer to hold them, then they
conform themselves to his laws; Bulla Pij 5.
Ecce nos constituti sumus super gentes and regna, etc. Behold (says the Pope)
we are set over nations and kingdoms, to build up and to plant, to pull up and
to destroy, etc. And therefore what the wisdom of God says (as M. Bishop
alleges) by me Kings reign, the same the Pope blasphemously applies to
himself; Proverb. 8. verse. 15.
Per me R^ges regnant, By me Kings do reign: thus the Pope would have Princes
as very beasts as Nabuchodonoser was, not to know of whom they hold their
crowns and kingdoms, but to think that al depends upon him. But M. Bishop
acknowledges here the truth, that of God they hold the same, and therefore
should make it their special care, that the same God be honored accordingly.
And here unawares he justifies our doctrine, as touching the Princes supreme
authority for the government of our Church, the effect whereof we teach to be
this; to provide by laws and to take special order, that God be purely and
uprightly served; that Idolatry and superstition be removed; that the word of
God be truly and sincerely taught; that the sacraments be duly administered, and
the Bishops and Pastors diligently perform the service and duty that does
appertain unto them; that the commandments of God be not publicly and
scandalously broken: for these things we acknowledge the King to be under
Christ, the supreme governor of the church within his Dominions, and this duty
M. Bishop confesses to appertain unto him. And thus did the good Kings of
Judah, David, Ezechias, Josias, etc. thus have Christian Emperors and Princes
done; thus and no otherwise did Queen Elizabeth; and yet for the doing hereof,
she was proscribed by the Pope, and so much as in him lay, deprived of her
Crown and Scepter, but the hand of God was with her, and she prospered
thereby, and died in peace, etc.

WILLIAM BISHOP.
I Do many times much muse, how men of any sort and fashion, specially how
professors of Gods truth (such as M. Abbot would be esteemed) dare put into
light such odd paltry shifts, and pour out together such heaps of gross
lies. A lie it was, that I denied to his Majesty such authority, as would serve
for the taking order, how God might be rightly served in his realm. Another
lie it is, that the Popes laws do inbibite Kings to meddle with matters of
religion. A third, that I affirmed Kings to hold their crowns immediately
from God; which though it be true in that sense he takes it; yet is it false
that I so said in that place: for I meddle not with those terms of
immediately, or mediately. The fourth is, that the Pope denies Princes to hold
their Diademes and Princely authority immediately from God, but are to receive
them by his mediation; for even in the very Canon cited last before by
himself, the Pope acknowledges, Distinct. 96. Si Imperator.
That Emperors and Kings receive from God the prerogative of their power:
vvhereupon the Gloss plainly notes, that they did not receive their
sovereign authority from the Pope. Which was also observed in the Canon next
before, Eade^ disti^ct.
out of Pope Gelasius words. And it is further, the common opinion of al our
Divines: wherefore unless this counterfeit Divine, did mean here to lie for
the whetstone, I know not what he meant to huddle up lies so thick together,
every one louder then the other. But (says he) Pius Quintus writes, Eccenos
constituti sumus super gentes and regna; Behold (says the Pope) we are set
over nations and kingdoms, to build and to plant, to pluck down and to
destroy, etc. therefore they apply to themselves, that which the wisdom of God
gives to Kings, By me Kings do reign. This is the fifth lie that he makes
within the compass of less then half a side; for albeit the Pope use the
words spoken to the Prophet Hieremy: Ecce nos constituti sumus, etc. yet does
he not those by King Solomon, uttered in the person of Gods vvisdome, which M.
Abbot deceitfully shuffleth in the place of the other. Now the authority
committed to the Prophet Hieremy, did not make the King of Judah to hold his
crown of him, as al Divines both Catholics and Protestants do grant:
wherefore though the same be yet remaining in the Church of God, (as it is not
only granted by all Catholic Doctors, but even by the verdict of Calvin
himself, In cap. 10. Cor. verse. 6.
who to prove it does cite even the very same words out of Hieremy. And so
1200 years before him, that famous Father S. Chrysostom did allege the like,
out of the same chapter of the Prophet, to the same purpose: saying. Homil. 55.
in Mathaeum.
The Father said to Hieremy, I have put thee as a pillar of iron and wall of
brass, etc.) yet the Father placed him but over one nation (to wit, that of
the Jews) but Christ has placed Peter over the universal world. Briefly, we
granting the like power to be in the Bishop of Rome, that was in Hieremy the
Prophet (whose words he uses) it can be no more deduced thence, that Kings
hold their Princely diademes of him, then that the King of Judah did his of
Hieremy; which was neither mediately nor immediately: for only a certain
spiritual power to root out Idolatry, error, and iniquity, and to plant
religion and virtue, was by those words given to men of the Church. Which,
if it do in some certain case, extend to the deposition of a Prince (as I
read it has been practiced by most juditious, learned, and holy Personages,
though I do not read where it is by the Church defined to be any article of
our faith;) yet no man is so simple, as not to deem it more wholesome and
expedient for the uniform and peacible estate of Christendom, that such
supereminent power should rather rest in the supreme Pastor of Christ's Church,
then be left unto the discretion of the Ministers and Clergy of every country,
according to the Protestants opinion and practice: It being (I say) granted,
that the Bishop of Rome, may in some case depose any temporal Magistrate; yet
can it not there hence be gathered, that Kings do hold their Kingdoms of the
Popes Holiness. For when one King vvil not let his neighbor Prince live in
peace by him, but does extremely wast his Dominions, kill his subjects, and make
havoc of his country; the Prince so molested (if he cannot otherwise have
remedy) may most lawfully by force of arms, proceed even to the deposition of
that injurious King: And yet the inuader did not hold his Kingdom of the
other, any more then the other did depend upon him, but was an absolute King
himself as the other was, notwithstanding by his intolerable outrages
offered to his neighbor Prince, he made himself punishable, and subject to
the other, against whom he so grievously trespassed. In like manner, if a
Prince by most extreme persecution of Christ's flock, do become subject to the
correction of the chief Pastor thereof; yet thence it follows not, that that
Pastor had power to dispose of his Kingdom at his pleasure, or that the King
did hold his Diadem of him, either mediately or immediately; howbeit the
Prince through his own exorbitant and otherwise remediless fault, do justly
fall into the Pastors hands to be punished.

Here I do by the way, most humbly crave of them to whom it does appertain,
that it may without passion be duly considered: whether we Catholics do not
his Majesty more faithful service, and show our selves much more careful of the
quiet continuance of his glorious and happy estate, when by all humble and fair
means we do labor most diligently to entreat his most excellent Majesty, to
deal more graciously and mildly with his poor Catholic subjects; then those
hot-spurre Ministers, who labor tooth and nail, to cast their loving
Sovereign into such a brake of briars by incensing his Highness to hold so
extreme a course against them. For if his Majesty may be vvonne to follow the
gentle and sweet inclination of his own nature, and to qualify the rigor of
the laws against recusants in such temperate manner, that the said recusant
Catholics may not be oppressed thereby; the Popes holiness without al doubt,
will never go about to deprive his Majesty of his regal dignity, how forward
soever he be otherwise to embrace and advance his own religion: for not so
much for favoring the Protestants, as for extreme persecution of the
Catholics (as the former example of neighbor Kings does show) that most
severe censure of the supreme Pastor of the Church is inflicted. Wherefore,
when it shall please his Highness to condescend graciously unto our humble and
daily supplication, for more moderation and mercy; then shall his Majesty
without al doubt (as every man may easily perceive) take away al jealousy of
those buzzes, which seem so greatly to disquiet the whole state.

Now to that point wherein the Kings supremacy lies, according to M. Abbots
declaration. If it were only by laws to provide and to take special order,
that God be well served, his word truly taught, his Sacraments duly administered,
and that al Bishops and Pastors perform their duties; then I should think him
a badde Christian, that would not acknowledge that his supremacy: And I most
willingly admit, that the good Kings of Israel did so; but the man is so
shallow, shuttle-witted, and uncertain, that there is no trust to be given to
his declaration. M. Perkins goes more substantially to work, and affirms
the Supremacy to consist, not in the points above mentioned; Reformed Catholic
page 285.
but in authority to declare, which books of Scripture be Canonical, which
not; and to determine finally of al controversies, and doubts rising
thereupon; to call general Councels, and to ratify their decrees; to make
Ecclesiastical laws that bind all the Church, and to excommunicate whosoever
shall obstinately resist or break them; to consecrate and institute Patriarchs
and Metropolitanes, and many such like: which when M. Abbot shall prove to
appertain justly to Kings and Princes, whether they be men, women, or
children; then we vvil allow the supreme temporal Magistrate, to be also
supreme governor in causes Ecclesiastical: In the mean season we vvil pray
that God will vouchsafe to make them good and dutiful children, of the one,
holy, Cacholike, and Apostolic Church, and that they may humbly learn those
high mysteries of religion, whereof most Princes (as all the world sees)
would be very unmeet judges and also very evil dispensours. What variety of
religions has grown by that kind of supremacy, what dissolution of Church
discipline, what corruption of civil justice, what iniquity and deceit in
contracts and bargains, what oppression of the poor, and generally what
looseness and lewdness of conversation, every true Christian man does see and
lament, and daily pray to almighty God our most merciful Father for amendment.

That vvorldly peace and temporal prosperity be no assured marks of Gods
favor, nor of his true religion, King David is a sufficient witness, Psalm. 72.
Whose feet (as he writes) were almost moved, and began to slip through
his zeal against the wicked, because he saw them suffered to live in such
prosperity and to die in so great peace. And our Savior in express terms
teaches, Math. 5. verse. 45.
That our Father in heaven makes his Sun to rise upon good and had, and
raineth upon just and unjust: that is, bestows out of his own bounty many
temporal commodities upon them that do full little deserve them at his hands.
Wherefore M. Abbot was ouer-seene to bring in the Princes prosperity for proof
of the goodness of their religion. Let us proceed.

WILLIAM BISHOP.
BUT sithence there be in this our miserable age, great diversities of
religions, and yet but one only wherewith God is well pleased, and truly served,
(as says the Apostle) Ephesians. 4.
One body, one spirit, as you are called into one hope of your vocation, one
Lord, one faith, one baptism: my most humble suit and supplication to your
high Majesty is, that to your eternal good, you will embrace, maintain, and set
forth, that only true Catholic and Apostolic faith, wherein your most roial
Progenitors lived and died; or if you cannot be won so soon to alter that
religion, in which it has been your Highness misfortune, to have been
bredde and brought up; that then in the mean season, of your tender goodness
you would not suffer the sincere Professors of the other, to be so heavily
persecuted.

R. ABBOT. SECT. 3. Page 14.
HERE M. Bishop propounds briefly to his Majesty, the sum of his petition,
the foundation whereof, he lays in a principle which we acknowledge to be a
truth, that whereas there be diversities of religions in the world, there is
but one only where with God is truly served. Hereupon he frames his humble
suit, that his Majesty will embrace and maintain that only true Catholic and
Apostolic faith: but that needs no suit of his, for his Majesty already does
that. For what is the Catholic faith, but the faith of the Catholic Church?
and which then shall we take to be the Catholic Church? surely the Catholic
Church by the very signification of the word, is the universal Church, so
called; Quia per totum est, August. de unit. Eccles. Athanas. Q 81.
Because it is over al, or through all the world, and is not tied to any
country, place, person, or condition of men: not this Church, or that Church
(as S. Augustine speaks) August in psalm. 56.
But the Church dispersed throughout the world; and not that which consists
i^ men now presently living, but so as there belong to it, both those that have
been before us, and that shall be after us to the worlds end: whereby we see,
how absurdly the Church of Rome takes unto it the name of the Catholic
Church, and how absurdly the Papists take unto them the name of Catholics. The
Catholic Church is the universal Church, the Church of Rome a particular
Church: there fore to say the Catholic Roman Church, is al one, as to say the
universal particular Church. To speak by their rule, the Roman Church is the
head, and al other Churches are members to it; but the Catholic Church
comprehends al: therefore to say the Roman Church is the Catholic Church, is
as much to say, the head is the whole body. Neither does it help them, that
of old, particular Churches were called by the name of Catholic Church, it
being no otherwise done, but as in toto similari, in a body where all the parts
are of the same nature, where every part has the name of the whole, and no
one part can challenge the same more then another: as in the elements, every
part of the fire, is fire; every part of the water, water; and so of the
like: for so every Church where true faith was taught, August. co^t. Epist.
Fund. cap. 4.
was called (to distinguish it from heretical assemblies) the Catholic Church;
and every Bishop of such a Church, was called a Bishop of the Catholic
Church, and no one Church more then another, assumed unto it any prerogative of
that title. Therefore they called the Catholic faith, the faith that was
received by the Church throughout the world: and the true Christians were
called Catholics, August. Epist. 48.
Ex communicatione totius orbis; by having communion and fellowship of faith
with the Church of the whole world: it is therefore a mere usurpation,
whereby the Papists call the Roman Church the Catholic Church.

WILLIAM BISHOP.
M. ABBOT is now at length come from his extrauagant ro^ing narrations, unto
some kind of argumentation. Here he will give a proof of his valor: here we
shall soon try whether he come so well furnished into the field, that he need
not to doubt of the victory, as in the beginning he vaunted of himself; or
whether his special skill and force, do not rather lie in railing at us, and
in cosening of his reader, then in any sound kind of reasoning. That doctrine
which he learned out of S. Augustine, concerning the signification of the
word Catholic, we willingly admit off, to wit: That religion is Catholic,
that faith is Catholic, which is spread over all the world, and has been
always embraced and practiced, even from the Apostles time to our days; and
such is the religion, which I would have persuaded his Majesty to receive in
to his Princely protection. To this what says M. Abbot? marry, that his
Majesty has already received it. How does he prove that? not by any one plain
and round argument directly to the purpose, but from the Catholic religion,
falls to the Catholic Church, and so spends the time in most frivolous
arguing against the Roman Church, of which I made no mention at al. Does he
not deserve a laurel garland, for the worshipful ranging of his battle? and is
he not like to fight it out valiantly, that thus in the beginning flies from
the point of the question? Prove (good Sir) that his Majesty embraces and
maintains that religion, which is spread over all the world, and that has
continued ever since the Apostles time; and then you may justly say, that he
vpholdeth the Catholic religion, according to your own explication out of the
ancient Fathers. But because M. Abbot saw this to be impossible, he gave it the
slip, and turns himself to prove the Roman religion not to be the
Catholic, and perceiving that also as hard to perform as the other, he
shuffles from the religion and faith, of which the question was, unto the
Roman Church, that is, from the faith professed at Rome, to the persons
inhabiting the city of Rome, whom he will prove not to be Catholics, and the
Roman Church not to be the Catholic Church. Do you mark what winding and
turning, and what doubling this simple Minister is driven unto, ere he can come
to make any show of a silly argument?

But let us give him leave to wander vvhither his fancy leads him, that we
may at length hear what he would say: It is forsooth, That the Church of Rome
does absurdly call her self the Catholic Church, and that Papists do absurdly
take to themselves the name of Catholics, because the Catholic Church is the
universal Church, but the Church of Rome is a particular Church; therefore to
say the Roman Catholic Church, is al one to say the universal particular
Church: here is a well shapen argument, and worthy the maker; it consists of al
particular propositions, which every smatterer in logic knows to be most
vicious: besides, not one of them is good, but al are sophistical and full of
deceit. First, concerning the form, if it were current one might prove by it,
that no one Church in the world were Catholic; take (for example) the
English congregation (which they hold to be most Catholic) and apply M.
Abbots argument to it thus: The Catholic Church is the universal Church, but
the Church of England is a particular Church; wherefore to say the English
Church is Catholic, is to say a particular Church is an universal. His first
fault then is in the very form of reasoning, which alone is sufficient to
argue him to be a sophister, and one that means to beguile them that vvil
trust him: now to the particulars. His first proposition (the Catholic Church
is the universal Church) is both absurd, because the same thing is affirmed of
himself (for universal is no distinct thing, but the very interpretation of
the word Catholic,) and also captious, as having a double signification. For
the Catholic Church does signify both the whole body of the Church,
compacted of all the particular members united and joined together, in one; in
which sense no one particular Church can be called the Catholic Church,
because it is not the whole body spread over all the world; for it is totum
integrale (to use the school terms) and not totum universal, quod dicitur
de multis. Secondly, the Catholic Church does also design and note very
properly, every particular Church that embraces the same true Christian faith,
which has continued ever since Christ's time, and been received in all
countries, not only because it is totum similare (as M. Abbot speaks,)
wherefore every true member of the Catholic Church may be called Catholic;
but also because each of the said particular Churches has the same Faith, the
same Sacraments, and the same order of government (al which are as it were
the soul and form of the Catholic Church,) which M. Abbot acknowledges:
and further also confesses out of S. Augustine, that Christians were called
Catholics, Ex communicatione totius orbis, Epistola. 48.
By having communion of faith with the whole world. If then by his own
confession, every particular Church, yea every particular Christian, that
embraces and professes that faith which is dilated all the world over, be
truly called Catholic; how fondly then did he go about to prove the Church of
Rome not to be Catholic, and Papists not to be Catholics, because forsooth
they were particulars? Yet that he may be thought not to doat outright, but
rather to dream, he adds: That at least the Church of Rome, has no reason
to assume to her self the prerogative of that title, because that every Church
where the true faith is taught, is truly called Catholic, and no one more then
another. I note first, that this man is as constant and stable, as the
weather-cocke on the top of a steeple: before he proved stoutly (as you have
heard) that no particular Church could be called Catholic; now he will have
every particular Church, that receives the true faith, to be called Catholic.
Neither do we say that any one Orthodoxe Church, is more Catholic then
another, if the word Catholic be taken precisely; though we hold, that among
all the particular Catholics, the Roman holds the greatest privileges, both
of superiority in government, and of continuance and stability in the same
true Catholic faith, which is deduced out of the word of God; because that
Church Math. 16. verse. 18.
Is the Rock (according to the exposition of the ancient Fathers) upon which
the whole Church was built, and against which the gates of hell should never
prevail. Again, the Bishop of Rome succeeds lineally unto S. Peter, Luc.
22. verse. 23.
Whose faith (through the virtue of Christ's prayer) shall never fail; wherefore
S. Ireneus, a most learned Archbishop of Lions in France, and a glorious Martyr
of great antiquity, says: That al Churches ought to agree with the Church of
Rome, Lib. 3. cap. 3.
for her more mighty principality. S. Cyprian Archbishop of Carthage in
Afric, affirms: Li. 1. epist. 3.
That perfidiousnesse and falsehood in matters of faith, can have no access
unto the Sea of Rome. S. Ambrose takes it to be al one, to say the Catholic
and the Roman Church, in these words: If he shall agree with the Catholic,
that is, De ob. Satyri. Hieron. in Apolog. 1. cont. Ruffi. cap. 1.
with the Roman Church. So does S. Hierome when he says of Ruffinus: What
faith does he say his to be? if the Roman faith, we are then Catholics:
affirming men to become Catholics by holding the Roman faith. De Praescript.
Tertullian, Epiphan. Haeres. 27.
Epiphanius, Lib. 2. co^t. Parmeni.
Optatus, August. Epist. 165.
S. Augustine, do prove their Churches to be Catholic, and themselves to be
Catholics, by declaring that they do communicate with the Church of Rome in
society of faith: and do condemn their adversaries to be Schismatikes and
Heretics, because they did not communicate with the same Roman Church. And
which is greatly to be noted, no general Council of sound authority, wherein
the Christian truth has been expounded and determined, but is confirmed by
the Bishop of Rome: And on the other side, no heresy or error in faith, has
sprung up since the Apostles days, that did not oppose it self against the
Roman See, and was not by the same finally overthrown. Whereupon S. Augustine
had good reason to say: That that chair obtained the top of authority, De
vtil. cred. cap. 17.
Heretics in vain barking round about it. This little (I hope) vvil suffice
for this place to declare, that there is great cause, why we should attribute
much more to the Roman Church, then to any other particular Church whatsoever;
and yield to it the prerogative of al singular titles, in a more excellent
manner.

Here comes in M. Abbots second proposition, (but the Church of Rome is a
particular Church) in which is as great doubling and deceit as in the former:
for albeit the Church of Rome, do in rigor of speech only, comprehend the
Christians dwelling in Rome; yet is it usually taken by men of both parties, to
signify al Churches of whatsoever other Country, that do agree with the
Church of Rome in faith, and confess the Pastor thereof, to be the chief
Pastor under Christ of the whole Church. Like as in times past, the Roman
Empire did signify, not the territory of Rome alone, or dominion of Italy; but
also any nation that was subject to the Roman Emperor: Even so the whole
Catholic Church, or any true member thereof, may be called the Roman Church, a
part principaliore; because the Bishop of Rome is the supreme head of their
Church. Whereupon, if you demand of a French Catholic of what Church he is,
his answer will be, that he is of the Catholic Roman Church; where he adds
Roman to distinguish himself from al Sectaries, who do call themselves
sometimes Catholics, (though most absurdly) and to specify that he is such a
Catholic, as does wholly join with the Roman Church in faith and religion.
Even as the word Catholic was linked at first with Christian, to distinguish
a true Christian believer from an Heretic, according to that of Pacianus an
ancient Author; Epistola. ad Simphorian.
Christian is my name, Catholic is my surname: so now a days the Epitheton
Roman is added unto Catholic, to separate those Catholics that join with the
Church of Rome in faith, from other sectaries; who do sometimes call themselves
also Catholics, though very ridiculously, because they be divided in faith,
from the greatest part of the universal world. Out of the premises may be
gathered, that the Roman Church may well signify any Church, that holds and
maintains the same faith which the Roman does: whence it follows, that M.
Abbot either dealt doubly, when he said the Roman Church to be a particular
Church; or else he must confess himself to be one of those Doctors whom the
Apostle notes, 1. Tim. 1. verse. 7.
For not understanding what they speak, nor of what they affirm.

Now to this his second sophistication, The Roman Church (by our rule) is the
head, and al other Churches are members to it, but the Catholic comprehends
al: ergo, to say the Roman Church is the Catholic, is to say the head is the
whole body. Here is first a misshapen argument, by which one may prove or
disprove any thing; for example I will prove by the like, that the Church of
England is not Catholic, thus: The Church of England by their crooked rule, is
a member of the Catholic Church; but the Catholic Church comprehends al:
where fore to say the English Church is the Catholic Church, is to say, a
member is the whole body. Besides the counterfeit fashion of the argument,
there is a great fallacy in it: for to omit, Fallacia accidentis.
that we say not the Church of Rome, but the Bishop of Rome to be the head of
the Church, it is a foul fault in arguing (as al Logitians do understand)
when one thing is said to be another by a metaphore, to attribute all the
properties of the metaphore to the other thing. For example, Christ our Savior
is metaphorically said to be a Lion, Apocal. 5. verse. 5.
Vicit Leo de tribu Judah: now if there hence any man would infer, that a Lion
has four legs, and is no reasonable creature, ergo. Christ has as many, or
is not endued with reason; he might himself therefore be well taken for an
unreasonable and blasphemous creature: Even so must M. Abbot be, who shifteth
from that propriety of the metaphore, bead, which was to purpose, unto others
that are clean besides the purpose. For as Christ was called a Lion, for his
invincible fortitude; so the Bishop of Rome is called the head of the Church,
for his authority to direct and govern the same: but to take any other
propriety of either Lion or Head, when they be used metaphorically, and to
argue out of that, is plainly to play the sophister. Wherefore, to conclude
this passage, M. Abbot has greatly discovered his insufficiency in arguing, by
propounding arguments that offend and be very vicious, both in matter and
form; and that so palpably, that if young Logitians should stand upon such in
the paruies, they would be hissed out of the schools: it must needs be then
an exceeding great shame, for a Divine to use them, to deceive good Christian
people in matter of salvation. And if after so great vaunts, of giving full
satisfaction to the reader, and of stopping his adversaries mouth, that he
should not have a word to reply, he be not ashamed to put such bables as these
into print; he cannot choose but make himself a mocking-stocke to the world:
surely his writings are more meet to stop mustard-pots, (if I mistake not
much) then like to stop any mean scholars mouth.

ROBERT ABBOT.
IT is therefore a mere usurpation, whereby the Papists call the Roman Church
the Catholic, and the very same that the Donatists of old did use. Aug. Ep. 48.
They held the Catholic Church to beat Cartenna in Africa; and the Papists
hold it to be at Rome in Italy: they would have the Church to be called
Catholic, Ibid. and breu. collat. 2. cap. dici. 3.
not by reason of the communion, and society thereof through the whole world,
but by reason of the perfection of doctrine and sacraments, which they falsely
challenged to themselves; and the same perfection the Church of Rome now
arrogateth to it self, and will therefore be called the Catholic Church. Co^t.
Crescon. grammat. lib. 2. cap. 37. Epist. 48.
From Cartenna the Donatists ordained Bishops to other countries, even to Rome
it self: And from Rome by the Papists order, must Bishops be authorized to al
other churches. They would be taken to be Catholics for keeping communion
with the Church of Cartenna: and so the Papists vvil be counted Catholics, for
keeping communion with the Church of Rome. They held, Ibidem.
that howsoever a man believed, he could not be saved, unless he did
communicate with the Church of Cartenna: And the Papists hold, that there is no
salvation likewise but in communicating with the Church of Rome. The Donatists
were not so absurd in the one, but the Papists are as absurd and ridiculous in
the other.

WILLIAM BISHOP.
IN the former passage M. Abbot bestowed an argument or two, raked out of the
rotten rubbish of those walls, (to use some of his own words) which were
before broken down by men of our side: Now he comes to his own fresh
invention, as I take it; for it is a fardle of such beggarly base stuff, and
so full of falsehood and childish follies, that any other man (I vveene) would
not for very shame have let it pass to the print. It consists in a
comparison and great resemblance that is between the old doting Donatists,
and the new presumptuous Papists, if M. Abbot dream not. The Donatists (says
he) held the Catholic Church to be at Cartenna, and the Papists do hold it to
be at Rome in Italy. False on both sides, because we do not hold it to be so
at Rome, as they did at Cartenna: for we hold it to be so at Rome, as it is
besides also dispersed all the world over; they, that it was wholly included
within the straight bounds of Cartenna in Mauritania, and her confines: so
that whosoever was converted in any other country, must go thither to be
purged from their sins, as S. Augustine testifies in express terms,
Epistola. 48.
in the very place by M. Abbot alleged. False also in the principal point,
that the Donatists held the Catholic Church to be at Cartenna: for there dwelt
only the Rogatists, who were (as S. Augustine there speaks,) Breuissimum
frustrum, de frustro maiore, A most small gobbet or fragment, broken out of a
greater piece; that is to say, a few schismatical fellows fallen from the
Donatists, as the Puritans are from the Protestants, or the Anabaptists from
the Sacramentaries: so that although men of that sect held the Catholic Church
to be at Cartenna, yet the maine body of the Donatists maintained it not to be
there at al, but held that congregation of Cartenna to be wholy schismatical,
and no true member of the Catholic Church. This first part then of the
comparison, is most ugly and monstrously false.

The second is not unlike: The Donatists would have the Church to be called
Catholic, not by reason of the communion and society thereof through the whole
world, but by reason of the perfection of doctrine and sacraments, which they
falsely challenged to themselves; the same perfection the Church of Rome now
arrogateth to her self. Here are many faults: the first is a gross lie in the
chief branch; for the Donatists did not call the Church Catholic, for the
perfection of doctrine and sacraments: see S. Augustine in both places, who
expressly delivers, Breui collat. cap. 2. diei 3. Epist. 48.
that it was for the fullness of sacraments, Ex plenitudine sacramentorum; or
for the observation of al Gods commandments, Ex obseruatione omnium diuinorum
praeceptorum: of perfection of doctrine they said not one word, they were more
sharpe-vvitted (as S. Augustine observes) then to go about to prove
universality by perfection, which is not universal. But seeing well that they
could not defend their congregation to be Catholic, (that is universal) but by
some kind of universality; they defended it to be so called, for the
universality and fullness of sacraments and commandments, that is: because
their Church retained all the sacraments that the Catholics did, and professed
to keep al Gods commandments as fully as they. M. Abbots former fault then in
this second point of resemblance (and that a foul one) is, in that he belieth
the Donatists. And more palpably should he have belied the Roman Church, if he
had justly brought in the resemblance, to wit: if he had said as due proportion
required, that we hold our Church to be Catholic as the Donatists did theirs,
for the perfection of doctrine and sacraments: which is so manifestly untrue,
and so clearly against the doctrine of al Catholic writers, that he (that was
wont to blush at nothing) seems yet ashamed to avouch it openly, and yet does
at last traile it in deceitfully. As for perfection of doctrine and sacraments,
though it be only in the Catholic Church; yet it is so far wide from the
signification and use of the word Catholic, that none (except such wise men
as M. Abbot is) do think any thing to be Catholic, because it is perfect.

The third particle of the resemblance is, That from Cartennathe the Donatists
ordained Bishops to other countries, even to Rome it self. And from Rome by
the Papists order, Bishops be authorized to al other Churches. I am not so
copious, as to afford to every leasing of M. Abbot a new phrase; wherefore the
reader (I hope) will bear with my rudeness, if I call sometimes a lie by the
name of a lie. It is an untrue tale, that the Donatists ordained Bishops from
Cartenna; for they could not abide that place, but esteemed it to be
Schismatical, as you have heard before. He does misreport S. Augustine, who
says: Lib. 2. cont. Crescon. c. 37
Quo ex Africa ordinare paucis vestris soletis Episcopum, you Donatists are
wont to order and send a Bishop thither to your few companions out of Africa,
not from Cartenna in Mauritania. Neither does the Catholic Church appoint,
that every Bishop should go to Rome to take holy orders, and from thence to be
sent to other Catholic countries; but in every other region where be three
Catholic Bishops, they may be lawfully consecrated: albeit for unities sake,
and to preserve due order, they be confirmed by the Bishop of Rome, the supreme
head under Christ of the Catholic Church.

The fourth point of the comparison is most absurd; for the Donatists were so
far from thinking them Catholics, that kept communion with the Church of
Cartenna, that they detested and abhorred their company as Schismatikes.
Neither do we call any men Catholics for keeping communion with the Church of
Rome, if it be taken for that particular Church which is contained within the
wales of Rome; but because that communicating with that Church in faith and
religion, they do communicate with all other of the same faith, which are
spread all the world over.

Finally, the fifth is as false as the fourth, and in the same sort to be
confuted. True it is, that the Donatists thought that none could be saved out
of their congregation, which is almost a common position of every sect and
heresy; but most sure it is, that there is no salvation out of the true Church
of Christ, no more then was out of the Ark of Noah in the general deluge:
wherefore, whosoever does not communicate with the Church of Rome, (which is
the chief member thereof) in society of faith and sacraments, is out of the
state of grace and salvation; according to that of S. Hierome to Pope Damasus:
I following no chief but Christ, Epistola. 7. tit. 2.
join my self to the communion of Peter's chair, upon that Rock I know the
Church to be built, whosoever does eat the Paschal lamb out of this house, he
is profane; he that is not found within the Ark of Noah shall perish, etc.
where there is much more to this purpose.

To conclude this passage, seeing that M. Abbot went about, to prove the Church
of Rome to be like that of the Donatists, by no one sound argument but by mere
fabling and lying; he must look (unless he repent) Apocal. 21. verse. 8.
to have his part with all liars in the poole burning with fire and brimstone.
And if it please the reader, to hear at what great square the Donatists were
with the Church of Rome, to which M. Abbot does so often resemble them, I will
briefly show it out of the best records of that time. S. Augustine speaks
thus to the Donatist Petilian: Lib. 2. cont. Petili. c. 51.
What has the Church or See of Rome done to thee, in which Peter did sit, and
now sits Anastatius? why do thou call the Apostolical chair, the chair
of pestilence? See how friendly the Donatists saluted the Church of Rome,
stiling it the chair of pestilence. Lib. 2. cont. Parmeni.
Optatus Bishop of Mileuitan says thus: Whence is it that you Donatists
contend to vsurp unto you the keys of the Kingdom? and that you wage battle
against the chair of Peter, presumptuously and with sacril^gious audacity? If
they vvaged battle against the Church of Rome so cruelly, surely there was no
agreement between them. Wherefore, as the Catholics of Africa then, so they
that were taken into the communion of the Church of Rome, cared little for the
Donatists, as witnesses S. Augustine, saying of Cecilianus Bishop of Carthage:
August. Epistola. 162.
He need not to care for the multitude of his conspiring enemies the
Donatists, when he saw himself by communicatory letters joined with the Roman
Church, in which always the principality of the Apostolical chair flourished,
etc. So we at this time, need as little to care for the bitter reproaches and
deceitful arguments of the Protestants, so we stand stable and firm, in the
like society of faith and religion with the same Church of Rome.

ROBERT ABBOT.
Cont. Epist. Fund. cap. 4.
THERE was reason why Augustine should be moved with the name of Catholic,
when they that were called Catholics, had testimony of their faith from the
communion and society of the Church throughout the whole world, and were
therefore so called; Breui. collat. diti 3. cap. 2.
Quia communicant Ecclesiae toto orb diffusae, Because (says S. Augustine)
they communicate with the Church spread over all the whole world. But most
sottishly it is alleged for a motive to us, being now Donatistically applied
to one particular Church of Rome, and to men bearing the name of Catholics,
only for communicating with that Church. Surely, as the name of Jews was of
old a name of honor, and the proper title of the people of God; but
afterward by their Apostasy who bare it, was left for Esai. 65. verse. 15.
a name of curse and reproach: so the name of Catholic was an honorable name,
and the peculiar title of the true children of the Church; but now by their
abuse who have unjustly taken that name unto themselves, it is become a name of
curse and shame with the people of God, and the proper badge of Apostataes and
Heretics. And as the Apostle Romans 2. v. 28.
denies the name of Jews to them, who yet according to the letter were so
called, because of the circumcision of the flesh; and applies the truth of the
nam^ to them, who were so according to the spirit, albeit according to the
letter they were not so named: so the name of Catholics in deed, belongs
not to the Romish faction, who according to the letter take upon them to be so
called; but the true meaning thereof belongs to them, who although they joy
not in the litteral name, etc. yet do follow the same faith which they
followed, who first were called by the name of Catholics. Let them have the
shel, so that we have the kernel, etc. the name in his true use, imports them
that embrace the faith of the Catholic, that is the universal Church, that
has been from the beginning of the world, that is through the whole world,
and shall be to the worlds end.

WILLIAM BISHOP.
S. AUGUSTINE indeed, was so much moved with the name of Catholic, that he
alleges it to have been one principal cause, Cont. Epist. Fund. cap. 4. De
vera relig. cap. 7.
which kept him in the lap of the Church. And else where very often exhorts
al Christians, To hold the communion of that Church, which both is Catholic,
and known also by that very name; not only to her own followers, but also to
others. And the self same reason alleged by M. Abbot himself, which caused
that most holy, wise, and learned Father to esteem so highly of that title
Catholic, is now of great force to persuade al reasonable men, to make
themselves members of the Roman Church: for by joining in society of faith with
the Church of Rome, they shall communicate with the Church spread over the whole
world; because the faith and religion of the Church of Rome, has been
generally received all the world over, as our adversaries themselves do
confess. The name Catholic, is by the Protestants Donatistically applied to
their Schismatical congregation, that neither are nor ever were scattered all the world over; but be enclosed and confined within certain countries of
Europe, as the Donatists were within the bounds of Afrike. Most sottishly then
(to use his own words) does M. Abbot affirm, the name Catholic to be
applied by us of the Roman religion, unto the particular Church of Rome; when
as we call al other Churches of what country soever (that with the Church of
Rome keep entirely the same faith) Catholic. And men of al other nations do
we call Catholics, as well as those who are Romans borne, because they al
believe and confess the same one Catholke faith, that is extended over all the
world.

Secondly, M. Abbot is much mistaken in his comparison of the name of Jew,
with the name Catholic: for to omit first that such examples prove nothing,
but do only serve for show, or explication; and moreover, that it can hardly
be showed that the name of Jew was a name of such honor at any time: for that
peoples honorable name was Israelites, and were not called Jews, til
toward the declination and wane of their estate. Neither was it ever any
peculiar and proper title of the people of God: for God had many good servants,
that were never called Jews, as may be gathered by Job the Husite, Naaman the
Sirian, the widow of Luc. 4. verse. 26.
Sarepta a Sidonian, and by a great number of Prosilites, and finally by that
which the Apostle teaches: Romans 2. verse. 14.
Many Gentiles were saved without the law. Lastly, most uncertain it is, of
what name the Prophet Isay speaks when he says: Cap. 65. verse. 13.
It shall be left for a name of curse. Al these impertinencies of his example
being too too many, I do remit him, but cannot pardon his gross fault in the
maine point of the comparison: for the name Jew (according to the usual
signification of the word) being the name of a certain people of one race and
kindred, and having a law given them by Moises, which should continue only for
a prescript time, and end at the coming of Christ, is not like the name of
Catholic; which is no special name of the people of any one country, but is
attributed and does agree to al sorts of men, of what country or nation
soever, that do embrace the true Christian faith: And is inseparably linked,
and so fast joined and riueted with the Christian profession and religion, that
it shall never fail, fall, or be separated from it, so long as Christ's faith
stands; nor ever be contemned of the faithful, whiles Christ's true religion
flourishes: which is proved inuincibly out of the very Etimology of the name
Catholic, and that according to M. Abbots own interpretation in the same
place, who does expound it to signify that Church, which is through the whole
world, and shall be to the worlds end. If the name Catholic, shall continue to
the worlds end the true title of the Church, who then but miscreants and
Heretics, can take it for a name of curse, reproach, and shame? Is it not until
this day set down in the Apostles creed, as the honorable title and epithet
of the true Church? I believe the holy Catholic Church. Must he then not be
rather an Apostata then a scholar of the Apostles, that blusheth not to avouch
the very name Catholic, to be the proper badge of Apostataes and Heretics,
which the Apostles asscribe and appropriate unto true Christianity? If any
proud and false fellows do usurp that name, and challenge it to themselves
wrongfully, as many did even in S. Augustines time, when M. Abbot confesses it
to have been in greatest estimation; let such usurping companions be rebuked
sharply, and convicted of their insolent and audatious folly: but the name
Catholic, which the Apostles thought worthy and fit to be placed in the
articles of our creed, and principles of our religion, must always remain
and be among true Christians, a name very glorious and desirable. We therefore
say with S. Augustine: We receive the holy Ghost, if we love the Church, Tract.
32. in Iohannem. Lib. 1. cont. Gaude^t. c. 33.
if we be joined together by charity, if we rejoice in the Catholic name and
faith. And they that do not joy in that name, but mock at it, do blaspheme,
as the same most holy Author intimates. The name Jew being taken in the
Apostles sense, for one (of what nation soever) that fulfilleth the justice of
the law, never was, nor never shall be a name of reproach: so that M. Abbot is
driven to hoppe from one sense of that name to another, to make it appliable to
his purpose.

But (and it please you) the Protestants have the kernel of the name Catholic,
and we but the shel. Why do they then so bitterly inueigh against it? why are
they not more willing to extol and magnify that renowned title, being of such
ancient Nobility? twenty pound to a penny, that what face soever he set on it,
yet in his heart he maruailously fears the contrary himself. If that faith
and religion only be Catholic and universal (as he acknowledges) that has
ever been, and is also spread over all the world, and shall continue to the
worlds end; then surely their religion cannot be Catholic, even by the
uniform confession of themselves: who generally acknowledge, that for nine
hundred years together, the Papacy did so domineer all the world over, that not
a man of their religion, was to be found in any corner of the world, that
durst peep out his head to contradict it. Could there be any Church of theirs
then, when there was not one Pastor and flock of their religion (though never
so small) in any one country? and even now when their Gospel is at the hottest,
has it spread it self all the world over? is it received in Italy, Spain,
Greece, Afrike, or Asia, or carried into the Indians? nothing less. They
cannot then call themselves Catholics, after the sincere and ancient
acceptance of that name, which is as himself has often repeted out of S.
Augustine: Quia communicant Ecclesiae toto orb diffusae; Because they
communicate in fellowship of faith, with the Church spread over all the world.
They must therefore (notwithstanding M. Abbots vain bragges) be content with
the shel, and leave the kernel to us, who do embrace the same faith that is
dilated al countries over: yea, they must be contented to walk in the
foote-steps of their forefathers the Donatists, even according to M. Abbots
explication, and fly from the universality of faith and communion of the
Church spread all the world over, unto the perfection of their doctrine; which
is nevertheless more absurd, and further from the true signification of the
word Catholic, then the Donatists shift was, of fullness of sacraments and
observation of al Gods commandments, as has been already declared. But let
us hear, how clearly and substantially, he will at length prove their Church
to be Catholic.

ROBERT ABBOT.
NOw, as of this Catholic Church from the beginning to the end, there is (as
appears in the words cited by M. Bishop) but Ephesians. 4. verse. 4.
One body, even as one Lord, one God and Father of al: so is there also but one
spirit, one hope, one faith, one baptism, one spiritual meat and drink, one
religion. Let us then look out those that have been before us, and consider
Abel, Noe, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and the rest of the Patriarchs and Fathers.
Let us look to Moises and the Prophets, and the whole generation of the
righteous and faithful of the old Testament and see what their faith was, what
was their religion and service of God: undoubtedly we find not a Papist among
them; we find no shadow of that which they now obtrude and thrust upon us,
under the name of Catholic religion. They did not worship Idols and Images:
they did not coming after, pray to Saints that were dead before them: they
used no invocation of Angels: they knew no Merits nor works of
supererogation. They vowed no vows of Monkery: they made no pilgrimage to
Relics and dead men's bones: they knew no shrift nor absolution, or any of
that riffe-raffe-stuffe, wherein the substance of Catholic religion is now
imagined to consist. But what they did, the same do we; as they worshipped
God, so (saving ceremonial obseruances) we also worship him; as they believed,
so by the same spirit of faith we also believe; as they prayed, so with the
same words we also pray; according to the approved example of their life, we
also teach men to live: therefore no Popery, but our religion is the Catholic
religion, because it is that which the Catholic Church has practiced from
the beginning of the world; and Popish religion not so. The same faith and
religion which they followed, and no other, our Savior Christ at his coming
further confirmed, and only stripping it of those tipes and shadows,
wherewith it pleased God for the time to cloth it, commending the same to his
Apostles, simply and nakedly to be preached to the nations. They did so, They
added nothing of their own, they preached only the Gospel, promised before by
the Tertul. de Praescript. Romans 1.
Prophets in the holy Scriptures, saying no other things Act. 26. v. 12. Lib.
3. cap. 1.
then those which the Prophets and Moises did say should come. The Gospel which
they first preached, afterward by the will God (as Ireneus says) they
delivered to us in writing, to be the pillar and foundation of our faith. Thus
then, what Christ delivered the Apostles preached; what the Apostles preached
they wrote; what they vvrote we receive and believe, De praescript.
and believing this (as Tertullian says) we desire to believe no more, because
we first believe, that there is nothing else for us to believe. And therefore
(as S. Augustine says) if any man, August. cont. literas Petili. lib. 3. cap.
6.
nay if an Angel from heaven, shall preach unto us any thing concerning Christ,
or concerning his Church, or concerning any thing pertaining to our faith and
life, but what we have received in the Scriptures of the law and Gospel,
accursed be he. Our faith therefore, because it is that which the Apostles
committed to writing, is the Apostolic faith, and our Church ex
consanguinitate doctrinae, by consanguinity and agreement of doctrine, is
proved to be an Apostolical Church, etc. of this Apostolical Church his Majesty
is the supreme governor under Christ. As for M. Bishops religion, it cannot be
the Catholic religion, because it is not that which the Catholic Church,
that is the faithful of al ages have practiced. His faith is not the Apostolic
faith, because it is not that which the Apostles left in writing. They make no
mention of the Pope, of his Supremacy, of his Pardons, of worshipping of
Images, invocation of Saints, Pilgrimages, and a thousand such trumperies.

WILLIAM BISHOP.
WE agree in this, that there is but one faith, one baptism, one spiritual
food, and one religion in the Catholic Church: but M. Abbot is foully
ouer-seene about the time, when the true Church began first to be called
Catholic; which was not before Christ's time but afterward, according to that
alleged out of Pacianus an ancient author, who writes of the name Catholic,
saying: Christian is my name, Pacian. epist. ad Simphor. de nomine Catholico.
Catholic is my surname. For when among Christians some began to teach false
doctrine, and to draw others after them into sects, they that remained sound,
and did cleave fast unto the whole body of the Church were entitled
Catholics, to distinguish them from Heretics that did not join with the
universal corpse of Christians, in faith and religion; which M. Abbot before did
in plain words confess: see his text before, where he begins to argue of
the word Catholic. And the reason is most perspicuous, why the Jews and their
religion could not be called Catholic, though it were right and according to
the will of God for that time, because Catholic signifies that which is spread
all the world over, and received of al nations; so was not the law of Moises,
and the manner of serving God therein prescribed, but was peculiar unto the
children of Israel, and as it were confined within the limits of one land and
country: wherefore it could not be called Catholic and universal.

And M. Abbot was greatly deceived, or else goes about to deceive others, when
for proof of communicating with the Catholic Church, he recoileth back unto
the beginning of the world. Why did he not rather show, that their new Gospel
flourished in all countries as soon as the Christian faith was planted, and
that it has continued in all ages since the Apostles days, until our time?
that had been to have spoken directly to the purpose, which he seldom uses.
But he saw that to be a work to hard for Hercules, and therefore to delude his
reader, and to lead him from the matter, he flies up to the old farne-daies of
Abel, Noe^, Abraham, etc. as though they had revealed unto them, al those
particular points of faith which Christ taught his Apostles, and the same
religion and manner of worshipping God that we Christians have; which is
flatly opposite to the doctrine of S. Paul, who testifies: Ephesians. 3. v. 4.
That the mystery of Christ unto other generations, was not known unto the
Sons of men, as now it is revealed unto his holy Apostles and Prophets in the
spirit. Those ancient Patriarchs (as men Hebr. 11. verse. 13.
looking a far off, at the days of Christ the light of the world) did not
discover so distinctly the mysteries of the Christian faith as the Apostles
who were Job. 6. v. 45.
taught by his own mouth, and made to know Ioh. 15. v. 15.
al his Fathers secrets, and had Romans 8. verse. 23.
the first fruits of the spirit, in best sort to understand them and carry them
away. To be short, our Savior has decided this question, and says in
express words: Math. 13. verse. 17.
Many Prophets and just men, have desired to see the things that you see, and
have not seen them, and to bear the things that you hear, and have not
heard them. Observe then how absurdly M. Abbot behaueth himself in this
matter. First he uses tergiuersation, in leaping so far back from the point
of the question, seeking communion with the Catholic Church, some thousands
of years before there was any Church Catholic. Secondly, in auouching the
ancient founders of the first world, to have believed clearly and
particularly, all the articles of faith that we believe; or else why does he
conclude, that the Roman faith is not Catholic, because in that old and
hoare-headed world, some branches of their faith were not sprung up and of full
growth? They did not (says he) worship Idols and Images, they did not pray to
Saints, etc. But (good Sir) did they believe that al their children were to be
baptized? and that al persons of riper years among them, were to receive the
holy Sacrament of Christ's body? yea, can M. Abbot demonstrate, that they had
perfect faith of the most holy and blessed Trinity, believing distinctly in
three persons and one God? or that the redeemer of the world Christ Jesus, was
to be perfect God and perfect man, the nature of man in him subsisting without
the proper person of man, in the second person of the Trinity; which are the
most high mysteries of our Christian faith? I am not ignorant, that albeit
those ancient Patriarchs and Prophets, had not clear and distinct knowledge of
many articles which we are bound to believe; yet they believed some few of
them in particular, and had a certain confuse and dark conceit by figures and
tipes, of most of the rest.

Touching these very points, whereof M. Abbot would have them wholy ignorant
(if his bare word without any manner of proof were so powerful) I affirm,
that they held the most of them; which I will not stand here to prove at large,
for that were Protestant-like to run from one question to another without
order: but I will only give a touch to every one of his instances, referring the
reader for more full satisfaction, to the proper place of those head
controversies. First, no Catholic ever taught any man to worship Idols, let
that then pass as a Protestant slander: but that Images are to be placed in
Churches, the examples recorded in the old Testament, of having them both in
their Exodus 25. verse. 18.
Tabernacle, and in the 3. Reg. 6. verse. 23.
Temple of Solomon, and this sentence of the Psalmist; Psalm. 98. verse. 5.
Adore his foote-stoole, and many such like places and resemblances, do argue
very strongly, that Images are to be worshipped. Secondly, invocation of Angels
is most plainly practiced, by the holy Patriarch Jacob the Father of al
Israelites: Genes. 48. verse. 16.
God, etc. and the Angel that has delivered me from al evil, bless these
children. The example of so religious a person is our sufficient vvarrant, to
pray to Angels and Saints: for Luc. 22.
Saints in heaven are equal to Angels, as our Savior himself assures us; and
Job was counseled to pray and call for aid unto some of the Saints: Job. 5.
verse. 1.
Ad aliquem Sanctorum convert. Thirdly, they of the old Testament knew good
works to merit life everlasting, and had by Gods grace free will to do them;
which I add, because by the same sentences I will prove both together. God said
unto Cain: Genes. 4. verse. 7.
If thou do well, shall thou not receive; if evil, thy sin will be at the door,
but the appetite or pange of it shall be under thee, and thou shall have
dominion over it: see both power given to the wicked to do well, if they will,
and recompense promised therefore. Again, in the law Moises having propounded
to the Israelites Gods commandments, exhorting them thereunto, says: Deuter.
30. verse. 15.
Consider that I set before you life and good, and contrariwise death and evil;
if you love God, and will walk in his commandments, life; or else death, etc.
Verse. 19.
choose therefore life, etc. Must they not be very dull, that hence cannot
gather the keeping of Gods commandments, to deserve and merit life
everlasting, and that man has by the aid of Gods grace, free will to perform
them? Fourthly, they that were skilful in the law of Moises, could not be
ignorant of works of supererogation, that is: that there were many good
works which men were not bound to do, yet if they did them, they might
thereby advance themselves in Gods favor; because there is Numer. 6.
special order taken, for the sanctification of any man or woman, that would be
a Nazarite, that is: any one that of devotion would withdraw himself from
secular affairs, and for some certain time serve God more religiously, yet no
man was bound thereunto. Further they were allowed and encouraged to make
vows, which is also a work of supererogation, against M. Abbot, fifth
instance. For not only David says: Psalm. 75. verse. 12.
Vow and render it to our Lord; but in the law it is written: Deuter. 23. verse.
21.
When thou do vow a vow unto the Lord thy God, slack not to perform it,
because the Lord thy God does require it, etc. but if thou will not promise
thou shall be without sin. And to leave the word Monkery, as fitter for a
Monkey then for an Abbot, Josephus a grave author among the Jews,
witnesses: That there lived in the time of the law many thousands called
Esseni, Antiquitat. Iudaic. lib. 18. cap. 2.
who were contemners of riches, lived in common, having neither wives nor
servants. What other thing do Monks profess then such poverty and chastity?
saving obedience, which must needs also in some degree be among the others,
who lived no doubt in orderly society. Sixthly, neither they nor we either buy
or sell pardons, yet had great mercy and pardon showed them for their
forefathers sake, as God test fieth in the first commandment. And that they
were on the other side, to endure temporal punishment for sin, after the
guilt of the sin, and the eternal pain was forgiven them, is most clearly
recorded both of all the people of Israel, Numer. 14.
Whose murmuration against God, was at the earnest intercession of Moises
pardoned; and yet were they therefore deprived of entering into the land of
promise. Yea Numer. 20. verse. 24.
Moises and Aaron themselves, were in like manner both pardoned for their
diffidence, that they did not glorify God at the waters of contradiction; and
yet nevertheless Deuter. 32. verse. 51.
debarred from entering into the land of promise, for the same offense: so that
after the mortal guilt of sin is remitted, there remains either some
temporal satisfaction to be made on our parties, or else to be forgiven and
pardoned us by God and his Ministers Seauenthly, that they made prayers and
offered sacrifice for the souls in Purgatory, is manifest by the fact of 2.
Match. 12.
Judas Machabeus, who was a most noble virtuous and faithful Israelite, as al
Christians do confess. Neither is there any need, for this purpose to auerre
and prove the books of the Machabees to be Canonical Scripture, when it
serves this turn, that they be taken for a grave History, and that the
Protestants allow them to be of sufficient authority for instruction of
manners. Further, all the Jews even to this day, do pray for the souls in
Purgatory: Titulo. 1. Sect. 4.
see the Catholic Apology out of Protestant Authors. Eighthly, the Jews of
the male-kinde, by their law were bound to go as it were in pilgrimage, at
three solemn feasts in the year, unto one special place, that God should
choose for his service: And King Solomon encouraged al strangers to go on
pilgrimage, to the Temple builded by him, when he prayed Deuter. 16. verse. 16
that what stranger soever, should come thither to pray, he might obtain his
suit. And the 3. Reg. 8. verse. 21.
bones of the Prophet Elizeus, giving life by their touch unto a dead man, does
sufficiently instruct al true believers, that it is very profitable to go on
pilgrimage, unto the sacred bones and holy Relikes of Gods faithful servants
departed. Lastly, they were not wholly unacquainted with a kind of shrift and
absolution: for 4. Reg. 13. verse. 21. Numer. 5. Leuit. 5.
they were charged to confess the sins they had committed, and to bring with
them unto the Priest, a prescribed sacrifice, to be offered by them for their
pardon and absolution. And as the lepers by that law were bound to present
themselves to the Priests, and were by them declared such, or purged from that
imputation: so in the law of grace, men infected with the souls leprosy (that
is mortal sin) are either to be bound, and declared obstinate by the Priests,
if they vvil not repent; or repenting and confessing the same, are to be
cleansed therefrom by the Priests absolution, Chrisost. li. 3. de Sacerdot.
Hieron. in ca. 16. Math.
as both S. Chrysostom and S. Hierome do argue. This in brief will suffice I
hope, for answer unto M. Abbots particulars.

I might easily add, how the sacrifice of the body and blood of Christ under
the forms of bread and wine, were both prefigured by Melchisedechs Host in
bread and wine, and foretold by the Genes. 14. Malach. 10.
Prophet Malachy: and what a lively type Manna (that Angelical and delicate
food) was of Christ's body in the Sacrament And how the supreme authority of
one head over all the whole Church, and that to belong to a Bishop and not to
the lay Magistrate, was not obscurely shadowed but lively represented, by the
Sovereign power that the high Priest of the old testament had over all the
rest, Deuter. 17.
To determine and end al doubts and controversies, arising about any hard point
of the law. As for consecrating of Priests, and hallowing of Churches and
Altars, with al vestiments and ornaments thereunto appertaining; and for the
several feasts and fasts, there is so great resemblance between them and us,
that Protestants commonly cry out against us, for the ouer-great affinity that
is betwixt the old law and our religion. But as they are to be reproved of
indiscreet zeal against the rites of Moises law, which were of God and good
for the time, and most of them figures and tipes of the law of grace, according
to that of the Apostle; 1. Cor. 10.
Al things chanced to them in figure, and were written for our correction and
instruction: so on the other side, some strange defluxion, and distillation of
corrupt humors, maruailously darkened M. Abbots soare-eies, that he could not
discern nor find in the whole law of Moises, any one shadow of that which
we now practice. May not these worthy words, which S. Paul pronounced of the
blinded Jews in his time, be verified of him? 2. Cor. 4.
Their senses were dulled until this day: when Moises is read, a veil is put
upon their heart; that is, they reading and hearing the law of Moises, do no
more understand it, then does a man hoodded, or that has a veil before his
eyes, see what is before him; or else M. Abbot reading the old Testament, could
not choose but have seen much of our religion, and many articles of our faith
there recorded. And albeit we teach, most mysteries of our faith to have been
in the law of Moises prefigured and foretold: yet is it very absurd, to say as
M. Abbot does, that we believe no more articles of faith then they did; for we
were by the Son of God our blessed Savior, given to understand many high
points of belief, which were not revealed unto them, as has been before
declared.

And much more reprochful is it, to hold as he does, That we worship God after
the same manner as they did: for then should we sacrifice to him, beefes,
muttons, calves, and lambs, and our sacrificers should be of Aarons issue and
order, and we al circumcised. I omit al their ceremonies, because M. Abbot
excepteth them. And if the Protestants do altogether pray as they did, and in
the same terms as M. Abbot affirms them to do; they sometimes then do
pray unto God to Exodus 32. verse. 13.
remember Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and for their sakes to take mercy on them:
for to that effect and in those terms prayed the Prophet Moises, and that
according unto those Patriarchs Genes. 48. verse. 16.
express order and commandment. Whereunto if it please the Protestants to
join that other prayer of the Psalmist: Psalm. 131.
Remember (o Lord) David, and al his mildness; let them tell me, whither this
small prayer, with which they find so great fault, ( Tu per Thomae sanguinem,
etc. Thou (o Lord) for that bloods sake, which thy servant shed in defense of
thy holy Church, take compassion upon us) be not warranted for good, by
example of the like recorded in the old Testament. For if they then did desire
God to remember the excellent virtues of his servants, and for their sakes to
show mercy to others, why may not we do the same now? why may we not as well
beseech God to remember the constant fortitude of S. Thomas, as they did the
mildness of David? I vvil not dwell upon these impertinent and loose follies,
which all that be not babes, may of them selves easily discry; but do out of
the premises infer: first, that no religion was to be called Catholic,
before the Gospel of Christ was preached, or to be preached to al nations; and
therefore the law of Moises, being peculiar to one people and country, could
not be called Catholic: secondly, that the Roman faith and religion, is very
conformable, to that of the Patriarchs and Prophets, as the verity is to the
figure; whence it follows, that the Protestants new devises, hold no due
correspondence with them. I have already confuted this his assertion, That
Christ at his coming, confirmed the faith and religion of the Jews, without
any additions of his own, and commended it simply and nakedly (only stripping
it of types and shadows) to be preached to al nations: And here I add, that
then Christians may yet have many vviues together, as the Jews had, or give
their wives upon any displeasure, a l^bel of divorce; for these were no
shadows nor ceremonies. And briefly, it should follow thereof, that all that
part of their law that does belong to justice and judgment, stands still in full
force and virtue among us Christians: which is most opposite to the
determination of the Apostles in the first Council holden at Jerusalem, where
it was plainly decided; that Act. 15. verse. 28.
we Christians were not bound to keep the old law. Again, if the Apostles
were simply and nakedly, to preach unto the Gentiles the law of Moises stripped
of tipes and shadows, why were they commanded to preach unto them the
Sacrament of baptism, or of our Lords supper, which are no where commanded
in the law of Moises? Well let this then pass, as a most notorious and gross
oversight. But the Apostles (says he) added nothing of their own, which is
very false; for many things were left by our Savior to their disposition:
vvhereupon S. Paul says, 1. Cor. 11. verse. 34.
Caetera cum venero disponain, I will dispose of the rest when I come; and was
further bold to say, 1. Cor. 7. verse. 12.
Haec dico ego non Dominus, For the rest I say not our Lord. M. Abbot goes on
belying the Apostle and saying, Romans 12.
and they preached only the Gospel, promised before by the Prophets: where he
corrupts the Text, by adding the word only; and vveaueth into that Text to
the Romans, these words out of the Acts of the Apostles, Act. 26. verse. 22.
saying none other things, then those which the Prophets and Moises did say
should come: where he both mangleth the Text, and also breaks off in the
midst of a sentence, that it might seem appliable to al points of the
Apostles preachings, which the Apostle applies only to Christ's death and
resurrection, and the preaching and carrying of light unto the Gentiles. It is
a piece of strange alchumy, to distill out of these words of the Apostle, that
they preached nothing but the same faith and religion which the Jews
embraced. S. Paul says, that be had preached nothing of Christ's death and
resurrection, and that he was the light of the Gentiles, but that which the
Prophets did speak should come to pass: M. Abbot of his own head, enlarges
this his speech to al other points of our faith. Again, al is besides the
purpose: for the Apostle says not, that he taught any one article, which the
common sort of the Jews did believe, but such things as the Prophets said
should come to pass. Who knows not, that they foresaw and foretold, many
things that were no articles of faith in their days? and touching these very
particulars, how many of the Jews did believe that their Messiah should die so
shameful a death? or that M^ises law should be abrogated by their Messiah? and
that the Gospel of Christ should be preached unto al nations? al these were
great nouels, and exceeding scandalous to the body of the Jews: wherefore,
though some better learned among them, and more religiously affected, might
understand the Prophets speaking of those points; yet were they far from the
common reach, and persuasion of that people of the Jews from these points,
that the Jews believed all that Christ taught, and all that he commanded his
Apostles to deliver to al nations.

M. Abbot runs like a wandering Planet to a third; that al which the
Apostles taught, they committed to writing, which is notwithstanding as false
as any of the former: for many of them who never ceased to preach, left not
one sentence in vvriting behind them; and he that wrote most, did not write
the hundredth part of that which he taught by word of mouth. We know well, that
they left the Gospel in writing, and many other most divine and rare
instructions in their Epistles; wherefore he needed not cite Ireneus to
witness that, which no man is ignorant off: but that they wrote al which they
preached, or al things necessary to salvation, Ireneus says not a word, but
plainly signifies the contrary; where he most sagely counsaileth al men,
Eusebius. hist. Eccles. lib. 5. cap. 19.
when any controversy in religion arises, to make their recourse to the most
ancient Churches, where the Apostles had conuersed, (amongst which he
commends the Roman for principal of all the rest) and from them to take their
resolution: he then was of opinion, that the decision of al controversies,
were not to be searched out of the written word, but rather to be taken from
the resolution of the Church. De Praescriptionibus.
Oh, but Tertullian says, That believing this we desire to believe no more,
because we first believe, that there is nothing else for us to believe.
Believing this? believing what? the written word only? nothing less; for in
that very Treatise, his principal drift is, to prove that Heretics cannot be
confuted out of the written word, but by ancient customs and traditions, which
he calls Praescriptions: but (says he) when we believe the whole doctrine of
Christ, both written and delivered by Apostolical tradition, then we desire to
believe no more of any vpstart Heretics new devises. To S. Augustine I answer
first, that those be not his formal words which he cites. Secondly, admitting
the sense (if it be rightly taken) I say, that these words; Gallat. 1.
If any man or Angel, shall preach any thing besides that which is written
(where he alludeth to the Apostles like words) are to be understood, as S.
Augustine himself expounds those of the Apostle, that is: If any man shall
preach contrary to that which is written. For this is his own interpretation:
Aug. lib. 17. cont. Faust. cap. 3.
The Apostle says not more then you have received, but otherwise then you have
received; for if he had so said, he had prejudiced himself, who desired to
come to the Thessalonians, to supply what was wanting to their faith. He that
supplies adds that wanted, but does not take away any thing that was before:
so that you see, when he faith that nothing is to be preached besides that
which is written, his meaning is, nothing which is contrary to it; allowing
withal, that much more conformable to it, may be added for a supply to make it
full and perfect.

M. Abbot having in few lines run over 4. large questions, to wit: first, That
the Prophets and Patriarchs believed no principal points of the Roman faith;
secondly, that Christ delivered nothing but what the Jews before hand
believed; thirdly, that the Apostles preached the same and no other to the
Gentiles; fourthly, that whatsoever they preached they afterward wrote: he
fifthly adds, that the Protestants receive and believe all the written word.
Whence he will have it to follow finally, that the Protestants are very good
Jews, and do jumpe just with them in all articles of faith; and consequently
are true Catholics: so that in M. Abbots reckoning, before you can be a true
Protestant Catholic, you must first become a good honest Jew. Behold what a
round this man is driven to walk, and how many brakes of thorns he is forced
to break through, ere he can come to make any show of proof that the
Protestants are Catholics, the matter is so improbable. I have already
declared how false every one of his former four propositions be: the fifth is
as untrue, and more (if more may be) then any of the other; and he plays the
sophister in it egregiously, to beg that which is principally in question.
How proves he that Protestants receive and believe all the written word? has he
so little wit and judgment, as to think that we would freely grant him that?
for to omit that they receive not, but reject diverse books of the old
Testament (because they were not in the Canon of the Jews, or doubted off by
some in the primitive Church, by which reason they might refuse as many of the
new) do they rightly understand and believe truly, all that is written in that
blessed book of Gods word? nothing less. Do they give credit to our Savior
JESUS Christ himself telling them: Math. 26. v. 27. and 28.
This is my BODY that shall be broken for you; this is my BLOOD that shall be
shed for you. Johan. 20. verse. 23.
Whose sins ye shall forgive on earth shall be forgiven in heaven. Math. 16.
verse. 18.
Thou art PETER, and upon this Rock will I build my Church, etc. and the gates
of hell shall not prevail against it. Math. 20. verse. 8.
Call the worke-men (that had labored in his vine-yearde) and pay them their
hire. Jacob. 2. verse. 24.
Do you see that by works a man is justified and not by faith only? Jacob. 5.
verse. 14.
Is any man sick among you? let him bring in the Priests of the Church, and
let them pray over them, anoiling them with OIL in the name of our LORD, etc.
Ibidem 16.
Confess therefore your sins one to another? these and an hundred more
plain texts recorded in that fountain of life, wherein our Catholic Roman
doctrine is delivered in express terms, to wit: The Real presence of
Christ's body in the Sacrament; That Priests have power to pardon sins; That
Christ built his Church upon S. Peter; That good works do in justice deserve
eternal life; That we are justified not by faith alone, but also by good
works; That in extremity of sickness, we must call for the Priest to anoile us
with holy Oil; That we must confess our sins, not to God alone, but also
unto men: these and diverse such like heads of our Catholic faith, formally
set down in holy Scripture, the Protestants will not believe, though they be
written in Gods word never so expressly; but do ransacke all the corners of
their wits, to devise some odd shift or other, how to fly from the evidence
of them. Whereupon I conclude, that they do not receive all the written word,
though they profess never so much to allow of all the books of Canonical
Scripture. Lib. 2. de Trinitate ad Constable.
For the written word of God consists not in the reading, but in the
understanding (as S. Hierome testifies:) that is, it does not consist in the
bare letter of it, but in the letter and true sense and meaning joined
together; the letter being as the body of Scripture, and the right
understanding of it, the soul, spirit, and life thereof: he therefore that
takes not the written word in the true sense, but swarneth from the sincere
interpretation of it, cannot be truly said to receive the written word as a
good Christian ought to do. Seeing then that the Protestants and al other
sectaries, do not receive the holy Scriptures, according unto the most ancient
and best learned Doctors exposition; they may most justly be denied, to receive
the sacred written word of God at al, though they seem never so much to
approve all the Books, Verses, and Letters of it; which is plainly proved by
S. Hierome upon the first Chapter to the Galathians.

Now to draw toward the end of this clause, not only never a one of M. Abbots
assertions (whereby he went about to prove them selves and their Church to be
Catholic) is true, as has been showed before, but over and besides, his very
conclusion conuinceth himself (even by the verdict of himself) to fall into
the foul fault and error of the Donatists. Our faith (says he) because it is
that which the Apostles committed to writing, is the Apostolic faith, and our
Church by consanguinity and agreement of doctrine, is prove to be an
Apostolical Church, etc. and is the only true Catholic Church, etc. see you
not how he is come at length, to prove their Church to be Catholic, Page 16.
Line 5.
Ex perfectione doctrinae, By perfectness of their doctrine? which was (as he
himself in this very assertion noted) a plain Donatistical trick, reproved
by S. Augustine, whom in that point he then approved. What doting folly is
this, in the same short discourse so to forget himself, as to take that for a
sound proof, which he himself had before confuted as heretical? we like well
of Tertullians observation, That our faith ought to have consanguinity, and
perfect agreement with the Apostles doctrine; but that is not the question at
this time: but whether our doctrine or the Protestant be truly called
Catholic, that is, whether of them has been received and believed in all
nations over the world? that is to be proved in this place. M. Abbot if he had
meant to deal plainly and soundly, should not have gone so about the bush, and
have fetched such vvide and vvilde windlesses from old father Abraham's days,
but should have demonstrated by good testimony of the Ecclesiastical Histories,
or of ancient Fathers (who were in the pure times of the Church, the most
Godly and approved Pastors thereof,) that the Protestants religion had
flourished since the Apostles days, over al Europe, Afrike, and Asia; or at
least, had been visibly extant in some one country or other, naming some
certain Churches in particular, which had held in all points their faith and
religion: which he seeing impossible for any man to do, fell into that
extrauagant and rouing discourse, which you have heard; concluding without any
premises (saving his own bare word) that in the written word, There is no
mention made of the Pope, or his Supremacy, nor of his Pardons, etc. Belike
there is no mention made of S. Peter, nor aught said of his singular
prerogatives. It has not peradventure, That whatsoever be should loose on
earth, should be loosed in heaven. The other points were touched before, and
shall be shortly again. But I would in the mean season be glad to hear, where
the written word teaches us, that Kings and temporal Magistrates, are
ordained by Christ, to be under him supreme Governors of Ecclesiastical
affairs; because M. Abbot made choice of this head-article of theirs for an
instance, that the written word was plain on their ^ide: he should therefore
at least have pointed at some one text or other in the new Testament, where it
is registered, that Princes are supreme governors of the Church. Nay, are
temporal Magistrates any Ecclesiastical persons at al? or can one that is no
member of the Ecclesiastical body, be head of all the rest of the Ecclesiastical
members? or is the state Secular higher and more worthy then the
Ecclesiastical, and therefore meet to rule over it, though they be not of it?
to say so, is to prefer the body before the soul, nature before grace, earth
before heaven: or is it meet and decent that the less worthy-member, should
have the supreme command over the more honorable? where the Christian world
is turned topsy-turuy, that may be thought meet and expedient, but in other
places, that will not be admitted for current, which in it self is so
disorderly and inconvenient; without it had better warrant in the word of God,
then that new position of theirs has.

ROBERT ABBOT.
NOw whereas he alleges, that al his Majesty's most roial Progenitors, have
lived and died in that which he calls the Catholic and Apostolic faith,
Ambros. lib. 5. epist.
he plaieth the part of Symmachus the Pagan sophister, who by like argument,
would have persuaded Valentinian the Emperor, to restore their Heathenish
Idolatry and abominations: We are to follow our Fathers (says he) who with
happiness and felicity followed their Fathers. Aug. psalm. 54.
Thus men have hardened themselves in their heresies, saying: What my parents
were before me, the same will I be. But his Majesty well knows, that in matter
of religion, the example of parents is no band to the children, L. 2. epist. 3.
but the trial thereof is to return to the root and original of the Lords
tradition (as Ciprian speaks) not regarding what any before us has thought
fit to be done, but what Christ has done, who is before al. It is not unknown
to his Majesty, that there should be a time, when Apocal. 17. verse. 13.
the Kings of the earth shall give their power and kingdom to the beast, until
the word of God be fulfilled, and with the whore sitting upon many waters,
Verse. 14.
should bend themselves to fight against the Lamb. Wherein if any of his
Progenitors or Predecessors erred, he leaves them to the counsel of God,
but by the word of God, learneth himself to be one of them Verse. 16.
that shall hate the whore, and make her desolate, and shall eat her flesh, and
burn her with fire: Albeit it is utterly false which he affirms, that al
his Majesty's Progenitors, Kings of these Realms of England and Scotland,
lived and died in the Romish faith, that now our Romish factours labor so much
to set up. Indeed, he and his fellows are wont to be very lavish in their
speeches of this matter, as if from King Lucius of Britanny, and Donaldus of
Scotland, the only religion that had been professed, had been that which now
is practiced by them: where as it shall afterward plainly appear, that at
the coming in of Augustine the Italian Monk, 400. years after the receiving
of the faith in this Island, the Bishops and Churches of Scotland, joined with
the Britanes against those new observations, which the same Augustine brought
from Rome, and would by no means admit thereof; and for the space of an
hundred years at least, refused to communicate with the English that had
received the same. Yea, in the time of King Henry the third, 1200. Math. Paris.
in He^rico 111. Anno 1238. and 1239.
years after the incarnation of Christ, when the Popes Legate would have
entered into Scotland, to visit the Churches there, the King of Scots Alexander
the second, forbadde him so to do, alleging that none of his Predecessors
had admitted any such, neither would he suffer it; and therefore willed him at
his own peril to forbear: so long was it before the Popes authority could
gain acknowledgment in that Kingdom, which his agents would make us believe,
has been in all ages universally and unquestionably received. But they care
not indeed what they say or write, so that it may carry a magnifical and
brave show, to dazel the eyes of them, that are not well acquainted with their
leude and naughty dealing.

WILLIAM BISHOP.
PAGANS and Heretics do now and then, like Apes counterfeit true Christians:
And no marvel, for their great master Satan 2. Cor. 11. verse. 14.
does transfigure himself sometimes into an Angel of light, and did always,
and yet does labor Esai. 14. verse. 14.
to be like unto the Highest; but it is easy to espy their apish tricks, and
to return their fond subtleties upon their own heads. Simmachus played but
the part of a foolish sophister, when he pleaded so with the Emperor
Valentinian, we are to follow our Fathers: for the Emperors Father and nearest
Predecessors were no Pagan Idolaters, but professed Christians, as al men know
who are conversant in those ancient histories. To the point of the proof I
answer in brief, that it is a most sound inducement among us Christians, and
to be dearly regarded of al, To follow the foot-steppes of our forefathers in
believing. if they before have not degenerated from their Ancestors. The base
and ground of it is this: As God is more ancient then the Devil, and Christ
JESUS then al Heretics; so was the true service of God and the right faith of
Christ planted, sown, and took fast root, before Heresy and Idolatry sprung
up: which has firm testimony from our Savior, who teaches; Math. c. 13.
verse. 24.
That the good seed was first sown by the Father of the household, and the
cockle after, and ouersowne by the enemy. Whence it follows perspiculously,
that they who do hold the same doctrine inuiolably, which was embraced by
them of that stock, who were first converted to the Christian faith, are true
and sincere Christians. Those children then, who follow the holy steps of
their Catholic Progenitors ascending from Son to Father successively, til
they ariue at the first Christians in that country, are true Christians: and
they that do not succeed their Predecessors in their faith and religion, but
either are fallen themselves, or do follow others who before fell from the
faith of their forefathers, are undoubtedly slipped into error and infidelity.
By which discourse it is evident, that I tendered a most reasonable request
unto his Majesty, that he would embrace and countenance that religion, which al
his Progenitors even to the first Christian among them, had lived and died in;
because they were al Catholic, and not one of them can be named, who changed
the religion of his forefathers: yet this notwithstanding, Simmachus the Pagan
using the like argument in show, was not to be heard; the difference is,
because his forefathers for whose Idolatry he pleaded, had before forsaken
the true and sincere worship of the one living God, and therefore their
children were not to continue in their Idolatry, but to return unto their
former Ancestors true piety. So were the Donatists children (of whom S.
Augustine cited by M. Abbot speaks) not to follow their Fathers in that sect
and heresy, but to leave their late corrupted parents in their new doctrine,
and to look back unto their grandfathers ancient faith and religion, from
whose integrity their Fathers were degenerated: Even as now a-daies we exhort
men that had or have Parents turned Protestants, not to be led away with their
erring Parents opinions, but happily to receive their forefathers ancient
faith, from which their Fathers revolted unadvisedly. And so shall they return
unto the root and original of our Lords tradition, as S. Cyprian speaks;
because they shall return to that faith which was received from hand to hand,
even from the Apostles, our Lords most trusty and sacred messengers: and
cleaving fast to that, shall not need to regard what any man has thought fit
to be dine or said against it

Now to that point which follows in M. Abbot: Apocal. 17.
There shall be a time, when the Kings of the earth shall give their power to
the beast, and bend themselves to fight against the Lamb, which I do
willingly admit; but when that time shall be, or what Kings, it is very
uncertain: for there shall be also a time, Esai. 60. Psalm. 70.
When the Kings of the earth shall be as nurses to the true Church, and shall
most humbly both obey it, and also enrich and defend it to the uttermost of
their power. Now, by the very insinuation of the Text, and the uniform consent
of ancient writers, the good Kings shall cherish, exalt, and magnify the
Church, before those evil Kings shall arise, who falling away from their
fathers faith and from the Catholic Church, vvil lend their aid to her
professed enemies, to work her overthrow: which is a shrewd presumption,
that the Kings of former ages, stood far better affected to the true Church
of God, then some of later times: Well, this I leave to understanding men's
judgment. But I may not slip M. Abbots exceeding gross ouer-sight, or
rather heinous crime, in ranking his Majesty among those Kings mentioned in
the Apocalipse: for albeit Cap. 17.
they shall hate the whore, and make her desolate and naked, and eat her
flesh, etc. yet they shall be most wicked and impious Kings, and shall adore
the monstrous beast there described, and fight against Christ JESUS. These be
the very words of the Text: And the ten horns, etc. be ten Kings, etc.
these have one Council and force, and their power they shall deliver to the
beast; these shall fight with the Lamb, and the Lamb shall overthrow them, etc.
Verse. 16.
And the ten bornes which thou saw in the beast, these shall hate the
harlot, and make her desolate and naked, etc. so that the very same ten
Kings signified there by ten horns, that did give al their power to the
beast, did hate the harlot. But how can it be says one, that they who hate
the wicked harlot, should join with the beast who was as wicked as she? Yes,
that may well be: for it is no news that wicked men fall out among themselves,
so that one ungodly and wicked Prince, does sometimes with all his might aid
another more wicked then himself; and at the same instant perhaps, or shortly
after fight against a third the most wicked of al: they do fight against both
good and evil, as their own rage, passions, or occasions carry them. Which I
say to stop a starting hole of the Protestants, who to avoid this
inconvenience say: that first these ten Kings were bent to al mischief^, and
then helped the beast against the Lamb, but afterward repented them of their
former iniquity then lo they hated the harlot, and persecuted her, which they
would not have done, if they had been had Princes; this is a pretty shift.
Well, say first that this sense could stand with the words of the text, yet
they cannot be applied to his Majesty, who was not in his former time any aider
of our religion, and now is fallen off from that to the Protestants: wherefore
this devise (if it could stand with the text) will not serve their turn. But
the spirit of God has prevented and wholly cut off this vain imagination; for
it says in the next verse, That the ten Kings who hated the harlot, even
then and after too, gave their Kingdoms to the beast, til the word of God be
consummate, that is, til the end of al. Wherefore most manifest it is, even by
the warrant of Gods sacred word, that those Kings mentioned in the Apocalipse,
were reprobates: such did they live, and such shall they die. Let then his most
excellent Majesty censure, what reward they are worthy off, who fear not to
thrust his Highness into that list of condemned cast-a-waies; and that too,
after they had such fair warning, as in my answer to M. Perkins I gave them,
to beware how they did his Majesty that shame and despite. If it please his
Highness to take notice of it, I doubt not, but that he will conne them little
thank, for this their commendation of him.

M. Abbot having acquitted himself so Clarke-like in the precedent part of his
answer; That we are not to imitate our forefathers, descends to the
subsequent, to wit; That his Majesty's Progenitors, Kings of England and
Scotland, were not of our Roman faith: which he will prove hereafter at more
leisure, that is to say never. For he does not deny but that the religious and
holy man Augustine, sent into our country by Gregory the great Bishop of Rome,
to convert our Ancestors the Saxons and English to the Christian faith, did
then teach the same Roman faith which we now profess: so that above this
thousand years by his own confession, his Majesty's Progenitors have been
of our Catholic Roman faith and religion, and very few Kings now living (I
ween) can derive their pedigree much further. Afterward he does rake out of
the channels of Bale, Page 198.
Jewel, Hollinshead, and such like late partial vvriters (which any man not
past al care of his reputation, would be ashamed to cite for sufficient
witnesses in matters of controversy, where in they themselves were parties)
that there was great disagreeme^t between Augustine the Italian Monk, (as he
speaks) and the Churches of England and Scotland: whereas venerable Bede a
most approved author, and near unto those times, who did as most diligently
trace out those matters, so record them most faithfully; he I say (whose
authority is sufficient to put down an hundredth late writers interessed in the
cause) affirms, that there was no variance betwixt them, in any one article
of faith, but only in some few points of ceremony, namely in these two: Beda.
lib. 2. histor. cap. 2.
Upon what day the feast of Easter was to be kept, and about the rites of
Baptism. For S. Augustine offered them to bear with al other their different
rites, if they would yield unto him in these two points: Vt Pascha suo tempore
celebretis; That ye would keep Easter Day at the due time appointed by the
Council of Nice, and minister the Sacrament of Baptism after the manner of the
Roman and Apostolic Church. And concerning these two points, who can think,
but that the Sacrament of Baptism, was like to be administered in those days,
in the most renowned city of Rome, after a more decent and devout manner,
Eusebius. in vita Constable. l. 3. 17. Epiphan. l. 3. Haeres. 70.
then among the Britans, that lived in a corner of the world? now for the other
of keeping the feast of Easter, the 14. day of the first Moon with the Jews,
It was many years before condemned in the first most famous general Council of
Nice: and therefore it cannot be denied, but that those Britans were either
very ignorant in the Canons of the Church, if they knew not so solemn a
decree; or else too too contentious and willful in refusing to yield unto it. A
third clause was added by S. Augustine, that the Britans would join with him
and his fellows, Beda ibidem.
in preaching the word of God unto the English nation; which also argues yet
more strongly, that they agreed together in all articles of faith, or else they
would not have required their help, in instructing others in matters of
faith. And this is not only registered by S. Bid, that holy Historiographer;
but also reported by their own late vvriters Hollinshead, Volum. 1. page 103.
and Page 6.
M. Godwine in his Catologue of the Bishops of England. S. Bid also witnesses
further in the place aboue-said, that the same Britan Christians, even then
confessed, that they did perceive that to be the true way of justice, which
Augustine did preach. Furthermore, the principal Preachers and most Godly men,
that lived not long before S. Augustines arriual among the Britans, as namely
S. Dulcitius and S. David, were brought up at Rome, and one of them the Popes
Legate too, John Baal in their lives.
as the adversaries themselves confess. Whereupon it follows clearly, that
not only for these later thousand years, but also in the former hundreths, al
his Majesty's Ancestors both English and Britans, embraced and maintained the
same Catholic Roman faith, which we now do.

The same might as easily be proved of the Churches of Scotland, who
acknowledge Palladius and Patritius, for two of the chief founders of the
Christian faith in that country; who both were brought up at Rome, and sent
into Scotland by Celestinus Bishop of Rome, to instruct the Scots in the
doctrine of the church of Rome, even as Augustine was from S. Gregory into
England, From which the Scots Church never swarued, until of late years,
Knoxe, Buchanan, and such like giddy-headed and fiery spirited fellows,
seduced them. And M. Abbot most ignorantly or impudently, affirms it to have
been 1200 years after the incarnation of Christ, ere the Popes authority
could get any acknowledgment there: for in the very same hundredth year by him
named, they were so far off from denying the Popes authority over them in
causes Ecclesiastical, that they did acknowledge him to be also their
Protector in temporal affairs. For when King Edward the third, would have
given them John Balial for their King, they answered him; Walsingham. in vita
Edw. Anno 1292.
That they would not accept of him for such, without the Popes consent who had
their country in protection, as they then pleaded. And M. Abbots argument to
the contrary, is most friuoulous: Alexander the King bade the Popes Legate to
enter his country at his peril: ergo, he did not acknowledge the Popes
authority. By the like argument one might prove, that King Philippe and Queen
Mary did not acknowledge the Popes authority; for they commanded a Legate of
his, to stay at Calis, and to forbear entrance into this Realm at his peril.
The Popes Legates then, when they be sent about affairs that do seem to the
Prince and his Council, prejuditious to the temporal state, may be refused,
without disparagement to the Popes supreme authority in causes Ecclesiastical.
And the King of Scots had reason to refuse that Cardinal Legate, whose special
arrand was, to collect money to maintain the wars of the holy Land, which
was not to be spared in his country. Besides, the very entertainment of such a
great State so accompanied, was reputed as needless, so over costly for that
poor country. If M. Abbot have no better stuff then this to uphold his badde
cause, he that best knew his own meaning and designement, has to the life
painted out himself, where he says: They care not indeed what they say or
write, so that it may carry a magnifical and brave show, to dazel the eyes of
them that are not well acquainted with their lewd and naughty dealing.

ROBERT ABBOT.
BUT M. Bishop being out of doubt, that he should not prevail in this first
part of his suit, therefore adds the second: Or if you cannot be won so
soon to alter that religion, in which it has been your misfortune to have
been bredde and brought up, that then in the mean season, you will not so
heavily persecute the sincere professors of the other. Where you see the
presumption of a base and beggarly vassal, (I forget here that he is a Doctor
of divinity, I consider him as a subject) thus to vpbraide his Prince with
misfortune in his breeding and bringing up: whereas his Majesty's bringing up,
by the singular providence of almighty God, has served to make him high and
admirable among other Princes; and he has learned thereby to be indeed a
King, by casting off the yoke of bondage, whereby sundry other Princes are
enthralled to a beast. Yea, and by his bringing up; is so well able to defend
the religion he professes, that M. Bishop must stand before him like a dumb
Ass, able to say nothing, but only to repeat their old cuckowes song, The
Church, the Church, The Fathers, the Fathers; albeit he can make nothing good,
neither by Church nor Fathers. But his suit is, that his Majesty vvil leave off
so heavily to persecute them, complaining before he have cause, and entreating
his Majesty to leave off before he has begun. And does he like a dissembling
hypocrite, talk of heavy persecution, only for an easy imprisonment and
amersement of goods, when they in most barbarous and cruel sort, by infinite
vexations and torments, by rackes and strappadoes, by fire and sword, have
spilt and destroyed the blood and lives of so many thousands of ours, only for
the profession of the Gospel of Christ? but no otherwise do they complain of
persecution, then did of old the Donatists, and runnegate Circumcellions. And
we say of them as S. Augustine did of the others: They suffer persecution, Sed
pro fatuitate, pro vanitate, but it is for their foolery, Proverb. 22. verse. 25.
it is for vanity. Foolishness is bound in the heart of a child (says Solomon)
but the rod of correction shall drive it away from him. Indeed they do for
the most part play the children; it is but their will or rather vvilfulnesse,
for which they suffer; they can give no reason why they do so, but what
ignorance affords them. They must follow the Church, they will do as their
fathers and forefathers have done: it is fit that a childs stomach be
subdued with a rod, and necessary that some course be taken, for the
subduing and reforming of their will.

WILLIAM BISHOP.
M. ABBOT concludes this his clowdy and vvindy Section, with a storm of
railing; calling me in it dumb Ass, dissembling Hipocrite, base and beggarly
Vassal. This last name he gives me, because I show my self sorry, for that
it was his Majesty's misfortune, to be bredde and brought up in the
Protestants religion: great cause you see was given him, to burst out into so
rude and bitter words. But to qualify this clownish trick, he adds the
excuse of a country Coridon, rather indeed accusing then excusing himself:
for why did he forget that I was a Doctor in divinity? or how did he forget it,
that even then so well remembered it? He would not (forsooth) respect it here,
but by a metaphysical abstraction consider me only as a subject: wherein he
discovers a double folly; for first who sees not, that any man of never so
great worship or honor, may in like sort be called a base vassal, if his
dignity and degree be excepted? Might not M. Abbot himself (if one should
forget his calling and learning) be styled in like manner a base beggarly
vassal? wherefore, this figure of his may rather be termed rustical then
rethorical. And had he not also forgotten himself to be a Doctor in divinity,
yea a man of ordinary ciuility, he would not have played the part of a furnish
and foule-mouthed butterwench, by falling into such rude terms of scurrillity.

His second ouer-sight is more queasie and dangerous; for if I be a base vassal
in that I am a subject, then is my Sovereigns honor called in question: for
none be base in that they are subjects, unless their Sovereigns be so mean
and obscure, that their roial estate cannot give luster and dignity to those
that serve and obey them; for Sovereign and Subjects be correlatiues, and the
splendor of the one does dignifie and ennoble the other. And to derogate from
the subject, in that he is a subject, is to disparage and to blemish greatly
the Sovereigns Majesty. M. Abbot then showed himself a jolly wiseman, and
very acute, when he would remove the cause of baseness, from my degree, and
cast it upon the respect of my subjection, which is common to me with all other
his Majesty's subjects, even of the highest dignity, and most honorable
calling. I do not here forget, that there is incomparable difference between
one subject and another, both in degree and quality: yet am I bold to say, that
he who debaseth any one subject considered as a subject, (as M. Abbot
speaks) does jointly offer great wrong and disgrace, not only to all the rest
of the subjects, but even to the Sovereign himself.

Here I hope, the courteous Reader vvil give me leave, to say something of the
birth and degree of some Roman Priests, being by M. Abbot so often vpbraided
with beggarly baseness: neither vvil I report aught else, then that which by
some honest men of great intelligence, is recorded for very true, to wit, that
since these times of persecution, more Gentlemen borne have been made Roman
Priests, then are to be found in all the English Ministry, though for every one
Priest there be more then an hundredth Ministers. And touching M. Abbot
himself, I am credibly informed, that he is by birth but a mean Tanners Son
of Gilford in Surrey, and was at his first coming to Oxford, but a poor
Scholar, glad to sweep and dress up chambers, and to play the drudge for a
slender pittance. Which I do not write as in contempt of such base
beginnings, from which many have proved profound Clerks, and grown to great
promotion; but only to admonish M. Abbot, out of the remembrance of his own
condition, not to carry himself so contemptuously toward others, who were
borne his betters far, and not brought up so beggarly, but that they had as
good maintenance in the University, as those whose shoes he was glad to
wipe, and to sweep their chambers: other wise that grave sentence of the wise
Poet must needs be verified in him. Nil est asperius humili cum surgit in
altum.

None carry themselves more rough currish and hawty,
Then these base companions once raised to dignity.
But setting aside both right of birth, and degree of study, the very sacred
order of Priesthood, (unto which albeit most unworthy, we are by the mere
goodness of God called,) does by the style of holy Canons, exempt us from the
vulgar sort, and by virtue of that sacred calling adorn and dignifie us:
Distinct. 5. Can. den^que
Denique Sacerdotes, etc. quos dignitas Ecclesiastici gradus exornat. Again,
the most ancient and reverend Fathers, have always had the holy vocation of
Priesthood in so high and singular estimation, that they have not feared to
paraleel and compare it, with the greatest temporal Majesty on earth. The
ground of their reason is this: Priests receive power from JESUS Christ, over
the souls of men, and that in supernatural courses, te^ding to the most high
end of everlasting bliss and glory; whereas the Princes of this world how
puisant soever they be, have dominion only over our goods and bodies in civil
causes, to the quiet and peacible government of the affairs of this life.
Priests then honored with such high gifts, which were never bestowed upon
Angels (to use S. Chrysostomes words) that is: that had Lib. 3. de Sacerdot.
from Christ authority and power to Ioh. 20.
forgive sins; to consecrate his blessed Math. 26.
body; that are briefly 1. Cor. 4.
the dispensours of Gods holy word and Sacraments; Hebr. 5. ve^s. 1. and. 2.
taken from among men, and appointed for men in those things that appertain
unto God, that they may offer gifts and sacrifices, as for their own, so for
the sins of the rest of Gods people (to use the Apostles words) if these
men's heavenly function be base, beggarly, and contemptible, it is in the
conceit only of blinded worldlings: 1. Cor. 2. verse. 14.
That perceive not the things which are of the spirit of God, nor can judge of
them, because they be spiritually to be examined. And M. Abbot (the best flower
of whose garland is his Ecclesiastical calling) should have left the vilifying
of the order of Priesthood, to some other of the laity: And so no doubt he
would have done; had he been a true Clergyman in deed, and not so called by
mere usurpation; for as you know, it is the part of an unclean bird to defile
her own nest. But the wel-nurtured man, would perhaps out of his little good
manners, have made exception of this also, as he did of my degree, if he had
remembered it.

Now to that which follows, to show that he had some cause to burst out into
those big words, he says: That I did vpbraide my Prince with misfortune in
his bringing up, which is false; for I mentioned it with compassion (as King
Priamus calamities are by many remembered with sorrow,) yet with great
affection to his person. I did not write a syllable that sounded to his
Majesty's disgrace, but did rather excuse his failing in religion, laying the
fault of it upon them, who in his tender years (when he was not able to
judge) misinstructed him; signifying, that if it had been his blessed hap, to
have escaped their seducing speeches, til he had come to riper age, he would
rather have controled and corrected them, then have given ear to their errors
and follies. I willingly acknowledge a most rare readiness of wit in his
Majesty, and firmness of memory both to attain to high litterature, and to
deliver it most eloquently: so much the more sorry I am, that these goodly and
fair gifts of nature, wanted such supernatural aides and ornaments, as
education in the Catholic Church, and among the best sort of Catholics, might
and would most willingly have afforded him; for then no doubt he would have
far out-gone himself in all good litterature, and proved most singular. Let
the considerate reader (to judge the better of our spirits) compare my speeches
to my Sovereign, with M. Abbots of the supreme Pastor of the Church as we
believe, (whom the Protestants do not deny to be one of the chiefest
Patriarchs of the Christian world) I mean the Bishop of Rome; whom M. Abbot
does commonly rail upon in most vile and reprochful terms, stiling him
ordinarily nothing else, but The man of sin and perdition, the whore of
Babylon, Antichrist himself, and such like: between whose supereminent
dignity, and M. Abbots mean place, there is no less difference then between
a temporal Prince, and his subject of any good sort. If I then be rightly
censured a base and beggarly vassal, for showing my self sorrowful for my
Princes misfortune, what style deserves he for such outrageous reproaches,
bealched forth against the highest Bishop of Christ's Church? Now whereas M.
Abbot boldly auerreth, That thereby his Majesty has learned to cast off the
yoke of bondage, by which other Princes are enthralled to a beast, (saving his
reverence:) I answer, that other Kings nourished in countries accounted as
civil (to say the least) as Scotland, vvil not change that their bondage, with
his Majesty's supposed liberty and freedom; because they hold it far better
to enjoy the direction and assistance of the Bishop of Rome, for the uniform
and peacible government of their Clergy, according unto the ancient Canons of
the Church; then either to take it into their own hands, or to commit it to
the discretion of Consistory Ministers, or to any other sort of late devised
Ecclesiastical plat-formes. Godly, wise, and understanding Kings vvil no doubt
consider, that some who persuade them to cast off such yokes, are very false
Parasites, no sound and true hearted subjects; because it is said of Kings out
of il counsel in the second Psalm: Let us break their bands, and let us cast
from us their yoke; whereas contrariwise in the same place, the spirit of God
speaks thus to Princes: Apprehendite disciplinam, Receive discipline, that is,
observe al good orders and take correction, least that our Lord wax angry with
you, and then you perish from the right way. And if they themselves should so
much forget their duty to God, and respect to his holy Church, as to seek the
utter ruin and subversion of it; yet very reason teaches them, that it is
far more safe, orderly, and expedient, that there should be one only supreme
Pastor, (assisted with the grave counsel of some of the wiser sort of every
Christian country, as the Popes holiness is with the counsel of his most
grave, wise, and learned Cardinals) to control and correct them; then to be
left to the mercy of the Ministers of every country, and to the tumultuous
reformation of the rash and giddy multitude, who by the common consent of the
best learned Protestants, must take their Prince in hand and belabour him, if
he go about to oppress the Gospel, as has been before proved.

To proceed, is it not a rare pranke of a parasite, to avouch that an ancient
student in divinity, must needs stand dumb like an Ass before his Majesty,
and not be able to answer him one word in his own profession, but the Church,
the Church, the Fathers, the Fathers? I vvish heartily, that his excellent
Majesty would match me with no meaner a man then Doctor Abbot, (he that
professes himself able to stop al men's mouths) to allege not only the
Church, and the Fathers, but the Scripture, the Scripture; and by his Highness
authentike judgment, approve him to have the better cause, that can
pertinently cite most plain texts of Scripture for their religion: I make no
doubt but the Protestant part (notwithstanding their common craking of the
word of God) should go to the ground. Marry, when we avouch holy Scripture
for us, in as express terms as can be devised, they will not yield, but
devise most extrauagant glosses, to fly from the evident testimony of Gods most
holy word; whereupon we are compelled, to make recourse unto the definition of
the Church of God, Job. 16. v. 13.
Which is guided by the spirit of God unto al truth, and unto the learned
commentaries of the most ancient, holy, and juditious Fathers who were for
their times, appointed by the holy Ghost to rule and instruct the same his
Church: that seeing how they understood the holy Scriptures, we may by their
even and impartial line and square, direct our judgment in the true sense of
holy Scripture; which is the principal cause why we rely so much upon the
Church and Fathers, and for which he so scornefully vpbraideth us with the
Church, the Church, the Fathers, the Fathers. And here to return one of M.
Abbots sharp words upon himself; what a dissembling hipocrite was he to
say, that when al was done, we could not make any thing good by either Church
or Fathers? Sect. 9. and 10.
when as he himself does plainly confess, that S. Augustine, S. Hierome,
Epiphanius, and diverse other Fathers, be flat for us; and is driven roundly to
deny their authority, and to prefer the opinions of condemned Heretics,
Iouinian, Vigilantius, and Aerius, before these most renowned Doctors and
Pastors.

As gross and palpable an untruth is that which follows; That the
Catholics be not heavily persecuted by the state: whereas al their goods and
chattels be wholy confiscate, and two parts of their lands; their bodies at
pleasure subject to prison, there to lie without bail or mainprise; their
persons daily in danger of death for receiving or any way maintaining their
Pastors; to omit al other their oppressions which be almost innumerable: but
belike, because al Catholics be not by most cruel death suddenly made away,
this Minister of blood, accounts their persecution light and easy. And
whereas he so enlarges the short and small persecution of their brethren, I
do offer to join with him in this issue: that more Catholic Priests,
Religious men and others, have been tormented, murdered, and most
despitefully slain by men of their religion, within the compass of two
Realms, France, and England, during the only time of Queen Elizabeth her
reign, then were of Protestants and men of al other Sects, for a thousand
years before in those countries, yea and take to them also al Spain and
Italy. The Donatists and al other sectaries, do suffer persecution (as S.
Augustine truly says) for their obstinate folly, what of that? ergo,
whosoever suffers persecution for his religion is a fool? what a foolish
reason in this? then were the Apostles and all the best Christians fools?

But M. Abbot says, We be children and can yield no reason for that we suffer,
but what ignorance affords us, to wit: we must cleave to the Church, and
follow our forefathers: Surely that were a foul fault, that we as children
should obey our Mother the holy Church, and follow the faith and religion of
our forefathers. But first it is most palpably false, that we can yield no
other reason for our religion, as our books evidently do convince. Then, if
we had no other reason but that one, it alone were sufficient: for it is an
article of our Creed, to believe the Church; and S. Paul assures us, 1. Tim.
3. verse. 15.
That the Church is the pillar and ground of truth: vvhereupon this is received
as a principle of faith among the ancient Fathers, allowed even by Protestants
themselves; That he that has not the Church to his Mother, shall never have God
to his Father: he therefore that cleaves fast unto the firm pillar of the
Church, and follows her precepts as of a most faithful Mother, can never go
astray. Finally, he does absurdly apply S. Augustines words spoken against the
Donatists, to us; they vvil much better fit the Protestants, who imitate their
errors in most points, as I have proved already: who also may be more aptly
resembled to children, that stand in need of a rod, because their religion
is every way childish; as being young and of late borne, fantastical, and
without any sound ground of mature judgment, as changeable also as children,
according to the diverse humor of the state and time.

SECT. 4. W. BISHOP.
VERY many urgent and forcible reasons, might be produced in favor and defense
of the Catholic Roman religion, whereof diverse have been already in most
learned Treatises tendered to your Majesty: wherefore I will only touch three,
two chosen out of the subject of this book, the third selected from a sentence
of your Majesty, recorded in the aforesaid conference. And because that
argument is as most sensible, so best assured, which proceeds from a
principle either evident in it self, or else granted and confessed to be true;
my first proof shall be grounded upon that your Highness resolute and constant
opinion, recorded in the said conference, Page 75.
to wit: That no Church ought to separate it self further from the Church of
Rome, either in doctrine or ceremony, then she has departed from her self,
when she was in her most flourishing and best estate: from whence I deduce
this reason. The principal pillars of the Roman Church in her most flourishing
estate, taught in all points of religion, the same doctrine that she n^w
holds and teaches; and in express terms condemns for error and
heresy, most of the articles, which the Protestants esteem as chief parts
of their reformed Gospel: therefore if your Majesty will resolutely embrace, and
constantly defend that doctrine, which the Roman Church maintained in her most
flourishing estate, you must forsake the Protestant, and take the Catholic
into your Princely and Roial protection.

ROBERT ABBOT.
YOU talk (M. Bishop) of many urgent and forcible reasons, but you talk as
your fellows do, like mount-bankes and juglers: You have much prating and
many words, but your reasons when they are duly examined, are as light as
feathers before the vvinde; neither would they seem other to your own
followers, but that you bewitch them with this principle, that they must read
nothing written on our part for answer to them: we see your urgent and
forcible reasons in this book, which you tell us is the marrow and pith of
many volumes. I doubt not but by that time I have examined the same, your own
pupils and scholars (if they read the answer) will account you a mere
seducer, a cosener and abuser of them, and will detest you accordingly. But to
begin withal, you offer three reasons to his Majesty in this your Epistle,
for the justifying of your Romish religion, and for the impeaching of ours: Two
chosen out of the subject of this book; the third selected from a sentence of
his Majesty. Now if these reasons prove reasonlesse, then your reason (M.
Bishop) should have taught you more manners and duty, then thus to trouble his
Majesty with your reasonlesse reasons. To examine them in order, the first
reason is grounded upon a principle, most judiciously and soundly affirmed by
his Majesty: That no Church ought further to separate it self from the Church
of Rome, in doctrine or ceremony; then she has departed from her self, when
she was in her flourishing and best estate, and (which is subtly left out by
M. Bishop) from Christ her Lord and head. For seeing it cannot be denied, that
the Church of Rome was once sound and upright in faith, the Apostle bearing
witness, Romans 1.
That their faith was published throughout the world; it must needs follow,
that what she has not since that time altered, is still upright and sound,
and therefore to be embraced. Now, from thence M. Bishop argues thus: The
principal pillars of the Church of Rome in her most flourishing estate, taught
in all points the same doctrine, that she now teaches, and in express terms
did condemn of heresy, most of the articles of our religion, ergo, etc. but
soft and fair M. Bishop, there is no have, etc.

WILLIAM BISHOP.
TRVE, there is no have indeed, for M. Abbot comes fair and soft to the
matter. What a number of idle vaunting words and vain repetitions be here? as
though any juditious man were to be persuaded by bare words and voluntary
supposals, before he see any proof. Sir I doubt not, but the indifferent
reader vvil suspend his judgment, and deem nere the worse of my vvriting, for
your empty censure, til he see good reason to the contrary. Sure I am, that
some Catholics having read your book, do like much the better of mine, and
esteem yours a very fond piece of work, full of babble, lies, and foul
words, void of found proofs, and far from common ciuility. Who are more
circumspect then you your selves, to keep your followers from reading our
books? who first imprison any that will help to print them, then set fines on
al their heads that shall keep them, and make very diligent search after them?
so that al these common words, may most truly be returned upon your self:
Mutato nomine, de te narratur fabula. You note that I subtly left out of his
Majesty's speech from Christ her Lord and head, but show no cause why; and no
marvel, for none indeed can be showed: they are needless words, as being
comprehended in the former. For if the Church of Rome departed not from her
self, when she was in her most flourishing and best estate, she cannot
depart from Christ her Lord and head: wherefore to note this for a subtle
trick, gives the reader cause to note you for a wrangler, and one that is
very captious where no cause is offered. M. Abbot comes at length to my first
reason, and goes about to disprove it thus.

ROBERT ABBOT.
WE hope you will not deny, but the Apostle S. Paul was one principal pillar of
the Church of Rome, who there shed his blood. He vvrote an Epistle to that
Church, when the faith thereof was most renowned throughout the world. He
vvrote at large, comprehending therein (as Theodor. in praefat. epist. Pat. li.
Theodoret says) doctrine of al sorts, or al kind of doctrine: Et accuratam,
copiosamque dogmatum pertractationem; An exact and plentiful handling of al
points thereof. Now in all that Epistle, what does he say either for you, or
against us? nay, what does he not say for us against you? he condemns the
Romans 1. v. 23.
changing the glory of the incorruptible God, into the similitude of the Image
of a corruptible man, and worshipping the creature in steed of the creator.
It is for us against you: for you by your schoole-trickes, doubt not to teach
men, by the Image of a man to worship God; and by religious devotion of prayers
and offerings, to worship Saints, and Saints Images in steed of God.

WILLIAM BISHOP.
WHAT a worthy grave Preface he uses, to assure men that we will not deny S.
Paul, nor his Epistle to the Romans, which never were called in doubt by any
man. But good Sir, vvhiles you muse and busy your head so much upon bables,
you forget or wilfully mistake the very point of the question. Was the Church
of Rome at her most flourishing estate, when S. Paul wrote that Epistle to the
Romans? was her faith then most renowned over all the world, as you write?
nothing less: for not the ten thousand part of that most populous City, was
then converted to the faith; and they that had received the Christian faith,
were very nouices in it, and stood in great need of the Apostles divine
instructions. Any reasonable man would rather judge, that the Church of Rome
then came first to her most flourishing estate, when Idolatry and al kind of
superstition was put to silence, and banished out of her; when the Christian
religion was publikly preached and countenanced by the Emperors authority,
which was not before the reign of Constantine the great, our most glorious
countryman: wherefore M. Abbots first fault is, that he shoots far vvide
from the mark which he should have aimed at principally. The second is more
nice, yet in one that would seem so acute, not to be excused: It is, that he
takes an Epistle written to the Romans for their instruction and correction,
as if it were a declaration and profession of their faith; when as al men
know, such a letter might contain many things which they had not heard off
before. Further yet, that you may see how nothing can pass his fingers
without some legerdemaine, mark how he englisheth Theodorets words: Dogmatum
pertractationem. The handling of opinions, is by him translated, al points of
doctrine; whereas it rather signifies some, then al opinions or lessons. But
I will let these ouer-sights pass as flea-bitings, and follow him whither he
pleases to wa^der, that every man may see, when he is permitted to say what he
likes best, that in truth he can allege out of S. Paul, nothing of moment
against the Catholic faith.

S. Paul (says he) is wholly against you, and for us. Quickly said, but will not
be so soon proved. First he condemns the worshipping of Saints, and Saints
Images, in that he reproves the Heathens, for changing the glory of the
incorruptible God, into the similitude of the Image of a corruptible man. O
noble disputer, and well worthy the whippe! because we may not make false Gods,
or give the glory of God unto Idols, may we not therefore yield unto Saints
their due worship? might not S. Paul whiles he lived, as al other most Godly
men, be reverenced and worshipped for their most excellent, spiritual, and
religions virtues, with a kind of holy and religious respect; even as Knights
and Lords and other worldly men, are worshipped and honored for their
temporal callings and endowments with temporal worship, without robbing God of
his honor? Is the Lord or Master dishonored and spoiled of his due reverence
and respect, if his servants for his sake be much made off and respected; yet
with such due regard only, as is meet for their degree? This is so childish
and palpable, that if the Protestants were not resolved to stick obstinately
to their errors, how gross soever they be, they would for very shame not
once more name it. To the next.

ROBERT ABBOT.
PAVL says and we say the same, that Ibid. verse. 17.
the righteousness of God is from faith to faith: you say otherwise, that it
is from faith to works, that faith is but the entrance to works, and that in
works the righteousness of God does properly consist.

WILLIAM BISHOP.
THE sentence of S. Paul is mangled, his words are: for the justice or
righteousness of God is revealed therein, (in the Gospel) by faith into faith;
which are obscure and subject to diverse expositions. The most common is, that
Christ (the justice of God) is revealed in the Gospel, by conferring the faith
of them that lived before the Gospel, with their faith that lived under it,;
the faith of them who live in the Gospel, giving great light for the cleerer
understanding of such things, as were taught of Christmore darkely in the law
and Prophets. This being the literal sense of this place, what is here for man's
justification by only faith? where only mention is made of Gods justice, and
not one word of the imputation of it to man, but of the revelation of it in
the Gospel. What a foul mistaking is this? alas, his poverty of spirit, and
want of good armor, compels him to lay hand on any weapons, how simple and
weak soever. In the next verse, it is plainly showed, that God did grievously
punish al them who lived wickedly, notwithstanding they held the right faith,
for (says S. Paul) Romans 1. v. 18.
the wrath of God from heaven is revealed upon al impiety and unrighteousness,
of those men that retain or hold the truth of God in injustice. Whence it
follows first, that men may have a true faith without good works, for they
held the truth of God being themselves wicked. Secondly, that the same faith
would not avail them aught, nor save them from the just wrath of God, if it
were not quickened by good works.

ROBERT ABBOT.
THE Apostle in express terms, affirms Romans 4. v. 6.
imputation of righteousness without works: We do the same, but you
professedly dispute against it.

WILLIAM BISHOP.
WE hold with the Apostle, that works be not the cause of the first
justification, whereof he there treats, nor to deserve it; though inspired
with Gods grace, they do prepare us and make us fit to receive the gift of
justification: neither do the Protestants wholly exclude works from this
justification, when they do require true repentance which consists of many
good works, as necessary thereto. We hold that justice is increased by good
works, which we call the second justification; against which the Apostle
speaks not a word, but does confirm it when he says in the same Epistle:
Romans 2. v. 13.
Not the hearers of the law are just with God, but the doers of the law shall be
justified. Mark how by doing of the law (which is by doing good works) men
are justified with God, and not only declared just before men, as the
Protestants gloss the matter. Now, touching See the place. Romans 4. v. 6.
imputation of righteousness, the Apostle speaks not like a Protestant, of
the outward imputation of Christ's justice to us, but of inherent justice, to
wit; of faith which works by charity, which are qualities Romans 6.
powered into our hearts by the holy Ghost* so that there is only a bare sound of
words for the Protestants, the true substance of the Text making wholly for the
Catholics.

ROBERT ABBOT.
PAVL teaches, that Romans 6. v. 23. Page 98.
eternal life is the gift of God through JESUS Christ our Lord: but you M.
Bishop tell us, That al who are of years, must either by their good carriage
deserve eternal life; or else for their badde behavior, be disinherited.

WILLIAM BISHOP.
IN the same place you had a large solution of this objection; but he that has
made a covenant with hell, vvil not look upon that which might help him to
heaven. We teach with the Apostle, and with his faithful interpreter S.
Augustine, That eternal life is the gift of God: both originally, because we
must receive grace by the free gift of God, before we can do any thing that
does deserve the joies of heaven; and also principally, the whole virtue and
value of our merits do proceed of the dignity of Gods grace in us, which does
eleuate and give such worth to our works, that they thereby deserve life
everlasting. Notwithstanding, if we take not hold on Gods grace, when it is
freely offered us, and do not concur with it to the effecting of good
works, we shall never be saved; and this our working with the grace of God
deserves heaven: both which are proved by this sentence of the same Apostle.
Romans 2. verse. 6.7. and 8.
God will render to every man according to his works, to them truly, that
according to patience in good works, seek glory, and honor, and
incorruption, life eternal; to them that are of contention, and that obey not
the truth, but give credit to iniquity, wrath and indignation: where you may
see in express terms, eternal life to be rendered and repaid for good
works, to such men as diligently seek to do them; and to others who refuse
to obey the truth, and rather choose to believe lies and to live wickedly,
eternal death and damnation.

ROBERT ABBOT.
HE tells us again and again, that Romans 7. verse. 7. and 8.
concupiscence is sin; to lust is to sin, and that by the law it is known
so to be: we say the same, and you go about to make us believe that it is no
sin.

WILLIAM BISHOP.
THE Apostle tells us again and again, that our Savior Christ JESUS, was
made 2. Cor. 5, 21.
sin; and yet no Christian is so simple, as to take him to be properly sin,
but the Romans 8. v. 3.
bost or satisfaction for sin: so when the Apostle calls concupiscence
sin, we understand him with S. Augustine, that it is not sin properly; yet
so called not unaptly: both because it is the effect and remnant of original
sin, and does also prick us forward to actual sin; but if by help of the
grace of God we repress it, we are delivered from the infection and guilt of
it. Which S. Paul in the very same chapter declares; when he demands: Lib.
1. cont. duas Epistol. Pelag c. 10. and Lib. 1. de Nupt. and Co^cupis. cap. 23.
Ibid. v. 25.
Who shall deliver me from this body of death? he answers presently, the grace
of God by JESUS Christ our Lord. And again, that profound Doctor S. Augustine
argues very soundly out of the same sentence, where concupiscence is called
sin: (but now not I work it any more, but the sin that is in me;) that the
Apostle could not mean sin properly, which cannot (says he) be committed
without the consent of our mind: Lib. 6. cont. Julian. c. 23.
but that had no consent of the mind to it, because it was not the Apostle
that did work it. Now how can that be the evil work of a man, if the man
himself do not work it? as the Apostle says expressly, not I do work
it. Lastly, the same Apostle teaches, that sin has no dominion over them
that are under grace; which were false, if concupiscence were properly sin:
for that has such dominion over every good body, that they cannot avoid the
motion and sting of it. No not S. Paul could be 2. Cor. 12. verse. 8.
clearly delivered from that prick of the flesh, though he prayed most
earnestly for it: wherefore by the testimony of S. Paul himself,
concupiscence is not properly sin: no more is it to lust, if lust be taken
for the first motions of concupiscence. But Jacob. 1. verse. 15.
concupiscence when it has conceived (as S. James speaks) that is, by our
liking begins to take hold on us, brings forth sin, yet but venial;
marry, when it is consummate by our consent or long lingering in it, then it
engenders death, that is, mortal sin.

ROBERT ABBOT.
S. PAVL says of the spirit of adoption, the same spirit bears witness with
our spirit, that we are the Sons of God: but you say we have no such
witness, whereby we should believe that we are the Sons of God.

WILLIAM BISHOP.
AND that we say upon good consideration: for we must not believe with the
Christian faith (which is free from al fear) any thing that is not assured and
most certain. Now the spirit of God does not bear us witness so absolutely
and assuredly, that we are the sons of God, but under a condition, which is
not certain, to wit, that we be the sons and heirs of God; Romans 8. v. 17.
Si tamen compatimur, yet if we suffer with him, that we also may be glorified
with him: but whether we shall suffer with him and constantly to the end bear
out al persecutions, we know not so assuredly, because as our Savior
fore-telleth; Luc. 8. v. 13.
There be some that for a time believe, and in time of temptation do revolt.
Was it not then a trick of a false merchant, to strike off the one half of
the Apostles sentence, that the other might seem current for him? now no man
does more plainly or roundly beat down their presumption, who assure
themselves of salvation, then S. Paul, as in many other places, so in this very
Epistle to the Romans, in these words. Cap. 11. v. 20.
Well because of their incredulity they (the Jews) were broken off: but thou
(Gentil) by faith do stand, be not to highly wise, but fear. For if God has
not spared the natural boughs, least perhaps be will not spare thee neither;
see then the goodness and severity of God: upon them surely that are fallen,
the severity; but upon thee the goodness of God, if thou abide in his
goodness, otherwise thou shall also be cut off. etc. Can any thing be more
perspicuously declared, then that some such who were in grace once, afterward
fell and were cut off for ever? and that some others stand in grace, who if they
look not well to their footing, may also fall and become reprobate? the Apostle
directly forewarning those men, who make themselves so sure of their
salvation, not to be so highly wise, but to fear their own frailty and
weakness, least otherwise they fall, as many had done before them. If this
plain discourse, and those formal speeches, uttered by the holy Ghost, will not
serve to shake men out of their security of salvation, I cannot see what may
possibly do it.

ROBERT ABBOT.
PAVL says: the Romans 8 v. 18.
sufferinges of this time, are not worthy of the glory that shall be revealed
unto us; but you say they are worthy.

WILLIAM BISHOP.
I Say that M. Abbot has gotten such a custom of abusing Gods word, that he
scarce alleges one sentence of it, without one paltry shift or other. The
words of S. Paul truly translated, are: Our sufferinges are not worthy to the
glory (or as our English phrase is) are not to be compared to the glory of,
etc. that is, our labors or pains are not either so great and weighty, or of
so long endurance, as be the joies of heaven: yet through the dignity which we
receive by being made members of Christ, and by the virtue of Gods grace,
wherewith those works be wrought, and by the promise of God, both we are
accounted worthy of heaven, according to S. Paul's own phrase; 2. Thessal. 1.
verse. 5.
Which (persecutions) you sustain, that you may be counted worthy the Kingdom
of God: and our sufferinges meritorious of life everlasting, which S. Paul
does very precisely teach, where he says; that 2. Cor. 4. verse. 17.
our tribulation, which for the present is momentary and light, yet works
above measure exceedingly an eternal weight of glory in us, we not considering
the things that are seen, but that are not seen: and else where is bold to
say, 2. Tim. 4. verse. 8.
That God had laid up for him a crown of justice, which our Lord will render to
me in that day, a just Judge; and not only to me but to them also that love his
coming. If God as a just Judge, render the joies of heaven as a crown of
justice, then were they before justly deserved, and the sufferinges of them
that deserved them, were in just proportion worthy of them. Thus briefly any
indifferent reader may perceive, how far S. Paul being rightly taken, is from
affording any relief unto the Protestant cause. They do now, as many
unlearned and unstable men did, even in his own time, (witness S. Peter) 2.
Pet. 3. verse. 16.
deprave and misuse certain sentences of his, hard to be understood, to their
own perdition, and to the deceiving and undoing of their followers: for in all
his Epistles (being understood as he meant them) there is not one word or
syllable, that makes for the Protestants or any other sectaries; and plenty
there are of plain texts for the most points of the Catholic faith. A taste
whereof I will give you, as soon as I shall have made an end of answering unto
this his idle discourse.

ROBERT ABBOT.
PAVL says nothing for those points, for the denial whereof M. Bishop
condemns us. Nothing for the justification before God by works, nothing for
free will, nothing for Relikes, nothing for the merit of single life, nothing
for prayer for the dead, nothing for traditions, nothing for any of the rest.
Now in this case M. Bishop, it had been fit, that you should by very good
reason have satisfied his Majesty, how it should be probable or possible, that
the Apostle writing at large to the church of Rome, should not once mention any
of those maine points, wherein the religion of the Church of Rome now wholy
consists; if the Church of Rome were then the same that now it is. That he
should say nothing of the prerogative of that Church, nothing of the Pope, of
his pardons, of the Mass, of transubstantiation, of Monkish vows, of Images,
of pilgrimages, of prayer to Saints, of all the rest of your baggage stuff; in
a word, that he should be a Papist, and yet should write nothing, Rhem. Test.
argum. of the Epist. in general.
but that in show at least serves the Protestants turn: only we must be
persuaded forsooth, that where anything sounds contrary to the R^mish faith,
we fail of the right sense. But undoubtedly M. Bishop, either S. Paul was a
Protestant, or else he dealt very negligently in your behalf. S. Peter was
another principal pillar of that Church, the founder and head thereof as you
persuade us: what would he also forget his triple crown? would he say
nothing for all these things? not a word: there is nothing hinders in either
of his Epistles, but that he also must be taken for a Protestant. Me thinks
here you should fare, Erasmus de ratione.
as in another case Robertu^ Liciensis did before the Pope, you should spit and
cry out, fie upon Peter, fie upon Paul, would they not think these trash and
trinkets of ours so much worth, as to speak of them: Ah these Protestants,
these Heretics, they say al for them, and nothing at al for us. But alas,
Peter and Paul had not heard any of these things, and therefore no marvel
that they wrote nothing of them. They read Moses and the Prophets, they
preached as Christ did according to the Scriptures; the Catholic religion that
had been from the beginning of the world, they continued: betwixt the old and
the new Testament we see a wonderful agreement, but concerning Popery we see
nothing.

WILLIAM BISHOP.
WE have here a dainty dish of M. Abbots cookery, a large rhetorical
conclusion, deducted out of lean, thin, and weak premises. He assaied to
make a show out of the Apostle, that there was not a little which would serve
the Protestants turn, and cited to that purpose certain sentences out of him:
but so properly, that some of them indeed seemed to sound for him, though they
had in truth a far different sense; others had neither sense, nor sound, nor
syllable for him. Nevertheless as though he had gotten a great conquest, he
sings a triumph, and strikes up a brave victory, that al in Peter and Paul
is for the Protestant, nothing for the Papist. Afterward as it were correcting
himself, he adds nothing, but in show at least serves the Protestants turn:
which is one of the truest words he there delivers. The Protestants indeed
be jolly nimble witted fellows, that can make any thing serve at least for a
show of their cause, and when al other things fail them, 2. Tim. 4. verse. 4.
A^ fabulas conuertuntur; they turn their ears away from truth (as the
Apostle speaks) and fall to fables; and one Robin good fellow (I vveene) for
lack of a better, is brought upon the stage, to spit and cry out: Fie upon
Peter, fie upon Paul, that had not remembered to say one word for Popery, but al
for the Protestant. Fie (I say) upon such a cause, that must be vnder-propt
with such rotten baggage stuff. What shadow of likelihood is there, that one
should tell the Pope such a tale to his face, or that Erasmus (who was in most
points a Catholic) should report it? or could there be any poor Robin
(excepting M. Abbots himself) so simple and poore-blinde, that in all the
writings of those blessed Apostles, he could not find one word, that gave any
sound or show for the Catholic cause? you have heard already, that I have to
every place picked by M. Abbot out of S. Paul in favor of their religion,
opposed another out of the same Epistle, that speaks more plainly against
them for us: I vvil here out of the abundance of testimonies which the same
S. Paul (whom the simple Protestants take to be wholly for them) bears to our
doctrine, set down some store even in defense of those very points, which M.
Abbot has made special choice off to object against us.

To begin with the first, there is plain testimony, that we are justified
before God by works, which I cited before: Romans 2. v 13.
With God the doers of the law shall be justified. There is much for freewil,
witness this: Ibid 6. verse. 12. and 13.
Let not sin therefore reign in your mortal body, that you obey the
concupiscence thereof, but neither do you exhibit your members instruments of
iniquitty unto sin; but exhibit your selves to God, of dead men alive, and
your members instruments of justice to God: for sin shall not have dominion
over you, for you are not under the law but under grace. See how the Apostle
makes it in the power and vvil of every man endued with Gods grace, either to
do well, or to do evil: and that sin has no such dominion over them, but
that they may do well, if they will concur with Gods grace. Item, that it is
not grace which does al, but a man must work with grace, and exhibit the
powers of his soul as instruments toward the producing of good works;
which is flatly our doctrine of freewil.

And before we depart from this matter of justification, as M. Abbot does very
quickly, you shall hear more of it out of the same Apostle: he teaches
expressly, that a man in the state of grace may fulfill the law, in these words.
Ibid. cap. 8. verse. 3.
For that which was impossible to the law, in that it was weakened by flesh, God
sending his Son, in the similitude of the flesh of sin, even of sin,
damned sin in the flesh, that the justfication of the law might be fulfilled
in us, who walk not according to the flesh, but according to the spirit. Which
is seconded in the thirtenth chapter, where he concludes Ibid. verse. 9. and 10.
love to be the fullness of the law, having before said, that he who loves his
neighbor fulfilleth the law. And as for that certainty of salvation, which
many Protestants brag off, the Apostle does wholy dispossess them of it:
first in the place before cited, where he wills Romans 11. verse. 20.
them that stand right in the true faith, to beware that they fall not; and
assures them that they shall fall as others had done before them, if they did
not diligently look unto it. Else where he advises us Philip. 2. verse. 12.
with fear and trembling to work our salvation. Mark how two points of the
Protestant doctrine be wounded in one sentence, and two of ours confirmed: both
that we must work our salvation, (it comes not then by only faith) and that
with fear and trembling; we are not then assured of it before hand by the
certainty of faith, which excludes al fear and doubt of it. Now that we ought
to have a firm hope of salvation, S. Paul teaches us: Romans 5. v. 2.
We have access through faith in to this his grace, wherein we stand and glory
in the hope of the Sons of God. Also, Ibid. 8. v. 24.
For by hope we are saved. Item, we give thanks to God, etc. Colloss. 1. v. 5.
for the hope that is laid up for you in heaven. With whom S. Peter consorteth:
1. Pet. 1. verse. 3.
Blessed be God and the Father of our Lord JESUS Christ, who according to his
great mercy has regenerated you into a lively hope, unto an incorruptible
crown, etc. laid up in heaven. Not to prosecute all the particular points of
justification, which have every one good ground in the Apostle S. Paul, as in
that question may be seen; the very faith, whereby Abraham was and we are
justified, is no such kind of faith, as the Protestants claim to be justified
by, that is, by an apprehension and drawing of Christ's righteousness to
themselves: but that faith whereby we believe al things to be true which God
has revealed, as S. Paul declares in the fourth to the Romans, where he
reports; Romans 4. v. 19.
Abraham to have been justified, by believing that God according to his
promise would give him a Son, and make him the Father of many nations: so
that finally there is not a word in S. Paul, which in his own meaning makes
for any one piece of the Protestants justification; but heaps of testimonies
for every branch of justification as we believe it.

Now I come to the other points named by M. Abbot. There is nothing (says he)
in S. Paul for the merit of single life. But he is greatly mistaken; for the
Apostle says: 1. Cor. 7. verse. 32.33. and 34.
That the care of the single and unmarried is to please God, and their study to
think upon those things that appertain unto God, and how they may be holy
both in body and in spirit; which must needs be more acceptable in Gods
sight, then to be carping for this world, and caring how to please their
yokemate. To this we add Monkish vows (of which if he were worthy to be a
good Abbot, he would speak more respectively:) somewhat S. Paul has of the
vow of chastity, which is one of their principal vows, for he avouches 1.
Tim. 5. verse. 12.
certain widows worthy of damnation, because they broke the same former vow
of chastity. And S. Paul himself Act. 18. verse. 18.
shore his head in Cenchris because he had a vow; which was the vow of a
Nazarite, not much unlike for the time, though much inferior unto the vow of
religious persons: see of that vow the sixth Chapter of the book of Numbers.
There is nothing (says M. Abbot) in S. Paul of prayer for the dead, which is
not true: for he teaches, that some of the faithful, who have 1. Cor. 3. v. 13
built upon the right foundation, hay, stubble, and such like trash, shall
notwithstanding at the day of our Lord be saved; yet so as through fire. Which
the ancient SS. Aug. in ps. 37. Hier. l. 2. co^t. Iouin. 13. Ambros. in hu^c
locu^ Gregor. in psalm. 3. poenit entiale^.
Doctors do take to be the fire of Purgatory. Now if many, vvhiles the dross
of their works be purged, do lie in fire, it will easily follow thereof, that
every good soul who has any Christian compassion in him, vvil pray for the
release of their Christian brother out of those torments.

I come now to Images and Relikes, of which he affirms that S Paul says
nothing: where was the good-mans memory when he wrote this? or remembering the
matter well enough, was he so fiercely bent to deceive others, that he cared
not what untruth he uttered? The Apostle makes honorable mention of Hebr. 9.
verse. 4. and 5.
the Images of the Cherubins, placed gloriously in the uppermost part of the
Israelites Tabernacle, which for the holiness thereof was called Sancta
sanctorum. Further, that within the Arc of the testament standing in the same
place, were reserved precious Relikes, as the rod of Aaron that blossomed, a
golden pot full of that Angelical food Manna, which God rained from heaven, and
the Tables of the Testament: to which if you join the sentence of the same
Apostle, 1. Cor. 10. verse. 11.
That al happened to them in figure, and were written for our instruction; may
not we then gather thereby, that Images are to be placed in Churches, and holy
Relikes in golden shrines? And the same Apostle in the same Epistle, declaring
Hebr. 11. verse. 21.
that Jacob by faith adored the top of Joseph's ^odde, which was a sign of
his power, does he not give al juditious men to understand, that the Images of
Saints for their holy representation, ought to be respected and worshipped?

With as great facility and no less perspicuity, we do collect out of S.
Paul, that the Saints in heaven are to be prayed unto: for he does Romans 15, 30.
2.
heartily crave the Romans to help him in their prayers, and hops by the
help of Cor. 1. verse. 11.
the Corinthians prayers, to be delivered from great dangers. Whence we reason
thus: If such a holy man as S. Paul was, stood in need of other men's prayers,
much more need have we poor vvretches of the prayers of Saints. S. Paul was
not ignorant how ready God is to hear us, nor of the only mediation of Christ
JESUS; and yet as high as he was in Gods favor, and as well informed of the
office of Christ's mediation, he held it needful to request other far meaner
then himself, to pray for him. All this is good (says a good Protestant) for
to instruct us to request the help of other men's prayers, that are living with
us, but not of Saints who are departed this world. Yes say we, because the
Saints in heaven are more charitable and desirous of Gods honor and of our
spiritual good, then any friend we have living, and therefore more forward to
assist us with their prayers: They are also more gracious in the sight of God,
and thereby better able to obtain our requests. Al which may easily be
gathred out of S. Paul, who says; that 1. Cor. 13.8.
charity never fails, but is maruailously increased in that heavenly country.
Also, that Ephesians. 2. verse. 19.
we are not strangers and forraigners to the Saints, but their fellow
citizens, and the household servants of God with them; yea, we are members of
the same body: wherefore, they cannot choose but tender most dearly al our
suits, that appertain unto the glory of God, and our own salvation. They
therefore, have finally no other shift to avoid praying to Saints, but to say,
that though al other circumstances do greatly move us thereto, yet considering
that they cannot hear us, it is labor lost to pray to them. To which we
reply and that out of S. Paul, that the Saints can hear us, and do perfectly
know our prayers made unto them; For the Apostle comparing the knowledge of
this life, with that of the life to come, says: 1. Cor. 13. verse. 9.10. and
12. De Ciuitat. Dei lib. 22. cap. 29.
In part we know, and in part we prophecy; but when that shall come which is
perfect, that shall be made void which is in part. And a little after: We see
now by a glass in a dark sort, but then face to face. Whence not I, but that
Eagle-eied Doctor S. Augustine does deduce, that the knowledge of the heavenly
citizens, is without comparison far more perfect and clearer, then ever any
mortal man's was, of things absent and to come: yea, that the Prophets (who
were endued with surpassing and extraordinary light) did not reach any thing
near unto the ordinary knowledge of the Saints in heaven, grounding himself
upon these express words of the Apostle: We prophecy in part, that is
imperfectly in this life, which shall be perfect in heaven. If then (says he)
the Prophets being mortal men, had particular understanding of things far
distant from them, and done in other countries, much more do those immortal
souls, replenished with the glorious light of heaven, perfectly know that
which is done on earth, though never so far from them: thus much of praying
to Saints.

Now to the Mass. The same profound divine S. Augustine, with other holy
Fathers (who were not wont so lightly to skimme over the Scriptures, as our
late new Masters do: but seriously searched them, and most deeply pierced
into them) did also find all the parts of the Mass touched by the Apostle S.
Paul in these words: Aug. epist. 59 ad Paulinu^. Ambros. and Chrisost. in
hunc locum. 1. Tim. 2. v. 1.
I desire that obsecrations, prayers, postulations, thanks-giuings, be made for all men, etc. declaring how by these four words of the Apostles, are expressed
the four different sort of prayers, used in the celebration of the holy
Mysteries. By obsecrations, those prayers that the Priest says before
consecration: By prayers, such as be said at and after the consecration, unto
the end of the Pater noster: By postulations, those that are said at the
communion, unto the blessing of the people: Finally, By thanksgiving, such as
are said after by both Priest and people, to give God thanks for so great a
gift received. He that knows what the Mass is, may by these words of the
Apostle, see all the parts of it very lively painted out, in this discourse of
S. Augustine; who though he calls not that celebration of the Sacrament, by
the name of Mass, yet does he give it a name equivalent: Epistola. 59.
Sacri Altaris oblatio; the oblation or sacrifice of the holy Altar, in the
solution of the fifth question, at the exposition of these words Orationes. As
for the principal part of the Mass, which is the Real presence of Christ's
body in the blessed Sacrament, S. Paul delivers it in as express terms as
may be, even as he had received it from our Lord: 1. Cor. 11. verse. 23.
This is my body which shall be delivered for you, etc. and adds, that he that
eats and drinks it unworthily, eats and drinks judgment to himself,
not discerning the body of our Lord. And in the chapter before makes this
demand: The Chalice or cup of benediction, which we bless, is it not the
communication of the blood of Christ? and the bread which we break, is it not
the participation of the body of our Lord? Moreover, he speaks of the Church
of Rome (being then but in her cradle) most honorably, saying: Your faith is
renowned in the whole world, and after, Romans 1. v. 8. Romans 16. verse. 19.
Your obedience is published into every place. But no marvel to the wise,
though he did not then make mention of her Supremacy, for that did not belong
to the Church or people of Rome, but to S. Peter, who (when S. Paul wrote
that Epistle) was scarce well settled there; neither did that appertain to the
matter he created of.

Of pardons, S. Paul teaches in formal terms, which both the Church of
Corinth and he himself gave unto the incestuous Corinthian, that then
repented: these be his words. 2. Cor. 2. verse. 10.
And whom you have pardoned any thing, I also: for my self also, that which I
have pardoned, if I have pardoned any thing, for you in the person of Christ,
that we be not circumuented of Satan. What can be more manifest, then that the
Apostle did release some part of the penance of that incestuous Corinthian, at
other men's request? which is properly to give pardon and indulgence. And if S.
Paul in the person of Christ could so do, no doubt but S. Peter could do as
much; and consequently, other principal Pastors of Christ's Church, have the
same power and authority.

The last of M. Abbots instances is, That S. Paul says nothing of traditions:
wherein he shows himself not the least impudent; for the Apostle speaks of
them very often. He desires the Romans to Romans 16. verse. 17.
mark them that make dissentions and scandals, contrary to the doctrine which
you have learned, and to avoid them: but the doctrine that they had then
learned, before S. Paul sent them this Epistle, was by word of mouth and
tradition (for little or none of the new Testament was then written:)
wherefore the Apostle teaches al men to be avoided, that dissent from
doctrine delivered by tradition. And in the Acts of the Apostles it is of
record, how S. Paul vvalking through Siria, and Silicia, confirming the
Churches: Act. 15. v. 41
Commanded them to keep the precepts of the Apostles and of the Ancients.
Item, when they passed through the cities, they Act. 16. v. 4.
delivered unto them to keep the decrees that were decreed by the Apostles and
Ancients, which were at Jerusalem: and the Churches were confirmed in faith,
etc. Where it also appears, that those decrees were made matter of faith,
and necessary to be believed to salvation, before they were written. He does
also charge his best beloved disciple Timothy, 1. Tim. 6. verse. 20.
To keep the depositum (that is the whole Christian doctrine, delivered unto
him by word of mouth, as the best Authors take it) avoiding the profane
nouelty of voices, and oppositions of falsely called knowledge. Again, he
commands 2. Tim. 2. verse. 2.
him to commend to faithful men, the things which thou have heard of me by
many witnesses. Was not this to preach such doctrine as he had received by
Apostolic tradition without writing? And further (which suppresseth all the
vain cauils of the sectaries) he says: 2. Thessal. 2. verse. 15.
Therefore brethren stand and hold the traditions which you have learned,
whether it be by word or by our Epistle: where you see that some traditions
went by word of mouth from hand to hand, as well as some others were written,
and were as well to be holden, and stood too, as the written, proceeding from
the same fountain of truth Gods spirit. Thus much in answer unto the
instances proposed by M. Abbot, which he very ignorantly and insolently
avouches, to have no proof or sound of proof out of S. Paul.

I could (were it not to avoid tediousness) add the like confirmation of
most controversies, out of the same blessed Apostle; as that 1. Tim. 3. verse.
15.
the Church is the pillar and ground of truth: wherefore any man may most
assuredly repose his faith upon her declaration. That Christ gave Ephesians. 4. v.
11. and 13.
Pastors and Doctors to the edifying of that his mistical body, until we meet
al in the unity of faith, etc. Therefore the Church shall not fail in faith
until the day of judgment, nor be invisible, that has visible Pastors and
teachers. Also Hebr. 5. verse. 1.
that Priests are chosen from among men, and appointed for men, in those
things that appertain to God, that they may offer gifts and sacrifices for
sin. That Preachers and 1. Cor. 3. v. 9.
Priests are Gods coadjutors and helpers, and not only idle instruments. That
S. Paul and Timothy 1. Cor. 9. verse. 23. 1.
did save other men, and therefore no blasphemy to pray to Saints, to help and
save us. That S. Paul did Tim. 4. verse. 16.
accomplish those things that want to the passions of Christ in his flesh, for
Christ's body which is the Church, therefore Christ's passion does not take
away our own satisfaction. That he Colloss. 1. verse. 24. 1. Cor. 9. verse. 16.
gloried in preaching the Gospel of free cost, which was a work of
supererogation. That Ephesians. 5. verse. 32.
Marriage is a great Sacrament. That 1. Tim. 4. verse. 23.
grace was given to Timothy, by the imposition of the hands of Priesthood:
whence it follows, that Matrimony and holy Orders be true and perfect
Sacraments. But what do I? I should be too long if I would prosecute all that
which the Apostle has left in vvriting in favor and defense of the Roman
faith. This (I doubt not) will suffice to confront his shameless impudency,
that blushed not to affirm, there was not a word in S. Paul that sounded for
the Catholic, but al (in show at least) for the Protestant. As for S. Peter I
vvil wholly omit him, because the Protestants have small confidence in him.

Here I may be bold I hope, to turn upon M. Abbot this dilemma and forked
argument, which S. Augustine framed against the Manichean Adimantus: Lib. 1.
cont. Adimant.
Hoc si imprudens fecit, nihil caecius; si autem sciens, nihil sceleratius: If
M. Abbot did ignorantly affirm S. Paul to have said nothing for the Roman
Catholics, what could be more blind, then not to be able to discern any thing
in such clear light? if he said it vvittingly knowing the contrary, then did
he it most wickedly, so to lie against his own conscience, to draw after him
self, other men into error and perdition.

ROBERT ABBOT.
WELL M. Bishop, let us leave Peter and Paul for heretics: let us see whether
those that succeeded, did al teach the same doctrine, that the Church of Rome
now teaches. Hollinshead descript. of Britan. ca. 7.
Eleutherius the bishop of Rome, being sent unto by Lucius king of this realm,
for a copy of the Roman constitutions, for the government of this new
converted Church, and of the imperial laws, for the better ordering of his
common wealth, about 150. years after the death of Christ, for answer writes
unto him: Annals of England by John Stow.
That having received in his Kingdom the law and faith of Christ, and having
now the old and new Testament, he should by a Council of his realm, take laws
from thence to govern them by: that he was the Vicar of God in his Kingdom:
that the people and nations of the Kingdom of Britany were his, even his
children: that such as were divided, he should gather them together unto the
law of Christ his holy Church, to peace and concord, and should cherish and
maintain, protect, govern and defend them, etc. But now the religion of Rome
has altered that style, and tells us: Sext. proem. in glossa.
That not the King, but the Pope is Gods Vicar upon earth; his Vicar general
for all Kingdoms. And as for the Church, the matters and government thereof
belong not to the King, who if he make any laws concerning religion, He
challenges to him self another right, that is, Distinct. 96. Si Imperator.
the Popes; because God would not have the work of Christian religion to be
ordered by public laws, or by the secular power, but by Popes and Bishops.

WILLIAM BISHOP.
TRVE M. Abbot, you had need to leave Peter and Paul for heretics, who so
plainly and plentifully confute your doctrine and establish ours; or else you
and your fellows must needs be taken for heretics. And if you hope to find
any of their Successors more friendly unto you, you will prove in the end as
foully (if not more grossly) deceived then you were before. But how chances it,
that you lept from Peter and Paul unto one that was the thirtenth Pope after S.
Peter? why did you ouer-skip all the rest? Was there not one of the other
twelve, that would afford you some piece of a dark broken sentence, out of
which you might pick some color of cauil against us? If they would have
yielded him any comfort, they should not have been forgotten, as we may see by
Anacletus, who is afterward haled in by the way, and yoked with another for
want of some clear sentence of his own.

Well let us come to Eleutherius, the man of whom you have made choice. First,
you relate such a wise tale of so worthy a Bishop, so impertinent and il
hanging together, and so weakly verified, that no considerate person standing
upright, can give you any credit therein. To begin with the Authors that
report it, they be both professed Protestants, and come more then a thousand
years to late for the relation of so ancient a matter, unless they had
alleged other authentike Authors in confirmation of it. But Hollinhead
reports himself to M. Fox, a crafty deceitful lying Minister of his own
time: Stow to some moth-eaten monument lying in the Guild hal. Now, what credit
is to be given to things so sillily confirmed, specially where there is far
greater probability against it? for Eleutherius was Bishop of Rome, whose
epistles and letters were registered there, and most diligently preserved in
their treasury, among other monuments of antiquity: where one only epistle of
his to the province of France is to be found. And if he had written another to
a King of great Britany, no question but it would have been as carefully
preserved there, as the other. Again, what likelihood is there, that any old
writing of or to Lucius King of great Britany, should be preserved in the city
of London, when all the Britons were driven thence by their enemies the
Saxons, who were most like to make small store of such letters, specially
which concerned the Christian religion, to which they were then enemies? And
if they had reserved any such, should not venerable Bede (our most learned and
industrious countryman, who made most diligent enquiry after al such, when
our Ancestors were converted to the faith) have heard some news of this
famous letter, who heard and writ as much of Pope Eleutherius, King Lucius,
and the realms conversion, as he could discover, and find any ground for, out
of any part of antiquity? the like may be said of all the rest of our ancient
Historiographers, whether English or Britons; among whom there is not one to be
found, that made any mention of this worthy letter: how then is it possible
that there should be any such? besides, if you mark but the Kings demand and
the Bishops answer, both being persons of great wisdom and gravity, such
simplicity and incongruity appears, that any man of understanding will take it
to be ridiculous and counterfeit. The King (forsooth) writes to the Pope, for
a copy of the Roman constitutions, and Imperial laws, for the government of
his realm: the Pope writes back ad correctionem Regis, to the correction and
amendment of the King; which is an answer as just as Germans lips: goodly
stuff surely, and fit to lie hid in dusty corners. Those words (for the
Roman constitutions to govern the Church) are deceitfully shuffled in, besides
the purpose; as may appear by the answer. And the King sent before, and
received by the Popes messengers, full instruction of al points concerning the
Christian religion: wherefore he then wrote only for the Imperial laws, to
direct him how to govern his temporal estate. To which the letter makes the
Bishop to answer very childishly, that he had the old and new Testament, and
wills him to fish out thence the civil government of his realm, which
never any Christian King, either before or since ever did. Add finally, that
the letter bears date in those authors cited by M. Abbot, 169. years after
the passion of Christ, which is at least twice seven years after the death
of Pope Eleutherius. But al these impertinences and improbabilities being set
aside for the while, let it be granted that the letter were true, and not
fained, what hold can the Protestants take on it to serve their purpose?
surely very weak, and such as may be most easily shaken out off their hands.
The letter has, That the nations and people of his Kingdom, were even his
children. Be it so, a good King is Parens Patriae, and Pastor populi; The
Parent of his country and foster-father of his people: follows it of this,
that he is their chief head in spiritual causes? then were the Heathen Roman
Emperors supreme head of the Church; for they were parents of their country,
that is nourishers, defenders, and rulers of the common weal: this then will
help the Protestants nothing. Neither will that which follows in the letter,
that they are Gods Vicars in his Kingdom, and should gather his people unto
the law of Christ; for the Roman Catholics do allow Kings to be Gods Vicars,
not only in all the temporal affairs of their realms, but also that they
should by counsel, countenance, example and authority, draw al their subjects
to the true faith of Christ, and seek to call home, al them that are gone
astray, and divided from the Catholic Church, and to establish peace and
concord among them: and finally to govern them so happily united, in all such
things as appertain unto their Kingly vocation, and to the public
tranquillity of the common weal. Now let the indifferent reader consider,
whether there be any one word in this supposed letter, that carries meat in
mouth (as they say) to feed the Protestants faith: so that here is an ancient
and reverend Fathers letter cited to no purpose.

But M. Abbot says, that now a-daies not the King, but the Pope is Gods Vicar,
and his Vicar general for all Kingdoms. True it is, the Pope is Gods Vicar in all Christian Kingdoms, Sext. proem. in glossa.
(though there be not one word of any such matter in the gloss cited by him)
but that is in Ecclesiastical matters; which nothing hinders, but that the
King is also Gods Vicar in temporal affairs: for he may be called a Vicar,
that does Vicem gerere alterius, that is another man's Deputy, Lieutenant, or
Substitute. One King may have many Vicars, that is substitutes or deputies, to
whom he commits some principal charge. King Henry the eight for example,
having given him by the Parliament, supreme power in both Ecclesiastical and
Temporal causes, had one Vicar for spiritual causes, and many other for the
temporal: so God has the Bishop of Rome for Christ's Vicar general in causes
of the Church, and Kings in the administration of the common weal. And the
very Canon cited by M. Abbot, would have taught him so much, if he had read it
with a mind to learn the truth, rather then to suck out some matter of
cauil out of it: Distinct. 96. Si Imperator.
for therein be these words; The Emperor has the privileges of his power,
which he obtained of God for the administration of public laws. Mark here
the Pope acknowledges the Emperor, to be Gods Deputy and Vicar in the
administration of the common laws; which in the Canon that goes next before
is confirmed: for there Gelasius an ancient Pope speaks thus to Anastatius
the Emperor; Ibidem duo sunt.
There be two things (o Sacred Emperor) wherewith this world is principally
governed, to wit, the holy authority of Bishops, and the power of Princes.
These two then be both Gods Substitutes and Vicars; the one for spiritual
causes, the other for temporal: wherefore M. Abbot reasons very childishly,
when he goes about to prove that we deny the King to be Gods Vicar, because
we teach the Pope to be Gods Vicar; for we hold that they both be Gods Vicars,
though in distinct and different matters. Neither lastly can he take any
advantage of the word govern, if it be in that letter; for King Lucius demand
was, for the Imperial laws to govern the temporal state of his realm:
wherefore it is evident that he spoke there of temporal government, and not
of spiritual. Now because the maine question is, whether Kings have authority
over Bishops in Ecclesiastical causes, or Bishops over Kings, let us hear
some two or three of S. Peter and S. Paul's Successors, M. Abbots own
vvitnesses, deliver their knowledge thereof. The first shall be the same learned
and holy Pope Gelasius last named: he affirms in the same Epistle which was
written to the Emperor himself, that the authority of Bishops in spiritual
causes, does extend it self over Kings and Emperors, these be his words.
Distinct. 96. Duo sunt.
Thou know (o Emperor) thy self to depend on their judgments, and that
they cannot be reduced to thy will and pleasure; therefore many Bishops
fortified with these ordinances, and with this authority supported, have
excommunicated, some Kings, others Emperors. And if a particular example be
demanded of the persons of Princes, blessed Innocentius the Pope did
excommunicate the Emperor Archadius, for consenting unto the deposition of S.
John Chrysostom. And blessed S. Ambrose, though a holy Bishop, yet not Bishop
of the universal Church, for a fault that to others did not seem so grievous,
excommunicating Theodosius the great, did shut him out of the Church, etc. Is
not this plain enough, and directly to the purpose, that Bishops have power
over Princes in Ecclesiastical causes? and the authority of Gelasius is of such
weight with M. Abbot shortly after, that here he cannot gainsay it with any
honesty. I vvil join to him Anacletus (whom M. Abbot also notes the next)
who succeeded immediately after Clement S. Peter's Scholar: he says expressly,
Epistola 1. prope finem.
That the Church of Rome received by our Savior Christ's order, the primacy
and preeminence of power over al Churches, and over the whole flock of
Christian people: If then M. Abbot vvil allow, that Kings be any of Christ's
people, the Pope has authority over them. S. Clement himself (one of S.
Paul's Philip. 4. v. 3.
coadjutors, and whose name is in the book of life) has left this written
among the constitutions of the Apostles: Lib. 2. c. 11.
Wherefore (o Bishop) endeavor to excel in sanctity of works, knowing thy
place and dignity; thou art Gods Lieutenant, and placed over al Lords,
Priests, Kings and Princes, Fathers, Sons, Masters, and al Subjects joined
together. Ibid. cap. 33.
And in the same book, touching by the way the dignity of Bishops, repeateth
these memorable words out of holy Scripture, spoken to Moses as a King and
Bishop: Exodus 7. v. 1.
Ecce constitui to Deum Pharaonis; Behold I have created thee the God of
Pharao, who was King of the land of Aegipt, where both Moses and all the
children of Israel then lived: see the dignity of a Bishop above his own King.
And the 38. chapter of the same book of Clement is formally entitled, That
Priests are more excellent then Kings and Princes. And finally, that the
government of the whole Church, was committed to Bishops, that vessel of
election S. Paul is a sufficient witness, who says: Act. 20. v. 28.
Take heed to your selves and to the whole flock, wherein the holy Ghost has
placed you Bishops, to rule the Church of God, which he has purchased with his
own blood. If then M. Abbot will allow that Kings be any of Christ's flock,
and that he purchased them with his blood, they are to be ruled by Bishops, who
are placed by the holy Ghost to rule the whol^ flock of Gods Church. Hitherto
comparing the Bishop of Rome with temporal Princes, I have proved the
prerogative of Ecclesiastical government, to appertain to the Bishops.

Now a word or two of the preeminence of the Church and See of Rome over al
other Churches; which shall be briefly verified, even by the testimony of some
of the most ancient, and most holy successors of S. Peter and S. Paul, to whom
M. Abbot attributes so much. The before named Anacletus, who succeeded next
after their own Disciple S. Clement, having showed that al Ecclesiastical
causes belong to Bishops even as temporal causes do to the temporal
Magistrate, Epistola 1. ad omnes Ecclesias.
adds: that if more difficult questions shall arise, as the judgments of
Bishops, and greater causes: let them (if any appeal be made) be referred unto
the Sea Apostolic. Because the Apostles, by the commandment of our Savior,
have ordained, that questions of greater difficulty, shall always be referred
unto the Apostolic See, upon which Christ built the whole Church, saying unto
blessed Peter, the Prince of the Apostles: thou art Peter, and upon this rock
will I build my Church, etc. Anacletus his immediate successor Euaristus Pope
and Martyr, writing unto the Bishops of Afric, Epistola. 1. ad Eccles.
Africanam.
speaks thus: Truly your charity following the rule of the wise, has chosen
rather to refer unto the Sea Apostolic, as to the head, what ought to be
observed in doubtful matters, then to presume your selves by usurpation: and
writing to the brethren in Aegipt, Epistola 2.
does command certain Bishops (whom he resembles to adulterers, because they
had intruded into other Bishops Cities) to be cast out of those places, and to
be made infamous, and deprived of al Ecclesiastical honors; adjoining, That if
(after these things so dispatched) they should have further complaint against
them, that matter were to be enquired out, and to be determined by the
authority of this holy See. Note how these holy Popes, that were so nigh unto
the Apostles, taught it to belong unto the Sea of Rome, to determine of the
causes of the Bishops of Afrike and Aegipt, most remote from them. And because
the Apostle S. Paul wills 2. Cor. 13. verse. 2.
every word to stand in the mouth of two or three witnesses, I vvil take for
the third, Alexander the first, Pope and Martyr, who succeeded unto Euaristus;
he is as plain and formal in this cause as any of the rest: these be his
words. Epist. 1. omnibus orthodoxis.
It is related unto the primacy of this holy and Ap^stolike See (unto which the
disposition of the highest cases, and the affairs of al Churches, are by our
Lord committed as to the head, etc.) and a little after, Our Lord here
appointed this holy See the head of the whole Church I omit here the verdict of
al others herein, because this very matter must be spoken off hereafter again
and again: these three most ancient grave and Godly Martirs, (al successors
of S. Peter and S. Paul, upon whose authority M. Abbot here only insisteth)
vvil suffice to certify the indifferent reader, that even from the Apostles
days, the Bishop of Rome has been taken for supreme judge in all
Ecclesiastical causes, as well in the East as West Church. To finish this
passage, thou may gentle reader by this little, see what shameless shifts M.
Abbot is forced to use, to make any coulourable show out of antiquity, for the
lay Magistrates superiority in spiritual causes. He is first driven to cite an
unlearned, an unlikely, and an Apocriphal letter of 1400. years old, upon the
credit of men of our own age, and those most partial too on his own side, the
letter bearing date also, many years after the death of him that is supposed
to be the author of it: and when al is done, in the same worshipful letter
there is not one pregnant proof for any part of their doctrine; lastly, that
his own chosen witnesses, do deliver up most clear evidence against
himself: he therefore that vvil give judgment on his side, must needs show
himself exceeding partial.

ROBERT ABBOT.
ANACLETVS Bishop of Rome, Did. 1. Episcopus and 2. peracta.
and after him Calixtus ordained, that consecration being done, al should
communicate or else be excommunicated: For so (say they) the Apostles did set
down, and the holy Church of Rome observes. But the Church of Rome that now
is, makes it lawful for the Priest to receive alone, the people in the mean
time standing gazing and looking on, and the fight only must suffice them.

WILLIAM BISHOP.
HERE is nothing in manner worth the answering, only the cosening
deceitfulness of the man is to be displaied. First, Anacletus has only, De
consecrat. did. 1. Can. Episcopus.
that Deacons, Subdeacons, and other Ministers, that in solemn feasts attend
in holy vestiments upon the Bishop whiles he does sacrifice unto God, should in
the same solemn feasts communicate, or else be debarred of their
Ecclesiastical places: where is not one word of the lay peoples communicating.
And therefore that Canon is wholly besides the purpose, saving that it does
teach, that then Bishops used to offer sacrifice unto God, and that the Clerks
did in holy vestiments serve them at Mass: See the Canon and vvonder at the
folly of the man. In like manner does the second Canon of Calixtus speak of
Ecclesiastical persons that serve at Mass: for so says the Collector, De
consecrat. did. 2. Can. peracta.
Ecclesiasticis liminibus careat Minister; Let the Minister or he that serves,
want Ecclesiastical place. With which agrees the gloss upon the same Canon,
which also is evident by the very Text: for the punishment set down is,
Ecclesiasticis carere liminibus, To be shut out of the Ecclesiastical men's
seats and places; which were no punishment to a lay man, that was not before
admitted into any such room. And as it may be seen in the said distinction
Cap. Etsi non frequentius. De consecrat. did. 1.
and Cap. Secularis. Lay men were commanded about those times, to communicate
but thrife in the year, at Easter, Whitsontide, and Christmasse. Briefly, here
is nothing against the modern practice of the Church of Rome; for both they
that solemnly serve at Mass on festiual days do receive, and no lay man is
denied to communicate on any day, either on those feasts or at any time else,
when he vvil prepare himself thereto. But to debar Priests from serving God
in that most high degree, (be their devotion and preparation never so good)
until they can get some company of the laity to communicate with them, is
without just cause to rob God of his sovereign honor, to extinguish the
working of his holy spirit in devout souls, and to defraude the whole flock
of the benefit of many most holy and effectual prayers, not only of the Priests
but also of the people; who do not with us stand gazing on at the time of
communion as M. Abbot profanely conceiteth, but humbly kneeling do then pray
most devoutly, and do in spirit and desire communicate also. Briefly, there is
not one syllable in those Canons sounding to the Protestant sense, that Priests
should not communicate, if the Clarke or people join not with them; but only
that the indeuout and slugglish Clerks should be deprived of their places, if
upon high feasts they did neglect to communicate with the Bishop or Pastor.

ROBERT ABBOT.
JULIUS the Bishop of Rome, disallowed intinctam Eucharistiam, De consecrat. 2.
cum omne.
the dipping of the Eucharist, the Sacrament of Christ's body in the cup,
Because no witness thereof was brought out of the Gospel; but there is
mentioned the commending of the bread by it self, and the cup by it self:
but now by the Canon of the Mass the Priest must dippe the third part of the
consecrated host into the Sacrament of the blood, and there prays that this
mixture may be heathful to himself, and all the receivers unto everlasting life.

WILLIAM BISHOP.
I Cannot easily judge, whether this man were more fiercely bent to deceive
others, or more foolishly set to shame himself with lying, that durst
adventure upon this Canon of the ancient and most learned Pope Julius; for
besides that it has nothing for the Protestants purpose, it does in sundry
points notably confirm the Roman doctrine: thus begins the Canon. When
every crime and sin, is purged and blotted out by sacrifices offered unto
God, what shall hereafter be given to God for the purgation of our sins, when
error is committed in the oblation of the sacrifice it self? (note how often
he repeateth and recommendeth the divine sacrifice of the Mass.) For we have
heard of some men possessed with schismatical ambition, who contrary to divine
order and the institution of the Apostles, do in the divine sacrifice, offer
milk in steed of wine: others also for a complement of communion, do give
the dipped Sacrament to the people, etc. Then confuting these opinions he
says: When the Master of truth did commend to his Disciples the true sacrifice
of our salvation, he gave to none of them milk, etc. let therefore milk be no
more offered when we sacrifice. Then come in the broken words of M. Abbot
thus: But for that of the dipped Eucharist, which for a complement of communion
they deliver to the people, they have not received any testimony brought out of
the Gospel, where our Lord commended to the Apostles his body and blood; for
there the bread is mentioned apart, and the commendation of the Chalice apart:
where M. Abbot first left out the commending of Christ's body and blood to his
Disciples, because those words would have scalded his tongue. Secondly, this
Canon has nothing against that which is now done by the Priest in the Mass:
for the Priest does not dippe any part of the Host into the Chalice, to be
afterward taken out and given to the people, which is that which Pope Julius
does disprove. Neither do our Priests (to speak properly) dippe any part of
the Sacrament into the Chalice; for dipping in, imports as much as the
putting in and taking forth again, which we do not: but only for a holy
signification we do put into the Chalice, one little par^^ of the Host, there
to lie and not to be taken out again, but to be received by the Priest
together with the blood; and therefore we call it not the dipping in, but the
mixture or mingling together of the body and blood of Christ: wherefore M.
Abbot erreth in the maine point of his reprehension. For Pope Julius reproved
only the giving of the dipped Host unto the people, which we do not, nor hold
it any way necessary; because we teach them, that the holy Host of Christ's
body, contains in it self (being a living body) as well Christ's blood as his
flesh: now, we do only put a little piece of the sacred Host into the
Chalice, there to be received with the precious blood, not of the people, but
by the Priest alone. That this is no new devise of the Church of Rome, may be
well gathered out of the same distinction, and in the very next leaf to that of
Pope Julius cited by M. Abbot, in the Canon Triforme, De consecrat. distinct. 2.
where Pope Sergius of more then 800. years standing, does expound this very
ceremony, of putting one part of the host into the Chalice. It was then a
known used ceremony of the Mass in his days, and no late invention, as M.
Abbot dreameth. I may not here forget, that in the very Canon of Pope Julius,
which M. Abbot alleges, there is most express and very earnest
commandment, of mingling water with the wine that is to be consecrated;
Because (says that blessed Pope) our Lords Chalice according unto the
precepts of the Canons, must be offered, the wine being first mingled with
water. Finally, we have in this Canon (alleged by M. Abbot) a confirmation of
a propitiatory sacrifice, of the real presence of Christ's body and blood, (two
principal points of our doctrine) and of mingling water with wine in the
offertory; and not one direct word for the Protestants. And because this
resolution of Julius, seems to be taken almost word for word, out of Pope
Alexanders first letter, who was but the fifth Pope from S. Peter; I will
acquaint the reader with his words: these they be. Alexand. in epist. omnibus
orthodoxis. De consecrat. did. 2. Can. 1.
In the oblations of Sacraments which are offered unto our Lord at the solemn
time of Mass, the passion of our Lord is to be blended; that his passion may
be celebrated, whose body and blood is made and consecrated: so that
superstitious opinions being banished, bread alone and wine mingled with water,
be offered in the sacrifice. For as we have received from the Fathers, and very
reason does teach, in the cup of our Lord only water, or only wine ought not
to be offered, but both of them mixed together. And a little after: Crimes and
sins are blotted out, when these sacrifices are offered; therefore the
passion of our Lord, whereby we were redeemed is to be remembered: with such
sacrifices our Lord is delighted, and shall be appeased, and will pardon huge
offenses. For among sacrifices, nothing can be greater then the body and blood
of Christ. Neither is there any oblation better then this, but this surpasses
them al, etc. Where you see the present Roman religion delivered in as formal
terms as may be. There is also much more to the same purpose; but I am the
briefer in these authorities, and do allege them more sparingly, because
Protestants (seeing them to be beyond al other exceptions) do flatly deny,
almost all the Epistles and Decretals of the most ancient Popes: nevertheless
they must needs be effectual, and have good place against M. Abbot, that does
take upon him to establish their doctrine, and put down ours, by the testimony
of these, the lawful heirs and successors unto the Apostles S. Peter and S.
Paul; alleging many testimonies out of the very same Epistles. Wherefore,
seeing he has appealed to them, he must needs stand to them; for this sentence
of the President Festus has his ground in very reason it self: Act. 25. v. 12.
Have thou appealed to Caesar? to Caesar shall thou go. M. Abbot judged those
Popes sentences of sound authority for confirmation of their religion, he may
not therefore deny them being brought in against him. The same Pope Julius, (to
omit many other clear testimonies, taken out of his own letters, because the
Protestants do cauil at them) does most evidently confirm, the sovereign
power of the Sea of Rome over all the East Church, even by the witness of most
approved authors. For upon the suit of diverse Bishops of the East, he did
solemnly summon S. Athanasius, that most learned and valiant Patriarch of
Alexandria, to appear at Rome before him, there to answer unto such crimes as
were indeed most wrongfully objected against him: Lib. 4. hist. Tripart. c.
6. Nicephor. lib. 9. cap. 6.
thus says the holy History. The Pope following the law of the Church,
commanded them also to come unto Rome, and according to the rule of the Canons,
cited the venerable Athanasius to judgment. Athanasius obediently appeared;
but his adversaries knowing that their lies in that place would soon be
discovered, durst not appear: vvhereupon Athanasius was purged of those
imputations, Ibid. cap. 12.
and restored to his Bishopric. Unto the same Julius not long after,
Athanasius (being pitifully abused by the Arrians) repaired the second time
for aid, where he found diverse other Bishops of the East, namely Paulus
Bishop of Constantinople, Marcellus Bishop of Ancony, Asclopas Bishop of Gaya,
and Lucianus Bishop of Adrianople, al Eastern Bishops; and yet appealing to
Julius Pope of Rome, for remedy of the wrongs done them by the Arrian
Heretics: which does most manifestly testify, that in the primitive Church,
al other Bishops acknowledged the Bishop of Rome for the supreme Pastor of
Christ's Church, which also Zozomenus does confirm, showing how Julius
restored them al: Tanquam omnium curam gerens, Zozom. l. 3. hist. cap. 8.
propter propriae sedis dignitatem; As one that had care over them al, for the
dignity of his own See. And Julius his own words recorded by no meaner a man
then S. Athanasius, do declare the same: for blaming the Bishops of the East,
he says; Athanas. in Apolog. 2.
Why did you not write unto us, especially you of Alexandria? are you ignorant
that the custom is, that we should first be written unto, that from hence it
might be defined what was right? therefore if you have any quarrel against any
Bishop, you ought to have referred it hither to our Church, etc. And shortly
after: I signify to you such things as were received from the blessed Apostle
S. Peter, etc. where M. Abbot may see, that one of S. Peter's successors, of
great worth and authority, does tell the Bishops of the East Church, that by
order set down by S. Peter himself, Bishops causes of al countries, ought to
be referred unto the definition of the Bishop of Rome; he therefore is their
superior. I add hereunto (because it belongs both unto Pope Julius, and
this present purpose, of their supremacy in Ecclesiastical causes) this
sentence taken out of the Ecclesiastical history: The Council holden at Antioch
was not good, Hist. Tripart. lib. 4. cap. 9.
for that Julius Bishop of Rome was not there present, nor sent any Legate in
his place; because the Ecclesiastical Canons do command, that Councels ought
not to be celebrated without the sentence of the Bishop of Rome.

ROBERT ABBOT.
GELASIVS Bishop of Rome says as we say; Gelas. cont. Eutich. and Nestor.
That in the Sa^rament is celebrated the Image or resemblance of the body and
blood of Christ, and that there ceasse^h not to be the substance or nature of
bread and wine: But now the Romish religion makes them Heretics, that say the
Sacrament is the Image or resemblance of the body and blood of Christ, and not
the body and blood of Christ it self; or will not believe, that the bread and
wine are substantially and really turned into the same body and blood. Albeit
they believe with the same Gelasius, that the Sacrament is a divine thing, and
that thereby we are made partakers of the divine nature, even of Christ
himself really and substantially, but yet spiritually with al his riches
becoming ours, and being eaten of us; not by our teeth into our bellies, but
by faith into our hearts unto life everlasting.

WILLIAM BISHOP.
FIRST I say, that M. Abbot having his eie-sight sore troubled with a gross
defluxion of salt rhewme, takes a Rowland for an Oliver, that is one Gelasius
an unknown Grecian, for Gelasius an African borne, yet Bishop of Rome. That he
was not Gelasius the Bishop of Rome, appears plainly out of that very
treatise cited by M. Abbot; for that Gelasius professes to allege the
testimony of all the learned Fathers who wrote before him, and yet he makes no
mention of the most renowned authors in the Latin Church, as of S. Hillary, S.
Augustine, S. Hierome, and of Pope Leo: al which wrote before Gelasius the
Bishop of Rome, and were had in very great estimation by him, as may be seen
by his declaration of the Canonical Scriptures, and of the most approved
fathers works. Did. 15. Sa^cta Romana Ecclesia. Ibidem.
Again, that Gelasius cites often, and relieth much upon the authority of
Eusebius Bishop of Caesarea; whereas Gelasius the Pope, has noted his works
for little better then Apocryphal: so that nothing is more like, then that the
good man has mistaken his mark and is fallen from the successors of S. Peter
and S. Paul, upon I cannot tell whom; yet because he is an old writer (though of
what credit it be uncertain) I will not refuse him. And to the former part of
his sentence (that in the Sacrament there is an Image or resemblance of
Christ's body) I answer, that we Catholics do say as much in effect: for
every Sacrament is a visible sign of an invisible and holy thing; and so
Christ's body under the form of bread and wine, is a resemblance of his body
parted from his blood on the Cross: and the body of Christ under the forms of
bread and wine, as it is in the Sacrament, is a picture also, or resemblance
of the union of his mistical body in faith and charity; even as the bread is
made of many grains of corn, and the wine pressed out of many clusters of
grapes. The later part of his sentence may also have a good meaning, and stand
well with our doctrine; for the nature of bread does not wholly cease to be in
the blessed Sacrament, because the form, savor, and taste of bread, (which be
natural qualities thereof) do still remain, though the whole inward substance
be turned into the body of Christ; which that Gelasius does in the same place
signify, when he there says: The same bread to be changed into the divine
substance, (that is, into the substance of Christ) by the operation of the holy
Ghost, whereby the receivers are made partakers of the divine nature. And M.
Abbots gloss upon these later words, is very extrauagant: for we cannot in
property of speech, be said to be partakers of Christ's nature really, by being
made partakers of his riches; for it is one thing to be partaker of a man's
nature really, and another far different to be partaker of his goods and
benefits. And as for the receiving of Christ spiritually by faith, that may be
done without receiving any Sacrament at al; but Gelasius either speaks of
receiving Christ in the Sacrament, or else M. Abbot does fondly allege his
words against the real presence: wherefore his later paraphrase is a mere
trifle and a vain shift. See more of this man and matter in the question of
the real presence. Let us proceed.

ROBERT ABBOT.
De consecrat. did. 2. comperimus.
THE same Gelasius, when he understood that some receiving only the portion of
the sacred body of Christ, did forbear the cup of his sacred blood, did
forbid that superstition, and willed that either they should receive the
Sacrament whole, or be kept from the whole; because the dividing of one and the
same mystery, cannot come without great sacrilege. But now the Church of Rome
is so far off, from acknowledging the dividing of that mystery to be
sacrilege, as that she pretends to be moved with just causes and reasons,
Council. Trid. Sess. 5. Can. 2.
(such as Christ and his Apostles and the primitive Church, had never the wit
to consider off) to administer the Sacrament to the people only in one kind;
and pronounces them accursed that say she erreth in so doing.

WILLIAM BISHOP.
NOW we come to Gelasius the Pope indeed, and by his very phrase related by M.
Abbot, you may plainly perceive, that he believed firmly, the sacred body of
Christ and his precious blood, to be really present in the blessed Sacrament:
for thus he speaks. We have found, that certain men having received the
portion of the sacred body, do abstain from the Chalice of the sacred blood.
Neither do his words fit M. Abbots turn, for the peoples receiving under one
kind; for he speaks of Priests that do consecrate both together, who
therefore must receive both together that he may be partaker of the sacrifice
which he himself has offered. For as it is said in the Canon next before: De
consecrat. did. 2. relatum est.
Quale erit illud sacrificium, cui nec ipse sacrificans particeps esse
dignoscitur? what kind of sacrifice is that, whereof he that sacrifices does
not participate? Wherefore, it is by all means to be observed, that how often
the Priest does sacrifice the body and blood of our Lord JESUS Christ upon the
Altar; so often he exhibit himself a partaker of the body and blood of our
Lord Jesus Christ. These words (taken out of the Council of Toledo) go
immediately before those words which M. Abbot cites, and do evidently show,
that they are to be understood of the Priest only that consecrateth the
Sacrament; as also the very title would have told M. Abbot, if he had been
disposed to take them right: It is, that the Priest ought not to receive the
body of Christ without his blood: So that here is not a word against the
giving the blessed body of Christ alone to the people. But M. Abbot is forced
like an evil Apothecary, to take quid pro quo (as they say) one thing for
another, or else he should not be able to furnish his poor erring customers,
with any sort of pleasing drugges, to feed their corrupt taste and gross
humors.

He does by a parenthesis enterlace, (That Christ nor his Apostles, nor the
primitive Church, had ever the wit to consider any just cause of giving the
Sacrament in one kind to the people:) which is spoken too too like a
blasphemer, to touch our Savior Christ Jesus with lack of wit, skill, or due
consideration, who (as diverse ancient Doctors do testify) ministered the
blessed Sacrament himself, to two of his Disciples at Emaus, under one only
kind of bread. Luc. 24. verse. 30.
He took bread, and blessed and brake, and did reach it to them, and their
eyes were opened; and they knew him, and he vanished out of their sight: where
the circumstances, August. lib. 3. De consensu Euang. c. 25. and Epist. 59. ad
Paul. q. 8. Hier. in Epitaph. Paulae.
of blessing, breaking, and giving bread, (as he did at his last supper) and
the maruailous operation of it, do very probably prove it to have been the
blessed Sacrament; after which given in one kind, JESUS vanished out of their
sight. Isichius lib. 2. in cap. 9. Beda in Theophil. in e^m locum Lucae. Opus
imperfectu^ in Mat. homil. 17.
In the Apostles time also very usually the Sacrament was administered in one
kind: They were perseuering in the doctrine of the Apostles, and in
communication of the breaking of bread and prayers: where breaking of bread,
being joined with preaching, and prayer, does convince it to be spoken of the
blessed Sacrament. Again says S. Luke: In the first of Sabbath, when we were
assembled to break bread, Paul disputed with them etc. This assembly upon a
Sunday, furnished with S. Paul's sermon, must needs be to be made for the
receiving of the blessed Sacrament, as August. Epist. 86. and Beda in illum
locum.
S. Augustine and venerable Bede do testify. In all which places, following
the express letter of the Scripture, and the interpretation of many holy
Fathers, we have warrant for the administration of the Sacrament to the people
under one only kind: they then (I hope) vvanted not wit, to know a cause of
giving the Sacrament in one kind. Lastly, that in the primitive Church, the
Sacrament was received under one kind, is most manifest by the testimony of
Tertull. lib. 2. ad Vxor^m. Cyprian. sermon de lapsis Ambros. de obitu Satyri.
Tertullian, S. Cyprian, S. Ambrose, and many others: who declare how the
Christians in those times of persecution carried to the sick, and reserved in
their own houses, the blessed Sacrament, viz. under the form of bread, to
receive it when they were in danger of torments or death, for their more
comfort and strengthening against those assaults. Thus much by the way, of
administering the Sacrament under one kind unto the laity, out of the practice
of the primitive Church, the Apostles, and our Savior himself, in answer
unto M. Abbots parenthesis.

Now ere I take my leave of this holy and most reverend Pope Gelasius, I vvil
note briefly some branches of the Catholic faith, which he does formally
deliver, to counterpoise those friuoulous objections, which M. Abbot haleth in
obtorto collo (as the Latin phrase is) by the heels, out of his writings.
First, I have declared out of him already, Epist. ad Anast. Imperat. In Epist.
ad Episcopos Da^daniae.
how that Bishops have power and authority over Kings and Emperors in
Ecclesiastical causes, so far forth as to excommunicate them when urgent
cause so requires. He says further, That the Canons of the Church do
ordain, that from any part of the world, appeal may be made to the Sea of
Rome, and that from it no man is suffered to appeal. Again, That every Church
in the world does know, that the Sea of blessed Peter the Apostle, has right
and power to loose and unbind, that which is bound by the sentences of what
Bishop soever, as that See which has lawful authority to judge of al Churches.
Item, In decreto de libris sacris and Ecclesiasticis, tom. 2. Council. Distinct.
15. Sancta Romana, etc.
That the Sea Apostolic takes great heed, that it be not stained with any
touch of peruersity, or any kind of contagion. Finally, Gelasius assisted with
seauenty other B shops, does declare the books of Wisdom, Ecclesiasticus,
Tobias, and of the Machabees, to be Canonical Scripture; and the Epistles
Decretals of the ancient Bishops of Rome, to be of sacred and sound authority,
and to be received with reverence: al which the Protestants deny.

ROBERT ABBOT.
LEO Bishop of Rome speaking of the Martirs, says: Epistola 81.
That although the death of many Saints has been precious in the Lords
sight, yet the death of no innocent person, has been the propitiation of the
world: that the righteous received crowns but gave none; and that the
fortitude of the faithful, have grown examples of patience, not gifts of
righteousness: that their deaths as they were several persons, were several to
every of themselves, and that none of them by his death, paid the debt of any
other man; because it is only our Lord Jesus Christ, in whom al were crucified,
al dead, al buried, al raised again from the dead. But now the Church of Rome
has changed that language, and tells us, that there are superabounding
passions, and satisfactions of the Saints, Bellar. de Indulg. l. 1. c. 2. Rhem.
Annot. in col. 1. v. 24
wherein they have suffered more then is due for their own sins, which do
serve to supply the necessity and want of others: and that they do thereby pay
the debt of other men, that hereof is grown a treasure in the Church of Rome,
which is to be dispensed and disposed by the Pope; and that hence his
Indulgences and pardons have their ground.

WILLIAM BISHOP.
HERE are many words of a right reverend Father cited to small purpose; for
the Church of Rome has not yet changed one syllable of the same her old
language. She does maintain with S. Leo; That no man (how holy soever he
were) has by his death or otherwise, paid the ransom of any other man's
sins, or satisfied God for any one mortal sin, either of his own or of any
other man's: but that it is Christ alone, who with the price of his precious
blood, has fully satisfied his Fathers justice, for all and every such deadly
offense, and for the eternal punishment which was due to the same; and this is
all that S. Leo teaches. Nevertheless, we hold (and that with S. Leo) that
after the guilt of such sins is through Christ released us, yet are we on our
own parts to endure some temporal punishment for the same offenses, by
Christ's order and appointment: both to apply unto us the virtue of his own
sufferinges; as also to make us (that are members of his body) like unto him
our head. Whereupon the Apostle says; Romans 8. v. 17.
That we be the sons of God, and coheires with Christ: Si tamen compatimur vt
conglorificemur; If yet we suffer with him that we may be glorified with him:
of this matter see more in the question of satisfaction. This to be our
doctrine M. Abbot could not be ignorant, Page 118.
because it is word by word delivered, even by M. Perkins himself in that
place. Now that S. Leo was well acquainted with such satisfactions, as we on
our parts are bound to make, his learned works do yield plentiful testimony.
I will cite but a place or two: thus he answers unto Nicetus, who did write
unto him to know how he should deal with some Christians, who being taken
prisoners of the Infidels, had there among them polluted them selves with
eating of meats offered up to Idols. Epist. 77. c. 5.
Let them (says Leo) be purged with satisfaction of penance, which is not so
much to be weighed by length of time, as by compunction of the heart. And
again, speaking of certain Priests that were doing of penance, he says;
Wherefore such men as these who have fallen, Epist. 99. ad Rusti. cap. 2.
must relieve themselves in private: Ad promerendam misericordiam Dei, To
deserve the mercy of God: Vt illis satisfactio si fuerit digna, sit etiam
fructuosa; That the satisfaction may be fruitful to them, if it be worthy, that
is, if it be correspondent to their faults, alluding to that of S. John
Baptist; Math. 3.
Do fruits worthy of penance: so that by the judgment of S Leo, and the
ancient practice of his time, men that truly repented them of their sins,
whereby the guilt and eternal punishment was abolished, were afterward put
to penance, and to do worthy satisfaction; and that not only to satisfy the
congregation or other men, (as the Protestants fable, who have a greater care
to please men then God) but to be purged of their fault, and to deserve mercy
at Gods hand, as S. Leo does plainly teach.

Now that this temporal punishment which is due to every Christian, after the
eternal is through Christ forgiven him, may be released and pardoned by the
governors of the Chuch, and principally by the Pope as chief Pastor thereof
under Christ, and that through the superaboundant sufferings of some others, is
a matter so well known to Antiquity; that he must needs confess himself a
very puny therein, that thinks it to be a new devise of the late Church of
Rome. For that S. Gregory the great, who lived above a thousand years past, D.
Tho. and alij in 4. sent. did. 20.
instituted Stations to diverse Churches in Rome, and granted great Indulgences
and Pardons, unto all that with due preparation visited the same, is so well
known, that few learned Protestants do doubt of it, or dare deny it. S. Leo
himself who was S. Gregory's Ancestor more then an hundred years, in the
said Epistle to Nicetus, does plainly signify as much: for he leaves that
enjoined penance of the converted party, Epistola 77. numer. 6.
to the discreet moderation of the Bishop, to be shortened and released as he
shall see cause; which is properly a Pardon or Indulgence. Moreover, Pope
Siluester who was S. Leo his Predecessor by more then an hundred years,
Antiodor. l. 4. summae cap. de relaps.
at the request of S. Helen (Constantine the great his mother) consecrated a
Chapel in Rome, called Sancta Croce in Jerusalem: the which he did both
beautify and enrich with diverse Relikes of Saints, and granted large
Indulgences to all that should with devotion visit the same, as the ancient
Records of the same place do testify. And that the Pastors of other
Countries, yet more ancient then the former, were very well acquainted with this
language of this superaboundant passions and satisfactions of some Saints, let
that most learned Archbishop of Carthage in Afrike, and glorious Martyr S.
Cyprian bear witness. He instructing the Christian prisoners and most noble
Confessors (for whose triumphant sufferinges the use then was, to grant
Indulgence and release of penance unto other penitent persons that had fallen)
advises them to be very circumspect, Lib. 3. epist. 15. quaest. 11. apud
Pamelium.
before they granted the participation of their passions unto others, and to
weigh well the measure of their offenses, that sued unto them for such pardon,
and to commend unto their Bishop and Clergy such only, and that by their
proper names; Quorum poenitentiam satisfactioni proximam conspicitis, Whose
penance you see almost ended, and very near to due satisfaction: whence an
understanding man, may fully gather our whole doctrine of satisfaction and
indulgences. First, that due penance is to be enjoined by the Ghostly father,
after humble and hearty sorrow, and acknowledgment of the fault. Secondly, that
the same penance may be abridged and released by the Pastors of the Church.
Lastly, that such favor, indulgence and release, is made at the contemplation
of other men's superaboundant passions. And he adds further in the same book,
That without doubt, Epistola 18.
those penitents are much helped toward the release of their sins with God,
(and not only with the congregation) by that communication of the Martirs
sufferings to them. And to mount yet higher, this doctrine of Satisfaction and
Indulgence, is confirmed by that glorious Doctor of the Gentiles S. Paul; who
first adjudged the incestuous Corinthian to a most grievous penance for his
sins, afterward struck off some part thereof by a special pardon, saying: 2.
Cor. 2. verse. 10.
And whom ye have pardoned any thing, I also in the person of Christ. And else
where he declares plainly, that he himself had a part of those
superaboundant passions, which might be communicated to others, saying: 2. Tim.
2. verse. 10.
I suffer or sustain al things for the elect, that they also may obtain the
salvation which is in Christ IESV, with heavenly glory. And yet more, that
Colloss. 1. verse. 24.
he did fulfill in his flesh, those things that wanted of the passions of
Christ, for his body the Church. Seeing the blessed Apostle S. Paul does so
plainly teach, that his own sufferings were auailable to other men's
salvation, and that he fulfilled in his own flesh, that which was wanting
unto other Christians, must he not be a rank Infidel, that will not believe any
man's sufferinges saving Christ's, to be able to help another, or to supply the
want or necessity of others? And if it needed I could yet ascend to the old
ancient days of that blessed man Job, who had good store of those
superaboundant passions, as the holy Ghost speaking by his mouth does testify:
for he says; Job 6.
Would to God my sins by which I deserved wrath, were weighed, and the
calamity which I suffer, in a balance: this calamity of mine would even like
the sands of the Sea, appear the heavier and more weighty. Now good reader
judge, whether it be such strange news to hear of superaboundant passions and
satisfactions in the treasury of Gods Church: and whether it be unfit or
unlikely, that the Bishop of Rome chief governor thereof, should carry a
special hand in the disposition of the same. It is not then the Church of Rome
that has changed her ancient language: but I could heartily wish that M. Abbot
would learn once to change his usual language, and evil custom of
calumniating her, and of misconstruing the holy Fathers words, which by the
grace of God he may the sooner be persuaded to do, if he will weigh well, that
Apocal. 12. verse. 9. DIABOLOS calumniator.
the great Dragon and old Serpent cast out of heaven, is called Satan and the
Devil, for calumniating and misreporting of others: wherefore if he will not be
taken for one of the Devils disciples, he must needs give over this shameful
practice of falsifying the ancient Doctors sentences, and of cauilling against
that doctrine which they taught, under color of some of their dark speeches.

ROBERT ABBOT.
THE same Leo did not take upon him to call general Councels, but when occasion
of the heresy of Eutiches so required, Leo Epist. 9.23.24.31.42 47.48.49.
Made request to the Emperor Theodosius, that he would command a Council, and
after entreated, that he would appoint the same in some place of Italy; which
notwithstanding the Emperor would not, but commanded it to be holden at
Ephesus: and Martianus after that at Chalcedon. And that when Leo again would
have had it deferred to a better opportunity: As in deed the affairs of the
Church, Socrat. lib. 5. hist. in proem.
after that the Emperors were Christians seemed to depend upon their will, and
at their liking the greatest Councels were assembled, as Socrates witnesses;
Secundum sanctionem Imperialem, per Imperialem sanctionem, Synod. 6. Constant.
art. 1. 4. 6.
as the sixth Council in Trullo often repeateth: yea, and so as the Emperor at
his pleasure, was President of the Council, as in that sixth Synod was
Constantius the fourth. But now the calling, and presidency, and confirmation
of Councels, is defended to belong wholly to the Pope: as for Christian Emperors
and Princes, they have nothing to do, but to send when he calls, and to
receive what he confirms. The same Leo professed Leo Epist. 16. and 17.
his obedience to the Emperors appointment and will, to Theodosius and
Martianus. And Agatho the Bishop of Rome, Agath. Epist. ad Constable. Syno. 6. ar.
4.
his due obedience to Constantius the fourth: and what your Majesty's clemency
has commanded (says he) our service has obediently performed; the Emperor
being honored according to the ancient doctrine of the Church, Tertull. ad
scop. and Apolog. cap. 30.
as next to God, and inferior to God only. But since that time, the Romish
doctrine is, that Decr. Greg. de maiorit. and obed c. solite.
look how much the Moon is less then the Sun, so much is the Emperor
inferior to the Pope: and therefore they have written him Catol. test. ver.
the Popes man, and made him to hold his stiroppe, and appoint him to hold the
basin to him, and to do sundry other offices of service. And to make al sure,
the Pope has made him to swear fidelity and allegiance to him: Clement. de
appellat. cap. Pastoralis.
There is no doubt (says the Pope) but we have superiority over the Empire;
who doubts but that Priests are the Fathers and Masters of Kings and
Princes? Distinct. 95. quis dubitet. Distinct. 96. Si Imperator.
Is it not miserable madness, for the children to go about to subject their
fathers, or scholars their masters? and therefore Christian Emperors must
subject their executions to the Ecclesiastical Prelate, and not prefer them.

WILLIAM BISHOP.
LET it first be considered, what blunt and weak tools the poor Protestants
are forced to use, for want of better weapons to vvound simple souls withal.
This (and it please you) is one of their mightiest proofs for the Princes
supremacy: the Emperors some times called general Councels: ergo, they were
supreme governors in causes Ecclesiastical: a doubty argument, as you may
perceive by the like. A Lord calls for his tenants being carpenters to build
him a house; ergo, that Lord is the chiefest carpenter in the country. If that
Lord be not taken for supreme judge in the carpenters occupation, though he had
full power to assemble the carpenters together; why shall the Emperor be
esteemed chief governor in Ecclesiastical causes, for that he has authority
to call Ecclesiastical persons together? Again, al men know, that
Ecclesiastical persons are in all temporal causes subject unto temporal Princes,
who therefore may command them to meet together, to compose contentions risen
about spiritual causes, whereby the temporal peace of his country is also much
hindered; and this may be well done, without any pretense unto soueraignity over
them in spiritual matters: so that if it were granted, that the Emperor had
authority to call general Councels, yet it would not follow thereof, that he
were supreme head in Ecclesiastical causes; much less can he be taken for
supreme governor, because the Popes gave unto the Emperors, the common and
usual words of courtesy, as M. Abbot afterward very childishly reasons.

But let us come to the groundwork of the question: I affirm then, that
though Emperor or King, for the temporal command he has over his spiritual
subjects, may call them together when there is just cause; yet the sovereign
summoning of al Bishops and Ecclesiastical persons to a general Council, does
not properly or principally belong to the Emperors, but unto the chief
Pastor among them: for very reason teaches every judicious man, and by
induction through al societies it is most manifest, that the chiefest member of
any corporation or assotiation, has by instinct of nature, that privilege of
calling together the rest of that company and corporation; wherefore the lay
Magistrate, that is no proper member of the Ecclesiastical congregation, cannot
in natural reason and equity, have that power of assembling the Clergy
together. Besides, no Christian Emperor had ever yet so much as temporal
dominion over al Christendom: those Christians then that were not his subjects
at al, could not be called together by his authority. That their Empire when
it was at the largest, was not so large as the bounds and limits of Christian
religion, S. Leo himself is witness in these words: Sermon. 1. in Natiuit.
SS. Apost. Petri, and Pauli.
Rome being made head of the world by the Chair of S. Peter, does rule over
more Countries by heavenly religion, then by earthly dominion. Again, since
the Emperors became Christian, not one hundred years together scarce, did one
Emperor command over all the Empire, but lightly one governed in the East,
another over the West: I would then gladly know, to whether of them it belonged
to call general Councels; or whether the Church of God must be destitute of such
Councels, until that matter were agreed upon? Further, the calling of national
and prouincial Councels, does (according unto S. Augustine and Antiquity, Aug.
Ep. 217. Call. lib. 4. Instit. c. 7. n. 8.
allowed therein by M. Calvin, and the great hundred of Centur. 4. c. 7. col.
534.
Magdeburge) appertain unto the Primates and Metrapolitans of the same nation
and province: therefore by the like proportion, it does not appertain to the
Emperors, but unto the chief Patriarch of the Church, to call a general Council.
That S. Leo, (on whose authority M. Abbot here does stand) took S. Peter
first, and after him the Bishops of Rome to be such, I will briefly prove; thus
he vvriteth: Out of the whole world one Peter is chosen, Sermon. tert. de
Assumptione sua.
to have chief charge of the vocation of the Gentiles, and is placed over the
other Apostles, and all the Fathers of the Church; so that albeit there be among
the people of God, many Priests and many Pastors, yet does Peter peculiarly
govern them over whom Christ does principally reign: so that al temporal
Princes, who vvil not deny Christ to reign over them, must by S. Leos verdict,
acknowledge themselves subject in spiritual cases, to S. Peter and his
successors. The same he does confirm at large, in an Epistle to the Bishops
of the province of Vienna, where he concludes in these words: To which S.
Peter, whosoever does deny the primacy, Epistola 87.
he cannot in any sort diminish his dignity, but puffed up with the spirit of
pride, he does drown himself in the gulf of hell. Now least any man should
take exceptions against S. Peter's successors the Bishops of Rome, though he
would grant the supremacy unto S. Peter, I add; that S. Leo in that second
place, does rather speak of his own authority under the name of S. Peter,
(impugned then by Hilarious Bishop of Vienna) then of S. Peter's own time. Yet
for more clear demonstration of it, Sermon. 2. de anniuersario. Assumptionis
suae.
take these his words: The disposition and order of truth does continue, and
blessed Peter perseuering in the fortitude of a rock, has not forsaken the
government of the Church, which he undertook; Peter (I say) does to this day
hold on and continue still, and lives in his successors: which he confirms
in an hundredth places of his Epistles, by me for breuities sake omitted,
contenting my self with that which he vvriteth in one letter unto Anastasius
Bishop of the Thessalonians; to whom you shall see what authority he gives.
Epist. 82. ad Anastasium.
Like as (says he) my predecessors have given to your predecessors; even so
do I following their example, delegate unto your charity, the room or charge
of my government: that you imitating our mildness, may help us in the care
which we owe unto al Churches, by the institution of God principally; and that
you may in a sort represent the presence of our visitation, unto provinces
far distant from the Apostolical See (of Rome.) For by reason of your
nearenesse to them, you may more readily see, what matters and in what manner,
either you your self may by your diligence compose, or else reserve unto our
judgment: where going on, according to the Canons of the holy Fathers, made
by the spirit of God (to use his own words) he gives to that Bishop of
Thessalonia, dignity and authority over many Metrapolitanes of diverse
provinces, That none be chosen without his priuity, but al confirmed by his
authority. Canon. 6.
Item, That if among the Prelates, there happen to be question of greater
affairs (which God forbid) that cannot be ended by the prouincial Synod,
the Metrapolitan shall then provide, to instruct your brotherhood of the state
of the whole business; and if the parties being present, it cannot be appeased
by your judgment, let it whatsoever it be, be referred to our knowledge:
Canon. 7.
where he gives him Authority to call Bishops before him, and a Council also
if any greater cause arise; and diverse such other plain and clear marks of
superiority, that even M. Abbots badde eyes may easily serve him to discern
them. Seeing then S. Leo thought himself and his predecessors, to have full
authority (and that by the holy Canons, made by divine inspiration) to delegate
over the Churches of the East (where was most doubt of his authority) such
power unto others: Can it be doubted, but that he was most certainly
persuaded, that the Bishop of Rome has and always had supreme command, in
Ecclesiastical causes all the world over? And that you may see that S. Leo was
not only of that opinion, but that the best and most learned of the East Church
of that time, were also as fully persuaded of the Church of Romes authority
over all the world, I will adjoine hereunto the sentence of Theodoretus, one of
the soundest Catholics, and one of the most learned and famous authors of
those days. He being Bishop of Cyrus in Asia, does write unto Renatus a Priest
of Rome, thus: Theodoret. Epistola 2.
The Heretics have spoiled me of my Priestly function and seat, they have
cast me out of the cities, having no respect unto my gray hairs, nor regard
of my time spent in religion: wherefore I pray you, that you will persuade the
most holy Archbishop Leo, that he will use his Apostolic authority, and command
us to come to your Council; for that holy See, does hold the stern of
government over all the Churches in the world. Another Epistle this holy Father
did write unto Leo himself, wherein he says: I do expect the sentence of
your Apostolic See, and do humbly beseech your Holiness, to succor me
appealing to your just judgment, etc. And that you may yet further perceive,
that S. Leo his sentence was of force to restore him, being a Bishop in Asia,
to his former dignity and seat, these few words out of the Council of
Chalcedon will sufficiently prove: thus speaks the Council. Action 1.
Let the most reverend Bishop Theodoret enter in, that he may be partner of the
Council, because the most holy Archbishop Leo, has restored him to his
Bishopric.

Now I come to answer M. Abbots goodly proofs, and wise glosses to the
contrary: S. Leo (says he) would not take upon him to call general Councels.
That is false, for he did call a general Council in the West, witness these his
words unto Tuilius the Bishop of Asturicensis. Epistola 91. numer. 17.
I have sent letters to our brethren and fellow Bishops of Carthage in Afrike,
Tarragone, in Spain, Portugal, and France; Eisque concilium Synodi generalis
indiximus, And have summoned them to meet at a general Council. And that could
not escape S. Leo his knowledge (who was most skilful in all Antiquity) which
by tradition descended unto one of his successors Pelagius the second, who was
S. Gregory the great his predecessor, to wit: Epistola 1 ad Orientales.
that the authority of calling general Councels, was through the privilege of
S. Peter, given unto the Sea Apostolic. But he made request (says M. Abbot)
unto Theodosius first, and after unto Martianus the Emperors, that they would
command a general Council to be holden in Italy, which they would not do, but
chose rather another place. Be it so, for sometimes such mighty Monarkes take
more state upon them, then Christian duty does permit. And as for Theodosius
the younger, though he were a good Emperor at the first, yet afterward it is
evident that he assisted the Heretic Eutiches and his Patron Dioscorus too
far, in that wicked assembly at Ephesus, See Actionem primam Council. Chalced.
and Liberatus. cap. 12.
the place by him assigned for that general Council. The reason that moved S.
Leo to request those Emperors to call a Council, was not for that he doubted of
his own authority therein; but for diverse other good respects. First, because
(as I before signified) the Bishops to be assembled, were for the most part
the Emperors subjects in temporal affairs, and therefore were not without
his priuity, to be called so far from their residences. And for this cause,
the Kings of every country being advertised by the Popes Holiness, of a
general Council, do to this day (as it appeared in the last general Council of
Trent) summon the Bishops of their Realms to the said general Council, and
command them to make choice of some to send thither; which does nothing
derogate to the Popes general summoning. Besides, the Heretics of those times
would not obey the Pope, nor their lawful Pastors command, no more then these
of our time: wherefore the Emperors power which they dreadded, and stood in
more awe off, was to be joined with the Popes authority; wherefore he had good
cause to request it.

Yet that the understanding reader may perceive, how S. Leo even then did
foresee, that some inconvenience might hap to follow, of his condescending
so far unto the Emperors pleasure, about the place and time of that Council;
he as it were to prevent it, does yield his consent in such sort, that no great
advantage can be taken of it: Epist. 41. ad Martian.
thus he vvriteth to the Emperor Martian. I required indeed of your most
gracious clemency, that the Synod which you thought necessary to be assembled,
as we also required, for the restoring of unity in the East Church, might be
for a time deferred; that the minds of men being more settled, those Bishops
which for fear of enemies are stayed at home, might also meet: but for that
you do zealously prefer Gods cause before the affairs of men, and are
wisely, and Godly persuaded, that it will further the wealth of your Empire, to
have the Priests of God in unity, and the Gospel preached without dissension;
Ego etiam vestris dispositionibus non renitor, I do not withstand or strive
against this your ordinance. Here you may see, that he did not yield upon
obedience, unto the Emperors order, but moved upon good consideration would
not contend against it: his very words yet giving, that he might have
withstoode him, if he had thought it more expedient for the common good.
Again, in his letters to the same Council of Chalcedon he puts in a caveat,
by which they might understand, that this his condescending to the Emperor,
should not be taken for a prejudice against the authority of the Sea of Rome,
for calling of Councels: these be his words. Epistola 45. ad Synod. Chalced.
I had wished indeed (most dearly beloved) that all the Priests of God did
agree in one profession of the Catholic faith, etc. but because many things
are done, of which we often repent, etc. the religious advise of our most
gracious Emperor is to be embraced, moving your holy brotherhood to assemble
your selves together, for the overthrowing of Satan's sleights, and for the
restoring of unity in the Church: (Beatissimi Apostoli Petri sedis jure atque
honor seruato; the right and honor of the Sea of the most blessed Apostle
Peter being preserved) inuiting us also by his letters to assist in person at
this reverend Council, which neither the necessity of the time, nor any custom
could permit; howbeit in our brethren Paschasius and Lucentius Bishops,
Bonifacius and Basilius Priests, your brotherhood has me President in your
Synod, etc. these words of S. Leo overthrow at once, al M. Abbots vveake
forces for the Emperors supremacy. First he declares, that he liked of the
Emperors (not commandment but) counsel and advise, of calling of a Council;
marry so to, that it be not taken to derogate aught from the right and honor of
the Sea of Rome, without whose sentence (according to the ancient Canons) no
Council could be celebrated: then that the Emperor had no power to command him
to come to that Council: and lastly, that he in his Legates (and not the
Emperor) was President in that general Council.

But to stay yet a while in this matter of calling the Council, for further
assurance that the Popes letters and authority, did principally move al
Catholic Bishops to meet in general Councels, take first their own
declaration, thereof in formal terms: thus spoke the Fathers assembled in the
second general Council, which was the first holden at Constantinople, in their
letters to Pope Damasus. Theodoret. hist. l. 5. c. 9.
By the commandment of letters sent the last year, by your reverence, unto
the most royal Emperor Theodosius, we undertook the journey, even to
Constantinople. And in the Council of Chalcedon, the Bishops of Maesia vvriting
unto the Emperor Leo, do say; That many holy Bishops met together in the
City of Chalcedon, Habetur inter Epistolas pertine^tes ad Council. Chal.
Per jussionem Leonis Romani Pontificis, qui vere caput est Episcoporum; By the
commandment of Leo Bishop of Rome, who is truly the head of Bishops. Join
hereto the testification of the Emperor Martianus himself, being one of M.
Abbots own witnesses: thus writes that Godly Emperor. In Epist. eius
praefixa Council. Chalced. ad Leon. Po^t.
Being called by the providence of God to the Empire, etc. we for the venerable
Catholic religion of the Christian faith, etc. have thought good in the
beginning thereof, to speak by our letters to your Holiness (who hold the
principality in the Bishoply function of the same Godly faith,) requesting your
Holiness, to remember in your prayers the good estate of our Empire: and that
also for the extirpation of al wicked error, we may fully purpose to restore
unity and concord among al Catholic Bishops, in celebrating of a Council, (Te
authore) by your authority, or you being the Author thereof. What can be more
manifest, then that this most Godly Emperor did agnize and confess, the
principal authority of calling general Councels, to appertain unto the Bishop
of Rome? whom he professed also, to be the supreme Pastor of the universal
Church: to whom afterward he sent the same Council when it was ended, to have
his confirmation of it, as you shall hear anon. Socrat. lib. 2. cap. 13.
Zoz^m. l. 3. cap. 9. Tripart. l. 4. cap. 9. Niceph. l. 9. cap. 5.
Al which is exceedingly fortified by an ancient Canon of the Church, urged by
Pope Julius (who lived an hundred years before S. Leo) and is recorded by all
the approved Ecclesi^stical Historiographers, for a most ancient and inviolable
rule in Christian religion, to wit: that no general Council be holden, Praeter
sententiam Romani Pontificis; besides or without the consent and sentence of
the Bishop of Rome: thus far about the authority of calling general Councels.

Now to that which follows in M. Abbot, Who was President in those general
Councels. M. Abbot affirms the Emperor to have the Presidency thereof, and
for proof alleges only the example of Constantius the fourth: Who (says he)
was President of the sixth Synod holden in Trullo. To which I answer, that the
penurious man shows himself very naked and needy of some proofs, that is
compelled to ouer-leape five of the first general Councels, and to fall to the
year 675. after Christ, before he can find out one Emperor that did obtain
the name of President in a Council. To which also I pick an answer, out of
the Epistle of the Chalcedon Council (which was more then two hundred years
ancienter then the other) unto Pope Leo: thus it is there. Quibus tu quidem vt
caput praeeras, in his qui tuum tenebant ordinem: Imperatores vero decentissimi
ad ornandum praesidebant, etc. Over which Bishops there assembled thou (o Leo)
wast (by them that held thy rank) President, as the head is to the rest of the
members, etc. but the Emperors were Presidents most comely, to adorn that
assembly. Where you see two kind of Presidents in the Council: the Pope in his
Legates, as the head is over the members; the Emperor to honor and grace the
Assembly: And therefore to the Popes Legates it did appertain principally, to
propose, argue, determine, and define the questions there debated and
discussed; to which also they did set their hands in the first place; To the
Emperor it did belong, to see due order kept in the Council, where were many
vvily and unruly Heretics, that al things might be examined quietly, and
without perturbation or tumult determined: who also in the end subscribed after
all the Bishops and their Substitutes, consentiens, consenting, embracing, and
approving the same; not determining or defining, as may be seen in the 18.
Action of the said sixth general Council, cited by M. Abbot.

To make this distinction more perspicuous and certain, let us hear some
Emperors of those days, declare themselves what they did at those general
Councels. Theodosius the younger, sent (for his Legate) unto the third general
council holden at Ephesus, the Earl Candidianus: what? to be President there
in his place? nothing less, no not so much as to entermeddle in any
Ecclesiastical matters, but only ad Synodi defensionem, to defend the Council.
Ex eius Epist. ad Synod. Ephesians. In oratione sua ad Synodum.
The Emperor Martianus was present in his own person, at the fourth Council
kept at Chalcedon, where he shows what is the proper office of a good
Emperor: Our endeavor must be (says he) to apply the people to the one right
Church, being first persuaded the true and holy doctrine; And therefore let
your reuerences, expound and declare the true and Catholic faith, according to
the doctrine of the Fathers, in all unity and concord, etc. Valentinian the
elder, being requested to be present at a Council holden between the
Catholics and the Arrians. answered: Hist. 1. Tripart. lib. 7. cap. 12.
That it was not lawful for him being but a lay person, to examine
Ecclesiastical matters; but the Priests to whom they did belong, might meet
together among themselves when they pleased, and determine of them. Of
Constantine the great I shall speak more at large presently. This therefore may
suffice, to satisfy any indifferent reader, how the first Christian Emperors
were Presidents at Councels: that is (as may be gathered out of their own
words) first to honor that assembly with their presence; then to see that al
things there be peacibly and orderly handled; thirdly, to learn the true
Catholic faith, by the definitions of those learned Bishops there assembled;
fourthly, to recommend the same to al their faithful subjects; and lastly to
defend it against al obstinate Heretics. Al which put together, does not come
near any probable proof, that they are supreme governors in Ecclesiastical
matters, but rather that they are in them to be governed: For they neither
argue, determine, nor define them; but only do receive, approve, and defend
them, being before decided and defined by the Fathers assembled in the Council,
by the Bishop of Rome. Indeed Constantius an Arrian Emperor, was persuaded
by the Arrians, to take upon him the supreme judgment in Ecclesiastical
causes; but he was very sharply reprehended therefore, by that most valiant
champion of Christ's Church, Athanasius Patriarch of Alexandria: If (says he)
the judgment of these matters belong to Bishops, In Epist. ad Solitar. vitam
agentes.
what has the Emperor to entermeddle with them? where he relates what that
blessed Father Hosius (who was Pope Siluesters chief Legate in the first
Council of Nice) spoke of that usurpation of Constantius: Who (says he) seeing
the Emperor, Ibidem prope finem.
in decreeing to make himself Prince of the Bishops, and President over their
Ecclesiastical judgments, may not worthily affirm him to be that abomination
of desolation, which is foretold of Daniel? In a word then, the Protestants
treading in the steps of the condemned Arrians, would have the lay Magistrates
such Preside^ts of Councels, as have supreme authority over the Bishops
judgments: which we Roman Catholics, with the consent of al ancient and
holy, both Bishops and Emperors, do think to be very preposterous,
incommodious, and intolerable.

Now to that trash, which M. Abbot chops in by the way, by broken and half
sentences: the same Leo (says he) professes his obedience to the Emperors
appointment and will, to Theodosius and Martianus; for proof he quoteth Leo:
where we may gather, that a false merchants fingers are to be looked unto. For
in the first place there is express signification of S. Leo, Epist. 16. and 17.
not fulfilling the Emperor Theodosius request, which was to have him present
at the second Council of Ephesus; and there was no reason for it: these be his
own words. Albeit no reason does permit me, Epistola Leon. 16.
t^ meet at the Episcopal Council appointed by your piety, because I have no
president for it, by the example of any of my predecessors, and the necessity
of the time will not suffer me to leave the city, etc. yet so far forth as
our Lord will vouchsafe to help, I have applied my endeavor, that the decree
of your clemency may in some sort be obeyed, by sending hence some of my
brethren, who shall supply my place, etc. Do you see what profession of
obedience S. Leo made to the Emperor Theodosius, whom he tells plainly,
that no reason vvil permit him to obey his appointment and vvil? Is not this
trow you honest dealing? deserves not this man to be well credited, when he
cites the Fathers, when as he blusheth not to allege them, and to quote the
place distinctly, which if you will but turn unto, you shall find him to be a
man that has a seared conscience, and cares not what he says, so he may
deceive his simple reader? Now to the second place: there indeed S. Leo has,
that the Emperors piety, and most religious will, Epistola 57.
is to be obeyed by all means; but he does not make profession of his own
obedience to the Emperor, but speaks indefinitely, obediendum est: and that
not to his appointment and will, as M. Abbot fableth; but unto his Godly and
most religious will, that is, when he commands or desires any thing
according unto the will of God. Now if you will but look into the circumstances
of this obedience, you shall yet further discover the deceit of M. Abbot; for
the Emperor Martianus did write unto Pope Leo, that he would confirm the
Council of Chalcedon with his own sentence, which was before subsigned by his
Legates present thereat, and that in the first place: the Emperor being
persuaded, (as it is set down in the same Epistle) that the Council should
have greater force, to suppress al Heretics, if it might be taught throughout
al Churches, that the definition there of did please the Sea Apostolic. Here
you may see, that the Emperor demanded no obedience of S. Leo, but showed
himself to have so great opinion of his judgment and authority, that it would
greatly countenance, and commend that general Council, which was by all the
Bishops, and the Emperor himself before subsigned. A reasonable man can
desire no more, to prove S. Leo his supremacy in Ecclesiastical causes, then
the testimony of this godly Emperor Martianus. Tom. 1. Council. in Prolog.
Council. Chal. epist. 1. Martian. ad Leo.
For first he acknowledges him to hold the principality among al Bishops.
Secondly, he acknowledges him to be the author of calling general Councels:
these two points have been before rehearsed. Thirdly he promises S. Leo, to
assemble the Bishops of the East, that they might declare those things that be
agreeable unto the Catholic faith, and Christian religion, even as your
Holiness has according unto the Ecclesiastical Canons defined: Ibid. epist. 2.
Sicut sanctitas tua secundum Ecclesiastic as regulas definiuit. And lastly al
things being so defined, he does send unto S. Leo to confirm the general
Council. Does not this acknowledgement of the Emperor (that the Pope is the
author of calling general Councels, that he is to direct and instruct them
assembled, what they are to define, and lastly to confirm and ratify that
which is defined) evidently prove, that the supreme managing and authorizing of
the highest Ecclesiastical affairs, do belong unto the Bishop of Rome?

Now to return to M. Abbot; he shows the like words of Pope Agatho his due
obedience to Constantius the fourth. I find no such words in that place
quoted by him: true it is, that I have not his whole letter, but the abridgment
of it as is stands in the Sum of the Councels; Epist Agath. ad Constant. in
Synod. 6. art. 4.
where he thus begins. That we may briefly intimate to your piety, what the
vigor of our Apostolic faith does contain, which we have received by
tradition from the Apostles, Apostolic Bishops, and holy Councels, by which
the foundations of the Catholic Church of Christ, are fastened and fortified,
etc. Out of which words we may gather, that Pope Agatho was ready to satisfy
the Emperors request, in certifying and instructing him, what was the true
Apostolic faith, about the questions then handled. But forsooth, because he
did (belike) use these courteous words of obedience, M. A^bot that lies at
the catch and wants better stuff, is constrained to lay hold on them: by which
manner of arguing he might prove, every Pope to profess due obedience to every
private servant of God, because his ordinary style is; Seruus seruorum Dei, The
servant of Gods servants. Now if one had so little wit, as hence to argue and
gather, that the Pope professed obedience, or were inferior to al other
servants of God, (for if he be their servant he is bound to obey them:) would
not all the world wonder at his folly? And yet this admirable combatant and
champion of the host of Ismael, is feign to fly to the like miserable shifts,
and to employ perforce, words that are uttered of custom and courtesy in all
Countries, for sound proofs. If al Italians and French men, that vvil say they
are your servants; Seruitore di vostre Signoria: Monsieur je suis vostre
treshumble seruiteur; should be taken short at his word, and thereby be pressed
to your obedience and service, you might soon become a great Signiour over
many stately servants, that would do what they list. But that you may see,
how M. Abbot can scarsly borrow one weapon out of the true armory of Antiquiry,
which vvil not serve to wound himself, I will here acquaint you, with some
words out of the very same Epistle, of Pope Agatho to the Emperor Constantius
the fourth; which do demonstrate the Church of Rome never to fail in matter
of faith.

Did you mark before in those few words, how he esteemed Apostolic
tradition, and the definitions of Councels, and of the Sea Apostolic, to be
the firm foundation of the Church of Christ; which alone is sufficient to
batter and beat flat to the earth, that chief fortress of the Protestants,
of the al-sufficiency of the written word: then having delivered the true
faith of the blessed Trinity, he annexeth these words. This is the Apostolical
and Euangelical Tradition, which the Apostolic Church of God (the Mother of
your most happy Empire) does hold: this is the pure confession of piety: this
is the rule of the true faith, holden as well in prosperity as in adversity by
the Apostolic Church of Christ; which is proved by Gods grace never to have
straied from the path of Apostolical Tradition, nor ever was corrupted with
Heretical novelties, because it was said to Peter: I have prayed for thee that
thy faith fail not; and thou being converted, confirm thy brethren. Here our
Lord promised, that the faith of Peter should not fail, and willed him to
confirm his brethren: which the Bishops my predecessors, as is well known to
al men, have always done confidently; and I though much inferior to them, yet
for the person that by Gods goodness I sustain, do desire to follow them at
the heels: this out of Pope Agatho by the way, in favor of our cause, because
M. Abbot would have gladly begged an alms of him, to relieve his miserable
want.

Now that which follows in him out of Tertullian: That the Emperor is
honored according to the ancient doctrine of the Church, as next unto God, and
inferior unto God only. If the good man would have bethought himself a
little, what kind of men the Emperors were in Tertullians time, and before;
he would not (I think) for very shame, have once offered to prove those
Emperors supreme authority in causes Ecclesiastical: for they were al of them
Heathen Idolaters, and professed enemies to the Christian religion. If then
they were next under God supreme governors of Ecclesiastical causes, it would
follow thereof (see the good effect of M. Abbots argument) that the Christian
religion was to be forsaken of al men, and Idolatry to have been embraced:
for that was these Emperors supreme judgment in spiritual matters. What meant
M. Abbots (a Gods name) to persuade Christians, that Heathen and Idolatrous
Emperors (such as those were in Tertullians time) were to be honored and
followed in matter of religion, before Bishops and Archbishops, and next unto
God? If those be Tertullians words, every man can apply them better then M.
Abbot does, to wit: that Emperors in temporal causes, and in the civil
government of the common weal, are under no man, but next unto God; but in
Ecclesiastical causes those Emperors had nothing at al to do.

Now to those words which he proposes as very odious: That how much the Moon
is less then the Sun, so much is the Emperor inferior to the Pope. They be
not precisely the words of the Canon, but these: That how much difference
there is between the Sun and the Moon, so much is there between Bishops
and Kings. The sense he does not much alter, but only sets it out more
disdainfully; we allow of the sense being rightly taken, to wit, that the
authority of Bishops, is properly to be compared to the brightness of the
Sun, because it is wholly conversant in spiritual causes, which depend upon
the brightness and light of faith, and do formally appertain to the heavenly
Kingdom of the Sun Christ Jesus: Now who sees not, that the Emperors power
being properly to govern the temporal state, by the light of natural reason
(which is very dim and obscure, if it be conferred unto the light of grace)
may aptly be resembled to the Moon light; the light of heavenly affairs, as
far passing in clearenesse the light of vvorldly businesses, as does the
brightness of the Sun at noone days, pass the Moone-shine at midnight?
Now if we would search higher toward the most pure Antiquity, we shall find
far greater comparisons between the spiritual power of Bishops, and the
temporal of Emperors: I vvil for a taste, cite only the sentences of two most
authentike Doctors. S. Ambrose an ancient and most grave Father, says:
Brethren, the honor and sublimity of a Bishop, Ambros. initio sui Pastor.
citatur did. 96. cap. Si duo. Greg. Oration. ad populum perturb.
cannot be equalled with any comparison. The Majesty of Kings, and Diademes of
Princes, if they be compared to it, are far more inferior, then if the
metal of lead should be compered with gold. And S. Gregory Nazianzene makes
no less difference between them two, then there is between the soul and the
body, the spiritual power of Bishops, as much in his judgment, excelling that
of Princes, as the soul in dignity does surmount the body: so that the Popes
comparison (alleged by M. Abbot) is very temperate, in respect of these of the
ancient Fathers, which notwithstanding were made upon great judgment.

The lies and toies that ensue in M. Abbots text, are not worth the answering.
First, Catal. Testiu^.
he that reports the Emperor to be the Popes man, is an heretical and lying
companion; and therefore no sufficient witness. Secondly, if any Emperor or
King, out of his own profound humility, or abundance of zeal toward his
spiritual Pastor, would of himself do any such lowly service, as to hold the
basin, etc. that is not to be imputed to him that suffers it against his will,
as a mark of pride. To say that any Emperor or King, contrary to his will was
enforced to do it, is a very fitten, as every child may perceive: for who
either would or could force so mighty a Monarke, to so base a service, unless
he himself desired it? As for that oath of fidelity, which the Emperor
makes to the Popes Holiness, I find it not either in the 69. or 96.
Distinction, but in the 63 and it is only: that the Emperor shall not do any
harm, unto the Popes temporal state in Italy; and if he chance to come to
Rome, that be then shall carry to him and the Church of Rome, such respect as is
meet. I would gladly be informed what allegiance may be picked out of this,
and whether it be not expedient, (the Emperor being to be confirmed by the
Pope) that he should take such an oath of him for his own safety. The next
text cited out of the Clementine, De appellatione, is a mere fiction: Can.
Pastor.
for there is no such chapter nor matter. That Priests be spiritual Fathers and
Masters, in matters of religion, to Kings and Princes, who can doubt, unless
they would have Kings, neither baptized nor instructed in Christian religion
by Priests? And let the Protestants paint it out al they can, a monstrous thing
it must needs appear unto al men of upright judgment, and the Christian
world to be there turned topsy and turuy, where children shall take upon them to
rule their fathers, and scholars to teach their masters. Thus much in answer
unto all that is objected out of S. Leo: to which I will join that, which M.
Abbot in another place pleads for the same matter, out of the example of
Constantine the great; because it does principally appertain thereunto.

I having in my Epistle to his Majesty said, that he being at the Council of
Nice, would not sit down before the Bishops beckned to him so to do; and that
he there did profess, that it did not belong to him to judge of Bishops, but
was rather to be judged of them: M. Abbot answers (clean contrary to the
Emperors open confession) that he was judge over the same Bishops. Page 191.
Whether will you believe sooner, either the Emperor speaking for himself, or
M. Abbot speaking he knows not what of his secret thoughts and intentions?
specially when that which I affirmed of the Emperor has plain testimony out
of the best approved Authors, nearest to that time; and M. Abbots proofs to
the contrary do consist merely upon his own surmises and collections. Ruffi.
lib. 1. hist. cap. 2. Socrat. lib. 1. hist. cap. 5.
Ruffinus and Socrates I then cited, who in express terms delivered so much
as I said: to whom I add for further confirmation, first the irrefragable
record of the most famous Doctors, that were present at the same Council.
Hosius Bishop of Corduba in Spain, the Popes principal Legate in that Council
of Nice, affirms as is before rehearsed; that one may worthily call that
Emperor the abomination of desolation, foretold by Daniel, who presumes to
make himself Prince of Bishops, and President over Ecclesiastical causes:
which he would not have done, if he had been persuaded, that the Emperor
Constantine (whom he took to be a most virtuous Prince) had been judge over
Bishops, and their spiritual causes in that very Council, where he was there
also present. Secondly, Athanasius who was a principal agent in the same
Council, avouches: that it cannot be called a Synod and Council, Apolog. 2.
Where not a Bishop, but some temporal Magistrate is President. He then took
not Constantine for President of the Nicene Council, which he esteemed so
highly off, and was indeed the pattern of al other Councels. Thirdly, S.
Ambrose who lived shortly after, in formal terms does say: that Constantine
the great, was not judge in the Council of Nice, but left the judgment free to
Bishops. And writing unto the Emperor Valentinian, adds: When have you heard
most gracious Emperor, Ambros. l. 5. Epist. 32.
that lay men did judge over Bishops in cases of faith? surely if your Majesty
please to pervse the course of holy Scriptures, or of former times, you shall
find none that deny but in matters of faith, in matters I say of faith, Bishops
were wont to judge over Emperors, not Emperors over Bishops. S. Gregory the
great in express words witnesses, L. 4. epist. 31.
That the Emperor Constantine durst not judge Bishops though they themselves
wished and desired it. By the record therefore, of these most ancient, holy,
and learned Prelates, neither Constantine the great, nor any other Catholic
Emperor, was or could be judge in Ecclesiastical affairs over Bishops:
whence it follows most perspicuously, that Constantines own words
(confessing that it did not belong to him to judge Bishops and their causes)
are to be taken plainly as they signify, and were not spoken by him (as M.
Abbot speaking by guess affirms) of modesty only, as though he meant
himself to be their judge, in all causes as well Ecclesiastical as Temporal. But
let us hear what moved M. Abbot to hold that strange opinion, so contrary to
the Emperors own confession, and the declaration of the worthiest men of that
age. His first conjecture is, that though Constantine sat not down until the
Bishops beckned on him; yet he sat in the highest place, on a seat of gold:
which if it were true, Eusebius. de vita Constant. lib. 3. cap. 10.
as it is false, yet would it not prove Constantine to be the President or
Judge of that assembly. For as Theodoret does expressly note, the place that he
there had, was by permission of the Bishops at his suit, and not properly
belonging to him; these be his words. Then the Emperor sat down, Theodor.
l. 1. histor. cap. 7.
in a little chair set in the midst (istud enim sibi permitti ab Episcopis
postulauerat) for he had requested the Bishops to permit him so to do. It
being then a place by permission of the Bishops, it rather argues that he
acknowledged the Bishops of whom he requested that place, to have been the
Presidents and commanders there. Secondly, the Tripartite History does
manifestly declare, that Constantine sat below the Bishops: Lib. 2. Hyst.
Tripar. ca. 5.
these be the words taken out of Zozomenus. The Emperor Constantine entered
into the Council house after all the Bishops, and had his seat beneath them al,
neither would he sit down before the Bishops commanded him. Theodor. l. 1.
Histor. cap. 7.
And the words of Theodoret may also import as much: He sat in a little
seat, placed in the midst amongst them. And falsely or craftily, does M.
Abbot report out of Eusebius; That he sat in the highest place: for Eusebius
says not so; but that passing through the midst of the assembly, he came to
the uppermost place of it, where he stood on his feet; and when a little seat
of gold was set for him, he would not sit down, before the Bishops beckned to
him so to do. Where Eusebius says indeed, that he passed unto the uppermost
end of the Hal; but does not say, that when he came thither he was placed in
the highest seat: and one may well sit in the highest end of a large Hal, and
not in the highest place thereof. But in the uppermost part of the Hal, a
little chair was placed for him, beneath the benches whereon the Presidents
of the Council, and chiefest Patriarks did sit: for so the other Ecclesiastical
historiographers do intimate. Further, having after one of the Bishops, made
an Oration to the Council, Ibidem.
As a most loving Son unto the Bishops and Priests his Fathers, as Theodoret
vvriteth: not as a President of a Council to his inferiors. Eusebius. de vita
Constant. lib. 3. cap. 13.
Moreover, having finished his said speech, Sermonem omnem Concilij Praesidijs
reliquit (as testifies Eusebius) he left all the communication and discussings
of matters, unto the Presidents of the Council. Out of which words we gather
evidently, that the Emperor was not the President of the Council, but there
were other Presidents thereof, unto whom the Emperor referred the decision of
the questions then in controversy. Finally, the Emperor Bazilius delivers
in the end of the eight general Council, That Constantine subscribed the
Council, after all the Bishops there assembled; whereas the President and
chief Judge of the Council, subscribeth in the first place. Seeing then that
Constantine the great confessed, that it appertained not to him to judge
Bishops, but to be judged of them; and that therein he is seconded by Hosius,
Athanasius, S. Ambrose, and others, al most ancient and renowned Prelates of
Christ's Church; And being most probable, that he had no place in that Council,
but by permission of the Bishops, at whose beck he sat down, in a little
seat a part, and did not speak to them, in other manner then a child does to
his Father, leaving unto the Presidents of the Council, the discussion of the
matters there proposed: what upright weigher of such serious affairs can
doubt, but that he was nothing less then the chief President and moderator
there? True it is, that he out of his own zeal and grave vvisdome, did first
attentively hear them, then sometimes spoke himself specially to appease the
contentious wranglings of the Arrian Heretics, and their favorites of whom
many were there present, and the over forward and fervent zeal of some
Catholics: but this argues no superinte^dency or presidency, but only
Christian discretion and charity, to help forward an orderly examination, and
peacible determination of those controversies. But (says M. Abbot) the Bishops
acknowledged him to be their supreme judge, in that they referred their
controversies and quarrels to be ended by him. Nothing less; for we refer
many babbling matters, to be ended unto our honest neighbors: And as M. Abbot
himself rehearses out of Eusebius, about the Bishops of Aegipt, That
Constantine interposed himself as an arbitratour of their controversies, not
as Judge; even so did some of the Council refer their quarrels to him as an
Arbitratour. And most like that they who so did, were unruly Arrians or very
indiscreet Catholics: whereof who but an indiscreet person or wrangling
Heretic can take hold? Again, where Eusebius reports, that Constantine did
as an arbitratour, seek to make atonement between the Aegiptian Prelates, he
adds: that he did it with very great respect: Eos vt Patres, imo vt Dei
Prophetas omnino honorifice reuerens; Reuerencing them very honorably as his
Fathers, yea more, as the Prophets of God; not domineering over them as his
inferiors: and prescribed to them some such thing, as did belong to the good
of Gods Church, to wit, that they would leave off their dissension, and quietly
obey unto the decrees of the Nicene Council.

Lastly, M. Abbot perceiving very well that he had hitherto but trifled, and
spoken little to the purpose, he adds: And that M. Bishop may know, that
Constantine held himself the supreme judge over Bishops, let him hear
Constantine himself concerning them. Theodor. lib. 10. cap. 19.
If we have holy Bishops of right belief, and men endued with humanity, we
shall be glad; but if any audaciously and unadvisedly, shall grow unto the
commending of those pestilent heresies, his insolency shall be repressed by the
execution of Gods servant, even by me. These words of the Emperor,
(supposing them for the time to be spoken to Bishops) though they come nearer
to a probable show of some kind of supremacy, then his sitting in the upper
end of the Hal in a golden Chair, and his courteous exhortation to peace, and
now and then helping out this man or that man with his matter; yet do they not
reach home. For the execution of punishment inflicted upon Bishops, by the
decree of Councels or the Ecclesiastcal Canons, may be, and to this day is
committed unto the lay Magistrate, without any fear of making him thereby the
supreme judge in causes Ecclesiastical: It rather proves him to be the minister
or servant of the Church in those cases. But what will you say, if those threats
of the Emperors were not given out against Bishops or any Clergymen at al, but
only against laymen? then M. Abbot must needs confess, that he gives not M.
Bishop to understand, that the Emperor is supreme judge over Bishops, but that
M. Abbot is one of the most audacious, perfidious, and cosening vvriters that
ever set pen to paper; who blusheth not, even thereto vaunt of his forces, and
to assure even his adversary of an invincible argument, where is no shadow in
the world of any probable proof for his part: let any ind^fferent man but
turn to the place, and he shall find without any doubt, those words of
threat to be spoken only to the citizens of Nicomedia. Their Bishop Eusebius,
and Theognis Bishop of Nicea, were (for being though wily, yet obstinate
Arrians) by the decree of the Nicene Council deposed from their Bishoprics,
and other chosen in their places: whereupon the most Christian and wise
Emperor, vvriteth unto his subjects the citizens of Nicomedia (whom he heard
to be too much addicted to their Arrian Bishop and his heresies) to beware of
him; and having touched his faults, and just punishment inflicted upon him
therefore by the Council, comes to the words which M. Abbot peruerteth. The
words of the Emperor are these: I am vestrum est, ea fide in Deum aciem
mentis vestiae intendere, in qua vos semper mansisse constat, etc. Now it is
your parts (O ye citizens of Nicomedia) to serve God in that faith, in which
you have always continued, and to perform al offices of Godliness. And if it
so happen, that we may always have Bishops excelling in integrity of life, in
sound doctrine and charity toward al, we ought truly to rejoice: but if any
man among you, be so hardy and audacious, that he shall enterprise to commend
and praise those plagues of the Church (Eusebius and Theognis) his insolency
shall presently be punished, by the work and diligence of Gods servant, even by
me. This is word for word out of the Author: so that the Emperors threat of
punishment, was only to the citizens of Nicomedia, not to any Bishop or
Clergyman. Which if it be compared with M. Abbots corruption, either you must
take him for a very gross pate and more then poore-blinde, that could not
discern to whom, or of whom the Emperor spoke; or else so fervently set to
deceive others, that he cared not to strain courtesy with his Authors, and
to belie them a little, so that he might for a while, til it were discovered,
be taken for one that had found out some special proof, that made much to the
purpose.

ROBERT ABBOT. Page 192.
THEREFORE Constantine accepted of Appeals, when they were made to him from
the judgment of Bishops, and either heard matters himself, or appointed those
that should hear them; And so we find that Foelix a Bishop, August. Epist 162.
By the commandment of the same Emperor, had his cause heard, and was
acquitted before his Proconsul or Lieutenant. And where the Donatists said, That
a Bishop should not have his purgation before the Lieutenant, S. Augustine
answers: As if (says he) the Bishop himself had so taken course for
himself, and the Emperor had not commanded that the matter should be inquired
off, to whose charge (whereof he was to give account to God) that matter did
specially belong. And so does he send for the Bishops, Socrat. lib. 1. Hist.
cap. 22. Zozom. lib. 2. cap. 27. Ruffin. lib. 1. cap. 2.
that by his commandment were assembled in a Council at Tyrus, to give account
to him, of that they had done there, and in his hearing to show him, how truly
and sincerely they had carried themselves in their judgment: whereby as by
many other arguments, it is manifest to al men, that Constantine held himself
to have a supremacy over Bishops, and to be Judge of their judgments, and that
M. Bishop seeks merely to abuse his Majesty, in alleging the example of
Constantine against him.

WILLIAM BISHOP.
LIKE vvil to like quoth the Devil to the Colliar, as it is in our old Adage.
M. Abbot is so blindly bent to his errors, that for want of more worthy
Presidents, he will not stick to fly for succor, to both Donatists and
Arrians, old rotten and reprobate Heretics. Who were they that appealed from
the judgment of Bishops, to the Emperor Constantine? were they honest Godly
men, whose example a good Christian may follow? nothing less. Hear S.
Augustine, August. Epist. 166.
out of whom you craftily cul certain words to deceive your reader. Your
Ancestors (says S. Augustine to the Donatists) brought the cause of
Cecilianus before the Emperor Constantine: put us to proof of this, and
unless we prove it do with us what you can. The Donatists then, were the men
that appealed from the Bishops judgments to the Emperor: but though they
were otherwise wicked Heretics, yet in this point perhaps they did not amiss
says M. Abbot, a dear child of the Donatist. Yes marry did they: witness
first Constantine himself, who hearing of the Donatists appeal, was
maruailously moved with it, as testifies Optatus Bishop of Mileuitan, that
lived in the midst of them; these be his words: Lib. 1. cont. Parmen.
Donate the fire of the Donatists, thought good to appeal from Bishops to the
Emperor, etc. to which appeal the Emperor Constantine answers thus. O rabida
furoris audacia, sicut in casu Gentilium fieri solet, appellationem
apposuerunt! O mad pange of fury, they have put in an appeal, as the
Heathens are wont to do! Observe how this good Emperor liked of their appeal,
esteeming them mad men and like to the Pagans, that did make it. Another
witness shall be S. Augustine, and in that very Epistle out of which M. Abbot
does suck his poison: for he does most sincerely deliver the whole
circumstance of this matter; Epist. 162.
these be his words. Constantine the Emperor gave the Donatists another
hearing or judgment at Arles in France; not that it was then needeful, but
condescending to their perverse stubbornness, and coveting by all means to
suppress their impudency. Neither durst the good Emperor so admit of their
seditious and false complaints, that he himself would judge of the sentence of
those Bishops, who sat at Rome; but assigned them other Bishops (as I said)
from whom they yet again appealed to the Emperor himself: Wherein how be
detested them you have heard, and I would to God they had at last, upon his
judgment made an end of their most outrageous animosities. And as he yielded
to them so far forth, as to judge of that cause after the Bishops (a sacris
Antistibus postea veniam petiturus, minding afterward to ask pardon of the
holy Bishops; because he did it that the Donatists might have no excuse left
them, if they did not obey unto his sentence, unto whom they themselves
appealed) so they would once at the lenght yield to the truth. There you see
first, how the Donatists contrary to law and custom, appealed to the Emperor:
which S. Augustine does in other places also most formally teach. Secondly,
that the Emperor did vehemently dislike of their appeal, and put it off from
himself to Bishops, of whose causes and after whom, he knew and did profess,
that it did not appertain to him to judge: Yet finally, to stop the impudent
mouths of the Donatists, and to leave them clean without al excuse of their
obstinate stubbornness, he co^descended to hear the cause himself after the
Bishops; not that he thought himself to have any right so to do, but meaning
to crave pardon of the sacred Bishops, for that he had intermedled in their
matters, further then he ought to have done. All this is taken out of S.
Augustine word by word, in that very place which M. Abbot alleges for
himself. Is not he then a very conscienslesse, and most perfidious man, that
would thus under the color of some broken words, bear his reader in hand,
that the Emperor Constantine took himself in his own right, to be the
supreme judge of Bishops, and that even by the testimony of S. Augustine, who
so plainly in the same place relates the clean contrary? But Foelix (says
he) a Bishop, by the commandment of the same Emperor, had his cause heard,
and was acquitted before his Lieutenant. True, but how came it to pass, that
the good Bishop was co^uented before them? not by any his own seeking or
liking, but through the most important suit of the Donatists, August. ibid. and
Epist. 166
Qui quotidianis interpellationibus, taedium Imperatori fecerunt, dicentes
illum esse traditorem: Who with their daily out cries, were tedious to the
Emperor, affirming Foelix to be a traitor. Whereupon, because the Donatists
would not admit of any ordinary judge of Bishops, within or without Afrike,
the innocent Bishop was content to refer his cause to be heard by any
vvhomsoeuer; for so it follows in the very next words of that same Epistle
of S. Augustine. For they (that is the Donatists) had made the Emperor
arbitrator, and judge of that cause, who first sued to him, afterward
appealed unto him, and yet in the end would not stand to his judgments; but
seeing that he gave sentence against them, they like frantike fellows, cried
out against the same as unlawful, which was their own seeking, and then
affirmed contrary to their former opinion and practice, that a Bishop was not
to have his trial and purgation before a secular Judge. Whereupon S. Augustine
infers: If he be blameworthy, whom a temporal Judge acquitted, when he
himself sought after no such Judge; how much more are they to be blamed, who
would needs have an earthly King to be judge of their cause? Iudex eligitur
Imperator: The Emperor was by the Donatists chosen for their Judge, but the
Emperor giving sentence against them, he was by them condemned: thus S.
Augustine. Are not these shuttle and giddy headed Heretics, sure cards for M.
Abbot to build the Princes supremacy upon? a sandy and slippery foundation, yet
meet for such a piece of work. But S. Augustine does say, That the Emperor
caused the matter to be diligently enquired of, to whose charge (whereof he was
to give account to God) that matter did specially belong. I answer, that the
Emperor having taken the matter into his hands, by the importunate suit of
the Donatists, and by the consent of the other party, was afterward bound in
honor and conscience, to see it thoroughly sifted out, and most uprightly
determined. But this furthereth nothing M. Abbots pretense of the Emperors
supremacy; when first the Emperor himself acknowledges most ingeniously and
perspicuously, that he judges in such cases against his will, and as it were
under the correction of the Bishops. And S. Augustine as manifestly teaches;
that neither Foelix nor any other Catholic Bishop, required the Emperor for
their judge of their own free choice, but that being thereunto constrained by
the impudency and headstrong wilfulness of the Donatists, who would be judged
by no other: Neither yet would they finally yield to the Emperors own
judgment, which they so earnestly sued for, against the Canons of the Church.
Were not these headstrong Donatists a most perfect pattern of heretical
obstinacy, and fit men to be propounded for an example to follow by M. Abbot?
if any man desire to see more of S. Augustines mind in this matter, let him
read his 48. and 166. Epistles, and the first Chapter of his third book
against Julian the Pelagian; where he cutteth those Pelagian Heretics short,
who having been once condemned by a Council of Bishops in Palestine, would
have appealed to the Emperor, and did then allege the Example of the
Donatists for their President, Lib. 3. cont. Julian. cap. 1.
as M. Abbot now does. Not so (says S. Augustine) your cause has bad a
competent and sufficient trial before many Bishops, neither are you to be dealt
withal any further, concerning the right of examination and trial; it only now
remains, that you quietly accept of the sentence pronounced of this cause: so
that in S. Augustines judgment, the competent, lawful, and ordinary trial of
Ecclesiastical causes, is before Bishops, from which none but Heretics do
appeal and fly. And touching the Donatists, whose example the other Heretics
alleged, Ibidem.
this holy Father says: They were so violent, and withal so strong, that we
were forced to follow them appealing to the Emperor: for they ranged and raged
with such fury, almost al Afrike over, that they would not suffer the
Catholics to preach, or to live in peace by them; but by fire, sword, and
forage, put the whole country in garboile and combustion: wherefore the
Bishops were compelled for the suppressing their fury, and for to bring them to
reason, to confer with them before the lay Magistrate. Thus much of M. Abbots
former instance of the Donatists. Now to his other borrowed from the Arrians,
who were assembled in a very wicked conuenticle at Tire, to condemn the most
innocent Prelate and Saint of God, Athanasius; who besides also was Patriarch
of Alexandria, the chief seat of all the East, and therefore rather to judge
over them, then to be judged of them: yet those most malicious Arrians, to
wreake their teene on him, invented most strange crimes of Rape, Murder, and
Treason against the man of God, and had false vvitnesses in readiness, to
testify what they would desire; yet were they so prudently encountered, and al
their most wicked plots so plainly discovered, by the grace of God, and S.
Athanasius most vigilant industry, that they fell at last to conspire his death
by open violence. Al which being related to the Emperor, he wrote a most
sharp letter to those bloody conspiratours, and willed them to come to the
place, where he then made his abode, there in his presence and hearing, to show
whither that which they had done there, were equal and just. He does not say
(as M. Abbot falsely reports) that the Bishops were to give him account of
that they had done; but according to Athanasius request, Socrat. lib. 1.
Histor. c. 22.
which was as it is set down in the same letter, Vt eo accederetis, quo nobis
praesentibus, de injuria qua passus fuerit, (necessitate coactus) posset
expostulare: That the Council might be removed to the Emperors Court, to the
intent that Athanasius (compelled by necessity) might expostulate and complain
in the Emperors presence, of the injury done unto him. First note, that the
holy Patriarch compelled by necessity of the Arrians fury, repaired to the
Emperor. Secondly, that he desired the matter might be heard, though in the
Emperors presence; yet by the Bishops assembled in that co^uenticle: for he
had reason to think, that they would not for very shame suffer the matter to
be so partially and furiously handled, if that good Emperor were present and
did but look on them. Thirdly note, that there was no matter of faith in
question, but capital crimes and temporal affairs of the state objected
against Athanasius, wherein the lay Magistrate has more special interest.
Briefly, here is no mention of the Emperors judging over Bishops, but only of
a sending for them to come to him, and to handle so weighty a matter before
him, which any temporal Prince (for aught I see) may demand and also command,
of Bishops that be his own subjects, when cause of the temporal state is
touched.

Out of the premises it follows most evidently, that M. Abbot has not one
plain word, to prove the Emperor Constantine to be supreme judge in
Ecclesiastical causes, but relieth wholy either upon the example of reprobate
Heretics, or upon his own inferences and enforcements, drawn out of some
dark sentences, so shamelesly alleged for the most part, that they are clean
contrary to the plain testimony of his own authors in the very same place;
whereas we have that most renowned Emperors own formal and express words,
professing himself to have no power to judge over Bishops and Church affairs;
and that also fortified by the sound record of most grave, holy, and learned
Fathers, who lived some in his own days, and some very near thereunto. Let
then any man judge (if he be not too too partial) whether I gave his Majesty
wrong to understand, when I informed him, that Constantine the great (that
glorious ornament of our country) would not take upon him to be supreme
governor in causes Ecclesiastical: Or whether M. Abbot, do not go about
exceedingly to abuse his most excellent Majesty, that with such bables, foul
shifts, and manifest lies, would persuade him the contrary. Hitherto of the
Emperors authority in calling of Councels, and over Bishops, so far forth,
as M. Abbots objections out of S. Leo ministered just cause.

Now ere I pass unto the next Successor of S. Peter and S. Paul. which M.
Abbot would force to speak in defense of their new Gospel, I must according to
custom show in part, what this Author of his S. Leo, does teach in favor of
the Catholic cause; that the indifferent reader may judge, whether he were
rather a Protestant or a Papist, as they term us. And because S. Leo is both
ancient (for he lived about 1200. years past) and was also a most holy man, by
whom God did miraculously work, even in his life time: Again, for that he
was very skilful both in the holy Scriptures, and al learned Antiquity Greek
and Latin, as may be seen by his Sermons and Epistles, specially by the last
Epistle written for the instruction of the Emperor called also Leo; where he
cites S. Hillary, S. Ambrose, S. Augustine, Latins; S. Athanasius,
Theophilus, Cyrillus Patriarchs of Alexandria, Gregory Nazianzene, S. Basil,
and S. John Chrysostom, Greek Doctors: And finally, for that his works be
without al exception, even by the consent of the Protestants, yea of such
credit with them, that they are glad when they can snatch a broken sentence
out of him, in favor of their doctrine; I will therefore somewhat more largely
cite his sentences, in defense of the present Roman religion, because they
cannot choose but be of great value with all euen-minded men. And the better to
satisfy M. Abbots demandes, I will frame the order of S. Leos testimonies much
thereafter. Of the Pope and his Pardons, S. Leo taught very much and most
plainly, as has been related in the beginning of this matter. Of the Mass
and of Transubstantiation he speakeh as perspicuously in very formal terms,
commanding; Epist. 79. ad Dioscor. n. 2.
That two Masses be said every festiual day in great parishes, where the people
cannot conveniently meet al together at one: Ne quaedam pars populi sua
deuotione priuetur, si vnius tantum Missae more seruato, sacrificium offerri
non possit, nisi qui prima diei part conuenit; Lest some of the people be
deprived of their devotion, if the custom of one Mass a day be observed, and
the sacrifice may not be offered, but at their meeting that come first in the
morning. In those days when al men were so devout to hear Mass, that no body
would willingly omit to hear one Mass at least every holy day, there was (I
ween) no hundred marks to be forfeited for every Mass they heard. And were
they then true Protestants (think you) who so zealously coueted to be present
at the sacrifice of the Mass? Moreover, S. Leo was so well assured of the Real
presence of Christ's blessed body in the Sacrament, and knew it to be so
clearly acknowledged, even of the vulgar and common sort in those days, that
he took it for a ground to confute the Eutichian heresy. For having first
declared, that those Heretics (by affirming our Savior not to have taken the
true flesh of man) did destroy his passion and resurrection, he adjoineth:
Epist. 22. ad Clerum.
In what darkness of ignorance, in what drowsinesse of sloth, have these
Eutichians (I might as well say Protestants) lien, that they could neither by
hearing learn, nor by reading understand, that which in the Church of God, is
so uniformly voiced and spoken off by every man, that it is not withheld
from the tongues of Infants? to wit: the truth of the body and blood of Christ
among the Sacraments of the Christian faith, etc. the substance and sum of S.
Leos reason is, that our Savior gave his true flesh in the holy Sacrament to
be eaten of us; therefore he took the true flesh of man, otherwise he could
not have given it us to eat: ergo, Eutiches was deceived, who denied Christ to
have taken the true flesh of man, affirming him to have taken only some shadow
or similitude of it. And because I am in the matter of Sacraments, S. Leos
testimony for the virtue of Baptism, In quo (says he) foluitur quicquid
peccati est, Epist. 84. ad Aquileiensem Episcopum.
cum quo nascitur: Therefore is one baptized, that whatsoever there is of sin
in him, it may be loosed. And after in the same Epistle: Infants do die to
original sin, and elder folks to al manner of sin in Baptism; which
confutes the Protestants opinion, that original sin lives and reigns in all
men after baptism. auricular confession, he allows and commends: Epist.
78. nu. 2. ad vniuersos Episcopos Campaniae.
these be his words. I decree, that this manner of penance which is so exacted
of the faithful, that a prefession of every kind of sin be written in a
role, and rehearsed publicly, be wholly abrogated; when as it is sufficient,
that the guilt of consciences be in secret confession declared to Priests
alone. For albeit that fullness of faith seem laudable, which for fear of God
do not stagger to blush before men: nevertheless seeing that some men's sins
be such, that it is not expedient they should be published, least their enemies
should take hold on them, and prosecute them in law; let that custom be
abolished, least many be thereby frighted from the remedies of penance: for
that confession is sufficient, which is tendered first to God, then also to the
Priest, etc. Again, in another place: Epistola. 89.
The manifold mercies of God, does so succor man's frailty, that not only by
the grace of baptism, but by the medicine of penance also, the hope of eternal
life is recovered; that they who had lost the gift of regeneration, condemning
themselves by their own judgment, might attain unto remission of their
sins: the aid of Gods goodness being so disposed, that pardon from God
cannot be obtained, but by the supplication of Priests. For the Mediator of
God and Man, the man JESUS Christ, has given this power unto the Prelates of
the Church, that they may both enjoine satisfaction to the penitent, and that
they may also admit them, being by the same wholesome satisfaction purged,
through the gate of reconciliation, unto the communion of the Sacraments. Where
he further teaches; That they who die without this gift of pardon, shall never
be saved: and does also greatly blame them who defer their confession til
toward the point of death: when (says he) there is scarce space either for the
confession of the penitent, or for the reconciliation of the Priest. It was
not then (undoubtedly) treason in S. Leos days, to be reconciled by a Priest;
seeing he so often and so much recommended it to al Christian people, and held
it the only gate to re-enter into Gods favor, for all such Christians as were
fallen from the grace they had before received in the Sacrament of Baptism.
That Bishops, Priests, Deacons, yea and Subdeacons should not marry, and if any
married man were chosen a Subdeacon, that he should refrain from the company
of his wife, S. Leo is very plain: thus he decrees. Epist. 82. ad Anastasium
These. number. 4.
It is free for men that be not of the Clergy to marry, but to show the purity
of perfect continency, carnal copulation is not granted, so much as to
Subdeacons: that they who have wives, be as though they had them not; and they
who have them not, do continue single. And if in this order, which is the
fourth from the head (with the Protestants it is no order at al) it is meet
that chastity be kept; how much more is it to be observed in the first, second,
and third? that no man be esteemed worthy, either of the place of a Deacon, or
honor of a Priest, or excellency of a Bishop, who is discovered not to have
yet bridled himself from the pleasure of wiuing: This of the continency of
Priests. Will you hear S. Leos opinion of the Abbot scornefully terms
Monkish? Epist. 90. ad Rusti. Norb. cap. 12.
The profession of a Monk (says he) undertaken by a man's own free choice and
desire, cannot be forsaken without sin; because that must be performed, which
we have vowed to God. Wherefore, he that forsaking the profession of a single
or solitary life, is turned soldier, or fallen to marriage, is to be purged
publicly by the satisfaction of penance: for albeit warre-fare may be
harmless, and marriage honest; yet is it a transgression and offense to have
forsaken the better choice. It follows in the next number: Ibid. ca. 13.8.
Maidens who not constrained by their parents command, but of their own accord
have made profession of Virginity, and received the habit; if afterward they
desire to marry, they do sin, though they were not yet consecrated: Ibidem
14.
but if after both profession and consecration, they should fall to marry, it
cannot be doubted but that they should commit a very heinous crime. For if man's
decrees, cannot be infringed without punishment, what shall light upon them, who
have broken the covenants of the divine mystery? How forcibly does this chaste
doctrine of S. Leo, batter and beat flat to the earth, the voluptuous
looseness of runnegate votaries, and gives checkmate to the Protestants, for
upholding the same as well done? That you may yet further perceive, what an evil
Protestant and a perfect Papist S. Leo was; he commends highly the Emperor
Martianus his virtue and Godliness, for receiving with worthy honor the
Flamianus departed, who a little before was Patriarch of Constantinople. And
for praying to Saints you have heard before, Sermon. 5. de Epiphania.
how he encouraged al men, Eorum ambire suffragia, earnestly and as it were
ambitiously to sue for the aid of their prayers. Again, he exhorts his
auditors, to celebrate with him the Saturday following the Vigils of the most
happy Apostle S. Peter: Ser. 8. de Iejunio decim.
Who (says he) with his prayers, will vouchsafe to help our prayers, fastings,
and almes-deedes. Behold he made no question, but that S. Peter both knew their
desires and deserts, and would also further them with the aid of his
effectual prayers. In brief then we have, that the most learned and holy Pope
S. Leo the first, taught praying to Saints, and worshipping of their Relikes:
the vows of Monks and professed Virgins: that Priests and al in holy orders
should not marry, but live continently: that Priests have power to reconcile
and to forgive sins: and that every man who hops for any pardon of his
sins at Gods hands, must particularly confess them in private to a Priest,
and by due satisfaction purge himself from them: that in the Sacrament there
is the same true flesh of Christ which was crucified, and did arise from death:
that Mass is to be said every holy day, wherein the sacrifice of Christ's body
is offered: that S. Peter was the supreme Pastor of Christ's Church, and that
the Bishop of Rome is his lawful successor therein, having supreme authority
over both East and West Church. These with such like points, (which may by
diligent perusing his most eloquent and divine works, be gathered,) do most
perspicuously demonstrate, the Church of Rome in his time (which was near
1200. years ago) to have held the self same language, concerning matters of
faith, which the same Church of Rome at this day speaks. And that M. Abbot
in seeking to prove the contrary, did but show himself either very ignorant in
his works, or over studious, not to take his Author right as his manner is,
but to pick some matter of cauil out of him, thereby to blind and deceive the
simple reader. Now to the next.

ROBERT ABBOT.
PELAGIVS the Bishop of Rome, the first of that name, admitted a married man to
be Bishop of Syracusa, only putting in a caution, that he should not dilapidare
the Church goods, and transfer the same to his wife and children: Did. 28.
de Syracusana.
The danger whereof he signifies, was the cause of that constitution, which
did forbid a man having a wife and children to be preferred to a Bishopric;
otherwise a man is not repelled for having wife and children (says the Gloss)
because the Apostles permitted the same. But now the Church of Rome, Glossa
ibide^.
will by no means admit men to be Bishops or Priests: not for that they would
avoid the dilapidating of the Church goods (for that is a thing common with
the Popes themselves, Platina in vita Johan. 16.
To apply al to satisfy the greediness and covetousness of their familiars,
their brethren, their nephews, under which name commonly go their bastards:)
but because they asscribe to marriage, as the old Heretics did, Bellarm. de
Cler. lib. 1. cap. 19.
pollution and uncleanness, which cannot stand with the sanctity and
holiness of the Priestly function.

WILLIAM BISHOP.
IF M. Abbot did not every where almost, show himself to be a shameless man,
and one that cares not how corruptly, so he may somewhat colourably cite the
ancient Fathers sentences; this passage were alone more then sufficient, to
prove him to be no better then a cosening counterfeit. In these few lines there
are four evident untruths uttered by him. The first is, that a man is not
repelled from being a Bishop for having wife and children, but only for fear
of dilapidation of the Church goods. This is most evidently false: for though
the fear of spending the Church goods upon profane uses, be one cause why it
is not expedient that a Bishop or Priest should be married; yet the more
principal reason thereof, is the purity of the single life, and the freeness
of it from al such vvorldly affairs and temporal troubles, as are necessarily
linked with the care of provision for wife and children: This you heard before
out of S. Leo, who was predecessor to Pope Pelagius the first, by more then an
hundred years. These be also the reasons of S. Augustine and S. Hierome, who
vvrote thereof whole volumes against the Heretic Iouinian: and were given
first by S. Paul himself, when he teaches; that 1. Cor. 7. verse 31.
he who is without a wife, is careful for the things that pertain to our
Lord, how he may please God: but he that is with a wife, is careful for the
things that appertain to the world, how he may please his wife, and is
divided. And Verse. 32. Verse. 34.
the woman unmarried and virgin, thinks on the things that pertain to our
Lord, that she may be holy both in body and spirit. See the more special
grounds of the single life of clergymen: whereupon even by the confession of
M. Abbot himself, Page 42.
A law was made in the Church of Rome by Pope Siritius (who was 150. years
before Pelagius,) that al Priests and Deacons should either be chosen single
men, or else promise to abstain wholly from the company of their wives; which
is also decreed in the second Council of Carthage, holden about the same time,
where the holy Bishops there assembled do say: Canon. 2.
That we may keep that which the Apostles did teach, and Antiquity herself
observed; giving al men to understand, that the single and chaste life of the
Clergy, was taught by the Apostles, and observed in most pure Antiquity. It
being then so notorious and well known a thing, that whosoever would be a
Bishop must needs refrain from the company of his wife; no caution was
required for that by Pope Pelagius, because there was no question or doubt of
it: And M. Abbot deals deceitfully, to argue out of the not mentioning of
that, which was understood of al men as necessary to be presupposed, and is in
most of the Canons of the very same distinction, Distinct. 28.
expressly delivered; and also in two other whole distinctions going next
before. His second false trick is in the citation of the gloss, and that a
very foul one; for he chops it off in the midst, leaving out that which will
mar al his market. The gloss says (upon that caution against dilapidations)
that it is to be understood, when be that is chosen to be a Bishop, does love
his wife and children so tenderly, that it is to be presumed he would for their
sakes, dilapidare the Church goods, etc. otherwise a man is not repelled for
wife and children, to wit, for that point of dilapidations whereof the gloss
there speaks: This to be the sense, any understanding man would easily
perceive, if the gloss had gone no further. But it adds (as it were to meet
with M. Abbots cauil) Dum tamen longa continentia praecesserit: A man that has
a wife may be admitted to be a Bishop, putting in good surety that he will not
dilapidare the Church goods; yet with this prouiso, That he has long before
lived continently, that is, refrained wholly from the company of his wife; as it
is before said in the Canon Priusquam, of the same distinction: See how
expressly the gloss excepts that which M. Abbot avouches it to affirm. His
third false tale is, That the Church of Rome now, will by no means admit married
men to be bishops and priests, which is not true: for in those very cases
wherein they were at any time admitted before, they would be admitted now,
that is; If there were want of other able men, and some such eminent learning
and virtue in a married man, as were not to be found in a single, then he might
be made both Priest and Bishop, so that he and his wife would liu^ continently:
for there is no Canon of the Church to the contrary. His fourth lie is a
luculent and bright one, That we (forsooth) asscribe pollution and
uncleanness to marriage, as the old Heretics did: for neither Cardinal
Bellarmine whom he quoteth, nor any other Catholic, does teach the act of
matrimony to be the work of the Devil, or damnable sin, as the Manichees and
some other Heretics did. Nay, he declares there plainly, that it may be
without any sin at al, though most commonly concupiscence bear to great a
sway in it; both preventing the rule of reason, and somewhat exceeding the
measure of it, as Lib. 14. de Ciuitat. c. 17. Item, lib. 5. cont. Julian. cap.
8. and 10.
S. Augustine testifies: and does make a man more dull and heavy to spiritual
exercises, and not so pure and holy as the office of a Priest does require, as
Hier. lib. 1. co^t. Iouinian.
S. Hierome and Chrysostom. l. 6 de Sacerdot.
S. Chrysostom do witness. And that a man thereby is made less holy and
pure, both in body and spirit, S. Paul's own words do intimate; 1. Cor. 7.
verse. 34.
The woman unmarried, thinks how she may be holy both in body and spirit: so
that within the compass of not many lines, M. Abbot lets fly two cast of
lies, and yet as it were not content with so few, he interlaceth three other
lies to furbish and smooth up the rest.

The first is, that now a days married men are not repelled from Bishoprics
to avoid dilapidations: which is false. For that is one cause as I showed
before, and is also touched even by that most renowned Father Bellarmine, even
in the same place cited by M. Abbot, De Clericis lib. 1. cap. 19.
in his fifth reason: where he teaches; That the marriage of Bishops and
Priests, does hinder much that hospitality and tender care of the poor, which
men of the Church ought to have: for the care of providing for wife and
children, does wholly extinguish or greatly diminish their good housekeeping
and providing for the poor, as the lamentable experience of our very time does
sufficiently instruct us. What if some Popes or other Clergymen, have been
too forward to satisfy the greedy covetousness of their carnal friends, that
is their own fault, contrary to the provident order and law of the Church? and
if the corrupt nature of man, be so inclinable to favor them that be next in
blood to them, was it not right vvisely ordained by our Church, that Clergymen
should have no wives and children? for that men naturally do love them most
dearly, and use al means to provide for them. But how carelessly herein do
the Protestants carry themselves, who do encourage, and as it were push their
Clergymen forward, to have wives and children? who being thereby clogged with
the cares of this world, bid adieu to al courteous and plentiful hospitality,
and leave the poor to shift as they can for themselves: for they have more
then enough to do, to provide for their own wives and children. The second
lie is shuffled into the parenthesis, taken out of Platina, to wit: That under
the name of nephews, commonly go their bastards; which is not in his
author, but a most malicious slander devised of his own head, and avouched
without any testimony; and therefore to be contemned. The third is, in that he
makes Platina, to affirm it to be a common thing with the Popes, which he
only notes for a special fault in some few. Is this man worthy (think you)
the sacred title of a Divine, or of the common name of an honest man, who does
in manner nothing else, but sow lies together, and that sometimes so thick,
that for every line near hand, there is only or other? was his meaning
(trow you) to give instruction to the ignorant, and satisfaction to the learned
(as often he vaunteth,) or rather to blind the simple, and to feed the vain
folly of the over credulous Protestant? Proverb. 10.
Qui nititur mendacijs (says the wise man) hic pascit ventos, Idem insequitur
aues volantes: He that relieth on lies, does feed the winds, that is, may
please vain and light heads; He does also follow birds flying in the air,
that is, does feed the humor of hawty, wavering, and unsettled spirits; but
can never give contentment or satisfaction, to any grave, modest, and discreet
man, who does fly from a crafty and subtle liar, as from the very offspring
of that Serpent, which with lying deceived our first mother Eve. But go on
with your lies, seeing it will be no otherwise.

ROBERT ABBOT.
THE Emperors of Rome Theodosius and Valens, according unto the doctrine of
the ancient Church of Rome, Petri Crinit. de honest. disciplina. lib. 9. cap. 9.
Upon care of preserving the religion of the high God, did forbid the making,
grauing, or painting of the Crucifix: and commanded it upon penalty to be
abolished, wheresoever it was found. But now, not the making ^nly, but also the
worshipping of the Crucifix, is a matter of high religion in the same Church
of Rome.

WILLIAM BISHOP.
VERITAS non quaerit latebras: Truth is not ashamed of her self, nor coueteth
to hide her head in corners, when she may with safety be suffered to show her
face publicly. That decree of the Christian Emperor Theodosius is extant, and
to be seen in the very corpse of the civil law: what needed then M. Abbot to
run unto a late obscure author called Petrus Crinitus, Peter with the long
hair, to seek that which is of so good record, in so famous a volume? think
you that it is without some mystery, that he being thirsty, would leave the
fresh fountain, and run to drink of the dirty puddle? Latet anguis in
herbae, There is a padde in the straw. A strange longing he had, to find out
some cauil against any part of the doctrine of the Church of Rome; and because
that could not be, by the true and full report of the Catholic Emperors
decrees, he would needs fly to some broken relation of he cared not whom, to
blind his unwary reader vvithal. The decree then as it was made by the
Emperor, and stands Authentikely in the Code, makes much for the honor of
the Cross: for he commanded, That the sign of the Cross should not be
engraven, Lib. 1. Codi. tit. leg. Cum sit nobis.
or painted on the pauement: Ne sacrum signum pedibus calcaretur, that the holy
sign of the Cross might not be trodden under feet. Which said decree of
Theodosius the elder, the Emperor Tyberius the second (one of his Godly
successors) understanding well, when he espied a Cross cut in marble lying on
the ground, he commanded it to be lifted up, saying: Paul. Diaconus, lib. 18.
Rerum Romanarum.
We ought to bless our forehead and breast with the Cross of our Lord, and
we tread it under our feet. In what high estimation, the sign of the Cross
was, with that most bright mirror of Emperors Constantine the great, and how
gloriously it was placed in their Diademes, Palaces, and public places, no
man can be ignorant that is acquainted with their Hystories. And somewhat I have
said thereof already, in the question of Images; therefore I do here omit to
speak any more of a matter so evident. I might here by the way, blame M.
Abbot, not only for his deceitful dealing; but also because he forgets
vvhereabout he goes: for his drift here is to teach, that S. Peter and S.
Paul's successors the Bishops of Rome, did of old teach another doctrine, then
these of later years do now; of which number of Bishops, Theodosius the
Emperor was none: but many such faults as this, I let pass vvittingly, or
else I should never make an end. And whereas he adds; That these Emperors
did forbid the making of the Cross, according unto the doctrine of the
ancient Church of Rome: Observe first, that it is so said only, without any
proof; and besides, it is avouched very impudently, as being flat repugnant,
unto the known and notorious practice of Constantine the great, their late and
most famous predecessor. Now to the next.

ROBERT ABBOT.
Greg. lib. 9. Moral. ca. 1. and 14.
GREGORY Bishop of Rome taught: That all the merit of our virtue, al our
righteousness, is but vice and unrighteousness, if it be stricktly examined;
it needs therefore prayer after righteousness (says he) that whereas being
sifted it would quail, it may by the only mercy of the Judge stand for good.
Bernard. in Annot. 1. De lib. Arbit. and Great. In fine. Trident. sess. 6 cap.
16.
Yea and Bernard, by the same doctrine of the Church of Rome, says; That men's
merits are not such, as that eternal life is due unto them of right, or that
God should do wrong, if he did not give the same: they are the way to the
Kingdom (says he) but not the cause of obtaining the Kingdom. But now the
Rhem. Test. Annot. in 2. Tim. 4. v. 8. ad Hebr. 6. verse. 10.
Church of Rome, attributes so great perfection of righteousness to good
works, as that they fully satisfy the law of God, and worthily deserve
eternal life: yea, they affirm them to be so far meritorious, as that God
should be unjust, if he rendered not heaven for the same; chargeing the justice
of God, not in respect of his promise, but in respect of the merit and desert
of the works.

WILLIAM BISHOP.
NOW that M. Abbot is driven to fly to that most holy and renowned Pope S.
Gregory the great, for defense of their doctrine, he is like to speed well (no
doubt:) for he was the first founder of the Catholic religion amongst us
Englishmen, and a great maintainer of it all the world over, as shall appear to
the eye of every impartial man, that will but read that little, which shall by
me hereafter be produced out of him. First touching the merit of works, we
believe the same that S. Gregory taught, to wit; That all the merit of our own
virtue, al our own righteousness (that is, all that virtue and righteousness,
which we have by our own nature or strength) is rather vice and iniquity, then
virtue: And therefore that we had need most humbly to sue and pray to God,
for mercy and forgiveness of our sins and for the assistance of his heavenly
grace, which is the root and fountain of al good works and merits. M. Abbot
therefore mistakes S. Gregory grossly, if he think him to deny any true merit
or righteousness to be in a virtuous Christian: for though he say that our
own (to wit, that which we do by virtue of our own natural power) be naught
vvorth; yet he teaches most expressly, that good works done by the help of
Gods grace, do merit life everlasting. Thus he has left written upon that
verse of the Psalm: I have meditated in thy works. Gregor. in Psalm. 141.
He that acknowledges the riches of this world to be deceitful, and does
through the love of heavenly things, contemn earthly; that man does meditate
upon good works: which when this life does pass away, shall remain, and yield
the reward of eternal life. For we live not here profitably, Nisi ad
comparandum meritum, quo in aeternitate viuatur: But to get merits, by which we
may live eternally. And upon these words of the 101. Psalm: Their seed shall
be directed for ever. Our works are therefore called seeds (says he) because
like as we gather fruit of seed; even so do we expect reward of our works:
for the Apostle says, Gallat. 6.
Whatsoever a man will sow, that shall he reap. He therefore that in this life
sows the seed of good works, shall in the life to come reap the fruit of
eternal recompense. And in the same book of his Morals, (out of which M.
Abbot snatched his dark words) S. Gregory declares clearly: Greg. lib. 4.
Moral. c. 42.
That as there is among men a great difference of works in this life, so in
the next there shall be as great distinction of dignities: that how far here
one man exceedes another in merits, so much shall be there surmount the other in
rewards. If then according to S. Gregory's plain doctrine, (grounded upon the
Royal Prophets, David, and the Apostle S. Paul,) good works be the seeds,
which bring forth life everlasting: If the merit of this life, be that,
wherewith we must live eternally hereafter: If according to the difference of
merits in this life, we shall receive distinct dignities in the life to come;
can any man of judgment doubt, but that he most perspicuously taught, both
that there be true merits in virtuous and good works; and also that according
unto the different degree of merits, distinct dignities of glory shall be
rendered in heaven?

The most sweet and religious father S. Bernard, is haled into this rank of S.
Peter's successors, against al due order; because he was no Bishop of Rome: but
our profane Abbot says, that the holy Abbot Bernard herein agrees with the
ancient Church of Rome. How may we know that? Is it because that godly and
devout man, did in all points embrace and follow the ancient Roman faith? L. 2.
de Cons. ad Euge. In Vita. lib. 2. c. 3. and 6. Item lib. 4. cap. 4. Lib. 3.
cap. 5. and Sermon. 66. in Cant. lib. Sententiaru^ non procul ab initio.
then it is a clear case, that the Bishop of Rome is supreme governor of
Christ's Church: that the sacrifice of the Mass is a most true and holy
sacrifice, and that the same body that was borne of the blessed Virgin Mary, is
really and substantially there present: that it is flat heresy to deny either
prayer to Saints, or prayer for the dead: that every one must confess his
sins to a Priest: that the vows of Monks and religious persons, are most
precious jewels and ornaments of a Christian soul; whereof he was so earnest
a Patron and perswader, that in his In Vita.
lifetime he instituted 160. Monasteries. Briefly, there is no branche of the
present Roman faith, which may not be confirmed out of his godly and learned
works: Wherefore, if S. Bernard agreed wholy with the doctrine of the ancient
Church of Rome; so does the Church of Rome that now is. But if M. Abbot will
say, that in this point of merits only, he jumpeth with the ancient Church,
though in none of the rest; should he not rather have proved it to be so, then
to have taken it as granted? Yes verily, unless he would be esteemed for such
a trifler, as ordinarily does petere principium, beg that which he should
principally prove. To the purpose then I say, that neither the ancient Church
of Rome does deny the merits of good works, as may be seen in that question,
nor yet S. Bernard: for when he says, That our merits do not in justice
deserve heaven, he understands that, of our merits taken by themselves,
without Gods promise and appointment of heaven for the reward of them; the
which secluded and excepted, God should not do any body wrong, if he gave not
heaven for the same: but Gods ordinance and promise presupposed, and the grace
of Christ, by which the merit is wrought, then it does even in S. Bernards
opinion, of right deserve heaven, and God should do wrong not to repay it with
heaven. And this in effect does S. Bernard himself teach, in the second place
cited by M. Abbot, where he says: That it is just that God pay that which be
owes, De Lib. Arbitrio, In fine.
but he owes that which be promised; the promise was indeed of mercy, but now
to be performed of justice: which justice, though it be also principally Gods,
because it proceeds from his grace; yet it has pleased God, to have us to be
partners of that his justice, that he might make us merit ours of his crown.
In eo enim sibi justitiae consortem, and coronae statuit promeritorem, cum
operum quibus erat illa repromissa corona, habere dignatus est coadjutorem: For
therein did God appoint man to be copartner of his justice, and meritour of the
crown, when be vouchsafed to have him coadjutour of those works, unto which
that crown (of glory) was again and again promised. So that God is the
Author of merits, both by giving man grace to do them, and by ordaining them
to such a reward: Otherwise (says S. Bernard) those which we call merits, might
be more properly called the way to the Kingdom, not the cause of reigning.
Observe that he says, unless you take them otherwise then he had before
spoken of them. But we must bear with M. Abbot, for snatching here and there a
sentence out of the Fathers so abruptly; otherwise he could make no show for
his part out of them, because they were so full and wholly Roman Catholics.

Besides, the misconstruing of S. Gregory's words, and the corrupting of S.
Bernards, M. Abbot falsifieth both the Council of Trent, and the Annotations of
the Rhemes Testament: for the Council of Trent has not simply, that good
works do fully satisfy the law of God; but with this qualification, Pro
huius vitae statu: As far forth as the state of this life does permit. And
whereas M. Abbot fableth, that in those Annotations the justice of God is
charged, not in respect of his own promise, but in respect of the merit and
desert of the works; it is a palpable untruth, as every man may see, that will
but turn to the place: for there are these express words. Annot. in 2. Tim.
cap. 4. verse. 8.
Heaven is the goal, the mark, the price, the hire, of al striving, running,
laboring, due both by promise, and by covenant, and right debt: where you see
as well Gods promise and covenant, as the worth of the works to be mentioned.
Which is also set down distinctly in that very Chapter of the Council of
Trent, which M. Abbot cited, in these words: Eternal life is to be
propounded to them that work well, Council. Trid. sess. 6. c. 16.
and trust in God, both as a merciful grace promised to the sons of God
through Christ; and as a reward or hire by the promise of God, to be rendered to
their good works and merits. Thus you see, how roundly and familiarly M. Abbot
is wont to avouch untruths, and that (which testifies a good conscience in
the man) even clearly contrary to his own knowledge: for in the very same
both Chapter of the Council, and Annotation upon the Testament, which he
alleges, there is to be seen the plain affirmation of that which he
denies, which does convince him, to be one of the most careless men of his
credit, that ever set pen to paper.

ROBERT ABBOT.
Citat. in Orthodoxo consensu de sacra Eucharistia, cap. 1. ex Lyturg. Georgij
Cassandri.
THE same Gregory affirms, that Missa the Mass, was so called, for that they
were to be dismissed or sent away by the Deacon, that did not receive the holy
communion; for that they that should not be present at the celebration of the
Sacrament, were commanded to go forth: therefore says he, unless at the
voice of the Deacon, after the manner of our Ancestors, they that do not
communicate, be willed to go forth, the service which is called the Mass, is
not rightly performed. But now the Romish Mass is thought to be rightly
performed, albeit no man communicate but the Priest, and without any
dismissing of them that do not add themselves to the communion, the people
(as was said before) being only the spectatours and lookers on.

WILLIAM BISHOP.
M. ABBOT is very penurious, and wants matter, that comes forth with such idle
stuff as this, not taken out of S. Gregory's own works neither, (for no
such fond and unlearned thing is there to be seen,) but on the report of one
George Cassander, a man of small credit, and therefore deserves no answer.
Besides, these words, Ite Missa est, are not pronounced in the Mass by the
Deacon or Priest, until the communion be wholly past, even at the very end of
the Mass, when the people are licensed to depart; as may be seen in all Mass
books, and the ancient expositours of the Mass: wherefore they could not
serve to dismiss any before the holy communion. Lastly, why (on Gods name)
must they al be sent away, that will not communicate themselves? shall they
receive any harm, by their beholding either the blessed Sacrament, or others
receiving of it devoutly? were it not better they assisted the communicants
there, continuing in prayer, then to walk abroad idly? or is there any reason
why the communicants should be offended with their presence, that no way
seek to disquiet them, but rather honor them, for their greater fervor in
devotion, and assist them with their prayers? Idle and irreuerent gazers on, we
allow not off, nor like of their presence at any time of the Mass; but I see
no cause at al, why other orderly and devout people, should be driven out of
the Church at the time of communion.

ROBERT ABBOT.
THE same Gregory affirmed, That whosoever called himself, Gregor. lib. 6.
Epist. 30. Item, lib. 4. Epistola. 32.36.38.
or desired to be called the universal Bishop, was the forerunner of
Antichrist, and did propose to himself to follow him, who despising the legion
of Angels, that were placed in society with him, did endeavor to grow up to
the top of singularity, that so he might seem to be under none, and himself
alone to be above al. He calls it a new name, a name of error, a fond name,
proud, perverse, rash, wicked, profane: which (says he) none of my
Predecessors consented to use, by which no man has presumed to be called,
that was in truth a holy man. Decret. Gregorij de foro comp. c. Licet.
But soon after the time of Gregory, the Bishop of Rome took upon him that
hateful name, and has since continued the same, challenging the whole world
to be his Dyocesse, and is grown to that height of pride, as that he doubts
not to proclaim: Extrauag. de Maio. and Obed. ca. Vnam Sanctam.
That it stands upon the necessity of salvation, for every soul to be
subject to the Bishop of Rome.

WILLIAM BISHOP.
THIS is a precious argument with the Protestants, and though it has been an
hundred times (I ween) sufficiently answered by ours; yet they do as freshly
propose it, and as eagerly follow it, as if it were not to be satisfied:
whereas in truth it is but a mere sophistication, A vocibus ad res (as the
learned term it) from the word universal, unto the supreme authority of
government, thus: The Patriarch of Constantinople cannot be called an
universal Bishop, nor any Bishop of Rome has consented to take that name of
universal Bishop upon him: ergo, no Bishop of Rome has been supreme governor
of Christ's Church. To which fallacy it is most easy to answer: First, that
albeit the Patriarch of Constantinople, could not so call himself in a lawful
and good meaning, but proudly and wickedly; (because he had his jurisdiction
limited within the bounds of his own Patriarkship, and had nothing to do
with any other churches that were without it, so that his power was in no
sense universal, that is, spread over all the world): yet this name might in some
good sense notwithstanding, have been given unto the Bishop of Rome, as S.
Gregory himself in one of the same Epistles which M. Abbot cites, does
intimate. For vvriting to the Patriarch of Alexandria he says: Lib. 4. Epist.
36.
Your Holiness knows, that by the Council of Chalcedon, (which was one of
the four first general Councels, most highly esteemed off by S. Gregory) this
name of vniuersallity was offered to me, as Bishop of the Apostolic See; for
(as he testifies Epist. 32. of the same book) that name was in honor of S.
Peter Prince of the Apostles, attributed by many in that Council, unto the
Bishop of Rome: yet (says he) none of my Predecessors consented to use it;
because verily if one Patriarch be called universal, the other are made no
Patriarchs at al. Briefly then to dispatch this great matter: that name
universal (as it was challenged by John Patriarch of Constantinople, who had no
right to it in any good sense) was presumptuous, perverse, and profane; in
which consideration S. Gregory so termed it. Neither would he, nor any of
his predecessors use that name, though in that sense, that they had charge and
command over the universal Church, it might have been attributed to them: yet
because it was subject to another construction, to wit, that the Bishop of Rome
was the only, truly, and proper Bishop of every Diocese, and other named
Bishops were not true and proper Bishops there of, but the universal Bishops
Vicars, Suffraganes, and Substitutes; therefore they utterly avoided that name,
as matter of jealousy and scandal, choosing the humble style of seruus
seruorum Dei: The servant of Gods servants. For the further satisfaction of the
learned reader, I will prove out of S. Gregory, in the very same place quoted by
M. Abbot, both that he wrote against the name of universal Bishop in the later
sense: And that notwithstanding he refused that name, yet that he acknowledged
and taught, the Bishop of Rome to have supreme authority over all the Church of
Christ.

Touching the first, the words before alleged out of his 36. Epistle, Lib. 4.
Epist. 36.
do demonstrate so much, to wit: If one Patriarch be called universal, the
other are made no Patriarchs at al; which can have no other sense, then that
the calling of one Patriarch or Bishop Universal, does signify him so to be a
Bishop in every place, that no other besides him, can be truly and properly
called Bishop, but must be his Vicar and Subdelegate. The like says he in his
34. Epistle to the Emperesse: Lib. 4. Epist. 34.
That his brother and fellow Bishop John, striued to be called Bishop alone.
And in the 7. book, and 69. Epistle to Eusebius he says: Si vniuersalis est,
restat vt vos Episcopi non sitis; If one Bishop be universal, it remains that
you be no Bishops. This then is most certain, that S. Gregory spoke against
the name of Universal Bishop, taken in this sense; that he was so a Bishop, as
no other but he could be Bishop in any place: Marry, if we understand by it,
one man to have the general charge of all the Churches in the world, yet so as
there be also Bishops and Archbishops his brothers, who have the particular and
proper government of their several Diocese; then S. Gregory tells us
plainly, that S. Peter and his Successors the Bishops of Rome, were such:
these be his words. Lib. 4. Epist. 76.
It is manifest to all that know the Gospel, that the charge of the whole
Church, was by our Lords own mouth committed to S. Peter, Prince of all the
Apostles. And again in the same Epistle: Behold, Peter received the keys of
the Kingdom of heaven; the power of binding and loosing is given to him; the
charge and principality of the whole Church is committed to him: which is also
repeated in one of the Epistles cited by M. Abbot. Lib. 4. Epist. 32.
And that by S. Peter, this universal charge and authority was left unto the
Bishops and See of Rome, no man can witness it more manifestly, then S.
Gregory has done. First, having proved out of the word of God S. Peter's
supremacy, he adjoyneth: Lib. 6. Epist. 201.
Therefore though there were many Apostles, yet for the principality it self,
the only seat of the Prince of the Apostles has prevailed in authority. As
far as the Sea Apostolic is evidently known to be set over al Churches, by
the authority of God: So far amongst other manifold cares, that does greatly
occupy us, when for the consecration of a Bishop our sentence is expected.
Again, Lib. 2. Epist. 69. Lib. 7. Epist. 64.
For whereas he (the Patriarch of Constantinople) acknowledges himself to be
subject unto the Apostolic See (of Rome) I know not what Bishop is not subject
unto it. Moreover, What thing soever shall be done (in that Council) without the
authority and consent of the Sea Apostolic, it is of no strength and virtue.
Whereas on the other side he says: Those things that are once ratified, Lib.
7. Epist. 69.
by the authority of the Sea Apostolic, need no further strength or
confirmation. If any man desire to see, how S. Gregory himself practiced that
sovereign authority over all the parts of the Christian world, let him but
read his Epistles, and he shall find it most perspicuously; Magdeburg. Centur.
6. In Indice verbo Gregorius.
even as their own great writers of the Centuries do testify, directing them
to the places in his works, where they shall find the same. How devoide then
was M. Abbot of al good conscience and honest dealing. that would under the
color of his writing against the name of universal in that sense, persuade the
simple, that S. Gregory utterly misliked of the supremacy of the Bishop of
Rome? Now because that S. Gregory has been always highly esteemed, and
greatly respected of both Latin and Greek Church, for his singular holiness and
learning; and was besides the principal cause under God, of the conversion of
us Englishmen unto the Christian faith; I will note out of his works
summarily, what was his opinion of many of the questioned points of faith,
between the Protestants and us, because M. Abbot cites him against us: that
every one may see, what religion was first planted amongst us Englishmen, and
continued for a thousand years.

Of the Supremacy, and Merit of good works, has been spoken already.
Concerning the sacrifice of the Mass, it was daily offered up to God in his
age, by most holy Personages: witness these his words. Homil. 37. in Euang.
Most dear brethren, many of you have known Cassius the Bishop of
Maruiensis, whose custom was to offer up to God daily sacrifice, so that
almost no day of his life passed, in which he did not offer to God almighty the
propitiatory Host, whose life also was very conformable thereunto; and then
declares, how in a vision he received a commandment from God, to hold on and
to continue to do as he did: And at the feast of S. Peter and S. Paul, thou
shall (says God) come to me, and I will repay thee thy reward. Again, he
relates of the most blessed Pope Agapitus, that having a dumb and lame man
presented unto him by his friends, who professed their confidence in the power
of God, and authority of S. Peter, he presently bent himself to prayer; And
beginning the solemnities of Mass, Lib. 3. Dialog. cap. 3.
he offers up sacrifice in the sight of almighty God: which being ended he
went from the Altar, took the lame man by the hand, and the people beholding
of it, he presently set him upright upon his feet; and putting the body of our
Lord into his mouth, his tongue that before was dumb, then began to speak.
Besides, of him self thus S. Gregory says: Homil. 8. in Euang. Lib. 4.
Dialog. cap. 55.
Because we are (by Gods grace) this day (of Christ's Nativity) to celebrate
Mass three times, we cannot long speak of the Gospel. And further, He caused
the sacrifice of the Mass to be offered thirty days together, for the soul
of one Iustus a Monk, until he was by the oblation of that comfortable saving
Host delivered from pains. This may suffice for his testimony of the sacrifice
of the Mass, that it is a true propitiatory sacrifice, and to be daily offered
both for the quick and the dead.

Now touching the Real presence, of which S. Gregory writes in this manner:
Christ living now in himself immortally, Dialog. lib. 4. cap. 58.
is yet sacrificed for us in this mystery of the holy oblation: for his body is
there received, his flesh is distributed to the salvation of the people; his
blood is not now shed by the hands of Infidels, but is powered into the mouths
of the faithful. Item, he says upon these words: Homil. 14. in Euang.
(A good sheepe-heard gives his life for his sheep) Christ is that good
Pastor, who gave his life for his sheep, that he might turn his body and
blood into the Sacrament, and fill those sheep which he had redeemed, with the
food of his own flesh. Moreover, expounding these words of Job: Who will
grant us that we may be filled with his flesh? The Jews (says he) and the
believing Gentiles, do both desire to be filled with Christ's flesh: the
obstinate Jews in striving to extinguish it, by spilling of it; but the good
Gentiles in coveting to feed their hungry minds with his flesh in the daily
sacrifice. This I hope be plain enough for the Real presence.

Now to the Inuocaton of Saints, and the worshipping their Relikes and Images.
S. Gregory persuades us to pray to the Saints, both because they are Patrones
very gracious with our judge JESUS Christ, and we very sinful creatures, that
without the favorable help of others, are most like to be condemned. Hom. 32.
super Euang. In fine.
Wherefore (says he) sue to those blessed Martirs, that they may help you
with their prayers; get them to be Protectours of your guiltiness: They look
to be requested, and as it were seek that they may be sought unto. In the same
place he shows, what miracles were wrought at their tombs, and what gifts
God bestowed on them that came to pray there: The sick men (says he) do come
and are cured; perjured persons presenting themselves there, are vexed by the
Devil; men possed with evil spirits, be there delivered: How gloriously then
do they live, there where they live, (that is in heaven) if they live so
miraculously here where they are dead? He propounds this question, how it
comes to pass, that Martirs do many times show greater favors, and work
greater miracles, in places where their bodies lie not? and answers in these
words: Where holy Martirs rest in their bodies, 2. Dialog. cap. vlt.
no doubt but that they can do many miracles, as they do unto them that with
a pure mind seek for them; but because weak minds might doubt whether they
be present to hear, there where their bodies be not, it is necessary that
there they work greater maruailes, least weakelings should doubt of their
presence: but they whose minds be fastened upon God, have so much the more
merit, for that they know them not to lie there in body, and yet not to fail
to hear them. Do you note how he reputeth it to be a weakness of faith, to
doubt whether the Saints in heaven do hear our prayers or no? which very
doubt he resolves in proper terms in another place, where treating of the
knowledge which the souls departed have, does say of the blessed souls in
heaven: 12. Moral. cap. 13.
Seeing that the souls of the Saints do inwardly behold the brightness of God
almighty, we must in no case believe, that there is any thing without it, which
they are ignorant off.

That Churches were dedicated in the honor of Martirs, and holy days kept in
remembrance of their deaths, he witnesses in twenty places. That Mass was
also said daily in eorum veneratione, to their worship, Lib. 7. Epist. cap. 29.
That Candels were lighted in the honor of S. Paul, to testify that he with
the light of his preaching filled the world, Lib. 12. Epist. 9. See the last
Epistle of the same book, where he ordains that lights be taken to serve
the high Altar of S. Medard. Now for the love and reverence, which we ought to
carry to their holy relikes, let this serve. A most religious Princess who had
in her own Palace built a Church in the honor of S. Paul, made suit unto S.
Gregory, to have S. Paul's Head, or Handkercheefe, to sanctify and enrich the
same: to whom S. Gregory vvrote this answer; Lib. 3. Epist. 30.
that he was very willing to pleasure her, yet as sorry that he could not do
it in that sort. For (says he) the bodies of S. Peter and S. Paul, do in
their Church glister and lighten with so many miracles and terrors, that no
man dare approach near them, not so much as to worship them, without great
dread: but he trusted she should not want the virtue of those holy Apostles
(whom with all her heart she loved) to protect her. And touching the
hand-kercheefe which she demanded, it did lie with the body, and could not be
touched more then the body it self: yet that her most excellent grace might
not be wholly frustrate of her religious desire, he would send her some part of
those chains, which S. Paul carried both about his neck and hands, and by
which many miracles were wrought, if with filing be could get off any thing.
For when many that come hither do crave that blessing, that they might have of
that dust, which is filed off those chains; the Priest coming with the file^
does for some presently get off something: whereas for other, he drawing the
file on the chains a long time, nothing at al will off it. Further, to a Noble
man of France he sent the blessing of S. Peter, and a little Cross, within the
which was enclosed some such filing of S. Peter's chains; Which for a time
(says he) bound S. Peter's neck, Lib 2. Epist. 72.
but shall loose your neck from sin for ever. Some relikes also of S.
Laurence Grid-yron were enclosed in the four corners of that same Cross; That
by the help of that whereon his body was broiled, your mind (says he) may be
kindled in the love of God.

Touching the Images of Saints, he not only approves them to be made, but
teaches them to be set in Churches, Lib. 7. Epist. 119.
that they who cannot read, may by beholding of them, learn to imitate some
of their virtues. Moreover, he exhorts al men to worship them, by kneeling
before them; yet with this caveat, that they do not yield them any such
adoration as is proper to God. What a protector he was of Purgatory and prayer
for the dead, Lib. 7. Epist. ad Secundin. Lib. 4. Dialog. cap. 20.
may be seen in these places where he says; that we must believe that there
is a Purgatory fire, to cleanse lighter offenses after this life, before the
day of judgment: And proves it both by Christ's words, Math. 12. verse. 32.
If any man blaspheme against the holy Ghost, it shall not be forgiven him,
neither in this world nor in the world to come; And out of S. Paul, 1. Cor. 3.
verse. 15.
He shall be saved, yet so as by fire. And in the beginning of the third
penitential Psalm, expounding these words of the Prophet; O Lord rebuke me
not in thy fury, neither chastise me in thy wrath, he adjoineth: This is as
much as if David had said, I know that after this life some shall feel the fire
of Purgatory, others shall receive the sentence of eternal damnation: But
because I esteem that transitory fire of Purgatory, to be more intolerable
then any tribulation of this life, I do not only wish not to be reproved in
the fury of eternal damnation, for I fear also to be purged in the wrath of
thy transitory correction. In this exposition he agrees with S. Augustine
upon the same Psalm, even as he did in the first with the same profound Doctor
Lib. 21. de Cinit. cap. 24. Et lib. 6. contra Iouintanum. cap. 9. Further he
teaches to pray for the souls departed, Lib. 4. Dialog. cap. 50. And to offer
sacrifice for them, Ibid. cap. 55. and else where in many places.

To speak a word of the single and chaste life of the Clergy. S. Gregory
says, None ought to be admitted to the ministry of the Altar, Lib. 1. Epist.
42. L. 12. In fine, In decretis.
saving such whose chastity has been approved before they were made
Ministers. Again, If any Priest or Deacon do marry, accursed be he. How well
he liked of the vows and holy profession of Monks and Nuns, may appear by
that, that he himself was one of them. And he relates, Homil. 11. in
Ezechielem, and Hom. 40. in Euangel.
that there were 3000. Nuns of name, in his time within the walls of Rome;
whose life was so holy, and so much exercised in fasting, prayers, and tears,
that he did believe, (had it not been for them) none of the rest had been
able to have subsisted so many years, amongst the swords of the Longobardes.
He then did not as the Protestants do, think religious persons unprofitable
members of the common weal, by whose holy lives and devout prayers, he
esteemed the City to have been preserved.

For the sprinckling of holy Water in Churches, erecting of Altars, placing
thereof Relikes of Saints, see Lib. 9. Epist. 71. For Pilgrimage to holy
places, Lib. 4. Epist. cap. 44. Homil. 37. in Euang. and Lib. 2. Dialog. cap.
17. Finally, if I would stand to rehearse all that S. Gregory has written in
the defense of the Catholic Roman faith, I should make a whole volume. And
this brief extract out of his own authentike works, vvil suffice (I hope) to
demonstrate, what a jolly patron he was of the Protestants doctrine, and with
what good conscience M. Abbot and his fellows do allege him, as a favorer
of their errors; which he disproued, confuted, and condemned so fully and
particularly, little less then a thousand years, before they were hatched
and thrust into the world. And must it not needs work in all considerate
English-mens hearts, a very vehement inclination to embrace the now professed
Roman religion, to see the same point by point, professed, taught, and
practiced, a thousand year gone, by so wise, holy, and learned a Bishop, who
was also as I noted before, the chosen instrument of God, principally to
procure our reclaiming from Idolatry, and the serving of false gods, unto the
true and sincere faith of JESUS Christ? That faith which he taught, was planted
first amongst us Englishmen, See the Catholic Apology out of Protestants.
as the most learned among the Protestants do confess; the same has also
ever since (until of late) been wholly retained of al our most holy Ancestors:
is it not then a great shame for us to degenerate so far, and to fall so
fondly from it? I trust in the mercies and goodness of God, that we shall once
have grace to perceive, understand, and amend it.

ROBERT ABBOT.
GREGORY the ninth, Bishop of Rome, though living in later time of great
corruption; yet by the ancient doctrine of the Catholic Church could say: that
Greg. Ep. ad Germ Archi-Episc. Co^stat. apud Math. Paris. in Henrico tertio.
the not knowing of the Scriptures by the testimony of the truth it self, is
the occasion of errors; and therefore that it is expedient for all men to read
or bear the same. But now the doctrine of Rome is, that it is pernicious for
the people to meddle with the Scriptures, that reading and knowledge thereoff,
is the breeding of error and heresy; and as dogs from holy things, so the
people must be secluded from the reading and use of them.

WILLIAM BISHOP.
M. ABBOT seems to be fallen into a dangerous consumption, and to draw fast
upon a desperate estate, or else he would never use such silly salues as this,
to prolong the life of his forlorn cause. From Gregory the first he leapeth
over the heads of an hundred Popes his Successors, and lights next upon
Gregory the ninth, that lived above six hundred years after him, whom also he
cites not out of his own works, but from the report of another; and when al
is done, he has not a word out of him that will greatly help their cause. For
what says he, that we say not? we hold with him that the want of knowledge of
the Scriptures, is the cause of heresy: for he that knows and understands
well the holy Scriptures, can never fall into error or heresy. Besides we
deny not, but that it is expedient for all men, either to read the Scriptures,
or to hear them: to read them themselves if they be men of judgment, and
endued with a lowly spirit, carrying with them this rule of S. Peter; 2. Pet.
1. verse. 19.
That the Scriptures as they were not written by a private spirit, so they must
not be understood by a private interpretation: wherefore in all dark and
doubtful places, they must not trust to their own wit, but make their recourse
unto the Catholic Church, ( Ioh 14. v. 26. Ioh. 16. v. 13. 1. Tim. 3. verse. 15.
Which is directed by the spirit of God into al truth, and therefore called the
pillar and ground of truth) for the true sense and meaning of them. All the
rest, both Men, Women, and Children, we would have to hear the holy Scriptures
read unto them, and expounded by their lawful Pastors, and approved Preachers,
who are chosen and sent to feed their souls, with that heavenly food of the
word of God: So that Gregory the ninth, differs nothing from Paul the fifth,
the present Pope of Rome, who is fully of the same opinion: And M. Abbots
audatious assertions to the contrary, are but mere slanders. For we hold it
not pernicious for all sorts of people to read the Scriptures, unless it be
in such false translations, as the Protestants have made; but have our selves
translated them into the vulgar tongue, that al Godly well minded people, of any
reasonable capacity, may diligently and devoutly read them at their good
opportunity.

M. Abbot was wont heretofore, to allege some author or other, to give the
better countenance to his lies; but now he is feign to face them out himself,
without the help of any other: and having put his special confidence in lying,
as they did of whom the Prophet speaks; Esai. 28.
Posuimus mendacium spem nostram, We have put our hope in lying, he thrusts
them out lightly by huddles. False then it is first, that we teach the people
to be secluded from the reading of Scripture, as dogs are from holy things:
for we would have none other debarred from reading of them, but wavering,
wilful, and perverse fellows, 2. Pet. 3. verse. 16.
Who (as S. Peter teaches) abuse the holy Scriptures, to their own
destruction, and to the seducing of others. Secondly, it is a lie in grain, to
avouch that we teach the knowledge of the Scriptures to breed error and
heresy, unless he mean the corrupt and perverse knowledge of them, which is
rather to be termed the ignorance of them: for the true knowledge of them
delivers us from al error and heresy, and settleth us in the sound doctrine
of the Catholic Roman Church. True it is that many now a-daies, who have some
smattering in the words and verses of the text, having itching ears and
wavering minds, are the sooner lead away through their little skill in the
Scriptures, and ouer-great presumption of their own wits: for hearing
Heretics cite for proof of their heresy, some texts of Scripture which they
know to be Gods word, and having neither sufficient learning to answer them,
nor grace to ask counsel therein of the true Pastors of Christ's Church, who
would rightly inform them, become a pray to the ravening wolves. Again, the
very experience of this age does sufficiently inform an understanding man,
that the over common reading of Gods word by the more rude and unruly sort,
has rather engendered a corruption of manners, then bredde any amendment
thereof: for every peevish scripturist, puffed up with the opinion of his own
learning, will rather take upon him to be a teacher of others, then a practiser
of them himself. And often very preposterously, Women will teach Men, Children
their Fathers, Sheep their Pastors: in a word, many will be jangling about
matter of religion, and very few studious to live religiously. These disorders
I grant do not spring directly out of Gods word, but out of our corrupt
nature, too too prone to presumption on our own skill: And there fore, let any
reasonable man judge whether they did not more vvisely, who used to bridle
this itching appetite of reading in the curious, and thought it better to bind
them to follow the advice of their spiritual guides, which have charge of their
souls; then our new brethren, who allow every Man, Woman, and Child to read
what books of Scripture they list, and to wrangle about them so commonly? S.
Paul insinuates, that al places of Scripture are not fit for all sorts of men;
but in some parts, 1. Cor. cap. 3. verse. 2.
There is milk for sucklings; and in others, Strong meat for the more
perfect: And our Savior Christ JESUS spoke much in parables, which are not
for every ones capacity. A sword is a good weapon, but put it into the hand of
a mad man, it will do more harm then good: so if some men get a smattering
in holy Scriptures, they will use it full madly. Wherefore the Catholic Church,
though she wish every child of hers to know so much of the Scriptures, as vvil
do them any way good: yet she knows it to be wholesome and very necessary,
that a moderation be used therein, according to the discreet advise and
judgment of Godly and prudent Ghostly Fathers.

ROBERT ABBOT.
HIEROME and RVFFINVS by the doctrine of the Church of Rome, Hier. in Prolog.
Galiat. and in Praefat. lib. Salomonis. Ruffin. in expositione Simboli.
excluded from Canonical Scripture the same books that we do; the books of
Judith, Tobias, Wisdom, Ecclesiasticus, Baruch, and the rest: they say
plainly, Non sunt in Canone, non sunt Canonici; They are not Canonical, nor in
the Canon. The Church reads them for instruction of manners, not to give any
authority to any Ecclesiastical doctrine. But now the Church of Rome, will have
them to be received and believed for Canonical Scriptures, and of equal and
like authority withal the other books.

WILLIAM BISHOP.
I Observe first, that M. Abbot forgetting himself (which is a foul fault in
a liar) and leaving his own prescript order, is now fallen clean from S.
Peter and S. Paul's successors, the Bishops of Rome. Secondly, that he
nevertheless holds his old custom in lying. I wink at that petty lie, that
he thrusts in Baruch among the rest, which his Authors do not; but may not
dissemble this greater: for whereas he says, Hierome and Ruffinus by the
doctrine of the Church of Rome, exclude from Canonical Scripture the same
books that we do; therein he fableth: for though they so did, yet did they it
not by the doctrine of the Church of Rome. For Innocentius the first, Pope of
Rome; whom S. Augustine alleges, stiling him a Saint, and ranking him with
S. Ireneus, S. Cyprian, and S. Ambrose, in these words: August. lib. 1. cont.
Iulianu^, cap. 4.
Cum hijs etiam ipse considet, etsi posterior tempore, prior loco; In time
somewhat after some of them, but in dignity of place before them. This holy and
learned Bishop of Rome I say, who flourished in S. Hieromes days, (or else S.
Augustine who was in manner his equal, Epist. 3. ad Exuper. cap. vltimo.
could not have cited his testimony) does expressly declare those very books to
be Canonical Scripture. I trust his declaration that ruled that See of Rome,
will rather be taken for the doctrine of the Church of Rome, then any other man's
besides. Again, Pope Gelasius the first, who lived not long after him (which
also is one of M. Abbots chosen patrons) did in public assembly, In Decret. de
Libris sacris in 2. tomo Co^ciliorum.
(assisted also with 80. other Bishops) define the same books to be Canonical
Scripture: who can then doubt, but that the Church of Rome, in S. Hieromes and
Ruffinus days, took those books to be Canonical Scripture? wherefore it was
but M. Abbots addition to the text, to affirm that Hierome and Ruffinus,
according to the doctrine of the Church of Rome did so say. Besides, the third
Council of Carthage holden at the felfe-same time, Council. 3. Carthag. cap. 47.
does declare the said books of Tobias, Ecclesiasticus, etc. to be Canonical
Scripture; affirming also, that therein they followed the sound judgment of
their Ancestors. Lib. 2. de Doctrina Christ. cap. 8. and Lib. 18. de Ciuitat.
cap. 36.
S. Augustine in sundry places of his works, does by name declare the books
of Wisdom, Ecclesiasticus, Tobias, Judith, and the two books of the Machabees
to be Canonical Scripture; and seems to expound S. Hieromes sentence in these
words: The books of the Machabees, the Jews indeed do not receive; but the
Church of God takes them for Canonical Scriptures. Whence we after the
ancient, Lib. 7. Etimolog. cap. ^.
learned, and holy Bishop Isidorus, do collect this distinction: The Canon of
the Scriptures is twofold; the one of the Hebrews, the other of the
Christians: that of the Hebrews was compounded long before Christ's days, in
which these books of Wisdom, Ecclesiasticus, etc. are not comprehended,
because they were written in later times, and not in the Hebrew tongue.
Prolog. Galiator.
Of this Hebrew Canon speaks S. Hierome in that Prologue, as it will be
manifest to all that shall but read it; for he says first, That the Hebrews
have but 22. letters, and according to the same number but 22. books in their
Canon: then reckoning them up by name, infers; therefore the book of
Wisdom, etc. be not in the Canon, to wit, that Canon of the Hebrews whereof
he there spoke: which also appears more evidently by his answer to
Ruffinus, who objected against him as a shameful reproach, that he rejected
certain Chapters of Daniel, because they were not in the Hebrew, though they
were in the Septuaginta. S. Hierome excuses himself, saying: Lib. 2. cont.
Ruffinu^, versus finem.
That therein be showed the opinion of the Hebrews, but did not deliver his
own sentence. And as he there says, That he who would calumniate that his
doing, should show himself a sycophant: so he does thereby give al others to
understand, that he who would after that fair warning, build any Catholic
conclusion upon his relation of the Hebrews opinion, should prove him self a
fool, in trusting to so sandy and slippery a foundation. And yet further, in
his Preface upon the book of Judith he teaches, That the Hebrews did not
take that book of Judith for Canonical; yet the first Nicene Council (which
is the most authentike of al general Councels) did account it in the number of
holy Scripture: so that in S. Hieromes opinion also, though these books were
not in the Canon of the Hebrews; yet they may be very sincere Canonical
Scripture with the Christians, who have the spirit of discerning and judging
of such Canonical books, as well as the ancient Hebrews had. But S. Hierome
says in the later place, That the Church does not use them to establish
Ecclesiastical doctrine. I answer, that the Churches of Afrike did use them
even in his own time, and the Church of Rome, (which is the principal of al
Europe at the least) as has been proved before: so that his words must
needs be restrained unto some Churches in Asia, where he lived for the most
part; or it may be said, that the Church had not then when S. Hierome so wrote,
generally declared them to be Canonical, though very shortly after, even before
his dying day, they were in the most principal places of the Church, both
declared and received for Canonical. That the Church had sufficient author^ty,
by declaration to make books of Scripture Canonical, that before were not
generally taken for such, the Protestants themselves must needs confess;
because they take for Canonical, the Epistle to the Hebrews, and diverse
others, with the Revelation of S. John, which were doubted off by many of the
learned Christians in the primitive Church, Lib. 3. Hist. Eccles. c. 10. and 19.
as witnesses Eusebius.

ROBERT ABBOT.
VIGILIVS borne at Rome, and Bishop of Trent, according to the doctrine of the
Church of Rome that then was, affirms: That the body of Christ when it was
upon the earth, Vigil. co^t. Eutich. lib. 4.
was not in heaven, and that now because it is in heaven, it is not upon the
earth. But now the Council of Trent and Church of Rome persuade us, that the
very body of Christ though it be in heaven; yet is really and substantially
here upon earth also, upon the Altar, and in the Pix, and in the Priests belly,
and in the bellies of as many as are partakers of the Sacrament.

WILLIAM BISHOP.
In vita S. Sisinnij.
THIS large amplification is shortly answered. Vigilius though a holy Catholic
Bishop, as his praying to Saints does demonstrate; yet was none of S. Peter's
successors: neither does he speak any thing against Christ's real and
substantial presence in the Bles. Sacrament, if his words be taken in his own
meaning, to wit; that Christ since his ascension is not here in that manner and
fashion, as he did converse upon the earth with his Disciples, that is in the
form of man. Which I gather out of Vigilius his own words; for he says,
that Christ is departed from us in the form of a servant, and so according
unto that form of a servant, in the habit and likeness of a man he is not
present with us: but the very same body under the form of bread, is in as many
places, as the blessed Sacrament is consecrated. See for this more in the
question of the Real presence.

ROBERT ABBOT.
Hier. in Catalogo.
TERTVLLIAN being for envy of the Clergy of Rome, fallen into the heresy of
Montanus, and thereupon oppugning the same Church, declares what the said
Church then taught concerning fasting, Tertul. de Iejun. aduersus Psythicos.
of purpose to dispute against it. They say (says he) that men are to fast
indifferently at their discretion, not by commandment, every one according to
his own time and occasion; that the Apostles did so observe, imposing no yoke
of standing fasts, and such as should in common be kept of al, etc.

WILLIAM BISHOP.
FROM the Pastors of the Sea of Rome, M. Abbot is declined to the enemies of
the same Church: does he not fairly observe his own order and promise? But
well M. Abbot, if Tertullian for envy of the Clergy of Rome fell into heresy,
let your charity toward the Roman Clergy, help to draw your self out of the
same sink of heresy. But where was your judgment, to cite an author vvriting
out of the corrupt humor of envy (as you confess your self) for an upright
and indifferent reporter of his adversaries cause? Did ever envy yet learn to
speak well? Why did you not rather allege some sound Catholic Author, for
the reporter of Catholics opinions? What? is it because as Vultures and Ravens
do rather fly to rotten carrion and dead stinking carcases, then to any sound
bodies; so they that seek to devour poor sinful souls, do make choice of
tainted and corrupt authors, out of their contagion to infect and destroy
others? Simile simili gaudet, Like will to like. Nay what if M. Abbot be not
satisfied with the badde words of Tertullian (which proceeded out of envy
and malice) but does yet by chopping and changing of them, make them far
worse then they be in the author? is he not then to be esteemed as a most
corrupt mangler of antiquity? Tertullian to make his own error seem the
less, proposes odd trifling arguments against it, which he could answer
with more ease, and that after an odious manner, as the adverse party is wont
to do; that he might make the Catholics out of love with them: yet does M.
Abbot relate the same in great gravity, as the most sincere and substantial
proofs of the contrary party, saving that now and then (after his old fashion)
he falsifieth his author too.

Now to the words of Tertullian: the first are craftily cropped off by him;
for Catholics never said so absolutely, That they were to fast at their own
discretion, and not by commandment: for Tertullian confesses there, that
Catholics held themselves bound to fast the Lent, and on Wednesdaies and
Fridaies; therefore they could not say that they were to fast only at their
own discretion. True it is, that they answered him and the Montanists, that
they were not bound to keep any of their new devised fasting-daies, nor to
fast after the manner that they prescribed, and that by the commandment (as
they said and lied) of the Paraclete or holy Ghost; from such fasts they
proclaimed themselves free: vvhereupon he maliciously reported, that they said
they might fast when they list, and were not bound to fast by any commandment.
Secondly, whereas Tertullian says in the name of Catholics, That the Apostles
imposed no yoke of standing fasts, and such as should be commonly kept of al;
Nisi eo tempore quo oblatus est sponsus (by which he means specially the
Lent, wherein the memory of Christ's death is celebrated:) and afterward
mentions the Catholics halfe-fasts, (as he terms them) of Wednesdaies and
Fridaies; M. Abbot to make them speak like good Protestants, dasheth all that
clean out of the text, leaving them to say, that the Apostles appointed no
fasting days at al, neither Lent nor Fridaies: So what by Tertullians odious
relation, and M. Abbots false addition or substraction, there is a pretty piece
of cosenage, to gul the simple and unwary reader. The words then of
Tertullian, being first such as proceeded from envy, and then also much mangled
afterward, and peeced together at M. Abbots pleasure, I hold it not necessary
to stand upon them; but do come unto M. Abbots inferences, and goodly
buildinges upon such a deceitful foundation.

ROBERT ABBOT.
SEE (M. Bishop) how like a Protestant, the Church of Rome spoke in those
days: would you not think that Luther, or Calvin, or Beza were the Author of
these words? How lightly do you regard these arguments from us, which the
Church of Rome 1400. years ago, used to the very same purpose that we now do?
But the Church of Rome has learned now to sing another song: she condemned
the heresy of Montanus then, but now she maintains it. I avouch it M.
Bishop, that concerning fasting, neither you nor al your fellows, are able to
acquit the Church of Rome of the heresy of Montanus.

WILLIAM BISHOP.
I See (M. Abbot) how like the Protestant humor is, unto the distempered
spirits of old time. I think verily, that Luther, Calvin, Beza, and such late
plagues of Christendom, do yet more deceitfully and falsely report Catholics
opinions and arguments, then ever Tertullian did. How lightly these arguments
which you afterward enforce, are to be regarded, shall shortly appear. The
Church of Rome has not changed one note of her old song concerning fasting,
neither shall you with the help of al your companions, prove us to be
Montanists in this point of fasting. I being the simplest of a thousand amongst
the learned on our side, vvil quickly clear our party from that imputation:
And contrariwise I doubt not, but to prove you and yours, to be the disciples
of louinian and Aerius, old condemned Heretics in this point of fasting. Let
us lay words a-side and come to arguments.

ROBERT ABBOT.
S. Paul to Timothy, of them that commanded to abstain from meats, answered;
that that place touched Marcion and Tatianus and such others, who condemned
the creatures as evil and unclean; not them, who did not reject the
creatures, but only forbear the use of them at sometimes: the same answer
give the Papists. Tertullian used for the Montanists. Look what cauils and
calumniations the Papists use against us, of feasting in steed of fasting, of
Epicurisme and pampering the belly; the same Tertullian being a Montanist, used
against the doctrine of the Church of Rome: whereas neither that Church then,
nor we now, do reject the true fasting which the Scripture teaches, but only
those opinions of fasting, which the Montanists first devised, and the Papists
have received against the Scripture; to forbear continually by way of
religion, such and such days, from such and such meats, with a mind there in
and by their very forbearing, to do a worship to God, to satisfy for sin,
to merit and purchase the forgiveness thereoff, and to deserve eternal life.

WILLIAM BISHOP.
BEFORE we come to join issue, let this maxim of arguing be observed: He that
vvil prove one to be the proper disciple of any Sect-master, must do it by
producing the proper and peculiar doctrine of the same sect, and not by
alleging such points of doctrine, as are common to that sect with many
others. For example, if I would prove a Protestant to be an Arrian, I must not
think to perform it, by proving that they believed in one God as the Arrians
did, or that they fly to the touchstone of the Scriptures, as the Arrians
did, refusing Traditions; and that they relied much on the power of temporal
Princes, setting the Bishop of Romes authority at naught, etc. for none of
these be proper branches of the Arrian sect, but common to them with others.
Marry, if I could prove them to affirm the Son of God touching his divinity
to be lesser then his Father, or after his Father, or not of the same substance
with his heavenly Father; I must needs be taken then to speak to the
purpose: Even so, if M. Abbot do insist upon those points of the Montanists
errors, which were proper to themselves, and not common with others, proving us
to maintain the same; I then will grant, that he acquiteth himself like a
brave champion. But if he do make al his instances, in such general
circumstances of fastinges, as the Catholic Church then did maintain, as well
as the Montanists; Yea that the Protestants themselves do in part uphold and
defend, as well as the Catholics: then every man must needs acknowledge and
take him for a wrangling Sophister, and a vain bragging writer, that crakes of
wonders and performs nothing. Let us now descend to his particulars, and try
what sharpness of wit, and soundness of judgment he shows therein.

The Montanists (says he) appointed certain and standing days for fasting,
and forbearing of certain meats: so do the Papists. I grant: what? be they
therefore Montanists? then the Protestants be also Montanists, because they
appoint certain and standing days of fastes, as Friday, Saturday, the Imber,
and Lent-fasts, and many feasts eues; which days they appoint for the
forbearing of flesh. Is not this a proper piece of Montanisme, that is common
to so many? Nay, the Apostles themselves did the like, as Tertullian in the
same place grants: were they also therefore Montanists? see how M. Abbot
begins to shame himself? To the next. The Montanists did not take any
creature or meat to be unclean, but did only by way of devotion forbear at
certain times: and the Papists do also the same; which I also grant. And
do not the Protestants agree with them in the former part, thinking no meat
to be unclean? Now in the later they do worse; for they forbear flesh at
certain times, not of devotion to chastise their bodies, and to please God, as
the Montanists pretended: but for worldly policy, of favoring the increase of
flesh, for the upholding of the trade of fishermen, and to please their
Prince. Here let any Godly man be judge, whether of these two ends of pleasing
God or the Prince, be more Christianlike, and whether of them do more savor
of the spirit of God? he shall no doubt find, that herein it is much better to
concur with Tertullian, then consort with the Protestants. And that the best
learned in the primitive Church so thought and so taught, I have proved in the
Question of fasting. The Montanists being urged with that place of S. Paul,
that it was the doctrine of Devils, to command to abstain from meats,
answered; that it touched Marcion and Tatianus, who condemned meats as
unclean in their own nature: the same answer do the Papists give; which I
acknowledge willingly. What? are they thereby become Montanus disciples? then
was S. Augustine, as a great Papist, so no small Montanist: for he does in most
express terms so expound that place; these be his words. The Apostle does
in these words properly point at, Aug. co^t. Adimant. Manichaeu^, c. 14. 1.
Tim. c. 4.
not them who therefore abstain from such meats, that they may thereby bridle
their own concupiscence, or spare another man's weakness: but those, who
think the flesh it self unclean. Do you see how S. Augustine interprets
those words of S. Paul, even as we do? who also answers to every of the
Protestants objections against set fasting above a 1000. years before they
troubled the world. In like manner does S. Hierome, in the very words that M.
Abbot sets down for ours: thus he writes. Lib. 1. cont. Iouin. ca. 41.
The Apostle does condemn them that forbid to marry, and command to abstain
from meats, etc. true, but he aimed at Marcion and Tatianus, and such other
Heretics that command perpetual abstinence, as though the creatures of God
were abominable: but we commend every creature of God, and do only prefer
fasting before fullness, etc. So that by this exposition of S. Paul's doctrine,
we are not proved Montanists, but do imitate therein the principal pillars of
the ancient Roman Church, S. Augustine and S. Hierome; and do therein also,
wipe away a sluttish imputation of Iouinian, revived and set a foot again by
the Protestants: that forsooth, Lib. 1. cont. Iouin. cap. 3.
We teach the doctrine of Devils condemned by the Apostles, and do fall into
the opinion of the Manichees, because we command to abstain on fasting days,
from some kind of meats, which God created to receive, etc. but of this more
exactly in the Question of fasting. Now to the rest of M. Abbots text. The
Montanists took that their fasting to be a service and worship to God:
wherein they were not deceived; for it is written in the word of God, Luc. 2.
That Elizabeth a blessed widow, departed not from the Temple, by fasting and
prayer serving night and day: serving, in Greek Latreuousa, that is, doing
service and worship to God, as by prayer, so by fasting. Again, by fasting,
watching, and other bodily austerities, we do (according to the common
exposition of the ancient Fathers) Romans 12.
exhibit our bodies to God, a living bost (as the Apostle speaks) holy and
pleasing God, and a reasonable service: It must needs then be a very holy, and
most acceptable service and worship of God, that is resembled by S. Paul, unto
a living and pure sacrifice. Canon. 5.
And in the Council of Nice it is said, That we may offer to God the pure and
solemn fast of Lent: they thought then it was a service of God. I omit here to
bring any further proofs, because this is not the place to stand upon the
matter of fasting, but only to answer to M. Abbots naked objections: whereof
the fifth is (as M. Abbot says) that the Montanists thought by their fasting to
merit at Gods hand. Good reason had they for that, if they did so teach, and
that the rest of their doctrine had been answerable to it; for our blessed
Savior does teach the very same expressly in these words: Math. 6.
When thou do fast anoint thy head and wash thy face, that thou appear not
to men to fast, and thy Father who sees thee in secret will repay thee.
Whereupon that grave and holy Father S. Ambrose says: Where be these new
Masters that do exclude the merit of fasting? Epistola. 82. ad E^cl.
Here, here Sir, says M. Abbot. If they were new sect-masters in S. Ambrose
time, that denied the merit of fasting, then surely the ancient Church of Rome
did maintain the merit of fasting. Again, Epiphanius (a more credible
reporter of Montanus errors, then his own disciple Tertullian) has left
written: Haeres. 48. co^t. Montan.
That many of the Montanists, did remove the reward of virtue, and crown of
glory from fasting: where fore M. Abbot does wrongfully attribute that unto
them. Besides, S. Augustine does affirm: De Ecclesiast. dogm. ca. 68.
That to equal marriage with virginity, and to believe that they who do
abstain from wine and flesh to chastise their bodies, do thereby merit
nothing, is not the part of a Christian, but of a Iouinian. It is then more
then manifest, that the ancient Church of Rome did uphold the merit of fasting,
and that they were of old, esteemed no better then Heretics that denied it.

To come now to the last fained concord between us and the Montanists: They
taught (as he avouches) fasting to be a satisfaction or expiation of sin,
and a special means to appease Gods wrath toward us; which if they did, they
had good warrant in the word of God for it For the children of Israel 1. Reg. 7.
fasting with Samuel, appeased God, and obtained victory of their enemies: so
did they again and again, in the time of Hester. 4. Judith. 4.
Hester and Judith. The Ionae. 3.
Ninevites turned away the wrath of God by fasting: Daniel also (as Ser. de
laps. Lib. de Vtilit. Iejunij, ca. 3.
S. Cyprian witnesses) by fasting promeruit Deum, appeased his wrath and did
win his favor. S. Augustine proposes the delicate Protestants objection, and
shows us how to answer thereunto: What (say they) is God so cruel, that he
takes pleasure to see thee torment thy self? Answer, (says that most
learned Doctor) I put my self to pain, that God may spare me; I punish my
self that he may succor me, that I may please his eyes, that I may delight
his sweetness: for the Host is hampered and vexed, that it may be laid upon
the Altar, etc. Briefly, we have by the evident warrant of Gods word, and by
sound testimony of the Nicene Council, S. Cyprian, S. Ambrose, and S. Augustine
(no Montanists, but most holy and juditious Prelates of the ancient Catholic
Church); that by fasting God is truly served, his just indignation against us
is appeased, satisfaction is made for the temporal pain due to sin, and the
increase of his grace and heavenly glory, is thereby also merited. Whence it
follows finally, that when M. Abbot assaied by these common accidents and
circumstances of fasting, (which were as well defended by the ancient Church of
Rome, as by the Montanists) to prove the present Church of Rome to be turned
Montanist; his soar eyes were piteously troubled with such a defluxion either
of envy or ignorance, that had wel-nigh blinded him. But if the discreet reader
for his further satisfaction, desire to know wherein lay the proper error of
the Montanists concerning fasting (for they held besides, diverse other points
of erroneous doctrine) I answer in brief, out of the Ecclesiastical history:
Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 17. Epistola. ad Marcellu^ de fide nostra and dogmate
haeretico.
Montanus decreed new laws of fasting, which did consist partly in the time,
and partly in the manner of fasting. S. Hierome recounting the principal points
of Montanus heresy: as that they held but one person in the Deity, and that al
second marriages were wicked; comes to the third point of fasting, and says:
We Catholics do fast one Lent or forty days once in the year, according to
the tradition of the Apostles, at a convenient time: They (that is the
Montanists) make three Lents in the year, as though three Saviors had suffered
for us; not that we may not fast any time in the year, except between Easter
and Whitsontide, but that it is one thing to do so voluntarily, and another
upon necessity: So that the first nouelty of their fast was, that every man
was bound to fast three Lents every year. Other days perhaps they might have
proper to themselves, which I have not read off; but the manner of their fast,
Tertullian in the place before cited, does signify: that it was to hold out
their fast until the Sun were set, without tasting of any thing, and then to
use that Cherophagia mentioned by M. Abbot, that is; to eat only dry meats
that had no juice or nourishment in them: Al which must needs be done
according to their doctrine, by the commandment of the Paraclete or holy
Ghost, which dwelt in Montanus; and was powered out upon his disciples (as they
fabled) far more pientifully, then upon Christ's Apostles. These indiscreete
laws then of fasting, that few were able to endure, enacted also by him that
had no authority to make laws; and peremptorily published in the name of the
holy Ghost, to be observed of al under pain of damnation, were Montanus
errors touching fasting. Let M. Abbot if he can, show out of Philastrius,
Epiphanius, S. Augustine, S. Hierome, or any other approved Author (who have
registered Montanus heresies, either in his own name or under the name of
Cataphriges, because he was a Phrygian borne, and there his heresy did most
rage) that his errors about fasting were, That he thought fasting to please
G^d, to be meritorious or satisfactory; and then he shall begin to speak to
some purpose. But any ancient sincere Author truly taken and reported, will
not serve his turn: they must be Heretics or writing at least in an heretical
vain, as Tertullian then did, or else, they will ^fford him no help or
comforr. The Montanists indeed, the more easily to intrappe Catholics in their
snares, might perhaps pretend the same end and spiritual fruits of fasting,
which the Catholics liked well off, as al Heretics do mingle and blend many
truths with their errors, the better to color their trumpery and deceit:
like unto Wolves that put on Sheepe-skinnes, that they may thereby the sooner
catch them whom they seek to devour, before they be aware of them. But as S.
Augustine advises very prudently, The sheep must not therefore cast off his
own skin, because the wolf does sometime put it on: no more must Catholics
forsake any branch or good circumstance of fasting, because the Montanists used
them.

If any man be desirous to know the true founders of the Protestant doctrine
against fasting, they are of record in right good authors, but noted by them
for very wicked Heretics. Aerius (says both Epiphanius and S. Augustine)
unto the Arrian heresy added some other errors of his own, to wit: That we
ought not to pray and offer sacrifice for the dead; and that certain standing
fastes were not to be commanded, but that men might fast when they pleased,
least otherwise they should be under the law. Is not this the first part of the
Protestant plea and opinion, that there must be no standing and ordinary
fastes? Join hereunto one branch of Iouinians heresy: Hieron. lib. 1. cont.
Iouin. cap. 2.
That there is no difference, between abstaining from meat, and receiving of
the same with thanksgiving, that is, al is one before God: and no more merit
or satisfaction in fasting then in eating; and then you have the full doctrine
of the Protestants, patched up out of the rotten reproved rags of two old
condemned Heretics, Aerius and Iouinian. The old Roman faith, which to this
day does remain inviolable, walks in the midst of these two extremities:
she leaves it not to every man's discretion, to fast when and how he pleases,
as Aerius would have had it (for then there would be little fasting with
many, as daily experience teaches us;) but commands certain standing times
of fasting, prescribing also one uniform manner to be observed of al, who be
of age and in health; which is done according to the tradition of the Apostles,
with that moderation of both time and diet, that she is as far on the other
side, from the presumptuous and indiscreet prescription of the Montanists, as
may be. We can better defend our selves from Montanus errors, then M. Abbot
can do the Protestants from one principal point of them; which was (as S.
Hierome reports,) that they at every sin almost, Epist. 49. ad Marcellum de
dogmate Montani.
did shut up the Church doors, that is, did deny that there was in the Pastors
of the Church, power to absolve them from those sins: And were so stern and
rough (as S. Hierome says) not that they themselves did not commit more
grievous offenses, but because there is this difference betwixt the Montanists
and us, that they are ashamed to confess their sins as men; but we whiles we
do penance, do more easily merit and deserve pardon: where you see, that the
ancient Roman Church (of which S. Hierome was an eminent Doctor) did dissent
from the Montanists about the Sacrament of confession. The Montanists then, as
the Protestants now, did not believe that Priests had power to forgive many
sorts of sin, and therefore would not go to confession: Contrariwise the
Catholics then, believed as we do now, that Priests could pardon al sorts of
sin, and therefore went to confession, and did such penance as was enjoined
them, thereby to deserve pardon of their sins.

ROBERT ABBOT.
TO this heresy of Montanus, the Church of Rome has added the practice and
defense of sundry other heresies, which were condemned of old by the same
Church. Epiphan. Haeres. 78. Antid. Idem Haeres. 79. Collyrid.
The Collyridians were adjudged Heretics, for worshipping the Virgin Mary, and
offering unto her: Epiphanius calling it a wicked and blasphemous act, a
Deuilish work, and the doctrine of the unclean spirit, affirming that she
was not given us to be worshipped: that because men should not admire or
think to highly of her, therefore he spoke to her in that sort in the Gospel;
Woman what have I to do with thee? that if God would not have the Angels to
be worshipped, much less a woman: that the Son of God took flesh of the
holy Virgin, but not that she should therefore be worshipped, nor to make her
a God, nor that we should offer in her name: That she should be in honor, but
yet let no man worship her (says he) let them not say we do honor to the
Queen of heaven. Yet the Church of Rome that now is, worshippeth the Virgin
Mary, prays and offers to her under the name of the Queen of heaven.

WILLIAM BISHOP.
Hierem. 13.
WHEN the Ethiopian does change his tanned skin, and the Leopard his speckled
case, (as the Prophet speaks) then (and not before I vveene) vvil the
Ethiopian black soul of this Tanners son, leave off to abuse the holy
Fathers writings, and to deceive his credulous readers. Epiphanius a most holy
man and a very learned Bishop, in recounting and confuting the heresies that
were sprung up in and before his time, comes at length unto the erroneous
opinions, which some held of the most blessed Virgin Mary, the glorious mother
of God: which were in two extremities. For some named Antidicomarianitae, that
is enemies to the sacred Virgin, because they spoke against her perpetual
virginity: whose blasphemy he checketh in the 78. heresy, which is the first
chapter cited by M. Abbot. Wherein that holy Father does most highly commend
her, stiling her an immaculate Virgin, worthy to be made the palace of the
Son of God; A holy, precious, most excellent, and admirable vessel,
comprehending him that is incomprehensible; The Princess of Virginity; The
Mother of the living and the cause of life, preferring her before S. John the
Evangelist, S. John Baptist, and Helias: Adding finally, That though she were
a woman and not in nature changed, yet for her sense, understanding, and other
graces, Honor honorata; which according to the phrase of Scripture signifies,
To be honored with singular honor: yea, With as great as the bodies of the
Saints, or what else he could name more to her glory; That it was affected
madness, in lieu of worshipping that holy Virgin, and honorable vessel with
Hymns and glory, to inueigh and rail against her. Where you see, that the
reverend Bishop Epiphanius does intimate, that it is the part of every sober
Christian to worship the holy Virgin Mary, using these formal words: Virginem
sanctam, and vas honoratum colere; To worship the holy Virgin, and honorable
vessel. If M. Abbot then had not been stark blind with malice, and madly
bent to delude and beguile his unwary reader, he would never have presumed to
allege Epiphanius words, against his own declaration and meaning. But what
then meant he, when he said, that the blessed Virgin was not to be adored?
(which M. Abbot Englisheth always, was not to be worshipped:) marry you shall
hear out of his own discourse. Even as some Heretics (says he) declining on
the left hand, blasphemed the Son of God, saying that he was not equal to his
Father in nature; Other walking too much on the right hand, extolled him so
far forth, that they affirmed him to be both Father and holy Ghost. In like
manner, as there be some Heretics that dishonored the holy Virgin Mary: so
there were some other foolish women, that would have made her a God, offering
up to her sacrifice, and instituting women Priests to do her service. Whose
doting folly, Epiphanius reproves in the next chapter, teaching first: that
it was not lawful for any woman to offer sacrifice, or to baptize. Secondly,
that neither the blessed Mother of God, nor any other creature was to be
adored, that is, worshipped with that honor which is due to God alone: but he
delivers in most express terms, that she is to be worshipped with another
meaner kind of worship, that is due unto excellent holy men, and the sacred
servants of God. Most goodly (says he) is the blessed Virgin, holy, and to be
honored, but not so far forth as to adoration: that is, she is to be
honored, but not with divine honor; which he otherwise repeateth thus: Let
the holy Virgin Mary be honored, but let the Father, Son, and holy Ghost be
adored. And yet more plainly explicating himself by that term of adoration;
Let not the Virgin be adored so, as we take her for a God, or offer up
sacrifice in her name: Wherefore, nothing will appear more manifest to him that
pleases to read that reverend Author, then that there he reproves them
only, who gave Divine and Godly honor unto the immaculate virgin Mary, making
her a God, and offering sacrifice to her. But that she is to be worshipped
with another sort of honor, due unto the best servants of God, he does both in
that and in the former Chapter, teach most plainly twenty times: which is the
very doctrine of the present Church of Rome, which holds God alone to be
worshipped with divine honor called Latria; but the Saints in heaven, and holy
Personages on earth, with a holy worship due to their gifts and graces of
heavenly Wisdom, Fortitude, and Holiness, which God has endued them withal.

This matter of worshipping Saints, S. Augustine that most learned Doctor, and
firm pillar of the Roman Church, has fully and distinctly delivered 1200.
years ago, in these most memorable words: August. lib. 1. cont. Iustum
Manich. cap. 21.
Christian people with religious solemnity do celebrate the memory of Martirs,
as well to stir up an imitation of their virtues, as to be made partakers of
their merits, and to be helped with their prayers; yet so, as we do erect
Altars only unto the God of Martirs, though in remembrance of the Martirs. For
what Prelate or Priest serving at the Altar, in the place of their holy bodies,
has at any time said, we offer unto thee Peter, or Paul, or Cyprian? but that
which is offered, is offered to God, who has crowned the Martirs, and is
offered at the memorial or relikes of them whom he has crowned; to the end
that by the admonition of those places, there may arise greater devotion to
inflame our charity, both toward them whom we may imitate, and also toward
him, by whose help we may be enabled so to do. Therefore we do worship the
Martirs, with that reverence and respect, with which holy men (whose hearts we
think ready to suffer as much for the truth of Christ) are in this life
worshipped; yet with this difference, that we do more devoutly worship the
Saints, of whose virtues we are assured, and who do now triumph in heaven,
then we do those that are yet combating in the field of this life: but with
that worship which in Greek is called Latria, (and has no one proper Latin
word, it being a certain worship properly due unto the Godhead) neither do
we worship, or teach to be worshipped, any other then God alone. And whereas
the offering of sacrifice, does properly appertain to this kind of worship,
(whence their act that offer it to Idols is called Idolatry) we do not in any
case offer any such thing, or command any such offering to be made unto
Martirs, nor to any other; and if any man fall into that error, he is reproved
by this sound doctrine, that he may be amended or avoided: hitherto S.
Augustine. Now let the upright reader consider well of this sacred and sound
doctrine, delivered by the best learned in the pure estate of the primitive
Church, and then judge whether the present Roman Church, does teach any other
worshipping of Saints at this day. We worship Saints in heaven, with a kind
of holy and religious worship, for their holy and religious virtues: so did
the good Christians in S. Augustines days, With a religious solemnity, and
with greater devotion, then they did the Godliest and most holy men alive. We
do teach word by word after S. Augustine; that with that kind of worship
which is proper to God alone, (which for want of a proper Latin word we call
Latria) God only is to be worshipped. Another kind of worship, (which for
distinction sake we call Dulia of Doulos, that in Greek signifies a servant)
we do exhibit as due to Gods servants, which is infinitely less, then that
which we give unto the sovereign Lord and Master of Men and Angels. Now
because the worship due by sacrifice, is a recognizing of his sovereign
dominion over us, to whom we do offer sacrifice, and of our subjection to him
as to our sovereign Lord; therefore to God alone sacrifice is to be offered:
Yet as you have heard out of S. Augustine, Sacrifice is principally to be
offered at the relikes and memorial of Martirs and Saints, and in their
remembrances; that we may thereby be made partakers of their merits, helped
with their prayers, and also inflamed with a fervent desire of following their
excellent virtues: Note by the way the antiquity of the Christians offering
sacrifice, of communicating the merits of Martirs to others, of the help of
the S^ints prayers. Now if any would offer sacrifice to the blessed Virgin
Mary, or attribute to her any other part of that honor, which is proper to
God alone, we would be as ready to check and reprove them, as Epiphanius then
was to confute the foolish female Collyridians.

To return to M. Abbot: where were his wits when he cited out of his author
these words, The holy Virgin is to be in honor, yet not to be worshipped? for
had he but marked well those words, he might easily have perceived, that
Epiphanius did not mislike with all kind of worship that was given to that most
blessed Virgin, seeing that he would have her to be honored, which is a higher
kind of reverence then ordinary worship is; for to be honorable, is more then
to be worshipful, as every man meanly seen in titles does know: wherefore M.
Abbot cannot be excused from a foul fault, in that he has translated the
Latin word adorare and adoratio, into bare and naked worship; for in that place
it is taken for Divine and Godly worship, as all the circumstances of the place
do convince. And then yet more sottishly does he ground al his objections,
upon his own corrupt translation of the same word: for if he had englished the
word adoratio sincerely, for divine honor, as in that place it signifies, he
had not had any color of this slander; for then he must have said thus: The
Collyridians were adjudged Heretics for adoring or worshipping with divine
honor the Virgin MARY, and so of the rest. But we Catholics do not give to
her any divine honor, neither do we offer sacrifice unto her, or unto any
Saint, as M. Abbot fableth, but to God alone: see more of this in the Question
of the Sacrifice. True it is, that we call that blessed Virgin Queen of heaven,
treading therein in the steps of the most ancient, learned, and Godly Fathers,
S. Athanasius, S. Gregory Nazianzene, S. Bazil, S. Chrysostom, and others,
whose words I have cited in the Question of worshipping of Saints. And the
reasons why she may be called Queen of heaven, be diverse: first, she is
Mother to the King of heaven JESUS Christ; and the Kings Mother is ordinarily
saluted Queen. Secondly, every true Christian endued with the spirit of God,
Romans 8.
Is Son and heir to God, and coheire of Christ: dying then in that happy
estate, no doubt but they shall enter into possession of the Kingdom of heaven,
and consequently be Kings or Queens thereof. Thirdly, the Spouse of the King
of heaven may in good sense be called Queen of heaven; but every good soul
(much more the most sacred Virgin of Virgins) is the Spouse of Christ: which
is confirmed by the Royal Prophet, where he describes as it were the blessed
Virgin MARY, standing at the right hand of her Son in his Kingdom, and
intituleth her Queen; Psalm. 44.
Astitu Regina a dextris tuis, The Queen did stand at thy right hand. Lastly,
the principal and chiefest person of any honorable society, may according to
the usual phrase of al men be styled Prince, or if it be a woman, Princess or
Queen: wherefore the most holy and glorious Mother of God, holding the
highest place in heaven of any pure creature, both according unto the ancient
Fathers judgment, and in very reason (the dignity of a mother, being to be
preferred before any subject or servant) may very rightly obtain the name of
the Queen of heaven. And thereupon also do we more specially reverence and
respect her, and repose greater confidence in her burning charity, and in the
help of her most gracious prayers; knowing also right well, and most willingly
confessing, that as the Queen of any country receives al her grace, riches,
and preferment from the King: so the blessed Mother of God, Queen of heaven,
has received through the merits of her best beloved Son, from the bounty of
his heavenly Father, al her most singular privileges; and is therefore of al
other pure creatures, most bound and beholding unto both Father and Son. With
that Queen of heaven, Hierem. 44.
of which the Prophet Hieremy (cited by Epiphanius) does make mention, the
blessed Virgin has no affinity or resemblance, besides the name; for with the
Prophet it signifies no living creature, but either the Moon or some eminent
Star in the firmament, unto which certain doting Idolatrous women did
offer sacrifice, in the Prophet Hieremies days: See how faringly M. Abbots
pieces of comparisons, match the one with the other.

ROBERT ABBOT.
CARPOCRATES and his minion Marcellina, Irenae. lib. 1. cap. 24. Aug. ad Quod
vult. 39. Theod^r. in 2. ad Collossen.
were condemned for Heretics, for worshipping, as other Images, so namely the
Image of Jesus Christ: yet now the Papists do the same, and notwithstanding
vvil be accounted Catholics. The Council of Laodicea approved by the old
Church of Rome, did forbid to pray to Angels, or to worship them, and they
that did so were accounted Heretics: But worship and prayer to Angels, is a
part of the Catholic doctrine, with the Church of Rome that now is.

WILLIAM BISHOP.
M. ABBOT is such a trusty merchant, that nothing can be taken up upon his
credit: therefore every wiseman had need to look to his fingers. Nay, he
seldom dares put down the Fathers sentences, as they lie in their own
works; but culs certain words out of them, and patcheth them together after
his own fancy, to collogue and deceive his trusty reader. These be S.
Augustines own words, in the place cited by him: Marcellina (not Carpocrates)
did worship the Images of Jesus, of Paul, of Homer, and of Pythagoras. And that
you may certainly know, of what kind of worship he meant, he adds; Adorando,
and incensum ponendo, by adoring and offering incense to them, that is, by
giving them divine honor: so that double was her foul fault and folly. For
she both adored together the holy Images of JESUS and S. Paul, with the
profane statues of heathen Poets; and again, gave to them godly honor: both
which points we Roman Catholics do condemn. As also that third (condemned
in the Council of Laodicea) concerning Angels; which was of leaving our Savior
Christ Jesus, to commit Idolatry to the Angels, preferring the Angels before
him: Canon. 35.
See the Canon, and you shall find M. Abbots legerdemaine.

ROBERT ABBOT.
Council. Gang. cap. 4.
THE Council of Gangra approved likewise, condemned the Eustachians for
Heretics, for taking exceptions against married Priests; and to that purpose
set down this Canon: If any man except against a Priest that is married, as by
reason of his marriage that he ought not to minister, and do therefore forbear
from his oblation or celebration; accursed be he. But the later Church of Rome
excepteth wholy against married Priests, and namely Gregory the seventh
forbadde al lay men, to be present at the celebration of any such Priest as
were married: Math. Paris. in Willelm. 1.
An example very strange (says Matthew of Paris) and very unadvised, as many
thought.

WILLIAM BISHOP.
HAS not M. Abbot a prodigious strange eie-soare, that can never see the
principal point of the matter which he alleges? Council Gang. cap. 4.
these be the words of the Canon by him cited. Quicunque discernita
Presbitero qui vxorem habuit, quod non oporteat eo ministrante, de oblatione
percipere, Anathema sit: Whosoever shall except against a Priest who has had a
wife, holding that one ought not to receive of the oblation or sacrifice when
such a one celebrateth, accursed be he. First, note how he mangleth the
words, thrusting in (by reason of his marriage) and darkning the matter of
the sacrifice, by adding to it celebration, which is signified in the other
words, eo ministrante: but the principal verb upon which al depends, is
egregiously perverted by his translation. For the state of the controversy
betwixt us is, whether a Priest married and keeping company with his wife, is
to be admitted to celebrate and minister the Sacraments? We say no, they say
yea: and for confirmation of their saying do allege this Canon; which makes
nothing at al for them, because it speaks only of a Priest that had a wife in
times past: Qui vxorem habuit, that had a wife, not that has a wife. Such men
that were once married after their vviues death, we do admit to be Priests,
and to offer sacrifice; condemning the Eustachians, or whosoever else under
pretense of their former marriages, does seek to debar them from that sacred
function: Marry, such sensual or weak men, that cannot, or will not refrain
from marriage or company of their wives, we do wholly exclude from the
celebration of the holy mysteries. And verily, ignorantly and sawcily does
Matthew of Paris, or any other late writer, reprehend Gregory the seventh, for
forbidding al men to be present at their Masses. For it argues great and
gross ignorance in all learned antiquity, to account it a strange thing, that
Priests keeping company with their wives, should be repelled from the Altar:
when not only Gregory the great, Leo the great, and Epiphanius, whose
sentences I have before recited; but also even by M. Abbots own confession,
Pope Stritius with the Clergy of Rome, and S. Hierome, did teach the very same,
little less then a thousand years before Matthew of Paris days, to omit
sundry other ancient Fathers and decrees of approved Councels: so that it was
no strange example, or unadvised act, to forbid such fleshly fellows to
celebrate Mass, neither could any but loose libertines be offended at it.

ROBERT ABBOT.
THE Valentinian Heretics and Heracleonites, Irenae. lib. 2. cap. 18. Epiph.
Haeres. 36. August. de Haeres. 16.
were condemned by the old Church of Rome, for using expiations and
redemptions, by anointing men when they were about to die: yet thereof has
the Church of Rome, now framed to themselves their Sacrament of Extreme unction.

WILLIAM BISHOP.
HERE are but a few lines, and yet not free from some lies. The Church of Rome
has her Sacrament of Extreme unction, registered in the holy Scriptures (as M.
Abbot knows well enough,) in these words. Jacob. 5. verse. 14.
Is any man sick among you? let him bring in the Priests of the Church, and
let them pray over them, anoiling them with oil in the name of our Lord: and
the prayer of faith shall save the sick, and our Lord lift him up; and if he be
in sins, they shall be remitted him. Where we see a set holy ceremony, which
was instituted by Christ, and published by his Apostle S. James, to be used
ordinarily by the Priests for remission of sins; which does convince it to be
a true and proper Sacrament. A fond fiction then was it, to say that it was
after the Apostles time invented by Heretics, and that the Church of Rome has
borrowed it of them; with which foolish devise of theirs it has also very
small affinity: for their dream was, that by the pronouncing of certain
unknown Hebrew words, over the head of the sick, their soul was made
invisible, and incomprehensible, Epiph. Haeres. 36.
even unto the infernal spirits, as M. Abbots own author witnesses. Briefly,
they differed in form of words, in substance of matter, and in the state and
intention of the Minister. They used certain Hebrew words; Messia, Vphared,
and such like, which are set down by Epiphanius: We these, God of his most
pitiful mercy, and by this holy anointing, forgive thee thy sins. They used
oil or some other ointment mixed with water: We oil alone blessed by a
Bishop. Any lay person of their brotherhood, might minister their drugs: Our
Sacrament is to be administered by a Priest only. Their intention was to make
the soul invisible to the infernal spirits: But ours is (according to the
doctrine of the Apostle) to purge the sick from the relikes of sin, and to
give him comfort and strength to resist the assaults of the ghostly enemy.
There being so great difference, in all the essential points of these two
anoilinges, judge what a wonderful inginer M. Abbot did take himself to be,
when he conceited, that he could (by his fine pen shall I say, or brazen
forehead) make them seem al one to the simple.

ROBERT ABBOT.
IT was heresy in the Pelagians with the old Church of Rome, to affirm in
this life a possibility perfectly to fulfill the law of God; and S. Hierome as
touching this point, L. 1 2. 3. aduers. Pelag.
expressly disputes against them: but now it is heresy with the Church of
Rome, to affirm and teach the same that Hierome did, as M. Bishop afterward
gives us to understand. The same Pelagians were accounted Heretics, for
saying that a man in this life might be anamarticos, without sin, and that by
baptism he becomes so: but now the Church of Rome teaches the same. And M.
Bishop in plain terms tells us, Page 32.
That there is no more sin left in the new baptized man, then was in Adam in
the state of innocence: to which state of baptism, they also equal a man
when he is shriuen to the Priest, and of him has received absolution from his
sins. I reserve the Pelagian doctrine of Free Will and Satisfaction, to their
due place, where God-vvilling it shall appear, that therein also the now
Church of Rome, approves those points as Catholic and true, for which the
ancient Church of Rome condemned them. Yea so far is the Pelagian heresy in
request with the Papists, as that Faustus a Bishop of France, at that time a
maintainer thereof, Bignae. Bibliot. sacrae Tom. 2. Osor. de Inst. lib. 9.
is by some of them recorded for a Saint, and his book which he has written
in behalf thereof, is called Opus insigne, A notable work. And by some other
the doctrine of S. Augustine against the Pelagians, concerning Predestination,
is repugned; which of old was acknowledged by the Church of Rome, to be the
Catholic doctrine of the Church.

WILLIAM BISHOP.
M. ABBOT comes now to make an end of his slanders and false imputations,
against the present Catholic Roman Church, after the same sort as he has
heretofore used, to wit; with wrested and untrue reports of the old Heretics
opinions, and the ancient Fathers refutations of them. The Pelagians did teach
indeed, that it was possible to keep Gods Commandments, but therefore they
were not accounted Heretics; for the same does both S. Augustine and S.
Hierome (that writ against them) approve and confirm in many places: I will
touch some of each of them. S. Augustine having alleged certain texts of holy
Scripture to prove the same, does conclude thus: By these and innumerable other
testimonies, De Peccatis, Meritis, and Remissione, lib. 2. cap. 6.
I cannot doubt, either that God has commanded man, any thing that is
impossible for him to do; or that it is impossible for God, to help man to
fulfill whatsoever he has commanded him: and therefore a man helped by God, may
if he will be without sin. De Great. and l. Arbit. ca. 16.
And in another place: It is certain that we may keep Gods Commandments if
we will. Again, Grace is given us, not because we did good works before, but
that we may be able to do them; De Spirit. and Liter. ca. 10.
that is, (as he expounds himself) Non quia legem impleuimus, sed vt legem
implere possimus: Not because we did (before we received grace) fulfill the law,
but that we may be able afterward to fulfill the law. Can any thing be more
manifest, then that (according unto S. Augustines opinion) a man endued with
Gods grace, may keep al his Commandments, and fulfill the law? The very same
does S. Hierome confess, in that very Treatise cited by M. Abbot, adding this
reason: We confess that God gives us Commandments possible to be fulfilled,
least God should be author of injustice, if be exacted of us to do that which
cannot be done: so that the present Church of Rome, does herein follow S.
Augustine and S. Hierome, a noble pair of most learned Patrones of the ancient
Church of Rome: And does nothing less then agree with Pelagius, in his errors
about that matter, which were two. The first, That without the help of Gods
grace a man may keep al Gods Commandments. The second, That a man could keep
all the Commandments so perfectly, that be needed never to sin so much as
venially. Which two erroneous branches of Pelagius doctrine, we do condemn as
roundly, as did the most holy Fathers; and consequently that a man coming to
years of discretion, is anamarticos, without sin: for if the justest man
alive, say that he is without sin, (that is some venial sin) he is even
thereby made a liar, (as S. John witnesses) and therefore a sinner. All this
Pelagian doctrine, the present Church of Rome does as well reprove, as did the
former: Marry, to affirm (as M. Abbot does) that Pelagius was of old
condemned, for affirming children to be made without sin by baptism, is
(saving your reverence) a stark lie, confronted and confuted by S. Augustine
in formal terms: these be his words. De Peccatis, Meritis, and Remissione,
lib. 10. ca. 9.
They (that is the Pelagians) will not believe that baptism does cleanse
Infants from original sin: what a notable tale then was it to say, that the
Pelagians were therefore accounted Heretics, because they held men by
baptism to become without sin? when they flatly denied baptism to cleanse
them from sin.

That which I said of the state of man newly baptized, that there was no sin
left in him, is S. Augustines and S. Hieromes doctrine, word for word: thus
says S. Augustine. Cont. duas Epist. Pelag. lib. 3. cap. 3.
Baptism does wash away al sins, utterly al, of deeds, words, and
thoughts, whether they were originally contracted, or afterward committed,
either of ignorance or wittingly. The same he repeateth treating of the Creed:
De Simbol. ad Catech. lib. 3. cap. 10.
Omnia prorsus delicta delet sanctum baptisma, and originalia, and propria,
dicta, facta, cogitata, cognita, incognita, omnia dimittuntur: which he does
inculcate in many places. I will cite but one more, which contains also an
explication of that other Pelagian proposition, how a good Christian may be
without sin: these be his words. L. co^t. Julian. ca. 13 and 15. Co^t. duas
Epist. Pelag. lib. 10. c. 14.
Multi baptisati fideles sunt sine crimine, sine peccato autem in hac vita
neminem dixerim, etc. Many of the faithful baptized, are without crime, (that
is, without mortal sin) but I will say no man to be without sin, (to wit,
venial) how much soever the Pelagians do rage against us for so saying: not
that anything of sin does remain, which is not forgiven in baptism; but
because in us remaining in the frailty of this life, there ceasseth not to be
committed something, that is daily to be pardoned to them that pray
faithfully, and do the works of mercy. In this one sentence of S. Augustine,
there is declared first: that al manner of sin is wholly pardoned in baptism,
and that therefore a man newly baptized, is as free from al sin, as were our
first parents in Paradise, as I said. Secondly, that though many of the better
sort of the baptized, do continue without mortal sin, yet none at al without
some kind of sin; the blessed Virgin MARY only excepted: De Nature. and Great.
cap. 36.
Of whom (says S. Augustine) for the honor of our Lord, I will have no
question when the matter of sin is handled. S. Hierome is as clear for the
virtue and efficacy of baptism, as in many other places, so specially in his
Epistle to Oceanus: wherein he proves by many texts of holy writ, That al
manner of sin is drowned in the water of baptism, Hieron. in Epistol. ad
Oceanum.
not one being left to swim out alive: And does call it the heresy of Cain,
To hold the wounds of our sins to be so venomous and incurable, that the
medicine of Christ in baptism cannot heal them. Thus much out of learned
Antiquity, to show how ignorant M. Abbot is therein, who thought that he had
hit me home, and given me some great blow when he produced these my words: M.
Bishop in plain terms tells us, that there is no more sin left in the
newly baptized man, then was in Adam in the state of innocence: whereas you
now see, that the best learned among the ancient Fathers, had 1200. years
before maintained the same doctrine, against the Pelagian Heretics

Concerning the Sacrament of Penance, we in deed teach the very same touching
the full and absolute purgation from sin, and the eternal punishment due to
the same, which every true penitent making his humble confession, does obtain
by the absolution of his ghostly Father: which is no late invention of ours,
but we learned it out of these our Saviors own words; Job. 20. verse. 23.
Whose sins you forgive on earth, they shall be forgiven in heaven: Al
antiquity having understood thereby, that Christ gave to his Apostles as
Pastors of his Church, full power to pardon sins, and by them unto al other
Pastors that should lawfully succeed them, until the worlds end. This matter
I have handled in a Question by it self, to which I refer the reader, that
desires to hear more of it in particular.

As M. Abbot reserues the Pelagian doctrine of Free Will and Satisfaction to
their due place, so do I; where it shall appear, that therein the now Church
of Rome, does no more approve those points then it does these, which he has
here touched: but that therein he is as foully deceived, and goes about to
deceive others, as here he has done. And if one Doctor Bignee has been so
much ouerseene, as to commend a favorer of the Pelagian heresy, let it be
inquired of the learned, what thank the present Roman Church does yield him
for his labor: for I have heard, that it has laid a censure and touch of
reproach, upon the same his work called Bibliotheca Patrum. Lastly, concerning
the doctrine of Predestination, I read not that the Pelagians were called in
question about it, nor yet for Satisfaction; wherefore, M. Abbot must first
out of some good Authors, show their errors therein, before he go about to
slander us with the imitation of them: but as I am well assured of the later,
so I think he will not in have perform the former.

ROBERT ABBOT.
I Omit many other matters that might here be added, persuading my self that I
said enough to trouble M. Bishop, in the proving of that that he has so
propounded, that the principal pillars of the Church of Rome, in her most
flourishing estate, taught in all points of religion, the same doctrine that now
she holds, etc. only for conclusion, let me ask him what Bishop of Rome
there was, for the space of a thousand years, that practiced or taught that
concerning Pardons, which is now practiced and taught in the Church of Rome,
that the Bishop of Rome has any authority to give such libels of pardon, or
that it is in him to give faculties, and authority to others to grant the
like, with reservation of special causes to himself? or that he can for
saying such and such prayers, or for doing this or that, release a man from
Purgatory, for so many hundred or thousand years? what Bishop of Rome was
there, that did proclaim a Iubilee, with promise that all that would come to
Rome to visit the Churches that year, should have full and perfect forgiveness
of al their sins? or that did charge the Angels, (as did Clement the sixth)
that whosoever should die in his journey thitherward, they should bring his
soul into the glory of Paradise? Balaeus in Clem. sexto.
which of them did take upon him to Canonize a Saint? who ever believed or
taught, as it is now received in the Church of Rome, that the Bishops blessing
is the forgiveness of venial sins? Sextus in proem. in glossa. Rhem. Test.
in Math. 10. verse. 12.
Other innouations I will pass over to further occasion; but concerning these
matters in this place, I would pray M. Bishop to let us be satisfied, how the
principal pillars of the Church of Rome, have in all points taught the same,
that the Church of Rome teaches now. The truth is, that as the name of Theseus
ship continued a long time, when as it was so altered by putting in of new
plankes and boordes, as that it had nothing left of that that was in it, when
it was first built by Theseus: so the Church of Rome still continues her name,
and would be taken to be the same, albeit by chopping and changing she is come
to that pass, that she has in a manner nothing left of that doctrine, for
which she was first called the Church of Rome. But M. Bishop takes upon him
to prove the contrary, let us now examine what his proofs are.

WILLIAM BISHOP.
YOU do wisely to omit many other matters, that you might have added, if they
be like unto these which you have already put down: for they are proved to be
nothing else in manner, but falsifications of the ancient Fathers writings,
or fond illations of your own, bolstered out with a huge and shameless troop
of untruths; the more one omitteth of such baggage and paultry stuff, the
more it makes for his credit: Wherefore, if M. Abbot had let all this alone, no
doubt but he should have saved much of his reputation, which by such
unchristian like and dishonest dealing, he is like to leese with the indifferent
and juditious reader. If he persuade himself, that he has put me to some
pains and trouble, to trace out the untruth of his allegations, he is not
deceived: for he produces them so corruptly, with such additions,
substractions, misconstructions, and evil applications, that every place he
cites, must needs be turned unto in the Authors own works, before a man can
repose any trust in him, or shall know what answer to make. I pray you (good
Sir) if there be any spark of Christian sincerity left in you, let this
admonition serve to entreat you, not to put your adversary or reader to such
trouble any more: Either for love of the truth, or for fear of Gods
judgments, and rebuke of honest men, forbear to misreport your Authors. If
it be a shame to belly the Devil, what impudency and impiety is it to belly most
reverend, holy, and learned Doctors; and which much increases that heinous
crime, thereby to blind Christian people, and to draw them along with him to
the bottomless pit of hell? It has (I willingly confess) more troubled me to
spend my spare time in discovering untruths, and dishonest shifts and tricks,
then it should have done to have bestowed it in substantial arguing, and in
round debating of questions in controversy, with short and sound arguments.
But (I hope) by this, the upright reader has seen, that M. Abbot was so far
off from troubling me to prove, The principal pillars of the Roman Church in
her most flourishing estate, to have taught the same doctrine that the present
Church of Rome no teaches; that he has rather furthered it, by ministering
unto me so fit an occasion: yea (omitting others which I could choose my self
for my better advantage) I have not refused, to verify and make good the
present doctrine of that Church, even by the testimony of those very authors,
of which M. Abbot himself made choice, as of men that spoke most against it.
If then by their verdict, who are thought by our adversaries, to be most
estranged from us, our cause is confirmed and proved to be most just and
veritable; who is so careless of his own salvation, that had rather follow a
lying Master leading to perdition, then to embrace so manifest a truth drawing
toward salvation? May I not here justly exclaim with the holy King and
Prophet, and say: Psalm. 4.
O ye Sons of men, how long will you be so heavy hearted? why are you so far
in love with vanity and seek after leasing? he that is the true light ( Johan.
1.
who does illuminate every man that comes into this world,) of his infinite
goodness and mercy, lighten your understanding and incline your hearts, that
you may perceive and receive that ingrafted word, that truth of Christ,
preached by his Apostles, approved by the most honorable Senate of the ancient
Fathers, believed all the world over; that has also continued ever since
inuiolably: which only and none other can save your souls.

Now for a conclusion and vpshot of this matter, M. Abbot would feign know,
What Bishop of Rome for a thousand years after Christ, had authority to give
any such libel of pardons, as are now given; or that could grant to others any
such faculty, with reservation of special causes to himself, etc. I answer,
if these be the greatest difficulties, that withold him from approving the
doctrine of the present Roman Church, he may upon very small consideration be
reclaimed, and brought to reform his errors. For to S. Peter himself, who
was afterward Bishop of Rome, was given even by our Savior Christ JESUS, full
power and authority to pardon whatsoever he saw fit to be pardoned: Math. 16.
verse. 19.
To thee I give (says he) the keys of the Kingdom of heaven, whatsoever thou
loosest or do pardon upon earth, shall be pardoned in heaven. And if S. Peter
might loose any sin how heinous soever, much more might he release some part
of the temporal pain which was due to sin, which is properly to give a
libel of pardon: the like power had S. Paul, who did in the person of Christ,
2. Cor. 2. verse. 10. Cyprian. l. 3. Epist. 15.
Pardon the incestuous Corinthian, by cutting off some part of his penance,
which otherwise he had been to suffer for his former sins, which were then
forgiven. S. Cyprian, and the Bishops and Clergy in those ancient days of the
primitive Church, did use to pardon and release the penance enjoined to
grievous offenders, after their repentance, at the intercession and request of
the Confessors, and designed Martirs, as has been before declared. The most
authentike Council of Nice does declare, Council. Nicen. cap. 12.
that it is lawful for Bishops to deal more mildly and favorably with them,
whom they saw to perform their enjoined penance seriously; which was to
grant them a pardon. Leo. Epist. 77 ad Nicetum, number. 6.
The very same does Leo the great (who was Bishop of Rome above 1100. years
past) teach most plainly, willing the Bishop to release of the due penance
injoined, what he thought good; which is properly to give indulgence or pardon.
I omit here Pope Siluester his predecessor, and S. Gregory the great one of
his successors, because I have before alleged them: not doubting but that
these few, so ancient, so grave, so learned, vvil suffice to satisfy and
instruct him that is willing to learn. And as for communicating the same
authority to others, who can reasonably doubt of it? considering that the
power of absoluing from sin, (which is far greater then the other) is
imparted to al both Bishops and Parish Priests. I have also before proved most
manifestly, Leo. Epist. 82 ad Anastat. Gregor. lib. 4. Epist. 6. ad Episcop.
Arelat.
that both S. Leo and S. Gregory most worthy Bishops, did, as delegate their
authority unto other Bishops, so reserve unto their own hearing and judgment,
the causes of greatest difficulty: wherefore, M. Abbot if he will hearken unto
reason, cannot choose but hold himself therein fully satisfied.

He recuiles back to Indulgences, and multiplieth his demands about one and
the same matter; like to a Cook that having but one sort of meat to serve in,
does mince it into many mammocks, and then make thereof sundry dishes: Can the
Pope (says he) for saying such or such prayers, or for doing this or that,
release a man from Purgatory, for an hundredth or a thousand years? What a
question is this? if the Pope can distribute indulgences, as has been before
proved, no doubt but he can the rather do it, by injoyning the party that
receives them, to say vvithal some prayers, or to do some other good works;
for thereby the party does the better deserve to be made partaker of the other
grace: But can he release a soul out of Purgatory, for a thousand years? Yes
marry can he, and that too not for some certain number of years, but for ever
and ever. The reason is; for that the souls there, are members of the same
body that we are, and there capable of the same graces of pardon, whereof also
they stand in very great need, according to the truth of Christian doctrine,
howsoever the Protestants do erroneously think the contrary: read the
Question of Purgatory. And touching the present purpose, among many other
pardons granted by S. Gregory the great, there is to be seen until this day,
one Altar by him erected, in the Monastery of S. Andrews in Rome, where he was
himself first Nouice and afterward Abbot; where at whosoever said Mass for
a soul in Purgatory, shall deliver one there-hence.

Concerning the Iubilee, which is free and full pardon granted once in five and
twenty years, unto every one that shall visit seven Churches in Rome that
year, some fifteen times or thereabouts; what new difficulty can there be
about that? yea it is as the most renowned pardon that is granted, so the most
reasonable: for it can be obtained but once in five and twenty years, and then
exceeding hardly, by under going a long, costly, and painful journey to the
city of Rome, and by exercising there all the works of piety and mercy; as
fasting, praying, and giving of alms, making general confession, and receiving
the blessed Sacrament, and often visiting of many Churches and Altars. Those
most godly means of training men to true repentance and satisfaction for their
former faults, and amendme^t of their lives, if the Protestant religion were
acquainted withal, there would be among them some check and stop of their
wicked courses. But if they vvil needs sin on themselves, and never give
over nor amend until Gods judgments fall upon them: yet let them not be offended
at us, that do advise al men to labor in time for such indulgences, that they
may escape the due punishment of their sins, either in this world or in the
next. Is it not also most probable and likely, if those good souls (who to
do some satisfaction for their former evil lives, and to serve God more
devoutly in those holy places, where some of the holy Apostles, and an
innumerable company of valiant Martirs and holy Confessors lived and died) do
die by the way in that Godly purpose, that they are carried by Angels to
heaven, as Lazarus was into Paradise? we pray to God to command such by his
holy Angels to be brought into Abraham's bosom, as may be seen in the Mass
for the dead. But Balaeus in Latin, and Bale the Irish Apostata in English, M.
Abbots worthy author reports, that Clement the sixth himself, did command
the Angels to carry them into Paradise. No great regard is to be had what such
a lying lewd fellow relates, and so I think him unworthy any other answer.
Touching Canonization of Saints we hold, that the Bishops of the provinces
where their virtuous lives and most godly deaths (confirmed by miracles) are
best known, did always from the beginning of christian religion, declare and
testify to the Church, that they were to be esteemed of al men for Saints.
Since, it has been found most expedient, that the whole course of the life
and death of such (being by most diligent inquisition tried out, and taken in
the places of their aboade) be afterward sent to Rome, there to be also
thoroughly examined first, and then accordingly to be declared Saints, by the
highest Pastor of the Church; that no man of any other country, might
afterward doubt of their so approved sanctity. To M. Abbots question I then
answer; that even by the order of S. Peter and S. Paul, Clemens l. 8. Constit.
c. 39.
S. Stephen was Canonized for a Martyr, and a festiual day kept in remembrance
of his glorious death: The like order was observed for the Apostles and other
Martirs. And from that time down to this time, I could prove (if need were)
Canonization of Saints, not only by the Bishops of Rome, but by the testimony
and practice, of the best Bishops and Doctors of the Christian religion: what
ignorance then in all antiquity, does this man bewray, by this impertinent
demand?

More impudent yet is this his next: Who ever believed or taught, as it is now
in the Roman Church, that the Bishops blessing is the forgiveness of venial
sins? He cites in the Margent the Annotations in the Rhemes Testament, upon
the 10. of S. Matthew and 12. verse; which being looked into, does convince M.
Abbot of unspeakable impudency. Lib. 9. in Lucam. L. 22. de Ciuit. Dei, c. 8.
He saw there S. Ambrose alleged formally, to confirm that the Bishops
blessing does remit venial sins. He could not choose also but see S.
Augustine and others quoted in the Margent, in commendation of the Bishops
blessing, who else where (with the Council of Carthage) reproves the
Pelagian Heretics, Epistola. 90.
for holding that the Bishops blessing was given to the people in vain. Seeing
then, that both S. Ambrose and S. Augustine, with other more ancient Fathers
and Doctors of the Church, did (grounding themselves upon Christ's own word
and promise) teach that the Bishops blessing was of great virtue; and that it
does namely forgive venial sins, by the verdict at least of S. Ambrose that
most holy and learned Bishop, whose antiquity, gravity, and sanctity, is more
to be respected, then a thousand of such light profane Abbots: was it not (I
say) incredible and most shameful audacity to demand, who ever believed or
taught that, when he saw before his eyes, such worthy Authors alleged for it?
this passes so far al ordinary audatious impudency, that I know not how to
style it. Other innouations he will of courtesy pass over to further occasion,
but for these jolly points (whereof the greatest is scarce worth a pin) he
requires satisfaction; which being so readily and easily given him, he will
belike become a new man, if he could once be persuaded to give over lying, and
trusting to his artificial coloring of lies: In the mean season, this which I
have said, will (I hope) serve to satisfy the indifferent reader, that the
principal pillars of the Church of Rome, in her most flourishing estate, have
in all points taught the same doctrine, that the present Church of Rome does now
teach.

And it is one of M. Abbots truths (that is to say, a most bright glistering
untruth) that as Theseus ship was in continuance of time, by putting in of
new plankes wholly altered; so is now the doctrine of the Church of Rome. For I
have before most evidently proved, out of authentike records of the ancient
Bishops of Rome; that they believed and taught the Real presence, and sacrifice
of the Mass, Praying to Saints, Worshipping of their Relikes and Images,
Purgatory and prayer for the dead, Auricular confession, Works of satisfaction
and supererogation, Merit of good works, the Vows of religious persons, the
Popes supremacy: Briefly, all the points in controversy between the
Protestants and us, as may more at large be seen, in the reformation of M.
Perkins Deformed Catholic: wherefore, the similitude of Theseus ship (which
M. Abbot borrowed of a Catholic, treating of another subject) vvil not serve
his turn, but may be more aptly returned upon themselves; who brag and
bear the world in hand, that they have reformed all the errors of the Church,
and brought it unto the purity of the Apostles times: whereas in truth, they
have plucked up most of the plankes and boordes of Christ's ship, by
oppugning most of the articles of the Christian faith: and do what in them
lies, to build up a rotten Thesean ship of old condemned errors, to steal
away the golden fleece of Christ's true ship, that is: to pil and poul the
true Catholic Christian, of that white fleece of innocence which he received
in baptism, or recovered by reconciliation, to sail after Theseus toward
Paganism, and the infernal gulf of hell.

Now because M. Abbot has here indeauoured, to stain the pure and clean
sanctity of our religion, with the spots and yron-mooles of errors and heresy;
I will to requite his pains, give a touch unto some special points of erroneous
doctrine (noted by the best Authors for such, in express terms) which the
Protestants have as it were raked out of the dunghill of rascal and reprobate
miscreants, and do now a-fresh deliver the same nothing in manner disguised,
unto their miserable followers, for the purity of the Gospel. Yea some of the
same are so evident and clear, that they are constrained to defend the
authors of them for learned and godly men, though by all antiquity they were
condemned for ignorant and infamous Heretics; and to note the most holy, and
best understanding and juditious Fathers, as less skilful then these other
erring companions. For example, Aerius (both a known and professed Arrian
Heretic, and also unknown to the world for any monument of learning or
virtue, and therefore likened by Epiphanius to a Beetle and Horse-flie, only
notorious for these his errors) taught first: That we ought not to offer
sacrifice, or to pray for the souls departed. Secondly, That we ought not to
keep any set times, or appointed days of fasting, but when any man will, then
let him fast, that we may not seem to be under the law. For these two points
specially, that Arrian Aerius was Cronicled for a notorious Heretic, both by
Epiphanius, a most holy, learned, and ancient Grecian Bishop, and by S.
Augustine, one of the most famous lights of the Latin Church; the later of whom
lived 1200. years past: Nevertheless, the Protestants prefer the odd
inventions of that contemptible, obscure, and blind Arrian, before the
judgment of these most renowned Doctors of Christ's Church. Must he not then be
a very simple, or rather senseless creature, that understanding so much vvil
notwithstanding follow them?

Again, Iouinian was so mean a scholar, that he was not able to write his
own mind in good and congruous latin; wherefore S. Hierome was feign to
help him out with it, and does (as he terms it) out of his dark works,
cast serpents (as it were) out of their holes into the light, Lib. 1. cont.
Iouin. cap. 1.
that they may be seen and slain. What were these venomous blinde-wormes
trow you? you shall hear in that most zealous and learned Doctors own words.
Iouinian says first; Lib. 1. cont. Iouin. cap. 2.
That Virgins, Widows, and married Women baptized, if they differ not in other
works, be of the same merit: and therefore Priests and religious persons,
might as well marry as live continently. Secondly, He labors to prove, that
the Devil cannot overcome them that be regenerated in full faith. Thirdly, He
puts no difference between abstinence from meat, and eating of the same
with thanksgiving. Fourthly, That al who have kept their baptism, shall have
the same reward in heaven, and not any one a greater then another. These (says
S. Hierome) be the hissings of the old serpent; by these sleights the Dragon
cast man out of Paradise. And do our Protestants by harkening unto these
serpentine voices, think to recover Paradise again? do they not believe just
with Iouinian; that it is of no greater merit, to live a professed Virgin, then
to live married, saving that they are so much worse then Iouinian was, as to
deny the best Christian to have any merit at al, by any state or work soever?
Be they not secondly well assured in their own opinion, that the Devil cannot
subvert them, and put them by their places in heaven? do they not thirdly, in
proper terms teach with Iouinian, that fasting is no more acceptable to God
then eating? And they that hold one simple justification common to al, without
any kind of merit, must needs consequently hold, that al in heaven have the
same reward; which was the fourth point of Iouinians heresy. They then be so
formal Iouinians, that they cannot deny it; but are driven to maintain, M.
Abbots Page 56.
that Iouinian was a right honest man, and understood Paul better then any of
them al: Hierome with all his Hebrew, Greek, and Latin, was no body in
comparison of him. But what say they then to Augustine, Lib. 2. Retract. cap.
22.
another professed adversary of that Iouinian? who styles him for his
ignorance joined with impudency, and for the lewdness of his doctrine, a very
monster: And further tells us, that the old holy Church of Rome, did most
faithfully and most valiantly, resist him and his errors. So did also that
most grave and holy Bishop S. Ambrose, Ambros. lib. 3. Epist. 81.
with many other worthy Prelates his neighbors; condemning Iouinian and his
accomplices for false teachers. Besides, he is yet further ranked in the rue of
damnable Heretics by the ancient, learned, and Godly Author Vicentius
Lyrinensis: In Co^monit. cap. 15.
neither can the Protestants name any one approved author, for a thousand
years after his days, that held him for any better; And yet such goslinges
do they make of their followers, that they must rather follow Iouinian, then
Hierome, Augustine, Ambrose, and the old Church of Rome, and whatsoever else.
He that will take no warning, but longs to be gulled, let him hardly hearken
unto them.

In like manner do they uphold the Heretic Vigilantius: Hieron. cont.
Vigilant.
Who denied the Relikes of Martirs to be worshipped, and wax candels to be
lighted before them at noone day: and said; That whiles we lived we might one
pray for another, but no man's prayer after his death will help any other Out of
which it follows evidently, that it is in vain to pray to Saints, that can
do us no good. Thirdly he taught: That they did better who use their own
goods, and do of their reuennues give peece-meale something to the poor,
then they that sell al away, and give it al at once to them, and become Monks
and Religious. Fourthly, That Clergy men should marry. For these points
expressly, Vigilantius was reproved by S. Hierome, as an vnpure and an ungodly
Heretic; and in one nights work, was so taken down, and (as it were)
crushed in the head, that he never after durst once quack or reply one word. S.
Hierome is therein also seconded by Gennadius, a famous Author of a thousand
years standing, and by S. Thomas of Aquine with others, without any
contradiction at al, until Luthers unhappy days: And yet the Protestants his
disciples, having put on their brazen faces, M. Abbots Page 68.
do not only paraleel and equal him, but also prefer him before S. Hierome,
one of the best learned among the Christians, that lived since the Apostles
days. M. Abbot very shamefully says; Page 67.
that Hierome himself commended this Vigilantius for a holy Priest: And to
make his lie the more luculent, he puts it in the superlatiue degree,
sanctissimum. S. Hierome does indeed commend one Vigilantius, for a holy
Priest: but were there no more of that name besides that wicked Heretic, whom
he calls rather Dormitantius then Vigilantius? Are there no more Abbots but
one? any man that has but half an eye, may see if he will view that Epistle,
that S. Hierome spoke there off a far honester man then the other was, whom
he calls neither sanctissimum nor sanctum; but a man replenished with an
unclean spirit, Hieron. cont. Vigilant.
very unlearned, and more fit to keep an Alehouse, then to serve in the
Church. To return then to my purpose: whereas he can be no true Catholic,
(according to S. Augustines rule and the common opinion) that believes any one
point of heresy; Ad Quodvult. In fine.
The Protestants do hold nine points of heresy, condemned in three notable
Heretics, Aerius, Iouinian, and Vigilantius: And that so openly without any
kind of cloaking or coloring, that they are compelled to defend the authors
themselves for honest men, who notwithstanding by the verdict of al approved
Antiquity, lay condemned as wicked Heretics, for more then a thousand years
together.

Now I will proceed to some of the rest of their erroneous opinions, which
though they embrace, yet they dare not defend the authors of them for godly
men; but with us do condemn their authors, though they uphold some of their
errors. It is noted by the blessed Martyr Ireneus, that one of Simon Magus
errors was; That men were saved by grace, Lib. 1. cont. Haeres. c. 20.
and not for good and just works: the Protestants agree with him in this, that
salvation and heaven are not given for good works. For though they teach that
good works be necessary, as signs and fruits of our faith: yet they will not
in any case, admit them to be any cause of salvation, but make their justifying
faith, the only and whole cause thereof, by which they fall also into the
heresy of Eunomius, related by S. Augustine in these words. Eunomius is
reported to have been an enemy to good works, August. ad Quodvult. Haeres. 54.
so far forth, that he avouched the committing of what sin soever, and the
continuance in the same, to hinder no man, so that he were a partaker of that
faith which he taught. Does not the new devised faith of Protestants, give them
the like assurance of salvation, though they be no less sure to commit and to
continue in mortal sin, even until their dying day?

The Nouatians were branded for Heretics, Eusebius. 6. Histor. cap. 35. Socrat.
1. Histor. cap. 7. Zozom. 1. Histor. cap. 21.
by the best Hystoriographers and other approved authors of the ancient
Church: for denying Priests to have power to forgive some sort of the more
heinous crimes. Our Protestants exceed the Nouatians therein: for they hold
that Priests have no power to pardon any sin at al either little or great,
but only to pronounce them absolved, for the satisfaction of the congregation.
And M. Abbot does upon mere surmises, go about very ignorantly to color
their deceit; Page 187.
in saying that the Nouatians denied absolution, not from any sins, but only
from the sentence of excommunication: Ibidem.
for both Socrates and Sozomene do affirm in plain terms, the Nouatians to
have taught; that it lay not in the power of a Priest, but in God alone, Illud
genus peccati ignoscere; To pardon and forgive that kind of sin. And again,
That hope of pardon was not to be expected of the Priests, but of God who could
remit sins. And there is no mention of any sentence of excommunication
pronounced against them; but that the offenders through the enormity of their
sins, had deprived themselves of the benefit of the Priests absolution. And
because M. Abbot says yet further, that Nouatus denied absolution to one only
kind of sin, let us hear how formally that most grave Doctor S. Ambrose
has 1200. years before confuted him: these be his words: The Nouatians say,
Ambros. de Poenitent. cap. 2.
that excepting some of the grievous sins, they do give pardon unto the
lighter offenses. But S. Ambrose replieth thus: So did not Nouatianus the
author of your error. For he held that penance was not to be enjoined to any
sin at al, upon this consideration: that he would not bind that which
afterward he could not loose; least by binding, he might put them in hope of
loosing. Therefore do you condemn the sentence of your own Master, because
you put that difference between sins, that some of them may be forgiven; and
other some you think remediless. But God makes no such distinction, who has
promised his mercy unto al, and has given license unto Priests, to pardon
without any exception. Observe how directly that ancient Father does cross
our new Masters, in witnessing; that both Nouatianus himself denied Priests to
have power to pardon not only the greater, but any sin at al: And on the
other part, that God gave unto Priests authority to pardon al sorts of sins,
without any exception of the most grievous. Hieron. (...) Epist. de errorivus
Mo^tan. Niceph. lib. 18. cap. 43. Math. Paris. in Henrico 3. Guido de lacobis
cap. 2.
The Montanists also as I rehearsed before out of S. Hierome, did jump with the
Nouatians in this point. Afterward (as heresies in tract of time grow more
formal) about the year of Christ 600. there sprung out of that corrupted
root, certain lewd impes called Iacobites, who did teach in terminis, That it
was not necessary to confess our sins to a Priest, but it would serve to
confess them only to God: Do our Protestants differ from them any one jote
therein?

That the Manichees among many other errors, did deny Free Will, al Antiquity
does confess: The same do the Protestants, though not altogether after the
same manner, nor upon the same grounds. For the Manichees denied freewil as well
to sin, as to do well: Aug. 1. Retract. 15. and de duobus naturis, cont.
Manich.
for they dreamed that there was in a man both a good soul (which they
supposed to be a part of the good God); and an evil soul descended of the
nation of darkness: Out of the forcible operation of the one of these two
souls, they imagined al good and badde deeds of man to proceed, without the
free choice or consent of his own will. M. Abbot craftily, to clear their
party from the infamy of the one branch of the Manichean heresy, does deny
that they do agree with them in the other. True it is, that the Protestants
do not deny us free will to do evil, as the Manichees did: yet do they agree
with them in the other part, attributing the whole vvorking of good unto
grace, as the Manichees did to the good soul, without any free choice or
consent of ours. And albeit S. Augustine in refuting them, do most commonly
insist upon their denial of liberty to do evil, In disput. co^t. Fortunatu^,
in act^s cum Foeli^e, cap 12.
as being the more evident and eminent absurdity: yet does he in sundry places
intimate, that the Manichees held it absurd, to affirm that we had free will to
do good.

The Donatists were of opinion, that the visible Church of Christ was perished
in all other parts of the world, and only remained undefiled in those coasts of
Afrike, where their heresy bare the sway, August. ad Quodvult. and alibi.
and were therefore by the verdict of Antiquity, declared blind Heretics.
The Protestants as obstinately and more blindly do avouch, that the visible
true Church was for 900. years together, banished out of the world, and was of
late restored from that long exile, by Friar Luther and his followers; and does
yet remain only undefiled in those corners of Europe, where their new Gospel
does domineer: they are therefore in that point Donatists.

It was a very preposterous and shameful invention of the Arrians, (yet of
necessity embraced afterward by other Heretics) to appeal from the
judgment of their spiritual Pastors, unto the lay Magistrate: thus writes S.
Ambrose of the Arrian Bishop Auxentius. He being brought unto an exigent, does
fly unto that subtle trick of his predecessors, to draw us into the
Emperors displeasure; Orat. tertia cont. Auxentium.
affirming that he (being but a young man, and a Nouice in the faith, ignorant
also of the holy Scriptures, as commonly other Princes are) must
notwithstanding in his Consistory determine this Ecclesiastical cause: so did
the Donatists appeal from the judgment of Bishops unto the Emperor, Epist.
48. and 162. Lib. 3. cont. Julian. cap. 1.
as witnesses S. Augustine; And so the Pelagians would have done, if they
could have prevailed therein, as the same most grave Father has also recorded.
And is not this (as it were) the foundation and shotanker of all the Protestants
superstitious proceedinges?

Another rotten twigge of the same Pelagians heresy it was, Aug. de Peccat.
and Merit. lib. 1. cap. 9.
To deny children to be purged from original sin by baptism, attributing
that rather to a covenant, made long since to old father Abraham; most learned
Protestants be of the same mind: And al of them agree with Proclus the
condemned Originist, Epiph. Haeres. 64.
who taught Original sin to be so in seperably joined with our mortal
bodies, that til death it is not clearly purged of it.

The Antidicomarianitae (that is, Epiph. Haeres. 78.
enemies of the blessed Virgin Mary) were scored up for Heretics, for denying
that most holy Mother of God to be worshipped and honored: yet do the
Protestants stiffly maintain the very same error.

Iconoclastae (that is, such men as denied the Images of our Savior and his
Saints, to be set up in Churches, yea that brake them down and cast them out
thence) were by 600. Bishops assembled out of al parts of Christendom, in
Nicenum Council. 2.
a general Council adjudged Heretics: what be then our Protestants?

If I would descend lower, I should light upon Berengarius, the great Grandsier
of those, that deny the sacred body of our Savior to be really and
substantially in the blessed Sacrament of the Altar: but because he lived not
much above 500. years ago, I do here stay, and demand: what proper points
of doctrine can be left unto the poor Protestants, if al these articles
condemned in the forenamed Heretics, were taken away from them? Remove from
them the errors of the Antidicomarianitans, Iconoclasts, and Vigilantius; and
you shall bereave them of their inuectiues against praying to Saints, and
honoring them, their Relikes and Images. Loose them from the chains of that
vile Arrian Aerius; and they vvil cease to rail against offering of
Sacrifice, and praying for the faithful souls departed. If they would shake
hands and depart from the Nouatians, they would immediately give over to
speak against confession of our sins to Priests. If they could be cleansed
from the muddy dregs of Iouinians loose and lewd opinion, then would they
blush to plead so earnestly for the marriage of Priests, and other religious
persons: And be ashamed to affirm it, to be as acceptable to God to feed our
rotten carcases, as to fast; and to solace them with the company of a
yoke fellow, as to live continently. Their new doctrine about original sin,
free will, and the merit of good works, should fall to the ground; If they
would once give over to participate therein with the Originists, Manichees,
Eunomians, and Simon Magus. Vnty them from the yoke of Donatists, and they vvil
follow no longer a scattered uncertain and invisible congregation; but shall
happily return unto the unity of that Catholic Church, which has always
been visible, and has spread her branches all the world over. Finally, strippe
them off that paradox and absurd position, borrowed from the Arrians,
Donatists, Pelagians, and many other Heretics, That (forsooth) the temporal
Prince and lay Magistrate, is supreme judge in Ecclesiastical causes; and you
utterly undo them, spoiling them of the only assured proppe and pillar of al
their religion.

Now the case thus standing, that most of the articles of the Protestant faith
be such old reproved errors, if too too many be found so destitute of al
grace, that they will nevertheless wilfully continue still in them, and most
obstinately defend them til death, though it cost them hell fire for their
pains; yet my trust in Gods infinite bounty and goodness is, that many
considerate and religiously disposed people (being more careful to please God
then men, and more vvilling to look unto the salvation of their souls, then
the preservation of their goods) will now at length upon this fair warning,
prefer light before darkness, and approved verity before condemned heresy.
They cannot but remember that which is every Sunday read in their own
service, out of Athanasius Creed: Unless they hold the Catholic faith entire
and whole, without violation of any one article off it, they shall without doubt
perish everlastingly. Of the same judgment was that very juditious Doctor, and
most vigilant Pastor of Christ's flock S. Augustine, who having numbered up
many of the same, and such like heresies, does conclude thus: Whosoever holds
any one of these, he shall be no Catholic Christian. Ad Quodvultdeum, In fine.
Woe then be unto al Protestant Christians, who believe not one or two of them
and the like, but more then twenty of them together; the whole frame of their
new Gospel, being principally reared and grounded upon nothing else, as has
been even now verified. I hope then, that many of my most dear Countrymen,
will (by the forcible working of Gods grace) give ear unto the wholesome
counsel of that most reverend, holy, and prudent Father S. Ambrose, Ambros.
lib. de Fide. ca. 1.
who forewarneth al Christians; To stand upon their guarde most watchfully,
and in no case to suffer such pestiferous and venomous errors to be powered
into their souls or senses: one drop whereof (says he) will infect and
poison the pure and single Tradition of our Lord, and his holy Apostles.

That which follows in the first part of M. Abbots book, because it is
nothing else, but as it were a flourish and light bickering against some such
points of doctrine, as are afterward in their due places severally and more
largely discussed; I will remit unto their proper Questions, there orderly to be
handled with the rest of the same kind. I will here before I end this part,
touch two extraordinary matters, which cannot without great digression, be
taken into other Questions. The one is, my mistaking of Proclus an Heretic,
for Methodius a most Catholic Bishop, as M. Abbot affirms: the other, of my
discovery of a great secret of the Papists conspiracy against his Majesty.

These be my words of Proclus.

WILLIAM BISHOP.
ONE Proclus an enormious Originist, taught that sin was not taken away in
baptism, but only covered, as it is recorded by Epiphanius: Haeres. 64.
M. Perkins affirms in like manner, that it remains still in the regenerate,
though it be not imputed unto them.

ROBERT ABBOT.
Page 49.
HERE M. Bishop unawares, has sheathed a sword in his own side, citing under
the name of Proclus the Heretic, the words of Methodius a Catholic Bishop,
against the heresy of Proclus. He saw in Epiphanius, Sequuntur verba Procli,
Here follow the words of Proclus: and his lips hanging in his light, he could
not see but that all the discourse following, was the words of Proclus;
whereas the words of Proclus are but a few lines in the beginning, and then
follows by Methodius, a large confutation thereof. Now M. Bishop
acknowledges, that this author did teach the same that M. Perkins does: it
follows therefore by his own acknowledgment, that our doctrine is approved
by Methodius Bishop of Tyrus, and also by Epiphanius.

WILLIAM BISHOP.
I Cannot well perceive, how M. Abbots ignorance may serve him for a sorry
excuse of this foul oversight; else I would rather impute it thereunto, then
charge him (as I otherwise must needs do) with very shameless audacity. I
know that he would not be esteemed ignorant, and he seems to have read both
Proclus and Methodius words; but he jumbleth them together as though they
were own text, though they stand in several divisions with Epiphanius, and
some of them four or five great leaves from the other. And yet me thinks, he
should not be so simple and shallow witted, as to have read them both over, and
not to discern where Proclus speech ends: for Epiphanius does most
distinctly point out the beginning and the end of Proclus discourse, with such
a beginning of Methodius confutation of it, that any man understanding the
Latin tongue, and enjoying the right use of his eyes, cannot choose but
perceive it. For Epiphanius having (under this title: Now follow the words of
Proclus, which Methodius does also rehearse, as he had done before the words of
Origin) put down Proclus discourse at length, does at the end of it make a
distinction, with this admonition: Sequuntur deinceps ipsius Methodij verba,
Now follow the words of Methodius himself; thitherto then went the words
of Proclus, wherein al M. Abbots help and relief is comprehended: therefore
Proclus the heretic by his own acknowledgment is his author, and not
Methodius the Catholic Bishop. Again, the very beginning of Methodius
discourse (if there were not so distinct a separation and admonition of
Epiphanius set down) would convince, that al before was Proclus discourse,
and that there he first began his own: these be his words. Cum igitur vix
desijsset Proclus, etc. Therefore when Proclus had scarce finished, and the
auditory was long silent, as very much inclined to give credit to Proclus
speech: I seeing them so still, began to lift up my head fair and soft, and
to take breath as men at the Sea use to do after the tempest is past; and
trembling as something Sea-sicke (for I must needs confess my self to have
been strooken with the vehemence of his Oration) I turn my self to Auxentius
and say. O friend, it was not in vain said by the Poet: If two go joined
together, for our adversaries be two; wherefore I crave your help in this
combat, that we may be also two to resist them, least that Aglaophon armed
with the perswasiue speeches of Origin and Proclus, do wrest out of our hands
the true resurrection. Go to then, let us range our battle against their
sophismes, nothing appaled at those encounters, wherewith the fearful are
daunted: and so goes on with his preamble, preparing toward the confutation
of Proclus. And being ready to give the onset, asks his partner Auxentius
whether it please him to begin: Vtrum igitur (Auxenti) tu huius viae dux
esse velis, and ego praecedam? Whether will you be the guide of the way, or shall
I go before? Who answered him, That it was meet because he began the
speech, that he should also march before. Go to then (says Methodius) let us
for our part examine that matter even from the beginning forward: hitherto
Methodius. Do not al these circumstances most evidently convince and
demonstrate, to him that is not more then poore-blinde, that unto the beginning
of those his speeches, Proclus former Oration continued? note the words, When
Proclus had scarce made an end. Again, Methodius would not begin to contend
against two, that is, Origin and Proclus, til he had gotten Auxentius to join
his forces with him, that they might be two to two. Moreover, after many other
complements, Methodius would have had Auxentius to have made the first sally
forth, and to have given the first charge upon Origin and Proclus, which he
refusing to do, Methodius began. Now let any man judge, whether my lips
hanged in my light (as M. Abbots ciuility lead him to speak) or whether his
soar eyes rather, were not strangely distempered, that he could not see
Proclus discourse to have lasted until that reply of Methodius; being so
distinguished by Epiphanius, and by such apparent signs of distinction marked
out by Methodius himself? If need were, I could prove by the coherence and
correspondence, of the beginning and ending of Proclus speeches, that they
lasted not only for a few lines in the beginning, as M. Abbot fableth; but
until the end of five full leaves. For Proclus purpose was to prove, That the
Resurrection could not be in the substance of this mortal body, wherein we
live; which (says he) cannot remain for ever without change and be immortal;
but the Resurrection must be in a spiritual and immortal body, which yet should
have the same outward shape and proportion that our mortal bodies have, even as
Origin has taught: This I affirm to be the opinion and proposition of
Proclus; where unto M. Abbot also consents. Now this very same is his
conclusion five leaves after, where he ends his discourse, with a fond
comparison of our mortal bodies unto a beasts-hide filled with water. Which
skin (says he) though the water be often changed, does neuerthel^sse remain
like it self; so (says that wise author) though that which under a man's
outward shape and form, does increase and diminish and be often changed; yet
the outward form it self of a man, always continues one and the same. Then
does he concludeful soundly; That like as now when the body is not the same,
yet the same shape of outward proportion, is always preserved: Even so in the
Resurrection, the same body in inward substance not remaining, notwithstanding
the same outward form shall remain increased to a greater glory, and shall be
showed (says he) not in a corruptible, but in a spiritual body, free from al
corruption, like to that of JESUS himself in his Transfiguration: then
concludes thus. These things hitherto are thus to be considered: And this is
in brief the sentence of Origin. Do you not see, how the same that Proclus
propounded in the beginning with Origin, the same he concludes in the end?
wherefore, all that whole discourse between those places was his own, and no
word in it of Methodius. Yea, he adds after the conclusion (because he had
made mention of Christ's body in the Transfiguration) an objection out of it
against his own opinion: That as Christ's body did rise again with the same
flesh and bones it had before; Even so should every other Christian man's body
do. Nay (says he) not so: for Christ's body was not conceived in sin as ours
are, but of the holy Ghost and of a Virgin; but our bodies are sleep,
pleasure, and filth: and therefore (according to the saying of wise Syrach) to
be devoured of worms, and consumed: So that to the very last words before
(Now follow the words of Methodius) there is no sign of a confutation, but a
plentiful confirmation of Proclus error, which was; That the same body of
ours, according to the inward substance of it, shall not rise again in the
general resurrection, but only according to the outward shape. Now, one reason
among the rest, that moved that doting Originist to believe, that the same
body of ours in substance should not rise again, was forsooth: That original
sin had so infected this body of ours, and was so fast riuited or rather
incorporated with it, that it could never be cleansed and rid clean out,
unless the body also it self, were utterly destroyed and extinguished with
it: which he assaieth to confirm with that sentence of the Apostle (so common
in the Protestants mouths) There is not in me (that is, in my flesh) any good.
Now to the Minor proposition of Proclus: but in the Resurrection there must be
a pure body, most clean from al contagion of sin; wherefore not this body of
ours (which cannot be without sin) must needs be utterly consumed, and a new
spiritual body framed. This was one principal foundation of Proclus enormious
opinion, in which the Protestants jump with him; that whiles this body of ours
lives, sin is never rooted out of it: It may be (say they, as also Proclus
there said before them) checked or cropped in us, or not imputed to us: but it
cannot whiles we live be clean purged and rooted out. Finally, this very
argument of Proclus, which M. Abbot would father upon Methodius, is in the
ensuing discourse of Methodius toward the end crossed and confuted: where he
teaches out of the same Apostle, That by the law of the spirit of God, and
through the virtue of Christ's grace, that sin which was in our bodies, is
condemned to death; that is, overcome, vanquished, and killed.

These arguments taken out of the most material circumstances of this discourse
(as of that which goes before it, and does immediately follow after, with the
principal assertion in it self, set down both in the beginning and ending of
it) must needs persuade any indifferent reader, that M. Abbot was wonderfully
careless of his credit, to thrust out such an impudent assertion, so contrary
to al likeness of truth, that any man that will but have the patience to read
over so long chapters, may most easily discover the falsehood of it. One poor
color M. Abbot found out to deceive himself and others, that it was no
continuation of Proclus speech: Because (forsooth) Proclus seems to confute
Origens exposition of the coats of skin, which God made for Adam. Origin
took them to signify this body of ours; Proclus not so, but only to notify
the same bodies to be then first made mortal: but this shadow of a reason is so
simple, that it vvil not fray a babe. For it often falls out, that the
scholar of an erroneous teacher, vvil not wholy agree with his master; but
though he follow him in the maine point of his doctrine, yet he vvil have some
one trick or other of his own above him: so Proclus, albeit he stood stoutly
to Origin, in the denial of the Resurrection of the same body in substance,
which was the head controversy; yet did he dissent from him in the exposition
of the coats of skins, which was but an appendix to the other. But this
proves not Proclus discourse to be that of Methodius; nay it plainly disproues
it: for Methodius gives a third interpretation of those skins, differing
from both the other, which is also far more litteral then the other two; to
wit, That the skins were made by God for our first parents, to cover their
nakedness, and to keep them from the cold.

To conclude this Section; seeing there be so manifold great and plain reasons
against M. Abbot, and he having no better shelter for his surmise, then that
silly shift which you have heard, of the diverse interpretation of the skins;
seems he not to be past al shame and worthy to be thrust into an Asses
skin, that hereupon takes an occasion to insult against me, as though he had
gotten a mighty victory? Page 52.
these be his words. Now where were M. Bishops wits, that could think that
these were the words of Proclus? Surely be read the place very early in the
morning, before he had his full sleep; or late after supper, when he should
have been in bed; or else he borrowed them from some of his Masters the
Jesuits, who make as little conscience what they say, as he does. We must be
content with such stuff as he can yield us: The broker can afford no other
wares, then he himself had received of the merchant. See how pleasant and
plentiful the man is, upon very small advantage, nay upon no advantage at al;
but only upon the displaying of his own gross ignorance, or too too great
oversight. I am so far off, from taking this upon the bare report of others,
that besides the diligent reading of the Latin translation of Epiphanius, I
have looked also into his own Greek text: where I find the same
distinctions. First, Proclus words with this title, Proclou tou Autou; the
words of Proclus himself: and after them an entire continuation of the same,
without any sign of interruption, for more then four full leaves. And then in
another distinct separation, Loipon tou Methodiou, the rest, or that which
follows is of Methodius. Between which two partitions, all the discourse is
of Proclus own devise, out of which M. Abbot draws for their defense some
sentences; and being ashamed (as good cause he had) of such a shameful Patron,
he would gladly have fathered that badde discourse upon Methodius, a reverend
Catholic Bishop: see, and wonder at the blind folly of Protestants, that
blush not to maintain Heretics opinions very stoutly, and yet are ashamed of
the name and company of the Heretics themselves. Either let them hardly avouch
those authors worthy to be respected, embraced, and followed; or else heartily
and happily give over, forsake, and detest those their damnable opinions, which
made them unto al holy and learned Antiquity, exceeding odious. Otherwise they
maintaining the very self same errors, must needs in the end prove unto al
upright and well understanding men, in like manner infamous; and be no less
hated and avoided of al good Christians, then their founders and masters were
before them. Thus far of Proclus the Originist, whom M. Abbot would by a
strange metamorphosis, have transformed into Methodius an ancient Catholic
Bishop.

Now I come unto his 34. Section, where to trounch me, and upon occasion of my
speeches to traduce al English-Catholikes, he powers out a foul turbulent
flood, of vain and currish eloquence. These are my words upon which he
runs a very rude and jarring descant.

WILLIAM BISHOP.
AND when they shall see no hope of remedy, the state being settled, Page 225.
and a continual posterity like to ensue, of the same nature and condition: God
knows, what that forcible weapon of necessity may constrain and drive men to,
at the length.

ROBERT ABBOT.
IN this period, M. Bishop thought to show himself a politic wiseman, and
contrary to his own expectation, Who told him so?
al his fellows condemn him for a fool: they had but one special secret
amongst them, and he has played the part of Tom-tel-trouth to reveal it. What
M. Bishop? are you such a blabbe, that you cannot keep your own and your
fellows counsel, but must needs out with it? And had you no other body to
whom to discover it, if you must needs so do^, but thus bluntly to blunder it
out to the King? But be of good cheer man, let not this discomfort you too
much, satisfy your friends, and assure them Which they esteem as much as of
a straw.
upon our word, that we knew your minds before, we knew you were no
changlinges, but what you have been, the same you continue still: God be
thanked his tongue is no slander.
treacherous, falsharted, faithless, waiting but for time and opportunity if
power would serve, to compel his Majesty to your order. The state is now
settled (you I said not so, but when they shall see etc.
say) and a continual posterity like to ensue of one nature and condition. O
this is it that grieueth you, this is it that makes you gnaw your tongues for
anger, and to fare like men at their wits end, that know not what way to take.
The vnsettlednesse of the state, was the common trappe wherein they catched
men, to be devoured of the Pope: what a trouble is it now for you to cry out?
O spes fallaces! O false and vain hope!

WILLIAM BISHOP.
THIS light scoffing inuectiue of his, most fit for the gravity of such a jolly
Preacher and a Doctor, I would have buried in deep silence, as unworthy any
serious answer, had he not al his book over been glansing and girding at
those few words of mine, as though they contained no less then high treason;
hudling also with them many odious imputations, and spiteful slanders of us
and our doctrine. The discreet reader will (I hope) bear with me, if I do
answer the man somewhat suitable to his own style. The general scope of my
Epistle was, to move his Majesty to favor the Catholic religion, at least to
mitigate the rigor of his Highness laws enacted against Catholics. Among
sundry other reasons which I produced to that purpose, it was one; to insinuate
an inconvenience that might happen to follow, upon the severe execution of the
said extreme penalties: wherein I cannot conceive, how M. Abbot should think
that I meant to show my self a more wise politic man, then in the rest; were
it not that I find him commonly to mistake matters very grossly, or else to
speak by contraries. For who almost, is so little acquainted with the
dispositions of great states, but that he knows, how they desire rather to
hear of present applaudites, praises, and congratulations, then of any future
perils, troubles, and disquietnesse? wherefore this infelicity is esteemed by
the wise, to be linked with the flourishing and most fortunate place of
Princes; that they shall find very few ready to admonish them of things
distastful, which may hap rather to engender melancholy, then to purchase
any commodity: most men being very covetous to wind themselves into their good
liking (from whom descend so many promotions and profits,) by presenting unto
them pleasant and delightful objects. It had then rather been a point of
humane policy, to have abstained from the mention of such an ungrateful
matter, and to have tendered only pleasing arguments, as M. Abbot and his
pew-fellowes are wont to do; gaping after preferments, temporising, and
accommodating themselves to their humor, that say: Loquere nobis placentia.
Nevertheless, he is not presently to be condemned of presumptuous folly, much
less to be holden for a disloyal subject; who out of his duty to his
sovereign, care of his countries good, and affection toward men of his own
religion, does in time and place, put his Prince in mind of a mischief, which
may fortune to arise out of some severe course intended: or else al loyalty,
and true fidelity, were to be banished out of the Court and Country. This then
should in equity and due construction, have rather been well taken, as
proceeding at least from a good meaning, then either to have been scoffed at,
or drawn unto a most odious signification?

But my fellows (says M. Abbot) do condemn me for a fool and a blabbe,
because I have revealed the only special secret, that lay hidden among them. I
marvel what fellows of mine he is so familiar withal, that he has their
opinion at his fingers ends so perfectly. But give him leave to feign of my
fellows what him list, so that he will stand stoutly to his own assertion;
That this is the only secret that lies hidden amongst us, and that there is no
other to be feared then this, which I have here uttered. This purgation of
ours proceeding from so bitter an adversary, may serve to convince himself and
his fellow Preachers, of a thousand slanderous lies, coined by themselves or by
men of their own sect, and then thundered out of their Pulpits, as strange
projects of the Papists. But the Lord be praised, I need not crave any pardon
of my fellows, for the discovering of this deep secret of ours: for the
courteous and comfortable Gentleman M. Abbot himself, vvil on his true word
quite clear me of it. In what sort I pray you? Marry (says he) it was no
secret at al, but as well known unto al Protestants, as the moone-shine is in
water. Now good Sir, though you have made me not a little beholding unto you,
for freeing me from so mighty an imputation of a fool and a blabbe: yet you
must give me leave to admonish you in the Lord, that it becomes not a man of
your coat, so suddenly to cross and contradict himself. First you say, that
I bluntly blundered out the only special secret amongst us: and shortly after
you say again, that it was no secret at al. The Apostle says, that in all his
preachings there was not to be found, It is, and it is not, that is, he did not
first affirm any thing, and afterward deny the same: And in another place
affirms, 2. Cor. 1. verse. 17. Gallat. 2. verse. 18.
If I build that which I destroyed before, I make my self a preuaricatour. But
M. Abbot that was wont to speak out of the Apostles affection, now clean
forgetting his rule, and being more mindful to display the colors of his
rethorike, then to mark what he himself said; in one period flourishes upon
one thing, and in the next inlargeth as freely upon the flat contrary: he must
therefore by the sentence of S. Paul, be taken not for a true Preacher, but for
a false cosening Preuaricatour. Let any indifferent reader judge, what credit
one may give to his words, when it is so apparent, that he not only makes no
conscience to misreport me, my fellows, and al sort of authors; but also
cares not greatly to give himself the flat lie, within the compass of few
lines, so he may make a fair show of a number of vain words.

True it is, that we Catholics are no changlings in matters of faith, and in
rite of Sacraments. The same which our forefathers and eldest ancestors,
embraced and held even from the Apostles days; that, and no other, do we
inuiolably observe and maintain unto this day: And what is taught among us in
one country for matter of faith, the same is generally received, by men of our
religional the world over. We be not (God be thanked) herein like the
Protestants; who, as though they had taken their name of Proteus, are as
changeable in articles of faith, as he is fained to have been various in the
transforming of his countenance: In Germany believing one thing, in Heluetia
another; at Geneua turning the third way, in Holland wandering the fourth. How
many countries they infect with their new and profane Gospel: so many diverse
professions of faith, and distinct forms of Church government they have.
These changlinges that are so far degenerated from their predecessors piety,
and do disagree so much one with another: Yea; that do in the same country
often chop and change their own religion; are of al constant Catholics to be
avoided, as unstable and wavering souls, carried about with every blast of new
doctrine. But concerning dutiful obedience unto the Prince, who is Gods
Lieutenant general in temporal causes, Catholics if they be compared to
Protestants, will be found an hundred times more loyal and constant: which
point because I have touched in my answer unto M. Abbots Epistle in the
beginning of this book, I need not here again handle it at large. And
although some men of our religion, have now and then (as frail and sinful
creatures) forgotten their duty both to God and their King: yet they have been
so few, and that so seldom in comparison of the Protestants, that for one of
ours, more then a thousand of theirs, have within this hundred years failed
therein; though we be in number, a thousand of our religion for one of theirs,
if you take al Christendom over.

And albeit the state seem now to be settled against the religion of our
forefathers, and not unlike so to continue, until it shall please God of his
infinite mercies to alter and amend it; which notwithstanding (as all the
faithful know) may be very shortly, because his divine power is infinite, and
no man able to resist his vvil: yet we shall be by the assistance of Gods good
grace, so far off from biting our tongues, or the lip either thereat as M.
Abbot fondly imagines; that we will rather pray to God to open our lips, and
to loose our tongues to magnify his holy name, that he has given us that true
Christian happiness and honor, not only Phillip. 1. verse. 28.
to believe a-right in Christ JESUS, in these days of infidelity; but also to
suffer disgrace, and to sustain persecution for the constant profession of his
holy name, and only true Catholic, Apostolic and Roman faith. They who make
profession of religion to please the Princes of the earth, to heap up honors
and to rake riches together, have great cause of grief, when they find
themselves therefore by the present state discountenanced, impouerished, and
utterly rejected: But others who know our blessed Savior as al Christians
ought to do, and the true honor, virtue, and riches of his Cross; do more
regard of his love, yea of one good look of his, then of al earthly Kings
countenances, favors, and preferments: And do make a higher estimate of
bearing his Cross after him, and of suffering persecution for his glorious
name sake, then of al vvorldly ease, honors, and commodities; Imitating
therein that generous and most noble minded Moses, Hebr. 11. verse. 25.
Who chose rather to be afflicted with the people of God, then to have the
pleasures of temporal sin, esteeming the reproach for Christ greater riches,
then the treasures of the Aegiptians. It does not therefore so much trouble us,
to behold the state settled against the Catholic religion, for our own
temporal interest; who have thereby so manifold occasions to mortify our evil
passions, to fly the temptations of the wicked world, and to endeare our
selves unto our most loving redeemer. But very great sorrow and continual
sadness of heart have we to consider, that Christian religion first planted in
our country, and ever since until our fathers days most constantly continued,
is now banished thence; and with it al honesty of life, al good and charitable
dealing with our neighbor, is utterly decayed and banished out of the City and
Country: And in place thereof, swearing, and forswearing, drunkenness,
dishonesty, and al manner of deceit and knavery, openly practiced,
countenanced, and without blushing professed. That the goodly, fair, and
stately Churches (built by our Catholic Ancestors, for Catholic assemblies at
the blessed sacrifice of the Mass, and for the due administration of the holy
Sacraments, and true preaching of Gods word) be now profaned and turned to
places of dishonouring of our sovereign Creator, and of seducing his poor
creatures. That the famous Universities and other Schools founded for
instruction principally of Catholic doctrine and devotion, be now made shops
of new errors, loose manners, and impiety. Upon these and such like spiritual
considerations, finding our poor country deprived in manner of al Gods
blessings, and our dear countrymen made slaves of the Devil, and fuel for the
flames of hell fire; we Catholics are exceeding pensive, yet do we not
therefore fare like mad men, nor gnaw our tongues for anger, as M. Abbot
scornefully vvriteth: but do in bitterness of soul most earnestly pray unto
the Father of mercies (in whose hands are the hearts of al Kings) to inspire
our dread sovereign King JAMES, and the Lords of his most honorable Council,
with the true knowledge of his sacred vvil and word: and to kindle in them so
fervent a zeal of the Catholic Roman faith, as that they may employ those
very rare and singular gifts of nature, art, and experience, which God has
plentifully powered upon them, toward the reclaiming of our country from the
new profane heresies, and most wicked conversation of these miserable times,
unto our Ancestors sound faith, sincere honesty, and most charitable, and
upright dealing: (This chiefly is the heap of our heaviness, this is all the
harm we wish them, this is all the treason that can be justly laid to our
charge.) That with the abundance of such honor and prosperity as this vale
of misery affords them, they might also be heirs of eternal happiness,
glory and felicity. And albeit for this inestimable heavenly bliss, which we
most heartily desire unto our native soil and best beloved country, we be
styled a thousand times traitors, and every way used most unkindly; yet we
shall not surceasse by Gods grace to pray for them continually, who do day and
night persecute us: yea over and besides, be ready also by the assistance of
the same his grace, not only to bestow our best and most serviceable days to
do them good; but also the dearest blood in our bodies, if it shall please our
blessed Savior so to dispose of us.

And is it likely? that men thus by the grace of God affected, should cry out
(as M. Abbot maliciously surmiseth) O fallaces spes! O deceitful hopes! does he
not here rather notably discover the baseness and corruption of his own mind?
as exceeding far dissenting from the right temper and disposition of a sound
and noble Christian, who should be nothing daunted, for seeing the worldly state
settled against him; because our great Master Christ has assured us of that
long before hand, saying: Johan. 15. verse. 19.
If the world hate you, know ye that it hated me before you. If you had been
of the world, the world would have loved her own: but because you be not of
the world, but I have choosen you out of the world, therefore the world hates
you. Remember my word that I said unto you, the servant is not greater then his
Master: If they have persecuted me, you also will they persecute. Had not M.
Abbot foully forgotten this worthy lesson, which Christ willed al his so well
to remember, when he imagined that there was no other remedy, but that we must
needs tear our tongues for anger, and fare like mad men, when we saw the
state settled against our religion and us? If he had not been such a mercinary
temporizer, that esteems the highest and greatest happiness of Priests and
Preachers, to consist principally in the favor of great personages, in fat
benefices, and bodily pleasures; he would never have thought (much less have
written) that the settling of the state against us, was like to cast us into
such a desperate and bloody agony. S. Paul surely was of a far other mind,
when he exhorted the Thessalonians, not so much as to be moved in
tribulations: 1. Thessal. 3. verse. 3.
For your selves know (says he) that we are appointed to this; as if he had
said, it is incident to the true state of a good Christian, to live in the
disgrace and hate of worldlings. Undoubtedly then, M. Abbot was greatly
ouer-seene, when he supposed the discountenance of the state to be able to put
good Catholics to their wits end. May he not therefore be saluted with these
words of S. James? Jacob. 4. verse. 4.
O adulterers (O base and bastardly minded Ministers) know ye not that the
friendship of this world, is the enemy of God? Whosoever therefore will be a
friend of this world, he is made an enemy of God. Let them therefore, that
prefer the frienship of this world before the favor of God, esteem as
highly as they list of worldly cherishings and preferments: we by the help of
Gods grace, will be so far off from tearing our tongues, so long as they
please to persecute us; that we will rather (after our blessed Saviors counsel)
Math. 5. verse. 12.
rejoice and be glad when we be reviled untruly, and persecuted for his sake:
For howsoever our good meaning and desert be mistaken in earth, yet therefore
very great shall be our reward in heaven. Finally, leaving the falsenesse and
vanity of hope, unto them that by pleasing worldly men seek after vanity and
false felicity, and who are not unlike so to fare (as M. Abbot vvriteth) if
according to their badde deserts, they were by our Savior Christ whipped out
of his Church: we Catholics following the Apostles instruction, Romans 5. verse.
2.
Do glory in the true hope of the glory of the Sons of God. The testimony of
an upright conscience, is to us here as it were a continual banquet: And the
assured hope which we have, to enjoy hereafter the perpetual glory of Gods
dear Sons in his heavenly Kingdom, do yield us more quietness of mind
and true hearty joy, in one day, then most of the Ministers receive by their
worldly prosperity, al their lives long.

ROBERT ABBOT.
AND now that there is no hope of remedy, God knows (you say) what that
forcible weapon of necessity may constrain and drive men to at length. Behold
the fair flowers of his sweet eloquence.
False Traitor, Base fugitive: do thou take upon thee to threaten thy
Prince? what? of a preaching Priest have we now a Herald at arms, if he
cannot persuade religion, to denounce war? is this the Catholic religion
that you commend to us? did Peter and Paul deal in that sort, to tell Princes
that if they would not give them way, God knows what that forcible weapon of
necessity might constrain and drive men to at length? was this the language
or style of the first Church? but what do I ask you of Peter and Paul, or the
first Church? God knows they are strangers to you, and you to them, you love
to talk of them, but little do you care to be guided by them. The first
Church could say to their Persecutours: Tertul. Apolog. ca. 37.
If we would deal with you not by secret revenge but by open enmity, do we
want thereto either number or strength? we are foraigners to you, and yet we
have filled al places of yours; your Cities, Islands, Castles, Boroughes,
meeting places; your Tents, Tribes, Bands, Palaces; your Senate and Court:
what war were we not fit for, though unequal in power, who so willingly yield
our selves to be slain? but that with us, more tolerable it is to be killed,
then to kill. And so Augustine speaks thereof: That the City of Christ,
August. de Ciuitat. Dei, 22. cap. 6.
albeit it had troops of mighty peoples, yet did not fight for temporal life,
but for the obtaining of eternal life: It did not resist; their fighting for
life was nothing else, but for their Saviors sake to despise life: thus they
were able to rescue themselves and their religion; yet no forcible weapon of
necessity could move them to rebel, and to take arms against them by whom they
were oppressed. And this was then thought to be the proper condition of the
faith of Christ.

WILLIAM BISHOP.
FALSE Traitor, Base fugitive, etc. Fair words courteous Sir, if not for
honesties sake, yet for the honor of the Ministry. This man (to say the
least) was surely some passionate vvomans son, he is on the sudden so
mutable into strange passions. This passage he began gravely, playing both
the Politician and Prophet; then counterfaiting an ouer-kinde Proctour, he
clears me of that I never offended in, though he therewith condemned
himself of forgery: so fast a friend would he then needs show himself to
me. And presently after, upon no other occasion but the very recital of the
same words again, he is in a moment so transported with choler, that he
seems to fare not much unlike one of those sober fellows in Bedlem, that have
their heads bound up in a clout, and cries out, false traitor, base fugitive.
Can I then in better fashion encounter him, then with these verses of grave
Seneca.

Pone vesanos precor,
Animi tumores, teque pietati refer.
Assuage I pray you the swelling waves of your mind.
Recover your wits, and stray not so far out of your kind.
Gentle Sr. Robert, if you please to pacify a little your distempered humors,
you shall not only avoid the obloquy of the vveake brethren, that may hap to
be scandalized, to behold so sage a reputed Doctor, and sober Preacher, to let
fly such base and barbarous words: but having purged your brains from the
foggy mistes of those gross exhalations, you also shall be able to discern
more clearly what my words signify, for you have not forgotten (I ween) the
old verse: Impedit ira animum, ne possit cernere verum. Well then, supposing
that upon this fair admonition, you be waxen for the while more calm, and
contemning the indignity of that vile term (base fugitive) as most untrue;
because (God be thanked) I was neither basely borne, nor ever any fugitive or
turne-coate: Let us patiently examine, where this treason lies, that he
speaks off; and what those threats be, wherewith I menace my Prince. These
be all the words I wrote: God knows what that forcible weapon of necessity may
constrain and drive men to at length. Is there in this sentence any one
syllable that sounds of treason? or savors of any undutiful demeanor
toward his Majesty? do I persuade, counsel, or encourage any reasonable
creature to take arms against my King and Country? nothing less: for I only
intimated to my sovereign Lord himself, that it was not in man's judgment
unlike, but that upon the severe execution of those rigorous laws enacted,
some ouer-great inconvenience might happen to ensue. And my humble Petition
unto his gracious H^ghnesse to prevent the same in due season, does without
further purgation, sufficiently clear me with all understanding men, from the
imputation of any such thing, if it should chance to follow.

Neither do my words in any ordinary construction, insinuate any deep secret
hidden amongst us; (as M. Abbot wavering like a vveather-cocke first
affirms, and after denies:) but do demonstrate a certain fear of mine
own, grounded, not upon any privy plot then in hand (according to M. Abbots
most malicious slander,) but upon that common maxim known to al men: Durum
telum necessitas; Necessity has no law, as in plain words I then and there
expressed. Which is also confirmed in holy writ: Multi propter necessitatem
deliquerunt; Many men through necessity have offended. This forewarning then
given to my Prince, of some offense that might happen to be committed, if he
out of his Princely clemency and wisdom, did not moderate the extremity of
those laws; was rather a loyal office performed to my King, then any kind of
encouragement to his subjects to fall into a mischief. And (which makes my
words much more sufferable) I do not affirm absolutely, that any evil at al
would follow upon that rigor; but say only, that God knows whether it will or
no; leaving it (as it was uncertain) unto his Majesty's more mature
consideration.

Neither do I talk of rebellion, or Herald-like denounce war to my Prince;
but barely insinuate, that it may procure some manner of mischief, one or
another: And that rather unto some headdy hot executioner of that severity,
then unto any other greater personage; And that too, when? what presently? not
so neither, but at length (may drive men at length) that is after a long time,
if the persecution be still followed. Which may perhaps not touch his Majesty's
reign, but be extended to a succeeding age. I then letting slip out of my
pen, but an uncertain conjecture of some manner of inconvenience, which might
at length, God knows when, happen unto some body: was there any spark of
Christian charity, nay any spice of moral honesty in M. Abbot, thereupon to
infer that I like a false traitor did proclaim open war against my King
and Country?

Let it be duly also considered by the discret reader, that the prodigious
mystery of concealed and smothered iniquity, whereon he harpeth and vvarbleth
al his book over, is nothing else but his own spiteful wresting of one poor
line of mine. Does not his great and often threats upon so small an advantage,
sufficiently witness; that he lacked not good will, but convenient matter to
run upon, and therefore was glad to snatch at any shadow? well, the old
Adage therefore must needs touch him to the quick: Parturiunt montes, prodijt
ridiculus mus; The mountains were long in labor, at length they brought forth
a ridiculous mouse.

And if it please you further to confer this my sentence, with the assertions
of the grand Rabbis of the new Sinagogue, you may better understand, in whose
bosoms lurketh the spirit of disloialty and rebellion. Luth. ad Elect ^.
Saxon. and L^ntgra.
Luther defines, That subject to offend God very grievously, that does not for
the defense of his religion, rise in arms against his Sovereign. Lib. 4.
Epist. Zwing. and Oecolamp.
Zwinglius declares, That if the Emperor oppress the Gospel, his people must
by force of arms withstand him, or else they sin as hainously as the Emperor
himself. Calvin. in Daniel. ca. 6. v. 22. and 25.
Calvin yet more hotly and impudently affirms, Those Kings that go about to
suppress the Gospel, to be rebels to God, and unworthy the name of men: And
that their subjects, must rather spitte in their faces then obey them. I omit
our own countriman Goodman, who held his Princess government to be
monstrous: And Buchanan, and an infinite rabble of such rebels, who in most
clear and plain terms deliver; that it is lawful for all subjects, to rise
in arms against their Sovereign, if he go about to fight against God, and to
supplant his holy religion. These good-fellowes and their followers, may justly
be styled Heralds at arms, that do denounce open wars to al Kings and
Princes, that resist the errors and heresies of these new furious and mad
Gospellers. As for me, I only (out of my bounden duty toward my King and
country, and affection unto men of mine own religion) did humbly request his
most excellent Majesty, to behold with the eye of pity, and to weigh in the
balance of equity; whether the rigorous execution of such extreme laws, were
not like to drive some of his frail impouerished subjects, unto desperation,
and so consequently unto some great inconvenience, if God of his infinite
goodness and mercy did not prevent it. Why this manner of speaking should
dislike Peter and Paul, or any of the first Church, M. Abbot has not showed
any shadow of a proof, unless outrageous railing and reuiling, must needs
stand in his plea for sound reasoning. He that will make a true Christian
interpretation of my words, shall find them not to differ much in effect, from
these words of S. Paul; Ad Ephesians. 6. verse. 2.
Fathers provoke not your children to anger: The reason whereof is, lest those
children being put in passion, should forget their duty to their Parents, and
thereupon fall into some inconvenience. Every good King is as it were, Pater
patriae, and omnium subditorum pius parens: The Father of his country, and the
kind Parent of al his people. My humble petition then unto his Highness was,
that he would out of his exceeding clemency toward his people, mitigate the
rigor of his laws, and not suffer his subjects (who never had offended him)
to be oppressed under the intolerable burden thereof, and thereby be moved to
anger and indignation; lest that should breed ouer-great impatience, and so
grow to a further evil: which is so conformable to the Apostles admonition,
that he must needs be much troubled with passion, that cannot perceive it.

Now to that which he says, that this is a threat. If every kind of
signification of future danger, in how fair manner soever it be delivered, may
be called a threat; then every friend that in the kind of disswasion
mentions any such inconvenience like to ensue, must be taken no longer for a
loving friend, but for an unkind menacer that uses threats: which in all men's
judgments that understand that matter, must needs be condemned for most
absurd. My words then, were very absurdly noted for a threat, because they
contained a certain signification of some future inco^modity.

Now whereas M. Abbot demandes, Whether this were the style of the first
Church? and to disprove it, alleges one sentence out of Tertullian, who
albeit ancient, yet is he to short of the first Christian Church by two hundred
years; and which is far worse, he was no sound member neither of the same
Catholic Church at al. I answer, that the first Church might have used the
like style very authentically: for the Prophets inspired by the holy Ghost,
uttered far more rough speeches to their Kings, which are warranted for
loial and dutiful subjects in the holy Scriptures, and therefore may be very
lawfully imitated. I will omit the words of that Prophet, who anointed 4. Reg.
9. verse. 7.
Iehu King of Israel: And of the Prophet Ahias unto the 3. Reg. 14. verse. 12.
Queen Ieroboams wife, because they are exceeding stern and boisterous, and
fit not our purpose. Let that mild Judge and Prophet Samuel his speeches to
King Saul be scanned, who being one of Saules best and most loving subjects,
yet was bold to tell him to his face: 1. Reg. 13. verse. 24.
That his Kingdom should rise no further: Ibid. ca. 15. verse. 23.
And that God had chosen another man to be governor of his people: And that
God had cast him off, and that he should not be King no longer. If some
flattering Parasite standing by, would therefore have challenged the Prophet
Samue^l for a false traitor, that durst so boldly menace his King, with no
less a punishment then deprivation from his Kingdom; had he not been a fit
pattern of M. Abbots patience? that Prophets admonition, as any man may see,
was exceeding vehement and plain in comparison of mine: yet I rehearse it,
that my reader may see, how the best subjects may without touch of disloialty,
admonish their Prince of some evil hanging over their heads. Nathan the
Prophet his words come nearer to my purpose: he took it to be no treason, nor
any point of disloialty, to tell his Prince (who was no meaner a personage then
that most puisant and holy King David,) plainly and roundly; 2. Reg. c. 12.
That the sword (that is, bloody strife and contention) should not depart from
his house and progeny for ever: That God would raise up out of his own house,
evil against him. What? is this holy man of God to be styled a false traitor
for his labor? is he of a Prophet become a Herald at arms, that durst
threaten his Prince with open war and rebellion? either he must be taken for
such a disloyal person, or else I that do not approach near unto the
sharpness and roundnesse of his words, am most wrongfully burdened therewith.
But let vain men either of malice toward their adversary, or of flattery to
their Prince, spit out their venim, and bark against innocents never so
currishly: yet his most excellent and mild Majesty, will I doubt not, rather
imitate that holy and noble King David, who took it in very good part; then
lend his Highness gentle cares unto such venomous declaimours, that care not
how vily and wrongfully they gal and slander their adversary. To conclude this
point, if the very nature of disswasion (according to the approved rules of al
men that write thereof) do allow me to signify that inconvenience in such
modest sort as I delivered it: if the same be also fortified by the examples of
men inspired with the holy Ghost, and warranted by the record of Gods word;
was not M. Abbot in a frantike humor (trow you) when he burst out so furiously
against it? was he not strangely transported with blind malice al his book
over, when as in every Section thereof almost, he glanseth and girdeth at this,
as if it were some horrible bugge-beare and heinous crime.

Now I come to Tertullian and S. Augustines words, which we receive with
reverence and great approbation. For first, We willingly yield our selves to be
slain for our religion, and think it not only more tolerable (as Tertullian
speaks) but a thousand times more honorable, to be killed in that holy
quarrel, then to kill or slay any man: Yet vvil I be bold to say, if I should
have used the like words, I doubt not, but they should have been much more
racked and tormented, then those which I uttered. For ^f I had said as
Tertullian did: If we would deal with you, not by secret revenge, In Apolog.
cap. 37.
but by open enmity, we want neither number nor strength; what war were we
not fit for? etc. who sees not, but such a quarreller as M. Abbot is, would
have taken that straight for a terrible threat indeed, and for an open
denouncing of war? We moreover, like very well of S. Augustines discourse, and
do accordingly exhort al Catholics, valiantly to contemn this transitory
life, for the obtaining of eternal life. See our Epistles of comfort to the
afflicted Catholics, and other like Treatises written to that purpose: you
shall not find one word in them, encouraging any man to seek remedy thereof by
taking arms, but to endure patiently whatsoever it shall please God to permit
the state to lay upon them, until it be his holy vvil to redress it. And
though this be our accustomed style, when we write or speak to our afflicted
brethren: yet pleading unto my Prince in their behalf, I might very dutifully
remember his clemency, of the ordinary mischief, which too too commonly
waits at the heels, upon overmuch severity. Neither was S. Augustine when
he counseled al men to patience, ignorant of that uproar which happened at
Millaine in his own time or not much before, even among the best affected
subjects, for the defense of S. Ambrose, against the Emperor his Sovereign.
The like shortly after happened at Constantinople, in the behalf also of their
most glorious Patriarch S. John Chrysostom, against the Emperor Archadius.
Now, albeit none of these most holy Bishops, would have had their flock taken
arms in their defense, but misliked that as much as any other: yet no
question, but that they might very well without suspicion of disloialty, have
humbly requested the said Emperors to have used more lenity in their
proceedings, for fear of such an after-clap. And he that should therefore have
styled them either false traitors, Heralds at arms, or menacers of their
Prince; would of al sober men have been esteemed to rave, rather then to
enjoy the right use of his wits. Let it be then well waighed, whether M.
Abbots case be not the very same.

Now to that which follows.

ROBERT ABBOT.
WHERE we are to note the singular impudency and impiety, of the Traitor
Father Jesuit; who seeing the example of the first Christians, to be contrary to
their practice now, colourably mentions it, and by mere falsehood seeks to
avoid and shift it off. Bellarm. de Romans Pont. lib. 5. cap. 7.
That Christians (says he) of old deposed not Nero, Julian the Apostata,
Valens and such like: the cause was, for that they wanted power, and if they
had had power they would have done it; directly contrary to that which they
themselves testify of themselves: That they had power sufficient, but held it
unlawful to rebel. And thus here the young Crabbe, goes according to the gate
of the old Crabbe; and tells his Majesty, that if they can get strength, they
will perforce win that, that his Majesty by entreaty will not yield: And
bids him in effect, Ibidem.
look for the practice of their rule; If Princes go about to turn the people
from the Roman faith, by all their consents they may, and ought to be deprived
of their Dominions.

WILLIAM BISHOP.
HERE we are rather to note the ignorance shall I say, or impudency of a
shameless railing Minister, that catches at al occasions to cauil at our
doctrine, how little congruity soever there be in the coherence of his own
speeches: for small reason had he, to leap from my words of so modest
signification, unto those of the right famous Cardinal Bellarmine, with which
they have no affinity or resemblance. For I only insinuate an inconvenience
that may proceed, out of the frailty and corruption of some impatient men:
whereas he seems to teach what may be done upon good advise justly. And that
you may understand the weakness of M. Abbots judgment, who would make the
Cardinals words directly opposite to Tertullians doctrine, observe; that they
be not so contrary, as he (through the fault of his soar eyes) does mistake
them. For Bellarmine says not, that Neroes and Julian the Apostataes subjects,
and such like, would have deposed their Princes if they had had power: But that
they might lawfully have so done. Now if you mark well Tertullians words, he
seems not to dissent much there-fro: For (says he) with us it is more
tolerable to be killed, then to kill. Out of which words it may rather be
gathered, that he held it also tolerable for those Christians, to make war
against their persecuting Emperors; though he thought it more tolerable to
endure even death it self, for their religion. Neither can I persuade my
self, that the Cardinal meant that of Heathen Princes, over whom the Church
has no power to judge; but of such Princes only, who had before made
profession of the faith, and therein promised obedience unto Christ's Spouse
the Church, as he does there in his fourth reason declare expressly. Now I
entermeddle not at al, with any such question: wherefore, he too too crabbedly
and crookedly, does resemble things so unlike together.

That which follows in this his Section, is but a most malicious exaggeration
of their heinous crime, that plotted about the gunne-powder-treason: of which I
have spoken so largely in my answer to his Epistle (where he first enforced
it) that I need not now again stand about the confutation of it. He after his
old manner dilating his lies, makes it not only a common conspiracy of al
Catholics in England, but adds: That it was also the effect of a
consultation held at Doway; but when, or by whom, he cannot well tell, I ween.
For all the Kings Majesty's most learned Council, having used all the diligence,
that was possible for men to do, to bolt out all the accomplices and
circumstances of that most odious enterprise, could tell no tidinges of any such
consultation held at Doway, as all the records thereof do testify. Was it not
then great pity, that they had not sought unto this holy Minister, for their
better instruction in so weighty a business, who could have given them greater
light therein, (as he seems to insinuate) then all the world besides? Marry if
one should appose him, how he came by the knowledge of that secret, he would
answer (I trow) that he had it by revelation, from the spirit that possesses
his heart, to wit, the father of al lies, that old Serpent and calumniator
Satan. Out of whose false figures, he has taken this more then Poetical
fiction which follows in his text: O, if the Protestants (says he) had used
any such practice in France, in Spain, or any where else, what hidious noises
and exclamations would these men have raised there-vpon? how would they have
traduced our religion? how would they have bent al their force, withal
extremity to extirpate utterly, not only the persons guilty, but all that
carried the name of that profession? what a senseless and most wicked fiction
is this? most wicked, for that it would enforce the slaughter and utter ruin
of many thousands of innocents and guiltless persons, for the guilt of a dozen
offenders. For he says, They would utterly root up, not only the guilty, but
all that are of the same profession, how innocent soever: And no less
senseless is the same his assertion, and repugnant to most evident truth. For
in France, (which is the first country that he does give instance in) the
Protestants have not only plotted and gone about, but have put in practice, and
actually done the uttermost of their power, to depose, and overthrow, and
ruinate, not only their lawful King, and most of the blood Royal; but also the
Catholic Peers, Princes, Dukes, Lords, Gentry, and Yeomanry, Clergy, and
Laity. To the effecting whereof, besides their own strength, and the help of
their neighbors, they called into the bowels of their own country, two mighty
armies of Germans, with help whereof, they have sacked many a noble City,
Castle, and Town; and blown up most stately Churches, and other fair
buildings, with fire, gunne-powder, and Cannon-shot. They have rifled,
spoiled, and ruinated many great Provinces of that goodly Country: they have
cruelly butchered, slain, and been the cause of the unjust death, of many
hundred thousands of Men, Women, and Children; as not only their own Hystories
testify, but many thousands of yet living eie-witnesses can verify. And
notwithstanding all this mischief really acted and done, be all that bear the
name of that profession, utterly extirpated and rooted out of that country
therefore? nothing less: nay they have not only tolleration of religion, but
free exercise thereof, openly allowed, and granted them. Was this man then well
in his wits, or did he know what he said? when he preferred that horrible
conspiracy of the gunne-powder-treason, before all the enormious crimes of
Protestants, both in France and al other countries? or was there ever such a
shameless writer as M. Abbot, that blusheth not to set out in print, such
monstrous and notorious lies; that in falsehood exceed al fictions of Poets and
Painters, and in malice do match with any deuilish devise whatsoever. Oh,
into what lamentable calamity is our poor Country fallen, that must have such
cosening Companions, such false Hypocrites, and most impudent Liars, for the
guides of their souls to salvation, and for the only teachers of al spiritual
doctrine! Can any man that injoyeth the right use of his senses, give credit
and trust unto them, who make no conscience, but a common custom to lie al
manner of lies? nay such a one (if they be wise) they should not believe when
he tells them a truth, which they do otherwise know. For Demetrius Phaleius
being asked what evil did follow a liar? Marry (says he) that no man afterward
believe him, when he tells truth: And good reason, for how knows he,
whether he do not lie then, as he was accustomed to do before? He therefore
that will be sure not to be deceived, must neither give credit unto M. Abbot,
who is plainly convicted to have told very many gross and palpable lies. Any
plain honest man, must needs much marvel to behold or hear, that he who
makes profession of Gods pure word, and the truth of the Gospel, should take
such a special delight in lying; but he must remember, that al is not gold that
glisters. Al be not true Pastors of Christ's flock that come in
sheepe-skinnes. Al be not sincere teachers of Gods word, that take upon them to
be Preachers. And no one more assured touch of counterfaite coin: no plainer
proof of a ravening wolf and false teacher, then such often and evident
lying. For as God is the truth it self, and al his doctrine most true: so are
they with truth alone to be vpholden and defended. Job. 13. v. 7.
What? (says holy Job) has God need of our lies, or that we should speak
deceitfully in his cause? no verily: for the truth is strong enough of it
self, to confound falsehood; Fortis est veritas, and praeualet. But the Devils
cause it is, that needs to be bolstered out, and vnder-propped with lies:
Johan. 8. verse. 44.
For he is a liar, and the Father of lies. And without lying, no falsehood can
be deceitfully colored, and made to appear and seem truth. He then that will
be fed with lies, let him take the Devil to his Father; and M. Abbot, or
some other such like of his lying Ministers for his Master.

A certain Minister being told, that M. Abbot was reputed much to blame, and
very hardly censured by many discreet persons, for that he had used so much
deceit and leasinges in his writings; answered (forsooth) in his defense, that
he could not belly the Papists and their cause, too much. What can be said unto
such shameless persons? surely nothing else, but that the new light of their
Gospel is now grown to his perfection; when as the brochers of it do not
only underhand colourably paint it out with lies, but are not ashamed openly
to maintain, that they cannot lie to much in that cause. O holy cause, that
needs the help of lies! But good master Minister, be better advised I pray
you, and rather hearken unto the grave counsel of the ancient Preacher:
Eccles 4. verse. 26.
Ne accipias faciem aduersus faciem tuam, and aduersus animam tuam mendacium;
take not falsehood (that is the face of the Devil) against truth, (which is the
true face of every reasonable creature made after the Image of God) and do not
admit lying against thine own soul: Sapient. 1. verse. 11.
For the tongue that lies, kills the soul. Yea, it does not only kill his
own soul that lies, but the others also that believes his lies; blinding
him with errors, and so leading him blindfold into hell fire: Math. 15. verse. 14.
For when the blind guides the blind, they both fall into the ditch.
Wherefore good Sir, if you will not yet a while, make open profession to cast
away your own soul vvilfully, and to lead al your followers after you to
eternal damnation; do not for very shame, uphold and maintain open lying. But
if it be Gods good pleasure, that you your selves shall make kowne to the
world, that ye do not only use lying, but also defend it as lawful and
necessary to vnder-proppe your badde cause: then my trust in Gods infinite
goodness and mercies is, that the Moone-shine of your obscure Gospel, waneth
a-pace; and the days of your deceit, draw toward an end. For howsoever you
like iniquity and allow of leasinges; Psalm. 5. v 6.
God (as the Prophet David teaches) does hate al them that work iniquity, and
will destroy al them that speak lies: by bestowing upon his faithful and
prudent servants, such heavenly light and grace, as they may easily discern
the juggling and false tricks of Protestant teachers. 2. Tim 3. verse. 9.
For not their folly only (as the Apostle speaks) but their falsehood also and
treachery, are now sufficiently discovered and made manifest, unto al men of any
reasonable capacity and study. Wherefore, all that have tasted of the true gifts
of Christ's spirit, vvil follow them no longer, in their most dangerous and
damnable courses; but fly as fast and as far from such false Prophets, as
poor sheep do from the jaws of ravening wolves, and with speed return
happily unto the only true fold of Christ's flock, the holy Catholic,
Apostolic, and Roman Church: there to learn and embrace that sincere ancient
faith, and pure religion, which only can save their souls; and which being
planted by Christ and his Apostles, has ever since continued, and brought
forth abundance of divine fruit all the world over. Which God almighty of his
incomprehensible bounty, grant through the inestimable merits of JESUS CHRIST
our most gracious Lord and Savior: to whom with the Father and the holy
Ghost, be al honor, praise, and glory, for now and ever.

AMEN.
PRINTED ANNO DOMINI, M.D.C.VIII.
A BRIEF ADVERTISEMENT TO THE READER.
I Have hitherto set down M. Abbots own text word by word, that the juditious
reader comparing it with my answer, may truly discern what substance is in
his writing: And how far forth he is to credit him in the rest, that has in
the first and best part of his book, behaved himself so insufficiently, in
matter of learning; and dealt so dishonestly, in the manner of handling of it.
There remains behind in this answer unto my Epistle, some light skirmishes
and vain frivolous brauadoes, upon those points of controversy; which I in
one sentence only touched in the same Epistle, excepting much foul speech, and
many slanderous lies, which he plentiful powers out by the way: in both which
masteries, I willingly leave to him the bucklers. Now because those his
discourses, are (as it were) scopae dissolutae, not arguments soundly knit
together, and set in any good array, but a feeble, loose, idle, and disordered
kind of wrangling; besides also, the very same questions be afterward
handled again distinctly and particularly: I have judged it far better, to
handle thoroughly every controversy in his due place, then first lightly to
skimme them over in have, as he has done; and afterward like unto one, that
had either forgotten or ouer-shotten himself, to recoile and turn back
again, to treat of the same matter more orderly and substantially: which
course I hope will not be misliked of the wise. Take (courteous Reader) this
that is already finished in good part: If thou find any thing in it to thy
liking, give the glory to God: And if thou be Catholic, help me with thy
good prayers, that he who has given me grace to begin, may increase his
blessings upon me, to bring it to a good and perfect end.

The end of the first Part.
FINIS.
COURTEOUS READER, I must needs acquaint thee with a notable legerdemaine,
which by perusing the Author I found out, after the rest was printed. M. Abbot
to prove that the Pope had no authority in Scotland 1200. years after Christ,
auerreth: Page 117.
that Alexander the second utterly for-badde the Popes Legate to enter within
his Kingdom; which is not true. For his Author Matthew Paris declares: In
He^rico 30 page 667.
that the King indeed did at the first oppose himself against that visitation
of his Kingdom, to be made by the said Legate: not for that he did not
acknowledge the Popes supreme authority in those Ecclesiastical causes; but
because it was needless, the matters of the Church being (as he said) in good
order, and for fear of ouer-great charges. Nay further, the said King did
write a large letter unto the Pope himself, as the very same Author
records: where he first acknowledges, In He^rico 30 page 873.
that very person to be his Holiness Legate, as well in Scotland as in England
and Ireland. Moreover the King confesses, that he himself, his heirs and
subjects, were and would be obedient unto the Popes jurisdiction and censures,
with much more to the same purpose. Which alone is sufficient to convince M.
Abbot, to be so perfidious and without al conscience in alleging ancient
Authors, that no man who will not willingly be blindly led by him, can repose
any trust in his allegations.

Good Reader bear with faults in printing, which besides false pointing, be
not many. The principal that I remember are these:

Page 169 line 21 For Constantius the fourth, read Constantine the fourth; and
so in all that matter following treating of Pope Agatho his obedience to the
said Emperor. Page 170 line 32 though Emperor, read although an Emperor.
Page 186 line 21 for Concilij Praesidijs, read Concilij Praesidibus. page 198
line 8 in the allegation of S. Leo, there wants in the margent, the quotation
of his 23. Epistle to Martianus Augustus, for the worship of Relikes. Page 213
lin. 27 for passed, read possessed. page 261 line 25 for and ego, read an
ego. page 272 line 16 for Undoubtedly, read Undoubtedly.


