APOCALYPSIS. A BRIEF AND LEARNED COMMENTARY UPON THE REVELATION OF SAINT
John the Apostle and Evangelist, applied unto the history of the Catholic and
Christian Church.

Written in Latin by M. FRANCIS JUNIUS Doctor of Divinity, and professor in
the University of Heidelberge: And translated into English for the benefit of
those that understand not the Latin.

DEVT. 29. v. 29. The things that are secret, let them remain unto the Lord
our God: but the things that are revealed, are revealed for us and for our
children for ever: that we may do all the words of this law.

Imprinted at London by Richard Field for Robert Dexter, dwelling in Paul's
Church yard at the sign of the brazen serpent. 1592.

UNTO THE RIGHT NOBLE PERSONAGE OTHO GRINALDIVS, FRANCISCVS JUNIUS SENDS
GREETING.
NAture it self (most noble Grinald) has taught the husbandmen that are
skillful in grafting, and inoculation, to fence the imps engrafted into the
stock, with clay, straw, mortar or lome mixed with chafe until the plant have
got a just strength, left by any injury of the wether it might receive hurt.
The same thing has God, the author of all wisdom and of every good gift, of
his exceeding mercy, toward all mankind, provided continually in ye
husba^drie of his Church. For he has both infused inwardly into his most
excellent plants, that vi^al sap which is necessary unto continuance, or
rather unto eternity, as those which are borne again of his mighty word: and
also by the covert of the same word, has fenced those that are planted in
Christ against the injuries that outwardly might happen unto them. In this
manner was that ancient Church of the Jews confirmed of old by the holy
servant of God Daniell a most faithful Prophet, against the violence and
fraud of tyrants and of false prophets that were to come: And so also this our
Church since the first coming of Christ, remaining in expectance of his second
and glorious appearance, has evermore by all his good servants, and especially
by this most holy Apostle and Evangelist S. John, the disciple whom Christ
loved, bin preserved against like, or also greater tempests: strengthened with
his own forces, and covered as with certain eaues least by this perpetual
shower of incommodities, it should rot, or any way drop through. For this
Apostle, undoubtedly inspired of God, has both mightily defended the truth of
the doctrine, and person of Christ, and the love of the Church from the
venomous teeth and bitings of heretics by his Gospel, thereby adding an
accomplishment unto the other holy and divine Gospels: and also has in this
book of Revelation maintained the faith and patience of the saints, from the
violent invasions of most cruel enemies, and of most false hypocrites. This
divine and wholesome providence, most familiarly laid out unto us in this
book, Satan has not ceased from the beginning to oppugn, that he might
pluck the same (if it were possible) out of the minds of the godly and elect.
For as he has striuen against the credit and authority of this book very
much: so (when the authority thereof was established) he went about by all
possible means to corrupt the sense and meaning of the Author. What and how
mighty engines, how cunning and dangerous underminings he has employed to
shake and overthrow the authority of this book, many godly and learned men
have long since declared. He has pretended the uncertainty of the Author, the
phrase, style, and arguments, and has abused the labor of some good men to
bring this his purpose to pass. What? is the Author uncertain of that book
which was committed unto the custody of seven Churches, and those the most
noble and renowned of all Asia, and preserved of them most religiously? It is a
fable. For shall those Epistles which were written unto the only Church of
Rome, of Corinth, and the like, be of certain and constant authority from the
testimony of that one Church unto which they were written, and shall the
authority of that book be called into question (if God will) which was written
unto seven Churches? They that pretend incongruity of speech, verily show
themselves to be of rude and rusticall judgment: who do not think that our
speech, as much as may be, ought to be attempered unto the heavenly laws. They
object strangeness of the style, the publicatio^ of his own name, and the
often repetitio^ of the same things. O worthy thetoricians! who will not have
the style to differ in a different matter. They think it agrees with the
modesty of S. John to have concealed his name: as if S. John in this argument
did not see it more material, that by diverse times expressing of his name, he
should (as Daniell did of old time) commend the credit and authority of the
book unto posterity of time to come: then by suppressing his name to provide
for this imaginary modesty whereof they speak. Is it not as modestly done of
S. John, that he does in express words profess him self the Author of this
book: as when in the last chapter of his Gospel, he does by circumlocution
describe him self? Verily in neither book did he err from modesty: but did
in both of them, by addition of his name, confirm the credit and authority of
his writing, necessarily and for the public good of the Church. That they
think the same thing is often repeated, is partly false, and partly where any
such repetition is, necessary: which thing our interpretation shall declare.
How necessary this argument was in the Church of God, we declared in the very
entrance: and no man will deny, that with clean eyes shall look unto the
history of the Christian church. Wherefore, albeit the authority of this book
seemed not so great unto some good and godly men in times past, yet can not
their particular judgment overthrow the public credit thereof: but it is
necessary that the authority thereof should in the Catholic Church be
accounted entire, believed, professed, and preserved. As for the meaning and
sense of the Author, what need many words? Here verily if any where else, that
saying is true, how many heads, so many opinions. But this evil of ignorance,
and dissenting in judgment, is partly borne with us from the darkness and
infirmity of our nature: and partly increased or heaped up by singularity of
affection: which inconvenience that common adversary of our salvation has
much increased, both by his own practice, and by the endeavor of his ministers
and instruments. Therefore the darkness of that ignorance infused into our
minds within, and scattered abroad without, has for the most part affrayed
good men, otherwise excelling in piety, learning, utterance, art, and
authority, from writing any thing in this argument, or at least from
publishing the same. This modesty I commend; but I follow it not. Why so? will thou say; I will show in few words what cause moved both others to require it
of me, and me to write of this argument. So shall I (as I hope) both approve
mine enterprisevnto good men: and take away the suspision of immodestie. There
were therefore some good persons that required this duty at my hands, for that
(I will use their own words) they esteemed me to abound with good means to
interpret this prophecy of the new Testament, by reason of my continual
reading and diligent exercise in the old Testament. I as privy unto mine own
poverty, excused my self, refused the work, and denied it earnestly. But they
replied, that this modesty was counterfaited, appealed unto their own
judgments of me, and flatly charged me to do it of envy. The importunity of
these men forced me much, especially when I considered, that both in conference
with my friends, and in scholasticall disputations (which I oftentimes held in
mine own house) I knew that some things had been uttered by me, and both noted
and taken in writing by mine auditors without my priuitie. Now, I see what
happened in old time to the holy fathers, and what now a days also unto some
good men. They of modesty withdrew and suppressed their meditations, words,
and writings: but by that means they opened a large field unto the impudency
and audaciousnesse of others. For when yet their corpse was scarcely buried,
writings, capsodies and comme^ts were published in their names, as if they had
bin authors of them, which either they never bred, or the other unskillfully
gathered, or impudently counterfaited. A most unworthy act, and to be
repressed by revenge of the Magistrate. I had rather once be immodest in the
judgment of these men, then beget any immodest person, which should attribute
unto me his own inventions and dreams. Of this exposition I will say nothing,
save that I will acknowledge it to be mine own, and that with mind not to
boast my self: but to provide for afterward, that no man ascribe unto me that
which him self has fained. I promise to say the truth wheresoever by the
grace of God I am able: and to be brief in all things: lest either I in
writing, or good men in reading, should be said to loose their time. If any
think otherwise then I do, their liberty of judgment shall for me remain
unto them. For I do not, as a judge, give sentence upon the work of others:
but as one that would furnish the same feast, bring in my dish amongst them.

This little work (most noble Grinald) I thought good to dedicate unto you, for
your own sake, for the public, and for my self. For your sake, that you may
know and find, that I do with the consent of many good men, unfeignedly rejoice
in your behalf, for that godly care wherewith you are wont to examine both the
word and judgments of God, of which this book is as a most plentiful
treasury. For the public cause, that the same your most holy study, which
shortly (as I trust) shall be profitable to this country, to all Germany, and
to the church, may by this small light of my dedication be set in the sight of
all men, and may be of glory unto God most gracious and mighty, of example
unto good men, and of ornament unto your self. For mine own sake, because I
am bound having been honored of you to honor you again, a man most honorable
by your own desert, and an ornament of your country of Germany. Farewell.
the 17. of March 1591.

AN ADMONITION UNTO THE READER.
LEast the shortness of this Commentary (gentle Reader) and thereby perhaps
the hardness of the same, might either hinder or discorage thee in the reading
thereof, I thought good to admonish thee of these few things. First, the meaning
of the Author was not to write any large or full volume at this time, but
briefly, yet exactly, to set down the method and order, and as it were the
frame of this Prophecy: and so to distribute the same into diverse branches
and members, that all confusion avoided, thou might distinctly see to what
part of the story of the Church, and to what point of time, every thing is to
be referred. As for the matters contained herein, he thought it sufficient in
few words to note and interpret the same. Notwithsta^nding my hope is, thou
shall find so much expressed briefly, as may in good part satisfy thy desire,
and give thee occasion to consider further of the particulars themselves, when
thou shall see the sense and meaning of them for thy direction. Many I know
have written more largely of this book, whose labors are not to be conte^ned.
Here breuity was sought, that all things, that all things being in a manner at
once set before thine eye, thou might both more easily comprehend that which
is said, and better imprint it in thy memory. If thou shall here find any thing
different from the judgment of others, let it not offend thee: considering
that in mysteries of this sort, it has always been free for men of learning,
and excelling in gifts, without either disgrace to those that went before them,
or prejudice to them that follow after them, to deliver that which they have
received, and to commend the same unto the judgment of the Church. Now that
thy labor may be with more ease, and with greater fruit and delight; read not
the commentary alone, but with present view and consideration of that part of
the text whereunto it does appertain: for which cause thou shall find the text
and the commentary belonging unto it, always printed upon the same page. As
for certain words of Art which could not be avoided, and some other unwonted
speech, they shall I trust nothing hinder thy proceeding, because that which is
obscure in them at the first sight, will by that which follows be made
lightsome and plain unto thee. It shall also be profitable for thee, when thou
art entered into the reading of this little work, not to suffer thy self to be
distracted or carried away by weariness or inconstancy, until thou have
seen the end of the book: that comparing all things together, thou may
make account of thy labor and profiting herein: both for the truth of the
matter propounded, and for thine use and fruit by the same. Also it shall not
repent thee, if not attaining to understand all things at the first reading,
thou shall for the excellency of the matter, which always brings some
difficulty with it, not refuse to repeat it the second, and if need rquire the
third time. The often noting of the particular Chapters and verses is more
certainly to direct thee to that, the knowledge or remembrance whereof is
necessary unto the present place, for thy further instruction. For the Tables
I have contracted them as I thought might be more commodious for thee. Unto
this commentary of Iunius is added the brief notes of Beza and others in a
diverse character, and that in the margent of the text, whereunto thou art
directed by the letters of the alphabet: as unto the commentary by
arithmeticall figures. For the translation of the text, I have in a manner
wholly used that which is most common and in every man's hand: only for
plainness sake and more euidencie, I have in some few places, framed the same
unto that later edition of the Latin, which as I thought, did more nearely
approach unto the original Greek copy. Thus commending thy studies unto the
direction of Gods most holy spirit, I bid thee farewell in the Lord Jesus. The
5. of February, 1591.

The order of time whereunto the contents of this book are to be referred. The
year of Christ. THe dragon watches the Church of the Jews, which was ready
to travail: She brings forth, flies, and hides herself, whilst Christ
was yet upon the earth.

1. etc The dragon persecuteth Christ ascending into heaven, he fights and is
thrown down: and after persecuteth the Church of the Jews.

34. The Church of the Jews is received into the wilderness, for three years
and an half.

67. When the Church of the Jews was overthrown, the dragon invaded the
Catholic Church, all this is in the 12. chap.

The dragon is bound for 1000. years chap. 20.

The dragon raises up the beast with seven heads, and the beast with two
heads, which make havoc of the Church Catholic and her Prophets for 1260.
years after the Passion of Christ. chap. 13. and. 11.

70. The seven Churches are admonished of things present, somewhat before the
end of Domitian his reign, and are forewarned of the persecution to come under
Traiane for ten years. chap. 2. and. 3.

God by word and signs provoke the world, and seals the godly. chap. 6.
and. 7.

He shows forth exemplars of his wrath upon all creatures, mankind excepted.
chap. 8.

97. The dragon is let loose after 1000. years, and Gregory the vii. being
Pope, rages against Henry the third, the^ Emperout. chap. 20.

1073 The dragon vexes the world. 150. years, unto Gregory the ix. who writ
the Decretals, and most cruelly persecuted the Emperor Fridericke the 2.

The dragon by both the beasts persecuteth the Church, and puts the godly
to death chap. 9.

1217 The dragon kills the Prophets after. 1260. years, when Boniface the
viij. was Pope, who was the author of the vi. book of the Decretals: he
excommunicated Philip the French king.

1295 Boniface celebrateth his first Iubiley.

1300 About this time was a great earthquake, which overthrew many houses in
Rome.

1301 Prophecy ceasseth for three years and half, until Benedict the 2.
succeeded after Boniface viij. Prophecy is revived. chap. 11.

The dragon and the two beasts oppugn Prophecy. chap. 13.

Christ defends his Church in word and deed. chap. 14. With threats and
arms. chap. 15. With singular judgments. chap. 16.

Christ gives his Church victory over the harlot. chap. 17. and 18. Over the
two beasts. chap. 19. Over the dragon and death. chap. 20.

The Church is fully glorified in heaven with eternal glory, in Christ
Jesus. chap. 21. and 22.

1305

A Table containing the sum of this book in three parts.
1. The exordium, in which are these three, The inscription of the book, chap.
1. verse. 1. 2. 3. The salutation, verse. 4. 5. 6. 7. The calling of John, and
the authority of this Revelation, verse. 8. 18.
2. The argument or co^tentes, in which is a Division of the whole into things
present and things to come, chap. 1. verse. 19. 20. Narration of things Present,
written for instruction unto the Churches that were At Ephesus, Smyrna, Chapter
2. Pergamus, Thyatira, Chapter 2. Sardis, Philadelphia, Chap. 3. Laodicea, --
Chap. 3.
To come General unto the whole world wherein is The calling of John, and the
authority of this revelation confirmed from the person of him that calls,
God the Father, chap. 4. and God the Son, chap. 5. The works of God, which
are of three sorts Foretelling and foresignifying of the miseries that should
come upon the world, chap. 6. Deliverance of the elect, who are sealed with the
seal of God before the evils prefigured should be executed, chap. 7. Execution
of Gods judgments upon Other creatures, chap. 8. Mankind, by tribulation and
slaughters, chap. 9.


Particular. As in the second Table.* * Particular belonging unto Gods people,
wherein is The calling of S. John, and the authority of his revelation, from
the person of the Son of God, chap. 10. The history of the Prophets,
fighting for the space of 1260. years: slain, and raised up again in the
church chap. 11 Church Of the Jews, oppugned by the dragon, before travel,
and in travel, and after travel chapter 12. Christian and Catholic, in which
are the Battles Sustained against the two beasts, chap. 13. Made upon the^,
in Christ, by Preaching, and working, chap. 14. Threats, chap. 15. Judgments,
chap. 16.

Victory gotten by Christ over the Harlot, chap. 17. 18. Two beasts, chap. 19.
Dragon, both before and after the thousand years. chap. 20.
Glory, of the Church eternally triumphing, chap 21. and 22. unto the sixth
verse.






3. The conclusion, which has a Confirmation, chap. 22. 6. 19. Salutation.
verse 20. etc.

I HAVE NOT THOUGHT GOOD TO PVT forth any such thing as yet, upon the
Revelation, as I have upon the former books: notwithstanding I liked well to
set down in the mean season that, that I wrote a few years since,
concerning the authority of this book. And this is it.
BEcause some men have of long time doubted of the authority of this book, I
will in few words confute those arguments, which are commonly brought to thu
purpose, and after show mine own opinion, and what I think. And I will
recite the arguments in such order, as Erasmus has paynfully and diligently
gathered them together: whose judgment seems to me so uncertain in this
point (as it is also in many other) that no man can readily tell what opinion
he was of, save that after much a do, he seems to bend this way, that he
is of opinion, that this book is of some authority, though not of so good as
the rest of the books are which we receive without any gainesaying. Therefore
let us hear what he says. Hierome witnesses, says he, that the Grecians in
his time did not receive the Revelation. Dorotheus Bishop of Tyrus, and a
Martyr, in his abbridgement of lives records that John wrote his Gospel in
the I Will of Patmos, but makes no mention of this book. Athanasius a Grecian in
his catalogue does not say that this is John's work. Dionysius of Alexandria,
as Eusebius reports his words, in the seventh book of his Ecclesiastical
history, thinks that this book was written of some other John, who was a
godly man. Eusebius him self so cites this book in diverse places of his
history, that he does not flatly vouch it to be John's: but alleges one
Caius that was a good Christian in the fourth book of his history, who says
it was written of one Cerinthus an heretic. Let this be the first argument
which I answer in this sort. If we weigh the reasons that moved those men to
reject this book, then we shall see how undeservedly they did it. Again as
some did reject it, so did the most part receive it: in so much that Epiphanius
reckons them amongst heretics that did reject it: as for Iustine the
philosopher, and Irene Bishop of Lions which were both martyrs, and did not
only allow it, but also wrote commentaries upon it, I will not speak of
them. As for that that is alleged of Dorotheus, it is to no great purpose, for
that he is thought to reject it, because he spoke not of it. As touching
Athanasius, Erasmus him self witnesses that it is doubtful whether that
work be his or no. Concerning Dionysius we will weigh by and by what he
says, when we come to consider of his reasons. As for Catus (what man so
ever he was) he is easily to be refuted even by Dionysius his words in the
third book of the Ecclesiastical history. As for Eusebius I make no account
of him, for there are none learned, but find want of judgment in him. Now
let us come to the other argument. Hierome writes (says he) that certain
very well learned men found great fault and spoke sharply against the whole
matter of this book, as though there were nothing in it worthy the gravity
of an Apostle, but only a common history of things shadowed with certain
dark figures and hard kind of speeches. And moreover that in the very
sentences them selves there was nothing that becommed the gravity of an
Apostle. Which I answer in this sort: What learned men so ever these were,
they are greatly to be blamed, in that they durst be so bold to speak evil
of that book, which no doubt is very short, if those things be excepted, which
are translated word for word out of the Prophets. Basil, Gregory, Cyril,
Epiphanius, Irene, Hippolite, as Aretas witnesses, were not of this judgment,
which thought not only as Dionysius of Alexandria did, that some godly man
wrote this book, but also plainly vouched it to be John the Apostle, which no
doubt they would never have done, if they had found no resemblance of the
gravity of an Apostle in it. And whether of these shall J count for the better
learned? whether these men, which have given record both of their singular
godliness, and excellent learning by publishing many works, or those men
rather, whose only names are scarcely heard of: and the reasons they use, give
sufficient proof how learned they were? They say there appeared no gravity
in this writer, and yet he has taken every what almost word for word out of
the Prophets: they say he has put down a common history. But how can that
be, seeing (a few things only except) he makes no relation of things past,
but foretells things to come? And therefore they do not only not speak
that, that is truth, but not so much as any piece or resemblance of truth.

Now let us come to the third argument: He is very curious (says one) in
setting down his own name, as though he should indite an obligation, and not
write a book, which is not only not used of any of the Apostles, but is also
unaccustomed of him self: for in his Gospel where he entreats a great deal
more modest matters, then these are, he never names himself, but only
points it out by some such marks as these, the disciple whom Jesus loved.
And Paul when he is enforced to speak of his Revelations, sets out the
matter under an other man's person. And yet this man, while he describes the
secret conference which he had with Angels, has never done with these kind
of words, I John. This reason moved Dionysius of Alexandria to think, that
some other man wrote this book. But what weak, and slender conjectures are
these? little did these good men consider, that it was one thing to write an
history, and an other to set down a prophecy: for the truth of an history
hangs not so much upon the credit of the writer, as upon other
circumstances, but a prophecy: because it foretells things to come, stands
upon the authority of him that reueileth it, and his that preaches it, so
that it is of necessitte to give us to understand, both from whence that
forewarning came, and who reueiled it, and who wrote it. Whereupon we see, that
not only in the beginning of prophecies, but also almost in every vision,
there is nothing so curiously set down as the Name of God who spoke it, and
the name of the Prophet who wrote it: Take for example, only the Prophet
Jeremy, who makes mention of his name, at the least an hundred times. And so
was it requisite for him to do, that he might not seem to seek lurking
corners to hide him self in as the false prophets did. And what? do we not
find from the seventh Chapter of Daniel, that almost in every verse he
repeateth his own name, and says, I Daniel? And how often does Esaias repeat
these words, Esaias the son of Amos? But John did not so in his Gospel. J
grant: for he wrote an history, wherein that befell him, which befell to none
other of the disciples: for he was occasioned to speak many things of
himself. Nay, Paul also did not so: In deed he did not so, in any place
where he handled not his visions purposely, but whenever he voucheth the
excellency of his ministry, how boldly and how magnifically does he call
himself that Paul which was appointed to be an Apostle, not of men, nor by
men, but by Jesus Christ? And how? when he reports those his great
combats, does he take upon him another man person? Nay let us go further:
John's name is not to be found (unless I be deceived in my reckoning) above
five times in all this work: and those words (I John) but only thrice, to
wit, chap. 1. verse 9. and yet with an explication added to it, which may
suffice abundantly to put away all suspicion of pride: and again, chap. 21.
verse 2. and chap. 22. verse 8. in both which places he reports only simply
what he saw, to the end, that no man might doubt of the truth of his
prophecy. Therefore, to make an end of this reason in few words, that
argument which Dionysius makes, is not only vain, but also argues want of
skill, and is in deed very slanderous: nay, I may say more, and say truly
(without any malice to any as the Lord is witness) that this was too
unadvisedly spoken, where he says, that the Evangelist is as curious in his
often repeating of, I John, as if he had been writing an obligation, and no
book.

Now to the fourth Argument: In all the Greek copies that I have seen, says
he, it was not entitled the Revelation of John the Evangelist, but, of John
the divine, which is sufficient to prove it was John the Evangelist: for all
that are learned know that he was by excellency, and by a prerogative as it
were, called by this name The Divine, of all the old writers, because never
man wrote so plainly and divinely of the divinity of Christ as he did. As for
the other John, who I think was a counterfaite, was not called by this
excellent name Divine, but an Elder.

Now for the unlikeness of his style, and speech, which that Dionysius of
Alexandria proves by three reasons as Nicephorus records, Eccle. lib. 6.
cap. 23. first by the whole course and nature of his words, secondly, that
whereas the Gospel and Catholic Epistle of John, agree in very many points,
this book has not one work like. Lastly, because John had an excellent gift
of speech, but this man is very clownish, barbarous, and tripped often in his
language. To the first I answer, that in so diverse a matter, it is no
marvel, to see so diverse a kind of style: for in the history of the
Gospel, and in the Epistles, though he spoke as he was moved by the holy
Ghost, yet he spoke what his mind led him: and here he is but the writer of
such things as he heard and were delivered him: In the other he somewhat
makes report of the history, and sometime teaches, but in this he speaks
of things to come, and in such order of words as he is appointed: And shall we
marvel then that he uses not one self same kind of sentences? Nay, what
writer was there ever that was tied so short? are not many things delivered to
him in the very words of the old Prophets, even in the same that Ezechiel,
Daniel, Zachary, Esai, and other spoke withal, by the direction of the self
same Spirit, which spoke the self same in them in old time? And therefore it
is no marvel that he uses not so refined a kind of speech, as happily they
would desire, seeing he swarueth neither in speech, nor in characters, from
the Prophets which wrote in the Hebrewe tongue: and therefore there is less
cause of suspicion that it should be any counterfeite work slily crept into
the Church.

Now remains the last Argument, which seems to charge him that he
favors the heresy of the Chiliastes, whereupon diverse thought that
Cerinthus made this book and fathered it upon some of the Apostles. But for
mine own part, though I grant that the Chiliastes have abused many
testimonies out of this book, yet I can not yield to that, and think that
some heretics should make it, unless some man he able to show me, that
those places can not sitly he taken in any other sense: or else what book is
there, that we may receive? And that those places are otherwise to be taken,
diverse learned men have showed long ago: so that the like has be fallen this
book as did to the Epistle to the Hebrews, which some man rejected very
obstinately, because it seemed to make for the Nouatians: where as in deed
they ought rather to have accused their own ignorance. Moreover, seeing
Cerinthus had many other mad and wicked opinions, as that, he denied that God
made the world, and taught that Christ was borne of Marie, and Joseph, as all
other men are borne, and makes Christ, and Jesus two distinct persons: how
comes it to pass that he sprinkled none of this Foul holy water amongst
the rest in this book? But he was so far from so doing, that contrariwise
there may be diverse arguments taken out of this book against those errors: so
that it may appear by this one reason, that Cerinthus was not the author of
this book. And again, where as he speaks of the thousand years, he
mentions no one jot of those things, which Cerinthus so impudently chattred
of. For where is there any mention of that ryote which Ceriathus talks of?
where is that cating? drinking? where are those marriages and pastimes? where
are the sacrifices and holy days which should be kept at Jerusalem? Therefore
this is a vain and a foolish argument. And seeing these things are so, though
I would not steffely stand in contention forth authors name, yet I rather
judge it to be John the Apostle, then any other man's: For besides that it
appears to be very aunctent, and the learned and the godliest of the old
Fathers doubt not, but it was John's.

These conjectures also lead me to think so: for that I find none of those
days to whom either prophecies so full of majesty, or so honorable a name
of a divine, may be ascribed: and moreover, that it sauoureth of the
worthiness and excellency of an Apostle, to write to the Churches of Asia,
and not to one Church: Lasily, because those things which are here spoken of
Patmos, agree wholly with that which the old Fathers have written with one
consent, concerning John's bantshment. And yet notwithstanding if it may be
lawful to conjecture by the kiude of speech it self, I would think it to be
no man's sooner then Marks, who was also called John: he is so like not only
in words, but also in diverse kinds of speech, to the Gospel of Saint Mark,
in so much that these two books have almost one kind of character. As for the
book it self, though I confess that these mysteries are as yet very dark to
me, yet notwithstanding, seeing there appears in all parts of it a great
majesty of the spirit of prophecy, and the very steps and sentences, yea
and the words of the old Prphets, seeing there are to be found in it manifest
and mighty testimonies, both of the Diuiniete of Christ, and also of our
redemption: And last of all, seeing that part of those things are most
manifestly come to pass, which were foretold by him, as those things which
he spoke of the destruction of the Churches of Asia, and of the kingdom of
the whore, which sits upon seven bills, I am persuaded and think that the
holy Ghosts meaning was to heap up together, in this most precious book, all
such things, as by the forewarning of the old Prophets remained to be
fulfilled after the coming of Christ: and added also a few things, as he
thought expedient for us. I grant they are very dark, but that is no strange
thing in the Prophets writings, as especially in Ezechiels. But this is our
fault, because we take not diligent heed to things, but ouerslip those
judgments of Gods providence, which daily are to be seen in his governing of
the Church, by having our hearts too much set upon our own private affairs.
To be short, the Lord knows what, and how far it is expedient for us to
know, and therefore in times past, he so disposed the light of his Prophets,
as for his infinite wisdom he saw it would be profitable for his Church.
And therefore godly men have to search and wade in these mysteries with fear
and reverence, so far forth, as lawfully and profitably they may: and let all
men reverence the mysteries of God, which are comprehended in this book,
whether they know them, or know them not, rather then as many do, either
mock at them, or defile them with their fantastical commentaries.

THE REVELATION OF SAINT JOHN THE APOSTLE and Evangelist, with a brief and
learned commentary, written by Franc. Iunius, etc.
CHAP. 1.
1 He declares what kind of doctrine is here handled, 8 eue^ his, that is the
beginning and ending: 12 Then the mystery of the seven candlestickes and
stars 20 is expounded.

THE An opening of secret and hid things.
revelation of Which the Son opened to us out of his Fathers bosom by Angels.
JESUS Beza and others
CHRIST, which God gave unto him, that he might declare unto his servants the
things which must shortly be done: which he sent, and signified by his Angel
unto his servant John; F. JUNIUS.


2 Who testified the word of God, and the This chapter has two principal
parts, the title or inscription, which stands in steed of an exordium; and a
narration going before the whole prophecy of this book. The inscription is
double, general and particular. The general contains the kind of prophecy,
the author, end, matter, instruments, and manner of communicating the same, in
the first verse: the most religious faithfulness of the Apostle, as a public
witness, verse 2. And the use of communicating the same, taken from the
promise of God, and from the circumstance of the time, verse, 3.
witness of Jesus Christ, and all things that he saw.

3 Blessed is he that reads, and blessed are they that hear the words of
this prophecy, and observe those things which are written therein: for the
time appointed is at hand.

4 This is the particular or singular inscription, wherein salvation is written
unto certain Churches by name, which represent the Church Catholic: and the
certainty and truth of the same is declared, from the author thereof, unto the
8. ver.
John to the seven Churches which are in Asia; Grace be unto you, and peace;
from him By these three times, Is, Was and Shall Be, is signifiaed this word
lehouah, which is the proper name of God.
Which Exodus 3. 14.
is, and Which was, and Which is That is, from God the Father aeternal,
immortal, immutable; whose unchangeableness S. John declares by a form of
speech which is undeclined. For there is no incongruitie in this place, where,
of necessity the words must be attempeted unto the mysteries, and not the
mysteries corrupted or impaired by the words.
to come; and from That is, from the holy Ghost, which proceeds from the
Father and the Son. This Spirit is one in person according to his
subsistencie; but in communication of his virtue, and in demonstration of his
divine works in those seven Churches, does so perfectly manifest himself, as
if there were so many Spirits, every one perfectly working in his own Church.
Wherefore after chap. 5. 6. they are called the seven horns and seven eyes of
the Lamb, as much to say, as his most absolute power and wisdom: and chap.
3. 1. Christ is said to have those seven Spirits of God: and cha. 4. 5. it is
said, that seven lamps do burn before his throne, which also are those seven
Spirits of God. That this place ought to be so understood, it is thus proved.
For first grace and peace is asked by prayer of this Spirit, which is a divine
work, and an action inco^municable in respect of the most high Deity Secondly
he is placed between the Father and the Son, as set in the same degree of
dignity and operation with them. Besides he is before the throne as of the
same substance with the Father and the Son: as the seuc^ eyes, and seven
horns of the Lamb. Moreover these Spirits are never said to adore God, as all
other things are. Finally, this is that power whereby the Lamb opened the
book, and loosed the seven seals thereof: when none could be found amongst
all creatures by whom the book might be opened cha. 5. Of these things long
ago M. John Luide of Oxford wrote learnedly unto me. Now the holy Ghost is set
in order of words before Christ, because there was in that which follows, a
long process of speech to be used concerning Christ.
the These are the seven spirits, which are afterward chap. 5 ver. 6. called
the horns and eyes of the Lamb, and are now made as a guard waiting upon God.
seven Spirits which are before his Throne;

5 And from Jesus Christ, A most ample and grave commendation of Christ, first
from his offices, the priesthood and kingdom: secondly from his benefits, as
his love toward us, and washing us with his blood, in this verse; and
communication of his kingdom and priesthood with us: thirdly from his eternal
glory and power, which is always to be celebrated of us, ver. 6. Pinally from
the accomplishment of all things once to be effected by him, at his second
coming; what time he shall openly destroy the wicked, and shall comfort the
godly in the truth ver. 7.
which is that Psalm. 89. 38.
faithful witness, 1. Cor. 15. 21. Colos. 1. 18.
that first begotten of the dead, and that Prince of the Kings of the earth;
who loved us, and washed us from our sins with his own Heb 9. 14. 1. Pet. 1.
19. 1. John. 1. 9.
blood:

6 And made us 1. Pet. 2. 5.
Kings and Priests unto God even his Father; to him be glory, and power for
evermore, Amen.

7 Behold, he comes with Esa. 3. 14. Mat. 24. 30. Jude. 14.
clouds, and every All men.
eye shall see him: yea even they which pierced him through: and all the
kinreds of the earth shall wail before him: Even so, Amen.

8 A confirmation of the salutation before going, taken from the words of God
himself: in which he avouches his operation in every singular creature, the
immutable eternity that is in himself, and his omnipotency in all things: and
concludes in the unity of his own essence, that Trinity of persons which
was before spoken of.
I Chap. 21. 6. and 22. 13.
am I am he, before who there is nothing; yea by who^ every thing that is made,
was made and who shall remain though all they should perish.
(...) and (...), that is, the beginning and the ending, says the Lord, that
is, he Which is, and Which was, and Which is to come, even that Almighty one.

9 The narration, opening the way to the declaring of the authority and
calling of S. John the Evangelist in this singular Revelation; and to procure
faith and credit unto this prophecy. This is the second part of this Chapter,
consisting of a proposition, and an exposition. The proposition shows, first
who was called unto this Revelation, in what place, and how occupied. verse. 9.
Then at what time, and by what means, namely, by the Spirit and the word; and
that on the Lords day; which day ever since the resurrection of Christ was
consecrated for Christians unto the religion of the Sabbath: that is to say, to
be a day of rest, ver. 10. Thirdly, who is the author that calls him, and
what is the sum of his calling.
I John, who also am your brother, and companion in tribulation, and in the
Kingdom and patience of Jesus Christ, was in the isle called Patmos is one of
the Isles of Sporas, whether John was banished, as some write.
Patmos, for the word of God, and for the witnessing of Jesus Christ:

10 And I was rapt in Thus is that holy rauishment expressed wherewith the
Prophets were ravished, and being as it were carried out of the world, were
conversant with God: and so Ezechiel says often, that he was carried from place
to place of the Lords Spirit, and that the Spirit of the Lord fell upon him.
spirit on the He calls that the Lords day, which Paul calls the first day
of the week. 1. Cor. 16. 2.
Lords day, and hard behind me a great voice, as it had been of a trumper,

11 Of one that said, I am (...) and (...), that first and that last: and, That
which thou see, write in a book, and send it unto the seven Churches which
are in Asia, at Ephesus, and at Smyrna, and at Pergamus, and at Thyatira, and
at Sardis, and at Philadelphia, and at Laodicea.

12 The exposition, declaring the third and last point of the proposition (for
the other points are evident of themselves) wherein is spoken first of the
Author of this calling, unto the 16 verse. Secondly of the calling it self,
unto the end of the chapter. And first of all, the occasion is noted in this
verse, in that S. John turned himself toward the vision: after is set down
the description of the Author, in the verses following.
Then I turned back to To see him whose voice he had heard.
see the voice, that spoke with me: The description of the Author, which is
Christ: by the candlestickes that stand about him, that is, the Churches that
stand before him, and depend upon his direction, in this verse: by his
properties, that he is one furnished with wisdom and dexterity to the
atchieuing of great things, verse 13. with ancient gravity, and most
excellent sight of the eye, verse 14. with strength invincible, and with a
mighty word, verse. 15. By his operations, that he rules the ministry of
his servant in the Church, gives effect there unto by the sword of his word,
and enlightening althings by his countenance, does most mightily provide for
every one by his divine providence. verse 16.
and when I was turned, I saw seven golden candlesticks:

13 And in the midst of the seven golden candlesticks, one like unto the Son
of man, clothed with a garment down to the feet, and girded about the pappes
with a golden girdle.

14 His head, and hairs were white as white wool, and as snow; and his eyes
were as a flame of fire;

15 And his feet like unto fine brass, burning as in a furnace: and his voice
as the sound of many waters.

16 And he had in his right hand seven stars: and out of his mouth went a
sharp two edged sword: and his face shone as the sun shines in his strength.

17 A religious fear, that goes before the calling of the Saints, and their
full confirmation to take upon them the vocation of God.
And when I saw him, I fell at his feet as dead. A divine co^firmatio^ in this
calling, partly by sign, and partly by the word of power.
then he laid his right hand upon me, saying unto me, Fear not: A most elegant
description of this calling, contained in three things, which are necessary
unto a just vocation: first the authority of him that calls, for that he is
the beginning and the end of all things, in this verse; for that he is
aeternall and omnipotent, verse 18. Secondly the sum of this prophetical
calling and revelation, verse 19. Lastly a declaration of those persons unto
whom this prophecy is by the commandment of God directed in the inscription
thereof, verse 20.
I am that Esa. 41. 4. and 44. 6.
first, and that last,

18 And which am alive; but I was dead: and behold I live for evermore, A men:
and I have the keys of hell and of death.

19 The sum of this prophecy, that the Apostle must write whatsoever he
should see, adding nothing, nor taking away any thing, as verse 2. Here of
there were two parts: one is a narration of those things which are, that is,
which then are at that time, contained in the second and third Chapters: the
other part is of those things which were to come, contained in the rest of this
book.
Write the things which thou have seen; both which are, and which shall come
to pass hereafter.

20 That is, the thing which was mystically signified by the particulars of the
vision before going.
The mystery of the seven stars which thou saw in my right hand, and the
seven golden candlesticks, is this; those seven stars are the By Angels, he
means the Ministers of the Churches.
Angels of the seven Churches: and those seven candlesticks which thou saw,
are the seven Churches.

CHAP. II
John is commanded to write those things, which the Lord knew necessary, to
the Churches of Ephesus, 8 of the Smyrnians, 12 Of Pergamus, 18 and of
Thyatira, 25 that they keep those things which they received of the Apostles.

1 F. JUNIUS.
Unto The former part of this book is comprised in a narratio^ of those things
which then were, as S. John taught us chap. 1. 19. it belongs wholly unto
instruction; and in these 2. next chapters, contains seven places, according
to the number and condition of those churches which were named before cha. 1.
11 figured verse. 12. and distributed most aptly into their Pastors and flocks,
verse. 20. which verse of that Chapter is as it were a passage unto this first
part. Every one of these seven places has three principal members, an
Exordium taken from the person of the Author: a proposition, in which is praise
and commendation of that which is good, reprehension of that which is evil:
and instruction, containing either an exhortation alone, or withal a
dissuasion opposite unto it: and a conclusion stirring up unto attention, by
divine promises. And this first place is unto the Pastors of the Church of
Ephesus.
the Angel of the Church of Ephesus write; The exordium; wherein are contained
the special praises of Christ Jesus the Author of this prophecy, out of the
16. and 13. verses of the first Chapter.
These things says he that holds those seven stars in his right hand, and
walks in the mids of those seven golden candlestickes.

2 The proposition, first commending the Pastor of this Church, verse 2. 3.
then reproving him, verse 4. after informing him, and withal threatening that
he will translate the Church to another place; verse 5. This commination or
threat Christ mittigateth by a kind of correction, calling to mind the
particular virtue and piety of that Church, which God never leaves without
recompense. verse. 6. Concerning the Nicolaitans see after upon the 15. verse.
I Know thy works, and thy labor, and thy patience; and how thou can not
bear them which are evil, and do examine them which say they are Apostles,
and are not, and have found them liars.

3 And thou wast burdened, and have patience; and for my Names sake have
labored, and wast not wearied.

4 Nevertheless, I have somewhat To deal with thee for.
against thee, which is, that thou have given over thy first love.

5 Remember therefore from whence thou art fallen, and repent, and do the first
works: otherwise I will come against thee shortly; and will remove thy
candlestick out of his place, except thou amend.

6 But this thou have, that thou hate the works of the Nicolaitans; which
also I hate.

7 The conclusion, containing a commandment of attention, and a promise of
everlasting life, shadowed out in a figure, of which Genesis 2. 9.
Let him that has an ear, hear, what the Spirit says unto the churches, To
him that overcomes, will I give to eat, of that tree of life which is in That
is, in Paradise; after the manner of the Hebrew phrase.
the midst of the Thus Christ speaks as he is Mediator.
Paradise of God.

8 The second place is unto the pastors of the church of the Smyrneans. The
exordium is taken out of the 17. and 18 verses of the first Chapter.
And unto the Angel of the Church of the Smyrna was one of the cities of Ionia
in Asia.
Smyrnians write, These things says he that is first, and last, which was dead
and is alive:

9 The proposition of praise is in this verse; and of exhortation joined with
promise, is in the next verse.
I know thy works, and tribulation, and poverty (but thou art rich) and the
blasphemy of them, which say they are Jews, and are not, but are the Synagogue
of Satan.

10 Fear none of those things, which thou shall suffer: behold, it shall come
to pass, that the devil shall cast some of you into prison that ye may be
tried; and ye shall have That is, often years. For so commonly both in this
book and in Daniel, years are signified by the name of days; that God
thereby might declare, that the space of time is appointed by him, and the same
very short. Now because S. John wrote this book in the end of Domitian the
Emperor his reign, as Justinius and Irenaeus do witness, it is altogether
necessary that this should be referred unto that persecution which was done by
the authority of the Emperor Traian: who began to make havoc of the
Christian Church in the tenth year of his reign, as the historiographers do
write; and his bloody persecution continued until Adrian the Emperor had
succeeded in his place. The space of which time is precisely teny ears which
are here mentioned.
tribulation for ten days: be thou faithful unto the death, and I will give
thee the crown of life.

11 The conclusion as verse 7.
Let him that has an ear, hear what the Spirit says to the churches: He
that overcomes, shall not be hurt See Chapt. 20. 6.
of the second death.

12 The third place is unto the Pastors of Pergamus. The exordium is taken out
of the 16, verse of the first Chapter.
And to the Angel of the church which is at Pergamus was the name of a famous
city in old time in Asia, where the Kings of the Aitalians were always
resident.
Pergamus write, These things says he which has that sharp sword with two
edges.

1 3 The proposition of praise is in this verse; of reprehension in the two
following; and of exhortation joined with a conditional threate, verse 16. Now
this Antipas was the Angel or minister of the Church of Pergamus as Aretas
writes.
I Know thy works, and where thou dwelleste, uen where Satan's throne is; and
that thou keep my Name, and have not denied my says, even in The faith of
the^ of Pergamus is so much the more highly commended, because they remained
constant even in the very heat of persecution.
those days when Antipas my faithful martyr was stain among you, where Satan
dwells.

14 But I have a few things against thee; that thou have there them that
maintain the doctrine of Number. 24. 14. and 25. 1.
Balaam, which taught Balac to put a stumbling block before the children of
Israel, that they should That which is here spoken of things offered to Idols,
is meant of the same kind which Paul speaks of 1. Co. 10. 14.
eat of things sacrificed unto idols, and commit fornication:

15 Even so have thou them, that maintain the doctrine of the Which follow the
footesteps of Balaam, and such as are abandoned unto all filthiness, is he
showed in the verse a foregoing and is here signified by a note of similitude
And thus also must the 6. verse be understood. For this matter especially
Irenaeus must be consulted withal.
Nicolaitans, which thing I hate.

16 Repent, or else I will come against thee shortly, and will fight against
them with the sword of my mouth.

17 The conclusion, standing of exhortation as before and of promise.
Let him that has an ear, hear what the Spirit says unto the Churches, To
him that overcomes, will I give to eat The bread of life, invisible,
spiritual, and heavenly, which is kept secretly with God, from before all
eternity.
of that He alludeth to that sermon which we read of, Ioh. 6 and to the place
we find Psalm. 105. 40.
Manna that is hid, and will give him a Arteas writes, that such a stone was
wo^t to be given to wrestlers at games, or else that such stones did in old
time witness the quitting of a man.
Which is a sign and witness of forgiveness and remission of sins, of
righteousness and true holiness, and of purity incorrupted, after that the
oldman is killed.
white stone, and in the stone a new A sign and testimony of newnes of life
in righteousness and true holiness by putting on the new man, whom none does
inwardly know, save the spirit of man which is in himself, the praise whereof
is not of (...) but of God. ^^. 2. 20.
name written, which no man knows saving he that receives it.

18 And unto The fourth place is unto the Pastors of Thyatira. The exordiu^ is
taken out of the 14. and 15. verses of the first Chapter.
the Angel of the Church which is at Thyatira write, These things says the
Son of God, which has eyes like unto a flame of fire, and feet like to fine
brass.

19 I Know The proposition of praise is in this verse: of reprehension, for
that they tolerated with them the doctrine of unrighteousness and
ungodliness, is verse. 20; the authors whereof though they were called back of
God, yet repented not, verse. 21. whereunto is added a most heavy threatening
verse. 22. and 23: of a conditional promise, and of exhortation to hold fast
the truth, is in the two verses following.
thy works and thy love, and So he calls those offices of charity which are
done to the Saints.
service, and faith, and thy patience, and thy works, and that they are mo at
the last, then at the first.

20 Notwithstanding, I have a few things against thee, that thou suffer the
woman lezabell which calls her self a Prophetess, to teach and to seduce my
servants, to make them commit By fornication of ten times in the Scripture
Idolatry is meant.
fornication, and to eat meats sacrificed unto idols.

21 And I gave her space to repent of her fornication, and she repented not.

22 Behold, I will cast her into a bed, and them that commit fornication with
her, into great affliction, except they repent them of their works.

23 And I will kill her children with death: and all the Churches shall know
that I am he which 1. Sam. 16. 7. Psalm. 7. 10. Iere 11. 20. and 17. 10.
does search the reins and hearts: and I will give unto every one of you
according unto your works.

24 And unto you I say, and the rest of them of Thyatira, As many as hold not
this learning, neither have approved the He points out the bragging of
certain men, which boasted of their deep that is plentiful and common
knowledge which notwithstanding is (...)
depth of Satan (as they speak) I will I will speak no worse thing against
you, being coment to have showed you what I require to be in you.
put upon you none other burden.

25 But, that which ye have already, hold fast till I come.

26 The conclusion, wherein Christ assures unto his servants the communion of
his kingdom and glory, in this verse, and that following: and commands an
holy attention; in the last verse.
For he that overcomes and keeps my works unto the end, to him will I That
is, I will make him a king, by communion with me, and my fellow heir: as it is
promised Mat. 19. 28. and 25. 34. Romans 8. 17. and 1. Cor. 63. Ephesians. 26. and 2.
Tim. 2. 12 and Apoc. 3. 21. and 44.
give power over the nations.

27 Psalm. 2. 9.
And he shall rule them with a rod of yro^: and as the vessels of a potter,
shall they be broken: even as I received of my Father.

28 And I will The brightness of greatest glory and honor, nearest
approaching unto the light of Christ, who is the Son of righteousness and our
head. Matthew, 4.
give him a morning star.

29 Let him that has an ear, hear what the Spirit says to the Churches.

CHAP. III.
1 The fifth Epistle sent to the Pastors of the Church of Sardis, 7 of
Philadelphia, 14 and of the Laodiceans, 16 that they be not lukewarm, 20 but
endeavor to further Gods glory.

1 The fifth place is unto the Pastors of Sardis. The exordium is taken out of
the fourth and 16. verses of the first chapter.
ANd unto the Angel of the church which is at Sardis is the name of a most
flourishing and famous city, where the Kings of Lydia kept their Courts.
Sardis write, These things says he that has those seven Spirits of God, and
those seven stars, The proposition of reproof is in this verse: of
exhortation joined with a threatening, in the two verses that follow: and of
qualification by way of correction, unto the comfort of the good which yet
remained there, verse 4.
I know thy works: that thou have a Thou art said to live, but art dead in
deed.
name that thou live, but thou art dead.

2 Be awake and strengthen the things which remain, that are Other things,
whose state is such, that they are now going, and unless they be confirmed,
will perish forthwith.
ready to dye: for I have not found thy works perfect before God.

3 Remember therefore, what thou have received and heard; and hold fast, and
repent: Chap. 16. 13. 1. These. 5. 2. 2. Pet. 3. 10.
if thou will not watch, I will come against thee as a thief, and thou shall
not know what hour I will come against thee.

4 Notwithstanding thou have a few persons yet in Sardis, That is, who have
with all Religion guarded them selves from sin and contagion, even from the
very show of (...), as S. Jude exhorts, verse 23.
which have not defiled their garments, and therefore they shall walk with me
in Pure from all spot, and shining with glory So it is to be understood
always hereafter, as in the next verse.
white: for they are They are meet and fie, to wit, because they are in stified
in Christ as they have truly showed it: for he is righteous that works
righteousness; but so, as the tree brings forth the fruit, Look Romans 8. 18.
worthy.

5 He that The conclusion, standing upon a promise; and a commandment, as
before.
over comes, shall be clothed in white array, and I will never put his name out
of the Chap. 20. 12. and 21. 27. Philip. 4. 3.
book of life; but I will confess his name before my Father, and before his
Angels.

6 Let him that has an ear, hear, what the Spirit says unto the Churches.

7 The sixth place, is unto the Pastors of Philadelphia. The exordium is taken
out of the 18. verse of the first Chapter.
And unto the Angel of the Church which is at Philadelphia write, These things
says he that is Holy, and True, which has the All power of rule in commanding
and forbidding, delivering, and punishing. And the house of David is the
Church, and the continual promise of David's kingdom belongs to Christ.
key of David, which opens and no man shuts, and shuts and no man
opens.

8 The proposition of praise is in this verse, of promises, to bring home
again those that wander, verse. 9. and to preserve the godly, verse 10. and of
exhortation verse 11.
I know thy works: behold, I have set before thee an open door, and no man
can shut it: because thou have a little strength, and have kept my word, and
have not denied my Name.

9 Behold, I will I will bring the^ to that case.
make the^ of the Synagogue of Satan, that is, them which call themselves Jews
and are not, but do lie: behold, I say, I will make them, that they shall come
That is, fall down and worship, either thee ciuillie, or Christ religiously,
at thy feet, (and thus I had rather take it) whether here in the Church (which
seems more proper to the argument of this place) or there in the world to
come. For Christ verily shall fulfill his word.
and worship before thy feet, and shall know that I have loved thee.

10 Because thou have Because thou have been patient and constant, as I would
my servants should be.
kept the word of my patience, therefore I will deliver thee from the hour of
tentation, which shall come upon all the world, to try them that dwell upon
the earth.

11 Behold, I come shortly: hold that which thou have; that no man take thy
crown.

12 The conclusion, which contains a promise, and a commandment.
Him that overcomes, will I make a pillar in the Temple of See. 2. 7.
my God; and he shall go no more out: That is, the new man shall be termed
after his father, mother, and head Christ.
and I will write upon him the name of my God, and the name of the City of my
God, (which is the new Jerusalem, which comes down out of heaven from my
God) and my new Name.

13 Let him that has an ear, hear what the Spirit says unto the Churches.

14 The seventh place is unto the pastors of the church of Laodicea. The
exordium is taken out of the fifth verse of the first chapter.
And unto the Angel of the Church of the Laodiceans write, These things says
Ame^ sounds as much in the Hebrew tongue as Truth, or Truth it self.
Amen, that faithful and true witness, that Of whom all things created have
their beginning.
beginning of the creatures of God:

15 The proposition of reproof is in this verse; whereunto is adjoined a
threatening, verse 16. with a confirmation declaring the same, verse 17. and of
exhortation unto faith and repentance verse 18. 19. whereunto is added a
conditional promise, verse 20.
I know thy works; that thou art neither cold nor hot: I would thou
werest-cold or hot.

16 Therefore, because thou art luke warm, and neither cold nor hot, it will
come to pass, that I shall spew thee out of my mouth.

17 For thou say, I am rich, and increased with goods, and have need of
nothing; and know not how thou art wretched, and miserable, The spiritual
misery of men is metaphoricallie expressed in three paints: unto which are
matched as correspondent those remedies which are offered verse. 18.
and poor and blind, and naked.

18 I counsel thee to buy of me gold tried by the fire, that thou may be
made rich: and white raiment, that thou may be clothed, and that thy
filthy nakedness do not appear: and anoint thine eyes with eye salve, that
thou may see.

19 As many as I love Prou. 3. 12. Hebr. 12 5.
I rebuke and chasten: be Zeal is set against the^ which are neither hot nor
cold.
zealous therefore and amend.

20 Behold, I stand at the door, and knock, This must be taken after the
manner of an allegory, as John. 14. 23.
If any man hear my voice and open the door, I will come in unto him, and
will suppe with him, and he with me.

21 The conclusion, consisting of a promise, as chap. 2. verse 26. and of an
exhortation. Hitherto has been the first part of the book of the Apocalypse.
To him that overcomes, will I grant to sit with me in my throne, even as I
overcame, and sit with my Father in his throne.

22. Let him that has an ear, hear what the Spirit says unto the Churches.

CHAP. IIII.
1 Another vision containing the glory of Gods Majesty: 8 Which is magnified
of the sour beasts, 10 and the sour and twenty Elders.

1 F. JUNIUS.
Hereafter follows the second part of this book, altogether prophetical,
foretelling those things which were to come, as was said before Chap. 1. 19.
This is divided into two histories: one common unto the whole world, unto the
ninth Chapter: and another singular, of the Church of God thence unto the 22.
Chapter. And these histories are said to be described in several books,
Chapter. 5. 1. and 10 2. Now this first verse is as it were a passage from the
former part unto this second: where it is said, that the heaven was opened,
that is, that heavenly things were unlocked; and that a voice as of a trumpet
sounded in heaven, to stir up the Apostle, and call him to the understanding
of things to come. The first history has two parts, (...) causes of things
done, and of this whole Revelation, in this and the next Chapter: An other of
the Acts done, in the next four Chapters. The principal causes according to
the distinction of persons in the unity of the divine essence, and according
to the oeconomie or dispensation thereof, are two. One the beginning which none
can approach unto, that is, God the Father, of whom is spoken in this Chapter:
The other, the Son, who is the mean cause, easy to be approached unto, in
respect that he is God and man in one person: of whom Chapter 5.
AFter this I looked, and behold, a door was open in heaven; and the first
voice which I heard, as it were of a trumpet talking with me, said, Come up
hither, and I will show thee the things which must be done hereafter.

2 And The manner of Revelation, as before. 1. 10.
immediately I was rapt Look Chapter 1. 10
in the Spirit; A description of God the Father, and of his glory in the
heavens, framed unto the manner of men; by his office, nature, company
atte^ding, effect, instruments, and events that follow afterward. In this
verse he is presented in office a judge, as Abraham said Genesis 18. which is
declared by his throne, as an ensign of judgment, and his sitting thereupon.
and behold, a throne was set in heaven, and one sat upon the throne.

3 By his nature, in that he is the Father, most glorious in his own person,
and with his glory over shining all other things.
And he that sat, was to look upon, like unto a Jasper stone, and a Sardine;
and there was a rain bow round about the throne, in sight like to an Emeraude.

4 By the company attending about him, in that, as that most high judge, he is
accompanied with the most honorable attendaunce of Prophets and Apostles, both
of the old and new Church, whom Christ has made to be Priests and Kings, Chap.
1. 65. 10.
And round about the throne were four and twenty thrones, and upon the
thrones I saw four and twenty Elders sitting, clothed in white raiment, and
had on their heads crowns of gold.

5 By effects, in that most mightily he shakes all things by his voice and
word, as Psalm 29. 3. and with the light of his spirit and providence peruseth
and passes through all.
And out of that throne proceeded lightnings, and thundrings, and voices: and
there were seven lamps of fire burning before the throne, which are the seven
Spirits of God.

6 By instruments used, in that he both has a most ready treasu^^ (...) it
were a worke-house excellently furnished with all things, unto the executing
of his will, which things flow from his commandment; as is repeated Chapter
15. 2: And has also the Angels most ready administers of his counsels and
pleasure unto all parts of the world; continually watching, (in this verse)
working by reason, otherwise then the instruments without life last mentioned;
courageous as Lions, mighty as Bulls, wise as men, swift as Eagles, verse 7.
most apt unto all purposes, as furnished with wings on every part, most
pearcing of sight, and finally pure and perfect spirits, always in continual
motion, verse 8.
Also before the throne there was a sea of glass like unto cristall: and
between the throne, and the things that were round about the throne, were
four beasts full of eyes before and behind.

7 The first beast was like a Lion, and the second beast like a Bull, and the
third beast had a face as a man, and the fourth beast was like a flying Eagle.

8 And the Every beast had six wings.
four beasts had each one of them six wings about him, and they were full of
eyes within; and they ceased not By events, in that for all the causes before
mentioned. God is glorified both of Angels as holy, Judge, omnipotent,
eternal, and immutable verse 8. and also after their example, he is glorified
of holy men (verse 9.) in sign and in speech verse 10. 11.
day nor night, saying, Holy, Holy, Holy Lord God almighty, Which Was, and
Which Is, and Which Is to come.

9 And when those beasts God is said to have glory, honor, kingdom, and
such like, given unto him, when we godly and reverently set forth that which
is properly and only his.
gave glory, and honor, and thanks to him that sat on the throne, which
lives for ever and ever,

10 Three signs of divine honor given unto God; prostration or falling down,
adoration, and casting their crowns before God; in which the godly, though
made kings by Christ, do willingly empty them selves of all glory, moved
with a religious respect of the majesty of God.
The four and twenty Elders fell down before him that sat on the throne,
and worshipped him that lives for evermore, and cast their crowns before the
throne, saying,

11 The sum of their speech: that all glory must be given unto God: the
reason, because he is the eternal beginning of all things, from whose only
will they have their being, and are governed, and finally in all respects are
that which they are.
Thou art Chap. 5. 12.
worthy, O Lord, That is, that thou should challenge the same to thy self
alone. But as for us, we are unworthy that even by thy goodness we should be
made partakers of this glory. And hitherto has been handled the principal
cause vnapprocheable, which is God.
to receive glory and honor, and power: for thou have created all things; and
by thy will they are, and have been created.

CHAP. V.
1 The book sealed with seven seals. 3 which none could open, 6 that Lamb of
God 9 is thought worthy to open, 12 even by the consent of all the company of
heaven.

1 A passage unto the second principal cause, which is the son of God, God
and man, the mediator of all, as the eternal word of God the Father,
manifested in the flesh. This chapter has two parts: one that prepares the
way unto the Revelation by rehearsal of the occasions that did occur, in the
first four verses. Another, the history of the Revelation of Christ, thence
unto the end of the chapter.
F. JUNIUS.
ANd I saw at the That is, in the very right hand of God.
right hand of him that sat upon the throne, Here are showed the occasions for
which this principal cause, and his Revelation was also necessary: the same
are three: the first a present vision of the book of the counsels of God,
concerning the government of this whole world, which book is said to be laid
up with the Father as it were in his hand: but shut and unknown unto all
creatures, in this verse. The second is a religious desire of the Angels of
God, to understand the mysteries of this book, verse. 2. whereof see 1. Pet. 1.
12. The third is a lamentation of S. John and all the godly moved by the same
desire, verse 4. when they saw that it was a thing impossible for any creature
to effect: which is declared in the third verse.
a book written within, and on the backside, sealed with seven seals.

2 And I saw a mighty Angel, which proclaimed with a loud voice; Who is
worthy to open the book, and to loose the seals thereof?

3 Thus, neither of them that are in heaven, nor of them which are in the
earth, etc. And this I like better. Now this enumeration of parts is
sufficient to the denying of the whole. For of the creatures, one sort is in
heaven, above the earth; another in the earth; and another under the earth, in
the sea, as is after declared, verse 13.
But none in heaven, nor on earth, neither under the earth, was able to open
the book, neither to look therein.

4 I therefore wept much, because no man was found worthy to open, and to
read the book, neither to look thereon.

5 The second part of this chapter, in which is set down the Revelation of the
Son; as before was said. This part contains first an history of the manner
how God prepared S. John to understand this Revelation, in this verse.
Secondly, the Revelation of the Son himself, unto the seventh verse.
Thirdly, the accidents of this Revelation, in the rest of the Chapter. The
manner how is here described in two sorts, one from without him, by speech in
this verse. Another within, by opening the eyes of S. John (which before were
held) that he might see, in the verse following.
Then one of the Elders said unto me, Weep not: behold, that Gene. 49. 9.
That is, The most mighty and most approved Prince: according to the use of
the Hebrew speech.
Lion which is of the tribe of Judah, that root of David, has gotten the
victory, that he might open the book and loose the seven seals thereof.

6 I looked therefore, and lo, The sum of the revelation. Christ the
mediator takes and opens the book, verse. 6. 7. Therefore in this
revelation is described the person of Christ; in this verse. His fact, in the
next verse. The person is thus described. Christ the mediator between God,
Angels, and men, as the eternal word of God; and our redeemer: as the Lamb of
God, standing as slain, and making intercession for us by the virtue and
merit of his everlasting sacrifice, is armed with the Spirit of God in his
own person, that is, with the power and wisdom of God esientially unto the
government of this whole world.
between the throne, and the four beasts, and in the midds of the Elders,
stood a Lamb as though he had been killed, which had seven horns, and seven
eyes, which are those seven spirits of God, sent our into all the world.

7 The fact of Christ the mediator, that he comes unto the throne of the
Father, of which chap 4. and takes the book out of his hand to open it. For
that he opened it, it is first expressed chap. 6. 1. etc.
He came, and took the book out of the right hand of him that sat upon the
throne.

8 Now follow in the end the accidents of the revelation last spoken of: that
all the holy Angels and men did sing unto him: both the chief, verse 9. 10.
and common order of Angels, verse 11. 12. and of all things created, verse 13.
the princes of both sorts agreeing thereunto, verse 14.
And when he had taken the book, the four beasts and the four and twenty
Elders fell down before the Lamb, having every one The symbols or signs of
praise, sweet in savor, and acceptable unto God. See chap. 8. 3.
harpes and golden vials full of odours, which are the Look cha. 8. 3.
prayers of the Saints:

9 And they sung a No common song.
new That is, composed according to the present matter: the Lamb having
received the book, as it were with his feet, and opened it with his horns;
as is said in the Canticle.
song, saying, The song of the Nobles or Princes standing by the throne,
consisting of a publication of the praise of Christ, and a confirmation of the
same, from his benefits, both which we have received of himself (as are the
suffering of his death, our redemption upon the cross by his blood, in this
verse: and our communion with him in Kingdom and Priesthood, which long ago he
has granted unto us with himself) and which we hereafter hope to obtain; as
our kingdom to come, in Christ; in the verse following.
Thou art worthy to take the book, and to open the seals thereof; because
thou wast killed, and have redeemed us to God, by thy blood, out of every
kindred, and tongue, and people, and nation.

10 And have made us unto our God Chap. 1. 6. 1 Pet 2. 9.
kings and priests, and we shall reign over the earth.

11 The consent of the common order of Angels answering in melody unto their
princes that stood by the throne.
Then I beheld, and I heard the voice of many Angels round about the throne,
and about the beasts and the Elders, A number finit, but almost infinite, for
one infinite in deed, as Dan. 7 10.
and their number was Dan. 7. 10.
By this is meant a great number.
ten thousand times ten thousand, and a thousand thousands:

12 Saying with a loud voice, Worthy is the Lamb that was killed, to To have
all praise given to him as to the mightiest and wisest, etc.
receive power, and riches, and wisdom, and strength, and honor, and glory,
and praise:

13 The consent of all the common multitud of the creatures.
Also all the creatures which are in heaven, and on the earth, and under the
earth, and in the sea, and all that are in them, heard I, saying: Unto him,
that sits upon the throne, and unto the Lamb be praise, and honor, and
glory, and power, for evermore.

14 A confirmation of the praise before going, from the contestation of the
Nobles, expressed in word and signs, as once or twice before this.
And the four beasts said, Amen; and the four and twenty Elders fell down
(upon their faces) and worshipped him that lives for evermore.

CHAP. VI.
1 The Lamb opens the first seal of the book, 3 the second, 5 the third, 7
the fourth, 9 the fifth, 12 and the sixth, and then arise murders, famine,
pestilence, outcries of Saints, earthquakes, and diverse strange sights in
heaven.

1 This is the second part of this first history (which I said was common, and
of the whole world) of the works of God in the government of al things. Of this
part there are generally three members, the foresignifying, the caution, and
the execution of all the evils which God powers out upon this world, which
has most hardly deserved of him. The foresignifying is set down in this
chapter: the caution for preserving the church, is in the next chapter: and the
execution is described chap. 8. and 9. In every part of the foresignifying
there are three branches: the several and express calling of S. John, to
prepare himself to take knowledge of the things that were to be showed unto
him in the opening of the seals: the sign; and the word expounding the sign.
And albeit, the expres calling of S. John, be used only in four of the
signs, yet the same is also to be understood in the rest that follow. The
author of these foresignifying is the Lamb, as that word of the Father, made
the mediator, opening the seals of the book. The instruments are the Angels
in most of the visions, who expound the sign, and the words thereof. Now this
first verse contains an expres calling of S. John to mark the opening of the
first seal.
F. JUNIUS.
AFter I saw, when the Lamb had opened the first of the seals; and I heard
one of the four beasts say, as it were the noise of thunder, Come and see.

2 Therefore The first sign joined with declaration; is that God, for the
sins and horrible rebellion of the world, will invade the same: and first of
all will as a far off with his darts of pestilence most suddenly, mightily
and gloriously, beat down the same as judge, and triumph over it, as
conqueror.
I beheld, and lo, there was present a white horse, and he that sat on him,
had a bow, and a crown was given unto him, and he went forth conquering, and
that he might conquer.

3 And The second sign joined with words of declaration, (after the express
calling of John as before) is, that God being provoked unto wrath by the
obstinacy and hard heartednes of the world not repenting for the former
plaugue, as setting upon the same at hand, will kindle the fire of debate
amongst men, and will destroy the inhabitants of this world, one by the sword
of another.
when he had opened the second seal, I heard the second beast say, Come and
see.

4 And there came out another horse, that was red, and power was given to him
that sat thereon, to take peace from of the earth, and that they should kill
one another; and there was given unto him a great sword.

5 The third sign with declaration, is, that God will destroy the world with
famine, withdrawing all provision: which is by the figure synecdoche
comprehended in wheat, barley, wine and oil.
And when he had opened the third seal, I heard the third beast say, Come and
see: Then I beheld, and lo, a black horse; and he that sat on him, had
balances in his hand.

6 And I heard a voice in the mids of the four beasts say, A Hereby is
signified what great scarcity of corn there was, for the word here used is a
kind of measure of dry things, which it in quantitic but the eighth part of a
bushel, which was an ordinary portion used to be given to servants for their
stint of meat for one day.
measure of wheat for a penny, and three measures of barley for a penie; I had
rather distinguish and read the words thus, and the wine and the oil: thou
shall not deal unjustly. In this sense; likewise the wine and the oil shall be
sold a very little for a penny. Thou shall not deal unjustly; namely when
thou shall measure out a very little for a great prise: so is the place
evident: otherwise that is most true, which the wise man says, that who so
withholdeth the corn shall be cursed of the people. Proverbs 11. 26.
and the oil, and wine hurt thou not.

7 The fourth sign joined with words of declaration, is that God will addict
the fourth part of the world indifferently, unto death and hell, or the grave,
by all those means at once, by which before severally and in order he had
recalled their minds unto amendme^t. Unto these are also added the wild and
cruel beasts of the earth, out of Leuit. 26. 22. Thus does God according to
his wisdom dispense the treasures of his power, justly toward all, mercifully
toward the good, and with patience or long sufferance toward his enemies.
And when he had opened the fourth seal, I heard ye voice of the fourth beast
say, Come and see

8 And I looked, and behold, a pale horse; and his name that sat on him was
Death, and Hell followed after him; and power was given unto them over the
fourth part of the earth, to kill with sword, and with hunger, and with death,
and by the beasts of the earth.

9 The fifth sign, is that the holy martyrs which are under the altar whereby
they are sanctified, that is, received into the trust and tuition of Christ
(into whose hands they are committed) shall cry out for the justice of God, in
an holy zeal to advance his kingdom, and not of any private perturbation of
the mind, in this and the next verse, and that God will, in deed, sign, and
word comfort them, ver. 11.
And when he had opened the fifth seal, I saw under the altar, the souls of
them that had been killed for the word of God, and for the testimony which
they maintained.

10 And they cried with a loud voice, saying, How long, Lord, which art holy
and true, do thou not judge, and avenge our blood, requiring the same of
them that dwell on the earth?

11 Then long As before 3. 4.
white robes were given unto every one, and it was said unto them, that they
should rest yet for a little season, until their fellow servants, and their
brethren that must be killed even as they were, were Until their number be
fulfilled.
fulfilled.

12 The sixth sign, the narration whereof has two parts, the sign and the
event. The sign is, that the earth, heaven, and the things that are in them,
for horror of the sins of the world upon those most heavy foretellings of God,
and complaints of the saints, shall be shaken most vehemently, tre^bling in
horrible manner, and losing their light, in this verse: falling from on high,
verse 13. withdrawing themselves and flying away for the greatness of the
trouble, verse 14. So holyly do all creatures depend upon the will of God, and
content themselves in his glory.
And I beheld when he had opened the sixth seal, and lo, there was a great
earthquake, and the sun was as black as So they called in old time those
woue^ works that were of hair.
sackecloth of hair, and the moon was all made like blood:

13 And the stars of heaven fell unto the earth, as a fig tree casts her
green figs when it is shaken of a mighty wind.

14 And the heaven departed away, as a scrole, when it is rolled up, and all the
mountains and yles were moved out of their places:

15 The event of the sign before going: that there is no man that shall not be
astonished at that general commotion, fly away for fear, and hide himself,
in this verse, and wish unto himself most bitter death, for exceeding horror
of the wrath of God, and of the Lamb, at which before he was astonished. Now
this perplexity is not of the godly, but of the wicked, whose portion is in
this life, as the-psalmist speaks, Psalm. 17. 14. Not that sorrow which is
according unto God, which works repentance unto salvation, whereof a man
shall never repent him; but that worldly sorrow that brings death, 2 Cor. 7.
9. as their vvishings do declare: for this history is of the whole world,
severed from the history of the church, as I have showed before Chapt 4. 1.
And the Kings of the earth, and the great men, and the rich men, and the
chief captains, and the mighty men, and every bondsman, and every free man,
hid themselves in dens, and in the rocks of the mountains;

16 And they said to the mountains and rocks, These are words of such as
despair of their escape: of which despair there are two arguments; the
presence of God and of the Lamb, provoked to wrath against the world, in this
verse; and the conscience of their own weakness, whereby men feel that they
are no way able to stand in the day of the wrath of God, verse 17. as it is
said. Esaias. 14. 27.
Esaias. 2. 19. Hose 10. 8. Luke 23. 30.
Fall on us, and hide us from the presence of him that sits on the throne,
and from the wrath of the Lamb.

17 For the great day of his wrath is come, and who is able to stand?

CHAP. VII.
1 The Angels coming to hurt the earth, 3 are stayed until the Elect of the
Lord, 5 of all tribes were sealed. 13 Such as suffered persecution for Christ's
sake, 16 have great felicity, 17 and joy.

1 The 2. member of this part is a preventing of danger, as we distinguished
the same before chapter 6. 1. that is, of the cautio^ whereby God took care before
hand and provided for his; that after the example of the Israelites of old
Exodus 8. 23. the faithful might be exempted from the plagues of this wicked
world. This whole place, is a certain interloquution and bringing in, for this
whose chap. by occasion of the prediction and argument of the sixth seal. For
first that evil is prevented in the elect, unto the 9. verse. Then thanks are
given by the elect for that cause, ver 10. 11, 12. Lastly the accomplishment of
the thing is set forth, unto the end of the Chapter. The first verse is a
transition, speaking of the Angels which keep these inferior parts from all
evil, until God do command For (as it is excellently figured by Ezechiel cha.
1. 11. 12.) their faces and their wings are reached upwards, continually
waiting upon and beholding the countenance of God for their direction, and
every of the^ goes into that part that is right before his face: whither
soever the Spirit shall go, they go, they step not out of the way, that is,
they depart not so much as a foot breadth from the path commanded them of God.
F. JUNIUS.
AFter that, I saw four Angels standing upon the On the four quarters or
coasts of the earth.
four corners of the earth, holding the four winds of the earth, that no
wind should blow upon the earth, neither on the sea, That is, neither into the
air, into which the tops of trees are adua^ced.
neither on any tree.

2 Now God provides against the danger of his elect, by commandment, ver. 2.
and 3. and by sign or figure, both for those of the nation of the Jews,
thence unto the 8. verse. and also them of the Gentiles verse. 9^.
And I saw Not only another, or differing in number from the common Angels of
God, but also in essence, office and operation excelling all Angels: that is
Christ Jesus the eternal Angel or word of God, and mediator of the covenant.
So hereafter Chap. 8. 3. and 10. 1. 5.
another Angel come up from the East, which had the seal of the living God;
and he cried with a loud voice to the four Angels, to whom power was given to
hurt the earth, and the sea, saying,

3 Hurt ye not the earth, neither the sea, neither the trees, till we have
sealed the servants of our God in their foreheads.

4 And I heard the number of them, which were sealed; and there were sealed
That is, of the Jews a number certain in it self before God, and such as may
be numbered of us: for which cause also the same is here set down as certain.
But of the elect which are of the Gentiles the number in deed is in it self
certain with God, but of us not possibly to be numbered, as God Genesis 15. 5. and
often elsewhere, and Esaias figured most excellently Chap. 49. and 60. This
therefore is spoken with respect, when a certain number is put for one
uncertain confer this with verse 9.
an hundredth and four and forty thousand of all the tribes of the children of
Israel.

5 Of the tribe of Judah, were sealed twelve thousand: Of the tribe of Ruben,
were sealed twelve thousand: of the tribe of Gad, were sealed twelve thousand:

6 Of the tribe of Aser, were sealed twelve thousand: Of the tribe of
Nephthali, were sealed twelve thousand: Of the tribe of Manasses, were sealed
twelve thousand:

7 Of the tribe of Simeon, were sealed twelve thousand: Here the tribe of Leui
is reckoned up in common with the rest, because all the Israelits were equally
made priests with them in Christ, by his priesthood. chap. 1. 6. and 5, 10.
and Romans 12 1. and 1. Pet. 2. 9. The name of Dan is not mentioned, because the
Danits long before forsaking the worship of God, were fallen away from the
fellowship of Gods people, unto the part of the Gentiles. Which evil many ages
before Jacob foresaw, Genesis 49. 18. for which cause also there is no mention
made of this tribe in the first book of the Chronicles.
Of the tribe of He skipped Dan, and reckeneth Leui.
Leui, were sealed twelve thousand: Of the tribe of Issachar, were sealed
twelve thousand: of the tribe of Zabulon, were sealed twelve thousand:

8 Of the tribe of Of Ephraim, who was Joseph's other son, and had the birth
right given him, whereof he is called Joseph.
Joseph, were sealed twelve thousand: Of the tribe of Benjamin, were sealed
twelve thousand.

9 After these things I beheld, and lo, a great multitude, See before upon the
4. verse.
which no man could number, of all nations and kinreds, and people, and
tongues, and they As Priests, kings, and glorious conquerours by martyrdom:
which things are noted by their proper signs in this verse.
stood before the throne, and before the Lamb, clothed with long white robes;
and palms in their hands.

10 The praise of God, celebrated first by the holy men, in this verse: then by
the heavenly Angels, in the two verses following.
And they cried with a loud voice, saying, Salvation comes from our God, that
sits upon the throne, and from the Lamb.

11 And all the Angels stood round about the throne, and about the Elders, and
the four beasts; and they fell before the throne on their faces, and
worshipped God,

12 Saying, Amen. Praise, and glory, and wisdom, and thanks, and honor,
and power, and might, be unto our God for evermore, Amen.

13 A passage over unto the expounding of the vision, of which the Angel
enquireth of S. John, to stir him up vvithall, in this verse: and John in one
form of speech, both acknowledges his own ignorance, attributing knowledge
unto the Angel, and also in most modest manner requesteth the expounding of the
vision,
Then one of the Elders spoke, saying unto me; What are these which are arrayed
in long white robes? and whence came they?

14 And I said unto him, Lord, thou know. The exposition of the vision,
wherein the Angel tells first the acts of the Saints, that is their
sufferings, and work of faith in Christ Jesus, in this ver. Secondly their
glory, both present, which consists in two things, that they minister unto
God, and that God protecteth them, verse. 15: and to come, in their perfect
deliverance from all annoyances, verse. 16. and in participation of all good
things, which even the memory of former evils shall never be able to diminish,
verse. 17. The cause efficient, and which contains all these things, is only
one, even the Lamb of God, the Lord, the Mediator, and the Savior Christ
Jesus.
And he said to me, These are they, which came out of great tribulation, and
have washed their long robes, and have made them white in the blood of the
Lamb.

15 Therefore are they before the throne of God, and serve him He alludeth to
the Levites, which served day and night, for else there is no night in heaven.
day and night in his Temple; and he that sits on the throne will Or, upon
them: whereby is meant Gods defense and protection as it were toward the^, who
are as safe, as men in the Lords tents.
over shadow them.

16 Esaias. 49. 10.
They shall hunger no more, neither thirst any more; neither shall the sun
light on them, neither any heat.

17 Because the Lamb, which is in the mids of the throne shall feed them,
and shall lead the^ unto the lively fountains of water; and Esaias 25. 8. Chap.
21. 4.
God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes.

CHAP. VIII.
1 After the opening of the seventh seal, 3 the Saints prayers are offered up
with odours. 6 The seven Angels come forth with trumpets. 7 The four first
blow, and fire falls on the earth, 8 the sea is turned into blood, 10. 11 the
waters wax bitter, 12 and the stars are darkened.

1 He returns to the history of the seals of the book, which the Lamb
opens. The seventh seal is the next foresignification, and a precise
commandment of the execution of the most heavy judgments of God upon this
wicked world: which foresignification being understood by the seal, all things
in heaven are silent, and in horror through admiration, until commandment
of execution be severally given of God unto the administres of his wrath. So
he passes unto the third member, of which I spoke before in the sixth Chapter
and first verse, which member is of the execution of those evils wherewith God
most justly determined to afflict the world.
F. JUNIUS.
ANd when he had opened the seventh seal, there was silence in heaven, about
half an hour.

2 Now follows the third branch of the common history, as even now I said:
which is the execution of the judgments of God upon the world. This is first
generally prepared, unto the sixth verse; then by several parts expounded
according to the order of those that administered the same, unto the end of the
Chapter following. Unto the preparation of this execution are declared these
things: first who were the administers and instruments thereof, in this verse;
secondly, what is the work both of the Prince of Angels giving order for this
execution, thence unto the 5. verse, and of his administers, in the sixth verse.
The administers of the execution are said to be seven Angels: their
instruments, trumpets, whereby they should as it were sound the al'arme at the
commandment of God. They are propunded seven in number, because it pleased
not God at once to power out his wrath upon the rebellious world, but at
diverse times, and by piece meal, and in slow order, and as with an unwilling
mind to exercise his judgments upon his creatures, so long called upon both
by word and signs, if happily they had learned to repent.
And I saw the seven Angels, which Which appear before him as his ministers.
stand before God; and to them were given seven trumpets.

3 This is that great Emperor, the Lord Jesus Christ, our King and Savior:
who both makes intercession to God the Father for the Saints, filling the
heavenly sanctuary with most sweet odor, and offering up their prayers, as
the Calves and burnt sacrifices of their lips, in this verse: in such sort as
every one of them (so powerful is that sweet savor of Christ, and the
efficacy of his sacrifice) are held in reconcilement with God and themselves
made most acceptable unto him, verse 4. And then also out of his treasury, and
from the same sanctuary powers forth upon the world the fire of his wrath,
adding also divine tokens thereunto: and by that means (as of old the
harauldes of Rome were wont to do) he proclaims war against the rebellious
world.
Then another Angel came, and stood before the altar having a golden censer;
and much odoures was given unto him, to offer with the prayers of all the
Saints upon the golden altar, which is before the throne.

4 And the smoke of the odours with the prayers of the Saints, Our prayers are
nothing worth, unless that true and sweet savor of that only oblation be
especially and before all things with the^, that is to say, unless we being
first of all justified through faith in his Son, be acceptable unto him.
went up out of the Angels hand, unto the presence of God.

5 Then the Angel took the censer, and filled it with fire of the altar, and
cast it into the earth: and there were made voices, and thundrings, and
lightenings, and earthquake.

6 This is the work of the administers. The Angels the administers of Christ,
only by sound of trumpet and voice (for they are only as haraulds) do
effectually call forth the instruments of the wrath of God, through his power.
Hitherto have been things general. Now follows the narration of things
particular, which the Angels six in number wrought in their order, set out unto
the nineteenth verse of the next Chapter: and is concluded with declaration of
the event which followed upon these things done in the world, in the tenth and
eleventh Chapters.
And the seven Angels, which had the seven trumpets, prepared them selves to
blow the trumpets.

7 The first execution at the sound of the first Angel, upon the earth, that
is, the inhabitants of the earth (by metonymie) and upon all the fruits
thereof: as the comparing of this verse with the second member of the ninth
verse, does not obscurely declare.
So the first Angel blew the trumpet, and there was hail and fire, mingled
with blood; and they were cast into the earth: and the third part of trees was
burnt up, and all green grass was burnt up.

8 The second execution, upon the sea, in this verse, and all things that are
therein, in the next verse.
Then the second Angel blew the trumpet, and as it were a great mountain,
burning with fire, was cast into the sea; and the third part of the sea became
blood.

9 And the third part of the creatures, which were in the sea, and had life,
dyed; and the third part of ships were destroyed.

10 The third execution upon the floods and fou^taines, that is, upon al fresh
waters, in this verse: the effect where of is, that many are destroyed with
the bitterness of the waters, in the verse following.
Then the third Angel blew the trumpet, and there fell a great star out of
heaven, burning like a torch, and fell into the third part of the rivers, and
into the fountains of waters.

11 The name of the star is called This is spoken by metaphor, of the name of
a most bitter herb, and commonly known: unless perhaps a man following those
that note the deriuation of words, had rather expound it adiectiuelie, for
that which by reason of bitterness can not be drunk, or which makes the
liquour into which it is powered, more bitter then that any man can drink the
same.
wormwood: therefore the third part of the waters became wormwood; and many
men dyed of the waters, because they were made bitter.

12 The fourth execution upon those lightsome bodies of heaven, which minister
unto this inferior world.
After the fourth Angel blew the trumpet, and the third part of the Sun was
smitten, and the third part of the Moon, and the third part of the stars; so
that the third part of the^ was darkened, and the third part of the day did not
shine, and likewise the night.

13 A lamentable prediction or foretelling of those parts of the divine
execution which yet are behind: which also is a passage unto the argument of
the next Chapter. Of all these things in a manner Christ him self expressly
foretold Luke 21. 24. etc. and they are common plagues generally denounced,
without particular note of time.
And I beheld, and heard one Angel flying through the mids of heaven, saying
with a loud voice, Woe, woe, woe, to the inhabitants of the earth, from the
soundes remaining of the trumpets of the three Angels, which yet must blow
their trumpets.

CHAP. IX.
1 The fifth Angel blows his trumpet, 3 and spoiling locustes come out. 13
The sixth Angel blows, 16 and brings forth horsemen, 20 to destroy mankind.

The fifth execution upon wicked me^ inhabiting the earth (as a little before
the Angel savd) wrought by the infernal powers, is declared in this place
unto the eleventh verse. And after it the sixth execution, thence unto the
nineteenth verse. And lastly is showed the common event that followed the
former executions in the world, in the two last verses.
F. JUNIUS.
THen the fifth Angel blew the trumpet, and I saw a That is, that the Angel of
God glittering with glory, as a star fell down from heaven: Whether thou
take him for Christ, who has the keys of hell of himself, and by Princely
authority, Chapter. 1. 18. or whether for some inferior Angel, who has the
same key permitted unto him, and oc-cupieth it ministerially, or by office of
his ministry; here and Chapter 21. so the word falling is taken Gene. 14. 10.
and 24. 64. and Hebr. 6. 6.
star fall out of heaven unto the earth; The key was given to this star.
For those powers of wickedness are thrust down into hell, and bound with
chains of darkness: and are there kept unto damnation, unless God for a
time do let them loose. 2. Pet. 2. 4. Iud. 6, and of this book Chapter. 20.
the history of which Chapter, has agreement of time with this present Chapter.
and to that Angel was given the key of the By the bottomless pit, he means
the deepest darkness of hell.
bottomless pit.

2 Unto this is added, the smoke of the hellish and infernal spirits, all
dark, and darkening all things in heaven and in earth. These spiritual
darkenesses are the causes of all disorder and confusion. For the devil at a
time certain (whereof verse five) sent these darckenesses into his kingdom,
that he might at once, and with one impression overthrow all things, and
pervert if it were possible the elect themselves. By this darkness all
spiritual light, both active as of the Sun, and passive, as of the air
which is lightened by the Sun, is taken away: and this is that which goes
before the spirits: it follows of the spirits themselves.
And he opened the bottomless pit, and there arose a smoke out of the pit, as
the smoke of a great furnace; and the Sun, and the air were darkened by the
smoke of the pit.

3 A description of the malignant spirits inuading the world, taken from their
nature, power, form and order. From their nature, in that they are like unto
certain locustes, in quickenesse, subtletie, hurtfulnesse, number, and such
like, in this verse. From their power, for that they are, as the Scorpions of
the earth, of a secret force to do hurt. For our battle is not here with flesh
and blood, but with powers, etc. Ephesians. 6. 12. This place of the power of the
devils, generally noted in this verse, is particularly decla-red afterward,
in the three next verses.
And there came out of the smoke Locusts upon the earth; and unto them was
given power, such as the Scorpions of the earth have.

4 Here that power of the devils is particularly described, according to their
actions and the effects of the same. Their actions are said to be bounded by
the counsel of God: both because they hurt not all men, but only the
reprobate (for the godly and elect, in whom there is any part of a better life,
God gardeth by his decree) whom Christ shall not have sealed, in this verse;
and also because they neither had all power, nor at all times, no not over
those that are their own, but limited in manner and time by the prescript of
God, verse 5. So their power to afflict the godly is none, and for the wicked
it is limited in act and in effect, by the will of God: for the manner was
prescribed unto them, that they should not slay but torment the wretched world.
The time is for five months, or for an hundred and fifty days, that is, for
so many years, in which the devils have in deed mightily perverted all
things, in the world; and yet without that public and unpunished license of
killing, which afterward they usurped when the sixth Angel had blown his
trumpet, as shall be said upon the thirteenth verse. Now this space is to be
accounted from the end of that thousand years mentioned chapter 20. 3. and
that is, from the Popedom of that Gregory the seventh, a most monstrous
Necromancer, who before was called Hildebrandus Senensis: for this man being
made altogether of impiety and wickedness, as a slave of the devil, whom he
served, was the most wicked firebrand of the world he excommunicated the
Emperor Henry the fourth: went about by all manner of treachery to set up and
put down Empires and Kingdoms, as liked himself: and doubted not to set
Rodolph the Swedon over the Empire in steed of Henry before named, sending
unto him a crown with this verse annexed unto it, Petra dedit Petro, Petrus
diadema Rodolpho, that is, The Rock to Peter gave the crown, and Peter
Rodolph does renown. Finally, he so finely bestirred him self in his
affairs, as he miserably set all Christendom on fire, and conveyed over unto
his successors the burning brand of the same; who enraged with like ambition,
never ceased to nourish that flame, and to in kindle it more and more: whereby
Cities, Commonweals, and whole kingdoms set together by the ears amongst
themselves, by most expert cutthroates, came to ruin, whiles they miserably
wounded one another. This term of an hundred and 50. years, takes end in the
time of Gregory the ninth, or Hugolinus Anagniensis (as he was before called)
who caused to be compiled by one Raymond his chapleine and confessor, the body
of the Decretals, and by sufferance of the Kings and Princes, to be published
in the Christian world, and established for a law. For by this slight, at
length, the Popes arrogated unto themselves license to kill whom they would,
whiles other were unawares; and without fear established a butchery out of
many, the wicked Canons of the Decretals, which the trumpet of the 5. Angel
had expressly forbidden, and had hindered until this time. The effects of
these bloody actions are declared upon the 6 verse: that the miserable world
la^guishing in so great calamilities, should willingly run together unto death,
and prefer the same before life, by reason of the grieuousnesse of the
miseries that oppressed them.
But it was commanded the^, that they should not hurt the grass of ye earth,
neither any green thing, neither any tree: but only those me^ which of have
not the seal of God in their foreheads.

5 And to them it was given that they should not kill them, but that they
should be vexed five months; and that their should be as the pain that
comes of a Scorpion, when he has stung a man.

6 Chap. 6. 16. Esaias. 2. 19. Hose. 10. 8.
Therefore in those days shall men seek death, and shall not find it; and
shall desire to dye, and death shall fly from them.

7 The form these hellish spirits and administers, is shadowed out by signs
and visible figures in this sort: that they are very expert and swift: that
wheresoever they are in the world the kingdom is theirs: that they menage al
their affairs with cunning and skill, in this verse: that making show of
mildnes and tender affection to draw on men with all, they most impotently rage
in all mischief: that they are most mighty to do hurt, verse 8. that they are
freed from being hurt of any man, as armed with the color of Religion and
sacred authority of privilege: that they fill all things with horror, verse
9. that they are fraudulent: that they are venomous and extremely noisome,
though their power be limited, verse 10. All which things are properly in the
infernal powers, and communicated by them unto their ministers and vassals.
The form of the locustes was like unto horses prepared unto battle; and on
their heads were set as it were crowns, like unto gold, and their faces were
like the faces of men.

8 And they had hair as the hair of women; and their teeth were as the teeth
of Lions:

9 They had also habbergions, like to habbergions of iron: and the sound of
their wings was like the sound of charets, when many horses run together in
battle:

10 Also they had tails like unto Scorpions; and there were stings in their
tails; and their power was to hurt men five months.

11 The order of the powers of maliciousness: that they are subject unto one
infernal king, whom thou may call in English the destroyer: who drives the
whole world both Jews and Gentiles into the destruction that belongs unto
him self. And I cannot tell whether this name have respect unto the
Etvmologicall interpretation of Hildebrand, by a figure often used in
Scripture: which albeit it may otherwise be turned of the Germans (as the
sense of co^pound words is commonly ambiguous) yet in very deed it signifies
as much as if thou should call him the firebrand, that is, he that sets
on fire those that be faithful unto him.
Now they had a King set over them, which is the Angel of the bottomless pit;
whose name in Hebrew is Abaddon, and in Greek is called Apollyon, that is, the
destroyer.

12 A passage unto the next point, and to the history of the time following.
One woe is past, and behold, yet two woes come after this.

13 The sixth execution done upon the world, by the tyrannical powers thereof,
working in the four parts of the earth, that is, in most cruel manner
executing their tyrannous dominion through the whole world: and killing the
miserable people without punishment, which before was not lawful for them to
do in that sort, as I showed upon the fourth verse. This narration has two
parts: a commandment from God, in the fourteenth verse: and an execution of
the commandment, in the verses following.
Then the sixth Angel blew the trumpet, The commandment given by Christ him
self, who is governor over all.
and I heard a certain voice from the He alludeth to the altar of ince^se,
which stood in the court which the priests were in, over against the Arc of
the Covenant, having a veil betwixt them.
four horns of the golden altar, which is before God,

14 Saying to the sixth Angel, which had the trumpet; As if he should have
said, these hitherto have been so bound by the power of God, that they could
not freely run upon all men as themselves lusted, but were staved and
restrained at that great flood of Euphrates, that is, in their spiritual
Babylon (for this is a Periphrasis of the spiritual Babylon, by the limits of
the visible Babylon long since overthrown) that they might not commit those
horrible slaughters, which they long breathed after. Now, go to, let loose
those four Angels, that is, administers of the wrath of God, in that number
that is convenient to the slaughtering of the four quarters of the world:
stir them up, and give them the bridle, that rushing out of that Babylon of
theirs, which is the seat of the wicked ones, they may flee upon all the
world, therein to rage and most licentiously to practice their tyranny, as God
has ordained. This was done when Gregory the ninth by public authority
established for law, his own Decretals; by which he might freely lay traynes
for the life of simple men. For, who is it that sees not that the laws
Decretall most of them are snares to catch souls withal? Since that time (O
good God) how great slaughters have there been? how great massacres? All
histories are full of them: and this our age abounds with most horrible and
monstrous examples of the same.
Loose the four Angels, which are bound at the great river Euphrates.

15 The execution of the commandment, is in two points: one, that these
butcherers are let lose, that out of their tower of the spiritual Babylon they
might with fury run abroad thorough all the world, as well the chief of that
crew which are most pro^pt unto all assayes: in this verse; as their
multitudes, both most copious, of which a number certain is named for a number
infinite, verse 16. and in themselves by all means fully furnished to hide and
to hurt, verse. 17. as being armed with fire, smoke and brimstone, as appears
in the color of their armor which dazeleth the eyes of all men: and have the
strength of Lions to hurt withal, from which (as out of their mouth) the
fiery, smokie, and stinking darts of the Pope are shot out, verse. 18. The other
point is, that these butcherers have effected the commandment of God by
fraud and violence, in the two verses following.
The^ the four Angels were loosed, which were prepared at an hour, at a day,
at a month, and at a year, to slay the third part of men.

15 And the number of the troops of horsemen were twenty thousand times ten
thousand: for I heard the number of them.

16 I also saw horses in a vision, and them that sat on them, having fiery
habbergions, and of Iacinth, and of brimstone; and the heads of the horses were
as the heads of Lyo^s: and out of their mouths came forth fire and smoke and
brimstone.

18 By these three was the third part of men killed, that is, by the fire, and
by the smoke, and by the brimstone, which came out of their mouths.

19 For their power is in their mouths, and in their tails: That is, they are
harmefull every way: on what part soever thou put thine hand unto them, or they
touch thee, they do hurt. So the former are called Scorpions, verse 3.
for their tails are like unto Serpents, having heads, wherewith they hurt.

20 Now remains the event, (as I said upon the first verse) which followed of
so many and so grievous judgments, in this most wicked world: namely an
impenitent obfirmation of the ungodly in their impiety and unrighteousness,
though they feel themselves most vehemently pressed with the hand of God: for
their obstinate ungodliness is showed in this verse; and their unrighteousness
in the verse following. Hitherto has been the general history of things to
be done universally in the whole world: which because it does not so much
belong unto the Church of Christ: is therefore not so expressly distinguished
by certainty of time and other circumstances: but is wouen, as they say, with
a slight hand. Also there is none other cause why the history of the seventh
Angel is passed over in this place, the^ for that the same more properly
appertains unto the history of the Church. But this is more diligently set
out according to the times thereof, Chapter. 11. and 16. as shall appear upon
those places.
And the remna^t of the men which were not killed by these plagues, repented
not of the works of their hands, that they should not worship devils, and
Psalm. 115. 4. and 135. 15.
images of gold and of silver, and of brass, and of stone, and of wood, which
neither can see, neither hear, nor go:

21 Neither repented they of their murders, nor of their sorceries, neither of
their fornication, nor of their theftes.

CHAP. X.
1 Another Angel appears clothed with a cloud, 2 holding a book open, 3 and
cries out. 8 A voice from heaven commands John to take the book, 10 He
eats it. F. JUNIUS.


1 Now S. John passes unto the other prophetical history, which is of the
Church of God, as I showed that this book should be distinguished, chap. 4. 1.
This story reaches hence unto the two and twentieth chapter. And this whole
chapter is but a transition from the common history of the world, unto that
which is particular of the church. There are in this transition or passage, two
preparatiues, as it were, unto this church story, comprised in this whole
chapter. One is the authority of Christ, revealing his mysteries, and calling
his servant, unto the seventh verse. The other is S. John his calling proper
unto this place, and repeated from before; unto the end of the chapter.
Authority is given unto this revelation, by these things: First, by the person
of Christ, appearing from heaven in his habit and countenance, strong, ready,
glorious, surueying all things by his providence, and governing them by his
omnipotency, verse 1. Secondly, that he brought not by chance, but out of a
book, this open revelation set forth unto the eye, to signify the same unto
the sea, and land, as Lord over all, verse 2. Thirdly, that he offered the same
not whispering or muttering in a corner (as false prophets do) but crying out
with a loud voice unto them which sleep: and with a lionish and terrible noise
roused up the secure: the very thunders themselves giving testimony
thereunto, verse 3. Lastly for that he confirmed all by an oath, verse 5. 6. 7.
THen I saw Christ Jesus: see chap. 7. 2.
another mighty Angel coming down from heaven, clothed with a cloud; and the
rain bow was over his head, and his face was as the sun, and his feet as
pillars of fire.

2 And he had in his hand a Namely a special book of the affairs of Gods
church. For the book that contains things belonging unto the whole world, is
said to be kept with the creator, chap. 5. 1. but the book of the church, with
the redeemer, and out of this book is taken the rest of the history of this
Apocalypse.
little book open, and he set his right foot upon the sea, and his left on the
earth,

3 And cried with a loud voice, as when a lion roareth: and when he had cried,
seven thunders uttered their voices.

4 A godly care is laudable, but must be joined with knowledge. Therefore
nothing must be taken in hand but by calling; which must be expected and waited
for of the godly.
And when the seven thunders had uttered their voices, I was about to write:
but I heard a voice from heaven saying unto me, (...) (...) close.
Seal up those things which the seven thunders have spoken, and write them not.

5 And the Angel which I saw stand upon the sea, and upon the earth, This was a
gesture used of one that swears. which men do yet now adays use.
lift up his hand to heaven,

6 And swear by him that lives for evermore; which created heaven, and the
things that therein are, and the earth, and the things that therein are, and
the sea, and the things which therein are, Neither time it self, nor the
things that are in time: but that the world to come is at h^d, which is
altogether of eternity and beyond all times.
that There shall never be any more time.
time should be no more.

7 But in the days of the Whereof cha. 11. 15. and 16. 17.
voice of the seventh Angel, when he shall blow the trumpet, the mystery of
God shall be finished, as he has declared to his servants the Prophets.

8 The other part of this Chapter concerning the particular calling of S. John to
the receiving of the prophecy following: which is enjoined him, first by sign
in three verses; then in plain words, in the last verse. Unto the setting
forth of the sign belong these things: That S. John is taught from heaven, to
demand the book of prophecy, in this verse: for these motions and desires God
does inspire: that demanding the book, he is charged to take it in a
figurative manner, the use whereof also is expounded, verse 9. (as Ezech 2.
verse. 9.) whence this similitude is borrowed: lastly, for that S. John at the
commandment of Christ took the book; and found by experience that the same
as proceeding from Christ was most sweet; but in that it foretells the
afflictions of the church, it was most bitter unto his spirit.
And the voice which I heard from heaven, spoke unto me again and said, Go and
take the little book which is open in the hand of the Angel, which stands
upon the sea and upon the earth.

9 So I went unto the Angel, and said to him, Give me the little book. And he
said unto me, Take it, and eat it up; and it shall make thy belly bitter, but
it shall be in thy mouth sweet as honey.

10 The^ I took ye little book out of the Angels hand, and did eat it up; and it
was in my mouth sweet as honey: but when I had eaten it up, my belly was bitter

11 A simple and plain declaration of the sign before going, witnessing the
divine calling of S. John, and laying upon him the necessity thereof.
And he said unto me, Thou must prophecy again before people and nations, and
tongues, and many Kings.

CHAP. XI.
1 The temple is commanded to be measured. 3 The Lord stirs up two
witnesses: 7 whom the beast murthereth, 9 and no man burieth them. 11 God
raises them to life. 12 and calls them up to heaven, 13 The wicked are
terrified. 15 By the trumpet of the seventh Angel, the resurrection 18 and
judgment is described.

1 The authority of the intended revelation being declared, together with the
necessity of that calling which was particularly imposed upon John: hereafter
follows the history of the estate of Christ his church both conflicting or
warfaring, and ouercomming in Christ. For both the true church of Christ is
said to sight against that which is falsely so called, over the which
Antichrist rules; Christ Jesus overthrowing Antichrist by the spirit of his
mouth: and Christ is said to overcome most gloriously until he shall slay
Antichrist, by the appearance of his coming, as the Apostle excelle^tly
teaches. 2. These. 2. 8. So this history has two parts: One of the state of
the church conflicting with temptations, unto the 16. chap. The other of the
state of the same church, obteining victory, thence unto the 20. chap. The
first part has two members, most conveniently distributed into their times,
whereof the first contains an history of the Christian church for 1260.
years, what time the Gospel of Christ was, as it were, taken up from amongst
men into heaven: the second contains an history of the same church unto the
victory perfected. And these two members are briefly, though distinctly,
propounded in this chap. but are both of them more at large discoursed, after
in due order. For we understand the state of the church conflicting, out of
chap. 12 and 13. and of the same growing out of afflictions, out of the 14. 15.
and 16. chap. Neither did S. John at unawares join together the history of
these two times in this chap. because here is spoken of prophecy, which all
confess to be but one: just and immutable in the church, and which Christ
commanded to be continual. The history of the former time reaches unto the
14. verse. the latter is set down in the rest of this chap. In the former are
showed these things: the calling of the servants of God in 4. verses: the
conflicts which the faithful must godly undergo in their calling, for Christ
and for his church, thence unto the 10. ver. and their resurrection, and
receiving up into heaven, unto the 14. verse. In the calling of the servants of
God, are mentioned two things: the begetting and settling of the church in two
verses: and the education thereof in two other verses. The begetting of the
church is here commended unto S. John by sign and by speech: the sign is a
measuring rod; and the speech a commandment to measure the Temple of God, that
is, to reduce the same unto a new form: because the Gentiles are already
entered into the Temple of Jerusalem, and shall shortly defile and overthrow the
same utterly.
F. JUNIUS.
THen was given me a reed, like unto a rod; and the Angel stood by me,
saying, Rise Either that of Jerusalem which was a figure of the church of
Christ, or that heavenly exemplar, whereof verse 19. but the first likes me
better, and the things following do all agree thereunto. The sense therefore
is, Thou see all things in Gods house, almost from the passion of Christ, to
be disordered: and that not only the city of Jerusalem, but also the court of
the Temple is trampled under foot of the nations, and of profane men whether
Jews or strangers: and that only the Temple, that is, the body of the
temple, with the altar, and a small company of good men which truly worship
God, do now remain, whom God does sanctify and confirm by his presence.
Measure therefore this, even this true church, or rather the true type of the
true church, omitting the rest and so discribe all things from me, that the
true church of Christ may be, as it were, a very little center: and the church
of Antichrist as the circle of the center, every way in length and breadth
compassing about the same: that by way of prophecy thou may so declare
openly, that the state of the Temple of God, and the faithful which worship
him, that is of his church, is much more straight then the church of Antichrist.
and mete the Temple of God, and the altar, and them that worship therein.

2 As if he should say, it belongs nothing unto thee, to judge those which
are without, 1. Cor 5. 12. which be innumerable: look unto those of the
household only, or unto the house of the living God.
But the He speaks of the outer court, which was called the peoples court,
because all men might come into that.
court which is without the temple That is counted to be cast out, which in
measuring is refused as prophene.
shut out, and mete it not: for it is given unto the To profane persons,
wicked, and unbelievers, adversaries unto the Church.
Gentiles; and the holy city shall they tread under foot, Or a thousand two
hundred and threescore days, as is said in the next verse: that is, a thousand
two hundred and threescore years, a day for a year, as often in Ezechiel and
Daniel: which thing I noted before 2. 10. The beginning of these thousand two
hundred and threescore years, we account from the passion of Christ, whereby
(the partition wall being broken down) we were made of two, one, Ephesians 2. 14.
I say one flock under one shepherd, Ioh. 10. 16 and the end of these years
precisely falls into the Popedom of Boniface the eight, who a little before
the end of the year of Christ 1294. entered the Popedom of Rome, in the feast
of S. Lucie (as Bergomensis says) having put in prison his predecessor
Coelestinus, whom by fraud, under color of oracle, he deceived: for which
cause, that was well said of him, Intrauit vt vulpes, regnauit vt leo, mortuus
est vt canis. That is, He entered like a fox, reigned like a lion, and died
like a dog. For if from 1294. years thou shall take the age of Christ which he
lived on the earth, thou shall find there remains just 1260. years, which
are mentioned in this place, and many others.
two and forty months.

3 But I had rather translate it illud then illam, the temple then the city:
for God says I will give that temple, and commit it unto my two witnesses,
that is unto the ministers of the word, who are few indeed, weak and
co^temptible: but yet two, that is of such a number as one of them may help
another, and one confirm the testimony of another unto all men, that from the
mouth of two or three witnesses every word may be made good amongst men 2.
Cor. 13. 1.
I will give the same unto my two witnesses, and they shall They shall exercise
their office enjoined by me by the space of those thousand two hundred and
sixty years, in the midst of afflictions though never so lamentable; which
is figuratively showed by the mourning garment.
prophecy a thousand two hundredth and threescore days, clothed in sackcloth.

4 These That is, the ordinary and perpetual instruments of spiritual grace,
peace and light in my Church, which God by his only power preserved in this
Temple. So Zach. 4. 3.
are the two olive trees, and two candlestickes, standing before the God of the
earth.

5 The power and efficacy of the holy ministry, and which is truly
Evangelical, is declared both in earth and in heaven, protecting the
administers thereof, and destroying the enemies, in this verse, virtue indeed
divine, most mightily showing forth it self in heaven, earth, and the sea,
verse 6. as it is described 2. Cor. 10. 4. according to the promise of Christ,
Mar. 16. 17. And this is the second place (as I said before) of the combats
which the servants of God must needs under go in the executing of their
calling, and of the things that follow the same combats. In the combats or
conflicts are these things: to overcome, in these two verses; to be overcome
and killed, verse 7. After the slaughter follow these things: that the
carcasses of the godly are laid abroad, verse 8. being unburied, are made a
matter of scorn, together with cursing and bitter execrations, verse 9. and
that therefore gratulations are publicly and privately made. verse. 10.
And if any man will hurt them, fire proceeds out of their mouths, and
deuoureth their enemies: for if any man will hurt them, thus must he be killed.

6 These have power to shut up heaven, that it reign not in the days of their
prophesying; and have power over the waters to turn them into blood, and to
smite the earth with all manner plagues, as often as they will.

7 That is, when they have spent those thousand two hundred and sixty years
mentioned verse 2. and 3. in publishing their testimony according to their
office.
And when they have When they have done their message.
finished their testimony, Of which after, chap. 13. etc. That beast is the
Roman Empire, made long ago of civil, Ecclesiastical: the chief head
whereof was then Boniface the eight, as I said before: who lifted up himself
in so great arrogancy (says the author of Fasciculus temporum) that he called
himself Lord of the whole world, as well in temporal causes as in spiritual.
There is extant of that matter, written by the same Boniface, most arrogantly,
shall I say, or most wickedly ca. vnam sanctam. extra. de maioritate and
obedientia; and in the sixth of the decretals (which is from the same author)
many things are found of the same argument.
the beast that comes up out of the bottomless pit, shall He shall persecute
most cruelly the holy men, and put them to death, and shall wound and pierce
through with cursings, both their names and writings. And that this was done to
very many godly men by Boniface and others, the histories do declare,
especially since the time, that the odious and condemned name amongst the
multitude, first of the brethren Waldenses or Lugdunenses, then also of the
Fraticells, was pretended, that good men might with more approbation be
masta^red.
make war against them, and shall overcome them, and kill them.

8 And their corpses shall lie in the That is, openly at Rome: where at that
time was a most great concourse of people, the year of Jubilee being then
first ordained by Boniface unto the same end, in the year of Christ one
thousand three hundred, example whereof is read Chapter 1. Extra. de
poenucntijs and remissionibus. So by on act he committed double injury against
Christ, both abolishing his truth by the restoring of the type of the Jubilee,
and triumphing over his members by most wicked superstition. O religious heart!
Now, that we should understand these things of Rome, S. John himself is the
author, both after in the seventeenth Chapter almost throughout, and also in
the circumscription now next following, when he says, it is that great City
(as Chapter 17. 18. he calls it) and is spiritually termed Sodom and Egypt:
and that spiritually (for that must here again be repeated from before) Christ
was there crucified. For the two first appellations signify spiritual
wickednesses: the latter signifies the show and pretense of good, that is, of
Christian and sound religion. Sodom signifies most licentious impiety and
injustice; Egypt most cruel persecution of the people of God; and Jerusalem
signifies, the most confident glorying of that City, as it were in true
religion, being yet full of falsehood and ungodliness. Now who is ignorant that
these things do rather and more agree unto Rome, then unto any other City? The
commendations of the City of Rome for many years past, are publicly
notorious, which are not for me to gather together. This only I will say, that
he long since did very well see what Rome is, who taking his leave thereof
used these verses: Roma vale, vidi, satis est vidisse: reuertar
Quumleno, meretrix, scurra cinaedus aero.
Now farewell Rome, I have thee seen: it was enough to see:
I will return when as I mean, baud, harlot, knave to be.



streets of the great city, which After a more secret kind of meaning and
understanding.
spiritually is called Sodo^ and Egypt, Namely in his members, as also he said
unto Saul, Act. 9. 5.
where also our Lord was crucified.

9 And they of the people and kinreds, and tongues, and Gentiles shall see
their corpses That is, for three years and an half: for so many years
Boniface lived after his Iubiley, as Bergomensis witnesses.
three days and an half, and shall not suffer their carcasses to be put in
graves.

10 And the inhabitants of the earth, So much the more shall they by this
occasion exercise the iolities of their Jubilee.
shall rejoice over them, and be glad; and shall send gifts one to another:
because these two Prophets The Gospel of Christ is the affliction of the
world; and the ministry thereof, the savor of death unto death, to those that
perish. 2. Cor. 2. 16.
vexed them that dwelt on the earth.

11 The third place as I noted before, is of the rising again of the Prophets
from the dead, and their carrying up into heaven. For their resurrection is
showed in this verse; their calling and lifting up into heaven, in the verse
following.
But after That is, what time God shall destroy that wicked Boniface.
three days and an half, That is, the Prophets of God shall in a sort rise
again, not the same in person (as they say) but in spirit; that is, in the
power and efficacy of their ministry, which S. John expressed before verse.
5. and 6. And so the prophecy that is spoken of Elias, is interpreted by the
Angel to be understood of John the Baptist, Luke 1. 17. For the same Boniface
himself, who sought to kill and destroy them, was the fire of Gods mouth
(which the holy ministry shows and exhibiteth) devoured, and died
miserably in prison, by the endeavor of Sarra Columnensis, and Nogaretus a
French knight, whom Philip the fair king of France sent into Italy but with a
very small power.
the spirit of life coming from God, shall enter into the^; and they That is,
the most grievous heat of afflictions and persecutions shall stay for a while,
for the great amaze that shall arise upon that sudden and unlooked for
judgment of God.
shall stand up upon their feet: and great fear shall come upon them which
shall see them.

12 After this they heard a great voice from heaven, saying unto them, Come up
hither. And They were called by God into heaven, and taken out of this
malignant world, into the heavenly Church, which also lies hidden here in the
earth, to exercise their calling secretly: as of who^ this wretched world was
unworthy. Heb. 11. 38. For the Church of the wicked is by comparison called the
earth or the world; and the Church of the godly, heaven. So in ancient time
amongst the godly Israelits; so amongst the Jews in the days of Manasses and
other kings, who^ the earth refused that heirs of heaven, we read that they
lay hidden as heaven in the earth.
they ascended up to heaven in a cloud, Yet could they not hinder the secret
ones of the Lord (as the psalmist calls them, Psalm. 83. 4.) but that they
went on forward in his work.
and their enemies did see them.

13 Bergome^sis says, in the year of our Lord 1301 this year a blasing star
foretelling great calamity to come, appeared in heaven: in which year upon
the feast of S. Andrew, so great an earthquake suddenly arose, as never before:
which also continuing by times, for many days, overthrew many stately houses.
This says he of the year next following the Jubilee: which S. John so many
ages before, expressed as it were word for word.
And the same hour was a great earthquake, and the tenth part of the city
fell, and in the earthquake was slain in number seven thousand men: and the
rest were sore feared, They were in deed broken with present astonishme^t of
mind, but did not earnestly repent as they ought to have done.
and Glorified God by confessing his Name.
gave glory to the God of heaven.

14 He passes unto the second history, which is the second part of this
Chapter. S. John calls these the second and third woe, having respect unto
Chap 9. 12.
The second woe is past, and behold the third woe will come quickly.

15 Of whose sounding the trumpet Christ expressly foretold. chapter 10. 7. and this
is the second part of this chap. containing a general history of the Christian
Church, from the time of Boniface the 8. unto the co^summatio^ of the victory
declared by voice from heaven. In this history there are three branches: a
preparation by the sound of the Angels trumpet: a narration by the voices of
heavenly Angels and Elders: and a confirmation by sign.
Then the seventh Angel blew the trumpet, and there were great voices in heaven
saying, The narration has 2. parts; an acclamation of the heavenly creatures,
in this verse. and, both an adoration by all the Elders, verse. 16. and also a
most ample thanks giving, ver. 17. 18. The sense of the acclamation is, Now the
Lord is entered on his kingdom, and has restored his Church, in which most
mightily recovered from the profanation of the Gentiles, he may glorify him
self. Namely, that, which the Lord ordained when first he ordained his Church,
that the faith of the Saints does now behold as accomplished.
The kingdoms of this world are our Lords, and his Christ's, who shall reign
for evermore.

16 As before 7. 11. This giving of thanks is altogether of the same content
with the words going before.
And the four and twenty Elders, which sat before God on their thrones, fell
upon their faces, and worshipped God,

17 Saying, We give thee thanks, Lord God almighty, Which art, and which
wast, and which art to come: for that thou have taken unto thee thy great
might, and have entered thy kingdom.

18 A speech of the Hebrew language, as much to say, as, the Gentiles being
angry, thine inflamed wrath came upon the^, and showed it self from heaven,
occasioned by their anger and fury.
And the Nations were angry, and thy wrath is come, and the time of the dead,
that they should be judged, and that thou should give reward unto thy
servants the Prophets, and to the Saints, and to them that fear thy Name,
both small and great, and should destroy them, which destroy the earth.

19 Then the temple of God was This is the confirmation of the next prophecy
before going by signs exhibited in heaven, and that of two sorts, where of
some are visible, as the passing away of of the heaven, the opening of the
Temple, the Arc of the covenant appearing in the Temple, and testifying the
glorious presence of God, and the lightnings: others apprehended by ear and
such more dull senses, which bear witness in heaven and in earth to the truth
of the judgments of God.
opened in heaven, and there was seen in his Temple the Arc of his covenant:
and there came lightnings, and voices, and thundrings, and earthquake, and
great hayle.

CHAP. XII.
1 A woman 2 appears traveling with child, 4 whose child F. JUNIUS.
the Dragon would devour, 7 but Michaell overcomes him, 9 and casts him
out, 13 and the more he is cast down and vanquished, the more fiercely he
exercises his subtleties.

1 Hitherto has been the general prophecy, comprehended in two parts, as I
showed upon the 11. chapter. Now shall be declared the first part of this
prophecy, in this and the next chap and the latter part in the 14. 15. and 16.
chapters. Unto the first part, which is of the conflicting or militant Church,
belong two things: The beginning and the progress of the same in conflictes
and Christian co^bats Of which two, the beginning or vpspringing of the Church
is described in this chap. and the progress thereof in the chap. following.
The beginning of the Christian Church we define to be from the first moment of
the co^ception of Christ, until that time wherein this Church was as it were
weyned and taken away from the breast or milk of her mother: which is the time
when the Church of the Jews with their City and Temple was overthrown by the
judgment of God. So we have in this chapter the story of 69. years and
vpwardes. The parts of this chap. are 3. The first is, the history of the
conception and bearing in womb, in 4. verses. The second, an history of the
birth, from the 5. verse. unto the 12. The third is, of the woman that had
brought forth, unto the end of the chap. And these several parts have every
one their co^flictes. Therefore in that first part are two things contained, one
the co^ception and bearing in womb, in 2. verses: and another of the lying in
wait of the Dragon against that which should be brought forth, in the next 2.
verses. In the first point are these things; the description of the mother,
verse. 4. and of the dolours of childbirth, verse. 2. all showed unto John from
heaven.
ANd there appeared a great wonder in heaven: A type of the true and holy
Church, which then was in the Nation of the Jews. This Church (as is the state
of the holy Church Catholic) did in it self shine about with glory given of
God, troad under feet mutabilitie and cha^geablenesse, and possessed the
kingdom of heaven as the heir thereof.
A woman clothed with the Sun, and the Moon was under her feet, and upon
her head a crown of twelve stars.

2 And For this is that barren woman that brought not forth, of which Esa. 54.
1. and Gal. 4 27. she cried out for good cause, and was tormented at that time;
when in the judgment of all she seemed near unto death, and in manner ready
to give up the ghost, by reason of her weakness and pouerrie.
being with child, she cried traveling in birth, and was pained ready to be
delivered.

3 And there appeared another wonder in heaven: That is, the devil or Satan
(as is declared, verse 9) mighty, angry, and full of wrath.
for behold a great red Dragon having Thereby to withstand those seven Churches
before spoken of, that is, the Catholic Church; and that with kingly
furniture and tyrannical magnificence, signified by the crowns set upon his
heads, as if the same without controversy belonged unto him by proper right:
as also he boasted unto Christ, Mat. 4. 9. See after, upon chap. 13. 1.
seven heads, and More then are the horns of the Lamb, or then the Churches
are: so well furnished does the tyrant brag himself to be, unto all manner of
mischief.
ten horns, and seven crowns upon his heads:

4 After the description of Satan follows his actions that is, his battle
offered unto the Church, partly to that which is visible, wherein the wheat is
mingled with the chafe, and the good fish with that which is evil; a good part
hereof, though in appeara^ce it shined as the stars shine in heaven, he is
said to thrust down out of heaven, and to pervert: for if it were possible, he
would pervert even the elect, Mat. 24. 24. and partly to the elect members of
the holy Catholic Church, in the second part of this verse. Many therefore of
the members of the visible Church (says S. John) he overthrew and triumphed
upon them.
His tail drew the third part of the stars of heaven, and cast them to the
earth. And the Dragon He withstood that elect Church of the Jews, which was
now ready to bring forth the Christian Church, and watched for that she should
bring forth. For the whole Church, and whole body is compared unto a woman:
and a part of the Church, unto that which is brought forth, as we have noted at
large upon Cant. 7. 6.
stood before the woman, which was ready to be delivered, Christ mystical (as
they call him) that is, the whole Church, consisting of the person of Christ as
the head, and of the body united thereunto by the spirit, so is the name of
Christ taken. 1. Cor. 12. 12.
to devour her child, when she had brought it forth.

5 The second history is of the Church delivered of child: in which first the
consideration of the child borne, and of the mother is described in two verses:
secondly the battle of the Dragon against the young child, and the victory
obtained against him, in three verses following: last of all is sung a song of
victory, unto the twelfth verse. Now S. John in consideration of the child
borne, notes two things; for he both describes him, and his station or place
in this verse.
So she brought forth a That is, Christ the head of the Church joined with his
Church (the beginning, root, and foundation whereof is the same Christ)
endowed with kingly power, and taken up into heaven out of the jaws of Satan
(who as a Serpent did bite him upon the cross) that sitting upon the
coelestrall throne he might reign over all.
man child, which should rule all Nations with a rod of iron: and her child was
taken up unto God and to his throne.

6 The Church of Christ which was of the Jews, after his Assumption into
heaven, hid it self in the world as in a wilderness, trusting in the only
defense of God, as witnesses S. Luke in the Acts of the Apostles.
And the woman fled into the wilderness, where she has a place prepared of God;
that Namely the Apostles and servants of God, ordained to feed with the word
of life, the Church collected both of Jews and Gentiles; unless any man will
take the word alerent, impersonally, after the use of the Hebrwes, in steed of
aleretur: but I like the first better. For he has respect unto those two
Prophets, of whom chapter 11. 3. as for the meaning of the 1260. days, look
the same place.
they should feed her there a thousand, two hundredth and three score days.

7 And there was a battle fought in heaven, Christ the Prince of Angels, and
head of the Church, who bears that iron rod, verse 5. See the notes upon Dan.
12 1. In this verse is a description of the battle; and of the uictorie, in
the two verses following. The Psalmist had respect unto this battle, Psalm 68.
19. and Paul, Ephesians. 4. 8. and Col. 2. 15.
Michaell and his Angels fought against the Dragon, and the Dragon fought and
his Angels.

8 The description of the victory, by denying of one thing in this verse, and
by affirming the contrary in the next verse. As that Satan gained nothing in
heaven, but was by the power of God thrown down into this world, whereof he is
prince: Christ himself and his elect members standing still by the throne of
God.
But they prevailed not, neither was their They were cast out, so that they
were never seen in heaven any more.
place found any more in heaven.

9 And that great Dragon was cast out, that old serpent, which is called the
devil and Satan, which deceives all the world: he was even cast into the
earth, and his Angels were cast out with him.

10 Then I heard a loud voice in heaven, saying, The song of victory or
triumph, containing first, a proposition of the glory of God and of Christ,
showed in that victory: secondly it contains a reason of the same
proposition, taken from the effects, as that the enemy is overcome in battle,
in this verse, and that the godly are made conquerours (and more then
conquerours, Romans 8. 37.) verse 11. Thirdly a conclusion, wherein is an
exhortation unto the Angels, and Saints; and unto the world a Prophecy of
great misery, and of destruction procured by the devil against mankind, lest
himself should shortly be miserable alone, verse 12.
Now is come salvation, and strength, and the kingdom of our God, and the
power of his Christ: for the accuser of our brethren is cast down, which
accused them before our God day and night.

11 But they overcame him by the blood of that Lamb, and by that word of their
testimony, and they He is said in the Hebrew tongue, to love his life, that
esteems nothing more precious then his life: and on the other side, he is
said not to love his life, who doubts not to hazard is, whenever need
requires.
loved not their lives unto the death.

12 Therefore rejoice, ye heavens, and ye that dwell in them. Woe to the
inahbitants of the earth, and of the sea: for the devil is come down unto
you, full of great wrath, knowing that he has but a short time.

13 Now when The third part: an history of the woman delivered, consisting of
two members, the present battle of Satan against the Christian Church of the
Jewish Nation, in four verses: and the battle intended against the seed
thereof, that is, against the Church of the Gentiles, which is called holy by
reason of the Gospel of Christ, in the two last verses.
the Dragon saw that he was cast down unto the earth, he persecuted the woman
which had brought forth the man child.

14 That is, being strengthened with divine power, and taught by oracle, she
fled swiftly from the assault of the devil, and from the common destruction of
Jerusalem, and went unto a solitary City beyond Jordan called Pella, as
Eusebius tells in the fifth Chapter of the third book of his Ecclesiastical
history: which place God had commanded her by Revelation.
But to the woman were given two wings of a great Eagle, that she might fly
from the presence of the Serpent into the wilderness, into her place, where
she might be nourished for a Into that place which God had appointed for her.
That is for three years and a half: so the same speech is taken Dan. 7. 25.
This space of time is reckoned in manner from that last and most grievous
rebellion of the Jews, unto the destruction of the City and temple: for their
defectio^ or falling away began in the 12. year of Nero; before the beginning
whereof, many foresignes and predictions were showed from heaven, as Josephus
writes lib. 7. cap. 12. and Hegesippus lib. 5. cap. 44. amongst which this is
very memorable, that in the feast of Pentecost not only a great sound and
noise was heard in the Temple, but also a voice was heard of many out of the
Sanctuary, which cried out unto all. Let us depart hence. Now three years and
a half after this defection was begun of the jews, and those wonders
happened, the City was taken by force, the Temple overthrown, and the place
forsaken of God: and this compass of time S. John noted in this place.
time, and times, and half a time.

15 That is, he inflamed the Romans and Nations, that they persecuting the
Jewish people with cruel arms, might by the same occasion invade the Church
of Christ, now departed from Jerusalem and out of Iudaea. For it is an usual
thing in Scripture, that the raging tumultes of the Nations should be compared
unto waters.
And the Serpent cast out of his mouth water after the woman, like a flood;
that he might cause her to be carried away of the flood.

16 That is, there was offered in their place other Jews, unto the Romans and
nations raging against that people: and it came to pass thereby that the
Church of God was saved whole from that violence; that most raging flood of
persecution which the Dragon vomited out being altogether spent in the
destruction of those other Jews.
But the earth help the woman, and the earth opened her mouth, and swalowed up
the flood, which the dragon had cast out of his mouth.

17 Being set on fire by this means, he began to be more mad, and because he
perceived that his purpose against the Christian Church of the Jewish re^nant
was come to naught: he resolved to fall upon her seed, that is, the Church
gathered also by God of the Gentiles, and the holy members of the same. And
this is that other branch, as I said upon the 13. ver. in which the purpose of
Satan is showed, ver. 17 and his attempt. ver. 18.
The^ the dragon was wroth with the woman: and went to make war with the
re^nant of her seed, which keep the co^mandeme^ts of God, and which have the
testimony of Jesus Christ.

18 That is, as a most mighty tempest he rushed upon the whole world (whose
Prince he is) to raise the floudflous and provoke the nations, that they might
by their furious billows toss up and down, drive here and there, and finally
destroy the Church of Christ with the holy members of the same. But the
providence of God resisted his attempt, that he might favor the Church of the
Gentiles yet tender and as it were green. The rest of this story of the Dragon
is excelle^tly prosecuted by the Apostle S. John hereafter in chap. 20. For
here the dragon endeavoring to do mischief, was by God cast into prison.
And he stood on the sea sand.

CHAP. XIII.
1 The beast with many heads is described, 8 which draws the most part of
the world to Idolatry. 11 The other beast rising out of the earth. 15 gives
power unto him.

1 The Apostle having declared the springing up of the Christian Church, and
the state of that Church from which ours takes her beginning, does now pass
unto the story of the progress thereof, as I showed in the entrance of the
former Chap. And this history of the progress of the Church and the battles
thereof, is set down in this Chapter, but distinctly in two parts; one is of
the civil Roman Empire, unto the tenth verse. Another of the body
Ecclesiastical or Prophetical, thence unto the end of the Chapter. In the
former part are showed these things: First the state of that Empire, in four
verses; then the acts thereof, in three verses; after, the effect, which is
exceeding great glory, verse 8. And last of all is commended the use: and the
instruction of the godly against the evils that shall come from the same, verse
9. 10. The history of the state, contains a most ample description of the
beast first entire, verse 1. 2. and the restored after hurt, verse 3. 4.
F. JUNIUS.
THen I saw a beast rise On the sand whereof stood the devil practicing new
tempests against the Church, in the verse next before going: what time the
Empire of Rome was endangered by domestical dissentions, and was mightily
tossed, having ever and anon new heads, and new Emperors. See after, 17. 8.
out of the sea, which had seven heads, and Having the same instruments of
power, providence, and most expert government, which the Dragon is said to
have had. Chapter 12. 3.
ten horns, and We read in the 12. Chapter and 3. verse, that the Dragon had
seven crowns set upon seven heads: because the thief avouches himself to be
the proper Lord and Prince of the world: but this beast is said to have ten
crowns, set upon several not heads but horns: because the beast is beholden
for all unto the Dragon, verse 2. and does not otherwise reign, then by law of
subjection given by him, namely, that he employ his horns against the Church
of God. The speech is taken from the ancient custom and form of deali^^ in
such case: by which they that were absolute kings did wear the diad^me upon
their heads; but their vassals and such as reigned by grace from them, wore
the same upon their hoodes; for so they might commodiously lay down their
diademes when they came into the presence of their Sovereigns: as also the
Elders are said, when they adored God which sat upon the throne, to have cast
down their crowns before him. Chapter 4. 10.
upon his horns were ten crowns; and upon his heads Contrary to that, which
God of old commanded should be written in the head piece of the high Priest,
that is Sanctitas Iehouae. Holiness unto the Lord. The name of blasphemy
imposed by the Dragon, is (as I think) that which Saint Paul says in the
second Chapter of his second Epistle to the Thessalonians verse 4. He sits
as God, and boasts him self to be God. For this name of blasphemy both the
Roman Emperors did then challenge unto themselves, as Suetonius and Dion do
report of Caligula and Domitian: and after them the Popes of Rome did with full
mouth prefesse the same of themselves; when they challenged unto themselves
soueraignetie in holy things; of which kind of sayings the sixth book of the
Decretals, the Clementines, and the Extrauagants, are very full. For these men
were not content with that which Anglicus wrote in his Poetria, (the beginning
whereof is, Papa stupor mundi. The Pope is the wonder of the world) Nec Deus
es, nec homo; sed neuter es inter vtrumque. Thou art not God, ne art thou man,
but neuter mixed of both; as the gloss witnesses upon the fixed book: But they
were bold to take unto themselves the very name of God, and to accept it given
of others: according as almost an hundred and twenty years since, there was
made for Sixtus the fourth when he should first enter into Rome in his dignity
Papal, a pageant of triumph, and cunningly fixed upon the gate of the City he
should enter at, having written upon it this blasphemous verse. Oraclo vocis
mundi moderaris habenas,
Et merito in ^erris crederis esse Deus.
By oracle of thine own voice the world thou gouernst all,
And worthily a God on earth, men think and do thee call.


These and six hundred the like who ca^ impute unto that modesty whereby good
men of old would have themselves called the servants of the servants of
God? Verily either this is a name of blasphemy: or there is none at all.


the name of blasphemy.

2 And this beast which I saw, was Swift as the Leopard, easily clasping all
things, as the Bear does with her foot, and tearing and devouring all things
with the mouth as does the Lion.
like a Leopard, and his feet like a bear, and his mouth as the mouth of a
Lion: That is, he lent the same unto the beast to use when he perceived that
himself could not escape, but must needs be taken by the hand of the Angel,
and cast into the bottomless pit, Chapter 20. yet did he not so abandon the
same utterly from himself, but that he might use it as long as he could.
and the Dragon gave him his power, and his throne, and great authority.

3 This is the other place that appertains to the description of the beast of
Rome: that besides that natural dignity, and amplitude of the Roman Empire,
which was shadowed in the two former verses, there was added this also as
miraculous, that one head was wounded, as it were, unto death, and was healed
again, as from heaven, in the sight of all men. This head of Nero the
Emperor, in whom the race of the Caesar's fell from the Imperial dignity, and
the government of the Common weal was translated unto others: in whose hands
the Empire was so cured and recovered to health, as it seemed unto all so much
the more deeply rooted and grounded fast, then ever before. And hence
followed those effects, which are next spoken of: First, an admiration of a
certain power, as it were, sacred and divine, susteining the Empire and
governing it: Secondly, the obedience and submission of the whole earth, in
this verse: Thirdly, the adoration of the Dragon, and most wicked worshipping
of devils, confirmed by the Roman Emperors: Lastly, the adoration of the
beast himself, which grew into so great estimation, as that both the name and
worship of a God was given unto him, verse 4. Now there were two causes which
wrought in the minds of men this Religion: the show of excellency, which
brings with it reverence: and the show of power invincible, which brings
fear. Who is like (say they) unto the beast? Who shall be able to fight with him?
And I saw one of his heads as it were wounded to death; but his deadly wound
was healed; and all the world wondered and followed the beast.

4 And they worshipped the Dragon which gave power unto the beast; and they
worshipped the beast, saying, Who is like unto the beast! who is able to fight
with him!

5 The second member containing an history of the acts of the beast, as I
said verse 1. The history of them is concluded in two points, the beginning,
and the manner of them. The beginning is the gift of the Dragon, who put and
inspired into the beast both his impiety against God, and his immanitie and
injustice against all men, especially against the godly and those that were
of the household of faith, verse 5. The manner of the acts or actions done, is
of two sorts; both impious in mind, and blasphemous in speech against God,
his Church, and the godly, verse 6. and also most cruel and injurious in
deeds, even such as are done of most raging enemies, and of most insolent and
proud conquerours, verse 7.
And there was given unto him a mouth, that spoke great things and blasphemies;
and power was given unto him, Namely his actions, and manner of dealing. As
concerning those 42. months, I have spoken of them before chapter. 11. 2.
to do for two and forty months.

6 He therefore opened his mouth unto blasphemy against God, to blaspheme his
Name, That is, the holy church, the true house of the living God.
and his tabernacle, That is, the godly in several, who hid themselves from
his cruelty. For this bloody beast, surcharged those holy souls most falsely
with innumerable accusations, for the name of Christ, as we read in Iustine
Martyr, Tertullian, Arnobius, Minutius, Eusebius, Augustine, and others: which
example the later times followed most diligently, in destroying the flock of
Christ: and we in our own memory have found by experince, to our incredible
grief. Concerning heaven, See chapt. 11. 12.
and them that dwell in heaven.

7 It was also given unto him to make war with the Saints, and to overcome
them; and power was given him over every kindred, and tongue, and nation.

8 Therefore all that dwell upon the earth, shall worship him, That is, such as
are not from everlasting elected in Christ Jesus. For this is that Lamb
slain, of which chapt. 5. 6. These words I do, with Aretas, distinguish in
this manner: Whose names are not written even from the laying of the
foundations of the world, in the book of life, of the Lamb slain: and this
distinction is confirmed by a like place, hereafter, chapt 17. 8.
whose names are not written in the book of life of that Lamb, which was
slain from the beginning of the world.

9 The conclusion of this speech of the first beast, consisting of two parts,
An exhortation to attentive audience, in this verse: and a foretelling, which
partly contains threatenings against the wicked, and partly comfortes for
those which in patience and faith shall wait for that glorious coming of our
Lord and Savior Christ, verse 10
If any man has an ear, let him hear.

10 If any lead into captivity, he shall go into captivity: Genesis 9 6. Matthew.
26. 52.
if any kill with a sword, he must be killed by a sword: here is the patience
and the faith of the Saints.

11 The second member of the vision, concerning the Ecclesiastical dominion,
which in Rome succeeded that which was politic, and is in the power of the
corporation of false prophets, and of the forgers of false doctrine. Wherefore
the same beast, and the same body or corporation is called of S. John by the
name of false prophet, chapt. 16. 13. and 19. 20. The form of this beast is
first described, in this verse, then his acts, in the verses following: and the
whole speech is concluded in the last verse. This beast is by his breed, a
son of the earth (as they say) obscurely borne, and by little and little
creeping up, out of his abject estate.
Then I saw an other beast coming up out of the earth, That is, in show he
se^bled the Lamb (for what is more mild, or more humble then to be the
servant of the servants of God?) but in deed he played the part of the Dragon,
and of the Wolf. Matthew. 7. 15. For even Satan changes himself into an Angel
of light, 2. Cor. 11. 14. and what should his honest disciples and servants do?
which had two horns like the Lamb, but he spoke like the dragon.

12 The history of the acts of this beast, contains in sum three things,
hypocrisy, the witness of miracles, and tyranny: of which the first is noted
in this verse, the second in the three verses following; the third in the
sixteenth and seventeenth verses. His hypocrisy is most full of leasing,
whereby he abuses both the former beast and the whole world: in that albeit he
has by his cunning, as it were by lime, made of the former beast a most
miserable (...) or anatomy, usurped all his authority unto him self, and
most impudently exercises the same in the sight and view of him: yet he
carries him self so, as if he honored him with most high honor, and did in
very good truth cause him to be reverenced of all men.
And does exercise the power of the first beast before him, and causes the
earth, and them which dwell therein, For unto this beast of Rome, which of a
civil Empire is made an Ecclesiastical hierarchy, are given divine honors,
and divine authority: so far, as he is believed to be above the Scriptures,
which the gloss upon the Decretals declares by this deuillish verse,

Articulos soluit, synodumque facit generalem. That is,

He changes the Articles of faith, and gives authority to general
Counselles. Which is spoken of the Papal power. So the beast is by birth,
foundation, seat, and finally substance one: only the Pope has altered the
form and manner thereof, being him self the head both of that tyrannical
Empire, and also of the false prophets: for the empire has he taken unto him
self, and thereunto has added this cunning devise. Now these words whose
deadly wound was cured, are put here for distinction sake, as also sometime
afterward: that even at that time the godly readers of this prophecy might by
this sign be brought to see the thing as present: as if it were said; that
they might adore this very Empire that now is, whose head we have seen in our
own memory to have been cut off, and to be cured again.


to worship the first beast, whose deadly wound was healed.

13 The second point of the things done by the beast is the credit of great
wonders or miracles, appertaining to the strengthening of this impiety; of
which signs some were given from above, as it is said that fire was sent down
from heaven by false sorcerie, in this verse. Others were showed here below in
the sight of the beast, to establish idolatry, and deceive souls: which part
S. John sets forth, beginning (as they say) at that which is last; in this
manner: First the effect is declared in these words. He deceives the
inhabitants of the earth. Secondly, the common manner of working, in two sorts:
one of miracles, For the signs which were given him to do in the presence of
the beast; the other of the words added unto the signs, and teaching the
idolatry confirmed by those signs, Saying unto the inhabitants of the earth,
that they should make an image unto that beast which etc. Thirdly, a special
manner is declared, That it is given unto him to put life into the image of the
beast: and that with such a kind of quickening that the same both speaks by
answer unto those that ask counsel of it, and also pronounces death
against all those that do not obey nor worship it: all which things often times
by false miracles through the procurement and inspiration of the devil, have
been effected and wrought in images. The histories of the Papists are full of
examples of such miracles, the most of them fained, many also done by the
devil in images, as of old in the serpent, Genes. 3. 1. By which examples is
confirmed not the authority of the beast, but the truth of God and of these
prophesies.
And he does great wonders, so that he makes fire to come down from heaven on
the earth, in the sight of men;

14 And deceives them that dwell on the earth, by reason of the signs, which
were given to him to do in the sight of the beast; saying to them that dwell on
the earth, that they should make an That is, images, by enallage or change of
the number; for the worship of them ever since the second council of Nice,
has been ordained in the church by public credit and authority, contrary
unto the law of God.
image of the In the Greek the word is of the dative case, as much to say, as
unto the worship, honor and obeying of the beast; for by this maintenance of
images, this pseudopropheticall beast does mightily profit the beast of Rome,
of whom long ago he received them. Wherefore the same is hereafter very fitly
called the image of the beast, for that images have their beginning from the
beast, and their form or manner from the will of the beast, and have their end
and use fixed in the profit and commodity of the beast.
beast, which was wounded of the sword, and did live again.

15 And of this miracle of the images of the beast (that is, which the beast
has ordained to establish idolatry) which miraculously speak, and give
judgment, or rather marueilously, by the fraud of the false prophets, the
Papists books are full fraighted.
And it was given to him to give To give life, as Iannes and I ambres imitated
the wonders that Moses wrought.
life unto the image of the beast, and that the image of the beast should
speak; and to cause that as many as would not worship the image of the beast,
should be killed.

16 The third place, is a wicked and most insolent tyranny, as was said
before, usurped over the persons of men, in this verse; and over their goods
and actions, in the next verse. For he is said, both to bring upon all person a
tyrannous servitude, that as bondslaues they might serve the beast: and also to
exercise over all their goods and actions, a pedlerlike abuse of indulgences
and dispensations (as they term them) amongst their friends; and against
others, to use most violent interdictions, and to shoot out cursings, even in
natural and civil, private and public contractes, wherein all good faith
ought to have place.
Also he makes all, both small and great, rich and poor, free and bond, to
receive That is, their Chrisme, by which in the Sacrament (as they call it) of
Confirmation, they make servile unto themselves, the persons and doings of men,
signing them in their forehead and hands: and as for the sign lest by Christ
(of which Chap. 7. 3.) and the holy Sacrament of Baptism they make as void.
For whom Christ has joined unto him self by Baptism, this beast makes
challenge unto them by his greasy chrisme, which he doubts not to prefer
before Baptism, both in authorite and in efficacy.
a The mark of the name of the beast.
mark in their right hand or in their foreheads:

17 And that no man may That is, have any free traffic, or intercourse with
men, but they only which shall have this anointing and consecration of
clerkly tonsure, as they call it. Read Grarian de consecrat. distinct. 5. c.
omnes; cap. spiritus etc. of these matters.
buy or sell, save he that has the Here the false prophets do require three
things, which are set down in the order of their greatness, a character, a
name, and the number of the name. The meaning is, that man that has not, first
their anointing and clericall tonsure or shauing; secondly holy orders, by
receiving whereof is communicated the name of the beast; or finally has not
attained that high degree of pontificiall knowledge, and of the law (as they
call it) Canonical, and has not as it were made up in account and cast the
number of the mysteries thereof: for in these things consists the number of
that name of the beast. And this is excellently set forth in the next verse.
mark, or the name of the beast, or the number of his name.

18 That is, in this number of the beast consists that popish wisdom, which
unto them seems the greatest of all others. In these words S. John expounds
that saying which went before of the number of the beast, what it has above
his mark or accognisance, and his name. These things (says S. John) the mark
and name of the beast, do easily happen unto any man: but to have the number
of the beast, is wisdom: that is, only the wise and such as have
understanding can come by that number; for they must be most illuminated
doctors that attain thereunto: as the words following do declare.
Here is wisdom. Let him yt has understanding count the number of the beast:
for it is the How great and of what denomination this number of the beast is,
by which the beast accounts his wisdom, S. John declares in these words;
Do thou demand how great it is? it is so great that it occupies the whole
man; he is always learning and never comes unto the knowledge thereof: he must
be a man in deed that does attain unto it. Ask thou of what denomination
it is? verily it stands of six throughout, and perfectly arises of all the
parts thereof in their several denominations (as they term them:) it stands
of six by unities, tennes, hundreds, etc. so as there is no one part in the
learning and order pontificiall, which is not either referred unto the head,
and, as it were, the top thereof, or contained in the same: so fitly do all
things in this hierarchy agree one with another, and with their head.
Therefore that cruel beast Boniface the eight does commend by the number of
six those decretals which he perfected: in the proaeme of the sixth book. Which
book (says he) being to be added unto five other books of the same volume of
decretals, we thought good to name Sextum, the sixth; that the same volume by
addition thereof, containing a senario, or the number of six books (which is a
number perfect) may yield a perfect form of menaging all things, and perfect
discipline of behavior. Here therefore is that number of the beast, who
powers from himself all his parts, and brings them all back again unto
himself by his discipline in most wise and cunning manner. If any man desire
more of this, let him search the gloze upon that place. I am not ignorant that
other interpretations are brought upon this place: but I thought it my duty,
with the good favor of all, and without the offense of any, to propound mine
opinion in this point. And that for this cause especially, for that it seemed
unto me neither probable nor like to be true, that the number of the beast, or
of the name of the beast, should be taken as the common sort of interpreters do
take it. For this number the beast teaches, gives out, imprinteth, as a
public mark of such as be his; and esteems that mark above all others, as
the mark of those whom he loves best. Now those other expositions seem to be
far removed from this property and condition of that number: whether you
respect the name Latinus, or Titan or any other. For these the beast does not
teach, nor give forth, nor imprint, but most diligently forbids to be
taught, and audaciously denies: he approves not these, but reproves them:
and hates them that think so of this number, with an hatred greater then the
hatred of Vatinius.
number of a man: and his number is six hundredth, sixty and six.

CHAP. XIIII.
1 The Lamb stands on mount Sion, 4 with his chaste worshippers. 6 One Angel
preaches the Gospel: 8 an other foretells the fall of Babylon: 9 the third
warns that the beast be avoided. 13 A voice from heaven pronounces the^
happy who die in the Lord. 16 The Lords sickle is thrust into the harvest. 18
and into the vintage.

1 The history of the church of Christ being finished for more then a thousand
and three hundredth years, at which time Boniface the eight lived, as before
has been said: there remains the rest of the history of the conflicting or
militant Church from thence unto the time of the last victory, in three
Chapters. For first of all, as the foundation of the whole history, is
described the standing of the Lamb with his army and retinue, in five verses:
after, his worthy acts, which he has done and vet does, in most mighty
manner, whilst he overthrows Antichrist with the spirit of his mouth, in the
rest of this Chapter, and in the two following. Unto the description of the
Lamb are propounded three things, his situation, place and attendancie: for
the rest are expounded in the former visions, especially upon the fifth Chapter.
F. JUNIUS.
THen I looked, and lo, a Lamb As ready girt to do his office (as Acts 5.
56.) in the midst of his Church, which before time mount Sion did prefigure.
stood on mount Sion, and with him As before 7 2. This retinue of the Lamb is
described first by divine mark (as before 7. 2.) in this verse. Then by his
divine occupation, in that all and every one in his retinue most vehemently
and sweetly (verse. 2.) do glorify the Lamb with a special song before God
and his elect Angels: which song flesh and blood cannot hear, nor understand,
verse 3. Lastly by their deeds done before, and their sanctification, in that
they were virgins, pure from spiritual and bodily fornication, that is, from
impiety and unrighteousness; that they followed the Lamb as a guide unto all
goodness, and cleaued unto him: that they are holy unto him, as of grace
redeemed by him: that in truth, and in the simplicity of Christ, they have
exercised all these things; sanctimonie of life, the direction of the Lamb, a
thankful remembrance of redemption by him: finally (to conclude in a word) that
they are blameless before the Lord. ver. 4. and 5.
an hundredth, forty and four thousand, having his Fathers Name written in
their foreheads.

2 And I heard a voice from heaven, as the sound of many waters, and as the
sound of a great thunder: and I heard the voice of harpers harping with their
harpes:

3 And they sung as it were a new song before the throne, and before the four
beasts, and the Elders: and no man could learn that song, but the hundredth,
forty and four thousand, namely they which were bought out of the earth.

4 These are they, which are not defiled with women; for they are virgins:
these follow the Lamb, whither soever he goes: these are bought from amongst
men, to be as first fruits, holy unto God, and to the Lamb:

5 And in whose mouths is found no guile: for they are without spot before the
throne of God.

6 The other part (as I said on the first ver.) is of the acts of the Lamb,
the manner whereof is delivered in two sorts; of his speech and of his factes.
His speeches are set forth unto the 13. verse of this chapter; and his factes
unto the 16. chapter. In the speech of the Lamb, which is the word of the
Gospel, are taught in this place these things: The service of the godly
consisting inwardly of reverence toward God; and outwardly of the glorifying
of him: the visible sign of which is adoration verse 7. The overthrowing of
wicked Babylon, verse. 8. and the fall of every one of the ungodly which
worship the beast, verse 9. 10. 11. Finally the state of the holy servants of
God both present, verse 12. and to come, most blessed, according to the promise
of God. verse 13.
Then I saw This Angel is a type or figure of the good and faithful servant
of God, whom God especially from the time of that Boniface the eighth, has
raised up to the publishing of the Gospel of Christ, both by preaching and by
writing. So God first, near unto the time of the same Boniface used Peter
Cassiodorus an Italian; after, Arnold de villa noua, a French man; then Ockam,
Dante, Petrarch; after that Johannes de rupe caesa a Franciscane; after again,
John Wickliffe Englishman, and so continually one or another, unto the
restoring of the truth, and enlarging of his Church.
another Angel fly through the mids of Heaven, having an everlasting Gospel,
to preach unto them that dwell on the earth, and to every nation, and kindred,
and tongue, and people,

7 Psalm. 145. 6.
Saying with a loud voice, Fear God, and give glory to him: for the hour of
his judgment is come: and worship him that made Act. 14. 15.
heaven and earth, and the sea, and the fountains of waters.

8 And there followed another Angel, saying, Esaias. 21. 9.
That is, Babylon is destroyed by the sentence and judgment of God: the
execution where of S. John describes chap. 18. And this voice of the ministers
of Christ has continued since the time that Babylon (which is Rome) has by
deliberate counsel and manifest malice oppugned the light of the Gospel
offered from God.
Babylon that great city is fallen, it is fallen: for she made all nations to
drink of the wine of the Jeremy. 51. 8. Chap. 18 2.
Of her fornication, whereby God was provoked to wrath.
wrath of her fornication.

9 And the third Angel followed them, saying with a loud voice, That is, shall
not worship God alone, but shall transfer his divine honor unto this beast,
whether he do it with his heart or counterfaiting in show. For he (says
Christ) that denies me before me^, him will I deny before my father and his
Angels, Matthew. 10. 32. And this is that voice of the holy ministry, which at
this time is very much used of the holy and faithful servant of God. For
having now sufficiently found out the public obstinacy of Babylon, they
labor not any longer to thunder out against the same: but to sa^e some
particular member by terror (as Saint jude speaks) and to pluck them out of
the public flame: or else by a vehement commiseration of their estate, to
lead them away; they set before them eternal death, into which they rush
unawares, unless in goodtime they return unto God: but the godly which are of
their own flock, they exhort unto patience, obedience, and faith in the Lord
Jesus, and charge them to give light, by their example of good life, unto
others.
If any man worship the beast and his image, and receive his mark in his
forehead, or on his hand,

10 He also shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God, even of the mere wine,
which is powered into the cup of his wrath; and shall be tormented with fire and
brimstone in the sight of the holy Angels, and in the sight of the Lamb.

11 And the smoke of their torment shall ascend up for evermore: and they shall
have no rest day nor night, which worship the beast and his image, and
whosoever receives the print of his name.

12 The patience, sanctification and justification by faith: the consequents
whereof are, rest, felicity, and glory eternal, in the he auenly fellowship
of God and his Angels.
Here is the patience of the Saints here are they that keep the commandments
of God, and the faith of Jesus.

13 Then I heard a voice out of heaven, saying unto me, Write; Blessed from
henceforth are the dead which die That is, for the Lord.
in the Lord, Yea, says the Spirit for they Heb 4. 10.
rest from their labors, and their By works, is meant the reward which
follows good works.
works follow them.

14 The second part of this Chapter, as I said verse 1. Of the acts and doings
of Christ in overthrowing of Antichrist and his Church, by the spirit of his
divine mouth: seeing that having been called back by word both publicly and
privately unto his duty, and admonished of his most certain ruin: he yet
ceasseth not to maintain and protect his own adherents that they may do him
service: and to afflict the godly with most barbarous persecutions. Of those
things which Christ does, there are two kinds; one common or general, in the
rest of this Chapter; another particular, against that savage and rebellious
beast, and his worshippers, in the 15. and 16. Chapters. That common kind, is
the calamity of wars, spread abroad through the whole earth, and filling all
things with blood, and that without respect of any person. This is figured or
shadowed out in two types, of the harvest and vintage. Since the time that the
light of the Gospel began to shine out; and since prophecy or preaching by
the grace of God was raised up again, how horrible wars have been kindled in
the world? how much humane flesh has been thrown to the earth, by this divine
reaping? how much blood (alas for woe) has over flowne for these three hundred
years almost? all histories do cry out, and this our age (if ever before) is
now in horror, by reason of the rage of that sickle which Antichrist calls
for. In this place is the first type, that is, of the harvest.
And I looked, and behold Declaring his fierceness by his color, like unto
that which is in the white or milk circle of heaven.
a white cloud; and upon the cloud sat one like unto a man, As one that shall
reign from God, and occupy the place of Christ in this miserable execution.
having on his head a golden crown, and in his hand a That is, a most fit and
commodious instrument of divine execution, desitoving all, by hewing and
thrusting thorough: for who may stand against God?
sharp sickle.

15 Christ gives commandment, in this verse, and the Angel executes in the
next verse.
And another Angel came out of the Temple, crying with a loud voice to him
that sat on the cloud, Joel. 3. 13.
Thrust in thy sickle and reap: for the time is come for thee to reap: for
the Matthew. 13. 39.
harvest of the earth is ripe.

16 And he that sat on the cloud, thrust in his sickle on the earth, and the
earth was reaped.

17 The other type (as I said verse. 14) is the vintage; the manner whereof is
one with that which went before, if thou except this, that the grape gathering
is more exact in seeking out every thing, then is the harvest labor. This is
therefore a more grievous judgment, both because it succeeds the other, and
be cause it is understood to be executed with greater diligence.
The^ another Angel came out of the temple, which is in heaven, having also a
sharp sickle.

18 And another Angel came out from the altar, which had power over fire; and
cried with a loud cry to him that had the sharp sickle, and said; Thrust in
thy sharp sickle, and gather the clusters of the vineyard of the earth: for her
grapes are ripe.

19 Therefore the Angel thrust in his sharp sickle on the earth, and cut
down the grapes of the vineyard of the earth, and cast them into that great
wine press of the wrath of God.

20 And the wine press was trodden without the City, That is, it ouerflowed
very deep, and very far and wide: the speech is hyperbolical or excessive,
to signify the greatness of the the slaughter. And these be those pleasant
fruits forsooth, of the contempt of Christ, and desiring of Antichrist rather
then him, which the miserable, mad, and blind world does at this time reap.
and blood came out of the wine press, unto the horse bridles, by the space of
a thousand and six hundredth furlongs.

CHAP. XV.
1 The seven Angels having the seven last plagues. 3 They that conquered the
beast praise God. 6 To the seven Angels, 7 seven vialles full of Gods wrath,
are delivered.

1 This is that other place of the acts of Christ, as I noted before 14. 14.
Now therefore is showed a singular work of the judgment of God, belonging to
the overthrow of Antichrist and his forces: of which divine work the
preparation is described in this chapter: and the execution, in the next. The
preparation is first set down generally and in type, in this verse: and is
after particucularly set forth, in the rest of the chap.
F. JUNIUS.
AFter I saw another sign in heaven, great and marvelous; Those seven Of
which chap. 8. and 9. in pouring forth the plagues of the world: for eue^ these
plagues, do for the most part agree with those.
Angels which have the seven last plagues: for by them is fulfilled the wrath
of God.

2 There are two parts of the narratio^: one the consessio^ of the Saints
glorifying God, when they saw that preparation of the judgments of God, unto
the 4 ver. another the vocation, instruction, and co^firmatio^ of those
instruments which God has ordained for the execution of his iugeme^ts, in 4.
other verses.
And I saw This part of the vision alludeth unto that sea or large vessel of
brass, in which the priests washed themselves in the entrance of the temple:
for in the entrance of the heavenly temple (as it is called verse. 5.) is said
to have been a sea of glass, most lightsome and clear, unto the commodity of
choice: mixed with fire, that is, as containing the treasury of the judgments
of God, which he brings forth and dispenses according to his own pleasure:
for out of the former, the Priests were cleansed of old: and out of this the
ungodly are destroyed now, chap. 4. 6.
as it were a glassie sea, mingled with fire; and That is, the godly martyrs of
Christ, who shall not give place even in miracles unto that beast: of these see
before chap. 13. 17. and 14. 9. 10.
them that had gotten victory over the beast, and his image, and his mark,
and the number of his name, Glorifying God, from the particular observation of
the weapons and instruments of Gods wrath, floting in that sea of glass.
stand at the glassie sea, having the Harpes of God,

3 And they sung the That song of triumph which is Exodus 152.
song of Moses the So is Moses called for honors sake, as it is set forth
Deuteronomy. 34. 10.
servant of God, and the song of the Lamb, saying, This song has two parts:
one a confession, both particular, in this verse, and general, in the
beginning of the next verse: another, a narration of causes belonging to the
confession; where of one kind is eternal in it self, and most present unto
the godly, in that God is both holy, and alone God: another kind is future and
to come, in that the clect taken out of the Gentiles (that is, out of the
wicked ones and unbelieving, as Chapter 11. 2.) were to be brought unto the
same state of happiness, by the magnificencie of the judgments of God, in the
next verse.
Great and marucilous are thy works o Lord God almighty: just and true are
thy Psalm. 145. 17.
Thy doings.
ways, o King of Saints.

4 Iere. 107.
Who shall not fear thee, O Lord, and glorify thy Name: for thou only art
holy; and all Nations shall come and worship before thee: for thy judgments
are made manifest.

5 The second part of the narration (as was noted, verse 2) wherein first the
authority of the whole argument and matter thereof is figured by a forerunning
type of a Temple opened in heaven, as Chapter 11. 19. namely that all those
things are divine and of God, that proceed from thence, in this verse;
Secondly, the administers, or executours, come forth out of the Temple, verse
6. Thirdly, they are furnished with instruments of the judgments of God, and
weapons fit for the manner of the same judgments, verse 7. Finally, they are
confirmed by testimony of the visible glory of God, in the last verse. A like
testimony whereunto was exhibited of old in the law, Exodus 40. 34.
And after this, I looked, and behold, the temple of the tabernacle of
testimony was open in heaven.

6 And the seven Angels came out of the temple, which had the That is,
commandments to inflict those seven plagues. Here is the figure called
Metonymia.
seven plagues, clothed in Which was in old time a sign of the Kingly or
Priestly dignity.
pure and bright linen, and having their breasts This girding was a sign of
diligence; and the girdle of gold was a sign of sincerity, and trustines in
taking in charge the commandments of God.
girded with golden girdles.

7 And one of the Of these before chap. 4. 7.
four beasts gave unto the seven Angels seven golden vialles, full of the
wrath of God, who lives for evermore.

8 And the Temple was filled with smoke proceeding from the majesty of God,
and from his power, and None of those seven Angels might return, till he had
performed fully the charge committed unto him, according to the decree of God.
no man was able to enter into the Temple, till the seven plagues of the seven
Angels were fulfilled.

CHAP. XVI.
2 and 17 The Angels power out the seven vialles of Gods wrath given unto them,
and so diverse plagues arise in the world, 18 to terrify the wicked, 19 and
the inhabitants of the great City.

1 In the former Chapter was set down the preparation unto the work of God:
here is delivered the execution thereof. And in this discourse of the
execution, is a general commandment, in this verse; then a particular
recital in order of the execution done by every of the seven Angels, in the
rest of the Chapter. This special execution against Antichrist and his crewe,
does in manner agree unto that which was generally done upon the whole world,
Chapter 8. and 9. and belongs (if my conjecture fail me not) unto the same
time. Yet herein they do differ one from another, that this was particularly
effected upon the Princes and ringleaders of the wickedness of the world; the
other generally against the whole world being wicked. And therefore these
judgments are figured more grievous then those.
F. JUNIUS.
THe^ I heard a great voice out of the Temple, saying to the seven Angels, Go
your ways, and power out the seven vialles of the wrath of God upon the earth.

2 The history of the first Angel, whose plague upon the earth, is described
almost in the same words with that sixth plague of the Egyptians. Exodus 9. 9.
But it does signify a spiritual ulcer, and that torture or butcherie of
conscience feared with an hot iron, which accuses the ungodly within: and
both by truth of the word (the light whereof God has now so long showed forth)
and by bitterness, stirs up and forces out the sword of Gods wrath.
The first Angel therefore went, and powered out his vial upon the earth: and
there fell a noisome, and a grievous sore upon the men, which had the Sea chap.
13. 16.
mark of the beast, and upon them which worshipped his image.

3 The story of the second Angel, who troubles and molesteth the seas, that
he may stir up the consciences of men sleeping in their wickedness: see chapter
8. 8.
After the second Angel powered out his vial upon the sea, and it It was
turned into rotten and filthy blood, such as is in dead bodies.
became as the blood of a dead man: and every living thing that lived in the
sea, dyed.

4 The story of the third Angel, striking the rivers, in this verse. who
proclaming the justice of God, commends the same by a most grave comparison
of the sins of me^ with the punishment of God: which is common to this place,
and that which went before. Wherefore also this praising is attributed unto the
Angel of the waters, a name common to the second and third Angels, according
as both of the^ are said to be sent against the waters, albeit the one of the
sea, the other of the rivers, in two verses.
Then the third Angel powered out his vial upon the rivers and fountains of
waters; and they became blood.

5 And I heard the Angel of the waters say, Lord, thou art just, Which art,
and Which wast, and Which shall be; because thou have judged these things.

6 For they shed the blood of the Saints, and Prophets, and therefore have
thou given them blood to drink: for they are worthy.

7 A confirmation of the praise before going, out of the sanctuary of God;
whether immediately by Christ, or by some one of his Angels: for Christ also is
called another Angel. Chap. 7. 2. 3. 8. and 10. 1.
And I heard another out of the Sanctuary say, Even so, Lord God almighty,
true and righteous are thy judgments.

8 The story of the fourth Angel, who throws a plague upon the heaven and
upon the Sun, of which Luke 21. 26. the effects whereof are noted two. The
one peculiar, that it shall scorch men with heat, in this verse. The other
proceeding accidentally from the former, that their fury shall so much the
more be enraged against God, in the next verse: when yet (o wonderful mercy
and patience of God!) all other creatures are first stricken often and
grievously by the hand of God before mankind, by whom he is provoked as the
things before going do declare.
And the fourth Angel powered out his vial on the Sun, and it was given unto
him to torment men with heat of fire,

9 And men boiled in great heat, and blasphemed the Name of God, which has
power over these plagues; and they repented not, to give him glory.

10 The story of the fifth Angel, who strikes the kingdom of the beast with
two plagues: abroad with darkness; and within with biles and dolors most
grievous, throughout his whole kingdom: that thereby he might wound the
conscience of the wicked, and punish that most perverse obstinacy of the
Idolaters: whereof arose perturbation, and thence a furious indignation and
desperate madness, raging against God, and hurtful unto it self.
The^ the fifth Angel powered out his vial upon the throne of the beast, and his
kingdom became dark, and they gnawed their tongues for sorrow:

11 And blasphemed the God of heaven for their pains, and for their sores, and
repented not of their works.

12 The story of the sixth Angel, divided into his act, and the event thereof.
The act is, that the Angel did cast out the plague of a most glowing heat,
wherewith even the greatest floudes and which most were wont to swell and
ouerflow (as Euphrates) were dried up, by the counsel of God, in this verse.
The event is, that mere madness wherewith the wicked are enraged, that they
may scorn the judgments of God, and abuse them furiously to serve their own
turn, and to the executing of their own wicked outrage.
Then the sixth Angel powered out his vial upon the great river The bound of
the spiritual Babylon, and the fortresses of the same, as Chapter 9. 14.
Euphrates; and the So the Church of the ungodly, and kingdom of the beast is
said to be left naked, all the defenses thereof, in which they put their trust,
being taken away from it.
water thereof was dried up, That is, that even they that dwell furthest off,
may with more commodity make have unto that sacrifice which the Lord has
appointed.
that way might be prepared for the Kings that should come from the East.

13 And I saw come out of the mouth of the That is, the devil, as Chapter 12.
3.
Dragon, and out of the mouth of the Whereof Chapter 13. 1.
beast, and out of the mouth of that That is, of that other beast, of which
Chapter 13. 11. for so he is called also Chapter 19. 20. and 20. 10.
false prophet, That is, every of them bent their whole force, and conspired,
that by wonders, word, and work they might bring into the same destruction all
Kings, Princes, and Potentates of the world, cursedly bewitched of them by
their spirits, and teachers of the vanity and impuritie of the beast that
committed fornication with the Kings of the earth. And this is a right
description of our times.
three unclean spirits Croaking with all importunity, and continually day
and night provoking and calling forth to arms, as the trumpets and furies of
war: as is declared in the next verse.
like unto frogs.

14 For they are the spirits of devils, working miracles, and go unto the
Kings of the earth, and of the whole world, to gather them to the battle of
that great day of God Almighty.

15 A Parenthesis for admonition, in which God warns his holy servants who
rest in the expectation of Christ, always to address their minds unto his
coming and to look unto themselves, that they be not shamefully made naked,
and circumuented of these unclean spirits, and so they be miserably unprepared
at the coming of their Lord, so Matthew 24. 26 and 25. 13.
( Chap. 3. 31. Matthew 24. 44. Luke. 12. 39.
Behold, I come as a thief. Blessed is he that watches and keeps his
garments, least he walk naked, and men see his filthiness.)

16 Namely the Angel, who holily according to the commandment of God, was to
do sacrifice: notwithstanding that those impure spirits do the same
wickedly, as servants not unto God, but unto that beast, that has seven heads.
He therefore gathered them together into a place, called in Hebrew That is (to
say nothing of other expositions) the mountain it self, or mountain places
of Megiddon. Now it is certain by the holy Scripture, that Megiddon is a City
and territory in the Tribe of Manasses, bordering upon Issacar and Asser: and
was made famous by that lamentable overthrow of king Josias, whereof 2. Reg.
22. 30. and 2. Chronic. 35. 22. and Zach. 12. 11. In this mountain country
God says by figure or type, that the kings of the peoples which serve the
beast, shall meet together: because the Gentiles did always cast that
lamentable overthrow in the teeth of the Church of the Jews, unto their great
reproach: and therefore were persuaded, that that place should be most fortunate
unto them (as they speak) and unfortunate unto the godly. But God here
pronounces, that that reproach of the Church, and confidence of the ungodly,
shall by himself be taken away, in the self same place where the nations
persuaded themselves, they should mightily exsult and triumph against God and
his Church.
Arma-gedon.

17 The story of the seventh Angel unto the end of the Chapter, in which
first is showed by sign and speech, the argument of this plague, in this
verse: and then is declared the execution thereof, in the verses following.
The^ the seventh Angel powered out his vial into the From whence he might move
the heaven above, and the earth beneath.
air: and there came a loud voice out of the Temple of heaven That is, from
him that sits on the throne, by the figure called Metonymia.
from the throne, saying, That is, Babylon is undone, as is showed verse 19.
and in the Chapters following. For the first onset (as I might say) of this
denunciation, is described in this Chapter: and the last, containing a perfect
victory, is described in those that follow.
It is done.

18 Now is declared the execution (as I said, in verse 17.) and the things that
shall last come to pass in heaven and in earth, before the overthrow of the
beast of Babylon: both generally, verse. 18. and particularly in the cursed
City, and such as have any familiarity therewith, in the three last verses:
And there were sounds, and lightnings and thunders, and there was a great
earthquake, such as never was since me^ were upon the earth, I say so mighty
an earthquake.

19 That seat or standing place of Antichrist.
And that great City was rent into three parts, and the Cities Of all such as
clean unto Antichrist, and sight against Christ
of the Nations fell and that great That harlot, of whom in the Chapter next
following. Now this phrase, to come into remembrance, is after the common use
of the Hebrew speech; borrowed from men, and attributed unto God.
Babylon came in remembrance before God, Iere. 25. 15.
that he might give unto her the cup of the wine of the fierceness of his
wrath.

20 And every isle fled away, and the mountains That is, were seen no more, or
were no more extant. A borrowed Hebraisme.
were not Appeared not, which the Hebrews utter after this sort, were not,
Genesis 5. 24.
found.

21 The manner of the particular execution, most evidently testifying the wrath
of God by the original and greatness thereof: the event whereof is the same
with that which is Chapter 9. 13. and which has been mentioned in this
Chapter, from the execution of the fourth Angel hitherto: that is to say, an
incorrigible pertinacie of the world in their rebellion, and an heart that
cannot repent, verse 9. and 11.
And there fell a great hail, as it were of the weight of a As it were about
the weight of a talent: and a talent was threescore pound, that is, six
hundredth groates, whereby is signified a marvelous and strange kind of weight.
talent, out of heaven upon me^; and me^ blasphemed God, because of the plague
of the hail: for the plague thereof was exceeding great.

CHAP. XVII.
1 That great whore is described, 2 with whom the Kings of the earth committed
fornication. 6 She is drunken with the blood of Saints: 7 The mystery of the
woman and the beast that carries her expounded: 11 their destruction. 14 The
Lambs victory,

1 The state of the Church militant being declared, now follows the state of
the Church ouercomming and getting victory, as I showed before in the
beginning of the tenth chapter. This state is set forth in 4. Chap. As in the
place before going I noted, that in that history the order of time was not
always exactly observed; so the same is to be understood in this history;
that it is distinguished according to the persons of which it treats; and
that in the several stories of the persons is severally observed the time
thereof. For first is delivered the story of Babylon destroyed, in this and
the next chapter, (for this Babylon out of all doubt, shall perish before the
two beasts and the dragon.) Secondly is delivered the destruction of both the
two beasts, chap. 19. And lastly of the dragon, chap. 20. In the story of the
spiritual Babylon are distinctly set forth, the state thereof in this chapter
and the overthrow done from God, chap. 18. In this verse and that which
follows, is a transition or passage unto the first argument, consisting of a
particular calling of the Prophet (as often heretofore) and a general
proposition.
F. JUNIUS.
THen there came one of the seven Angels, which had the seven vials, and talked
with me, saying unto me, Come hither: I will show thee The sentence that is
pronounced against this harlot.
the That is, that damnable harlot, by a figure called bypal large For S. John
as yet had not seen her. Although another interpretation may be borne; yet I
like this better.
damnation of that great whore that sits upon many waters;

2 With whom have committed fornication the Kings of the earth, and the
inhabitants of the earth are made drunke^ with the wine of her fornication.

3 Henceforth is propounded the type of Babylon, and the state thereof, in 4.
verses. After, a declaration of the type, in the rest of this Chap. In the type
are described 2. things, the beast (of whom chap. 13) in the 3. verse: and the
woman that sits upon the beast, verse. 4. 5. 6. The beast in process of time
has gotten somewhat more then was expressed in the former vision First in that
it is not read before that he was apparelled in scarlet, a robe imperial and
of triumph. Secondly, in that this is full of names of blasphemy: the other
carried the name of blasphe my only in his heads. So God did teach that this
beast is much increased in impiety and injustice, and does in this last age,
triumph in both these more insolently and proudly then ever before.
So he carried me away into the wilderness by the Spirit, and I saw a woman sit
upon a A skarlet color, that is, with a red and purple garment: and surely it
was not without cause that the Romish clergy were so much delighted with this
color.
skarlet colored beast, full of names of blasphemy, which had seven heads,
and ten horns.

4 And That harlot, the spiritual Babylon, which is Rome. She is described by
her attire, profession, and deeds.
the woman was In attire: most glorious, triumphant, most rich, and most
gorgious.
arrayed in purple and skarlet, and glittering with gold, and precious stones,
and pearls; In profession: the nourisher of all, in this verse; and teaching
her mysteries unto all, verse 5. setting forth all things most magnificently:
but in deed most pernicious, besotting miserable men with her cup, and bringing
upon them a deadly giddiness.
and had a cup of gold in her hand, full of the abominations, and filthiness
of her fornication;

5 Deceiving with the title of religion, and public inscription of mystery:
which the beast in times past did not bear.
And in her forehead a name written, A Mystery; An exposition: in which Saint
John declares what manner of woman this is.
that great Babylon, that mother of the whoredoms, and abominations of the
earth.

6 In deeds; She is red with blood, and sheddeth it most licentiously; and
therefore is coulored with the blood of the saints: as on the contrary part,
Christ is set forth imbrued with the blood of his enemies, Esaias 63. 1.
And I saw the woman drunken with the blood of the Saints, and with the blood
of the Martyrs of Jesus: and when I saw her, A passage unto the second part of
this chapter, by occasion given of Saint John, as the words of the Angel do
show, in the next verse.
I wondered with great marvel.

7 The second part or place, as I said verse 1. The enarration of the vision,
promised in this verse, and delivered in the verse following. Now there is
delivered first an enarration of the beast, and his story, unto the 14. verse:
After, of the harlot, unto the end of the chapter.
Then the Angel said unto me, Wherefore maruellest thou? I will show thee the
mystery of the woman, and of the beast that bears her, which has seven
heads, and ten horns.

8 The story of the beast has a triple description of him. The first is a
distinction of this beast from all that ever have been at any time: which
distinction is contained in this verse: The second is a deliniation or painting
out of the beast by things present, by which he might even at that time be
known of the godly: and this deliniation is according to his heads, verse 9.
10. 11. The third is an historical foretelling of things to come, and to be
done by him: and these are ascribed unto his horns, verse. 12. 13. 14. This
beast is that Empire of Rome, of which I spoke chapter 13. 11. according to the
mutations and chaunges whereof, which then had already happened, the holy
ghost has distinguished and set out the same. The Apostle distinguishes this
beast from all others in these words: The beast which thou saw, was and is
not. For so I expound the words of the Apostle for euidencie sake: as I will
further declare in the notes following.
The beast that thou have seen, The meaning is, that beast which thou saw
before (chapter 13. 1.) and which yet thou have now seen, was, was (I say)
even from Julius Csar, in respect of beginning, rising up, station, glory,
dominion, manner and stock, from the house of Julius: and yet is not now the
same, if thou look unto the house and stock: for the dominion of this
family, was translated unto another, after the death of Nero; from that other
unto a third, from the third unto a fourth, and so forth, was varied and
altered by innumerable changes. Finally, the Empire is one, as it were one
beast: but exceedingly varied by kinreds, families, and persons It was
therefore (says Saint John) in the kindreds or house of Julius: and now it is
not in that kindred, but translated unto another.
was, and is not: As if he should say, Also this same that is, shall shortly
not be: but shall ascend out of the depth, or out of the sea (as was said
chapter 13. 1.) that is, shall be a new stock from amongst the nations without
difference: and shall in the same state go unto destruction, or ruin, and
perish: and so shall successively new Princes or Emperors come, and go, arise
and fall, the body of the beast remaining still, but tossed with so many and
often alterations; as no man can but marvel that this beast was able to stand
and hold out, in so many mutations. Verily no Empire that ever was, tossed with
so many changes, and as it were with so many tempests of the sea, ever
continued so long.
and shall ascend out of the bottomless pit, and shall go into perdition, and
the inhabitants of the earth shall wonder (whose names are not written in the
book of life from the foundation of the world) That is, as many as have not
learned the providence of God, according to the faith of the saints shall
marvel at these grievous and often changes: when they shall consider, the
self same beast, which is the Roman Empire, to have been, not to be, and to
be, and still molested with perpetual mutation; and yet in the same to stand
and continue. This, in mine opinion, is the most simple exposition of this
place, confirmed by event of the things themselves. Although the last change
also, by which the Empire, that before was civil, became Ecclesiastical, is
not obscurely signified in these words: of which two, the first exercised
cruelty upon the bodies of the saints: the other also upon their souls: the
first by human order and policy, the other under the color of the law of
God, and of religion, raged and imbrued it self with the blood of the godly.
when they behold the beast that was, and is not, and yet is.

9 An exhortation preparing unto audience, by the same argument, with that of
Christ: He that has ears to hear, let him hear. Wherefore for mine own
part, I had rather read in this place, Let there be here a mind, etc. So the
Angel passes fitly unto the second place of this description.
Here is the mind that has wisdom. The Very children know, what that seven
hilled city is, which is so much spoken of, and whereof Virgil thus reports,
And compassed seven towers within one wall: that city it is, which, when John
wrote these things, had rule over the Kings of the earth: It was, and is not,
and yet it remains to this day, but it is declining to destruction.
seven heads, are This is the painting out of the beast by things present (as I
said before) whereby S. John endeavored so to describe the same, that he might
both be known of the godly in that age, and be further observed and marked of
posterity afterward. This delineatio^ has one type, that is, his heads; but
a double description or application of the type: one permanent from the nature
of it self: the other changeable, by the working of men. The description
permanent, is by the seven hills, in this verse; the other that fleeteth, is
from the seven kings, verse 10. 11. And here it is worthy to be observed, that
one type has sometimes two or more applications: as seems good unto the holy
Ghost to express either one thing by diverse types, or diverse things by one
type. So I noted before, of the seven spirits chap. 1. 4. Now this woman that
sits upon seven hills, is the city of Rome, called in time past of the
Graecians (...). i. of seven tops or creasts, and of Varro septiceps, i. of
seven heads (as here) of her seven heads; and of others septemcollis. i.
standing upon seven hills.
seven mountains, whereon the woman sits:

10 The beginning of these kings or Emperors is almost the same with the
beginning of the Church of Christ, which I showed before chap. 11. 1. Namely
from the year 35. after the passion of Christ, what time the Temple and Church
of the Jews was overthrown. In which ye are it came to pass by the
providence of God, that that saving, The beast was, and is not, was fulfilled
before that the destruction of the Jews immediately following, came to pass.
That was the year from the building of the city of Rome 809. from which year
S. John both numbreth the Emperors which thitherto had been, when he wrote
these things; and foretells of two others next to come: and that with this
purpose, that when this particular prediction or foretelling of things to come,
should take effect, the truth of all other predictions in the Church, might be
the more confirmed. Which sign God of old mentioned in the Law, Deuter. 18.
and Jeremy confirmed. chap. 28. 8.
They are also seven Kings, Whose names are these: the first Seruivs Sulpttius
Galba, who was the seventh Emperor of the people of Rome; the second Marcus
Saluius Otho; the third, Aulus Vitellius; the fourth, Titus Flauius
Vespasianus; the sift, Titus Vespasianus his son, of his own name.
five are fallen, Flauius Domitian son of the first Vespasian. For in the
later end of his days S. John wrote these things: as witnesses Irenaeus lib.
5. aduersus haereses.
and one is, Nerua. The Empire being now translated from the family of
Flauius. This man reigned only one year, four months, and nine days, as the
history writers do tell.
and another is not yet come: and when he comes, he must continue a short
space.

11 This is spoken by the sigure synecdoche, as much to say, as that head of
the beast which was and is not, because it is cut off, and Nerua in so short
time extinguished. How many heads there were, so many beasts there seemed to
be in one. See the like speech in the third verse of the thirteenth chapter.
And the beast that was, and is not, is Nerua Traianus, who him self in
diverse respects is called here the seventh and the eighth.
the eight, and is Though in number and order of succession he be the eighth,
yet he is reckened together with one of these heads, because Nerua and he were
one head. For this man obtained authority together with Nerua, and was Consul
with him, when Nerua left his life.
one of the seven, Namely to molest with persecutions the churches of Christ,
as the histories do record, and I have briefly noted chap. 2. 10.
and goes unto destruction.

12 The third place of this description, as I said verse 8. is a prophetical
prediction of things to come which the beast should do; as in the words
following and John does not obscurely signify, saying, which have not yet
received the kingdom etc. For there is an antithesis or opposition between
these kings, and those that went before. And first the persons are described,
in this verse; then their deeds, in the two verses following.
And the ten horns which thou saw, are That is, arising with their
kingdoms, out of that Roman beast: at such time as that political Empire
began by the craft of the Popes greatly to fall.
ten Kings, which yet have not received the kingdom, but shall receive power,
as Kings Namely, with that second beast, whom we called before a false prophet,
which beast ascending out of the earth, got unto him self all the authority
and power of the first beast, and exercises the same before his face, as was
said chapter 14. 11. 12. For when the political Empire of the West began to
bow downwards, there both arose those ten Kings, and the second beast took
the opportunity offered, to usurp unto him self all the power of the former
beast. These kings long ago, many have numbered and described to be ten, and a
great part of the events plainly testifies the same in this our age.
at one hour with the beast.

13 That is, by consent or agreement: that they may conspire with the beast,
and depend upon his beck. Their story is divided into three parts,
counselles, acts, and events. The counsels some of them consist in
communicating of judgments and affections: and some in communicating of power,
which they are said to have given unto this beast, in this verse.
These have all one mind, and shall give their power, and authority unto the
beast.

14 These shall fight with the With Christ and his church, as the reason
following does declare: and here are mentioned the facts and euentes which
followed for Christ his sake, and for the grace of God the Father toward those
that are called, elected, and are his faithful ones in Christ.
Lamb, and the Lamb shall overcome them: Chap. 19. 16. 1. Tim. 6. 15.
for he is the Lord of Lords, and King of Kings: and they that are on his side,
called, and chosen, and faithful.

15 This is the other member of the enarration, as I said ver. 7. belonging
unto the harlot, showed in the vision, ver. 3. In this history of the harlot,
these three things are distinctly propounded; what is her magnificencie, in
this verse, what is her fall, and by whom it shall happen unto her, in the 2.
verses following: and lastly, who that harlot is, in the last ver. This place
which by order of nature should have been the first, is therefore made the
last, because it was more fit to be joined with the next chapter.
After he said unto me, The waters which thou saw, where the whore sits,
That is, as unconstant and variable as are the waters. Upon this foundation
sits this harlot as a queen, a vain person upon that which is vain.
are peoples, and multitudes, and nations, and tongues.

16 And the The ten kings, as verse. 12. The accomplishment of this fact and
event is daily increased in this our age, by the singular providence and most
mighty government of God. Wherefore the facts are propounded in this verse; and
the causes of them in the verses following.
ten horns which thou saw upon the beast, they shall hate the whore, and
shall make her desolate and naked, and shall eat her flesh, and burn her with
fire.

17 A reason rendered from the chief efficient cause, which is the providence
of God, by which alone saint John by inuersion of order affirms to have come
to pass, both that the kings should execute upon the harlot that which pleased
God; and which he declared in the verse next before going: and also that by one
consent and counsel they should give their kingdom unto the beast etc. ver.
13. 14. for as these being blinded have before depended upon the beck of the
beast that lifts up the harlot, so it is said that afterward it shall come to
pass, that they shall turn back, and shall fall away from her, when their hearts
shall be turned into better state by the grace and mercy of God.
For God has put in their hearts to fulfill his decree, and to be of one
consent, and to give their kingdom unto the beast, until the words of God be
fulfilled.

18 And the woman which thou saw, is that That is, Rome, that great city, or
only city (as Lustinian calls it) the king and head whereof was the^ the
Emperor, but now the Pope, since that the condition of the beast was changed.
great city, which has dominion over the Kings of the earth.

CHAP. XVIII.
2 The horrible destruction of Babylon is set out. 11. 16. 18. The merchants of
the earth, who were enriched with the pomp and luxuriousness of it, weep and
wail: 20 But all the elect rejoice for that just vengeance of God.

1 The second place (as I said before 17 1) of the history of Babylon, is of
the woeful fall and ruin of that whore of Babylon. This historical
praediction concerning her, is threefold. The first a plain and simple
foretelling of her ruin, in three verses; the second a figurative prediction
by the circumstances, thence unto the 20. verse. The third, a confirmation of
the same by sign or wonder, unto the end of the chapter.
F. JUNIUS.
ANd after these things, I saw an Either Christ the eternal word of God the
Father, (as often elsewhere) or a created Angel and one deputed unto this
service, but thoroughly furnished with greatness of power, and with light of
glory as the ensign of power.
Angel come down from out of heaven having great power; so that the very
earth was lightened with his glory.

2 And he cried our mightily with a loud voice, The prediction or foreshewing
of her ruin, containing both the fall of Babylon, in this verse; and the cause
thereof uttered by way of allegory concerning her spiritual and carnal
wickednesses, that is, her most great impiety and injustice, in the next
verse: her fall is first simply declared of the Angel, and then the greatness
thereof is showed here by the events; when he says it shall be the seat and
habitation of devils, of wild beasts, and of cursed fowls, as of old Esaias. 13.
21. and often elsewhere.
saying, Chap. 14. 8. Esa. 21. 9. Ierem. 51. 8.
It is fallen, it is fallen, Babylon that great city, and is become an
habitatio^ of devils, and the hold of all foul spirits, and a cage of every
unclean and hateful byrd.

3 Because all nations have drunken of the wine of the wrath of her
fornication, and the Kings of the earth have committed fornication with her,
and the merchants of the earth are waxed rich by the abundance of her
voluptuousness.

4 The second prediction, which is of the circumstances of the ruin of
Babylon: of these there are two kinds: one going before it, as that beforehand
the godly are delivered, unto the ninth verse: the other following upon her
ruin, namely the lamentation of the wicked, and rejoicing of the godly, unto
the twentieth verse.
And I heard another voice from heaven say, Two circumstances going before the
ruin, are commanded in this place, one is, that the godly depart out of
Babylon: as I mentioned chap. 12. to have been done in time past, before the
destruction of Jerusalem: this charge is given here, and in the next verse. The
other is that every one of the^ occupy themselves in their own place, in
executing the judgments of God, as it was commanded the Leuits of old, Exodus
32. 27. and that they sanctify their hands unto the Lord, ver. 6 7. 8.
Go out of her, my people, that ye be Of this commandment there are two
causes: to avoid the contagion of sin, and to shun the participation of those
punishments that belong thereunto.
not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues.

5 For the heap of her sins does He uses a word which signifies the
following of sins one after another. and rising one of another in such sort
that they grew at length to such an heap, that they came vpeuen to heaven.
reach up unto heaven, and God has remembered her iniquities.

6 The provocation of the godly, and the commandment of executing the
judgments of God, stand upon three causes, which are here expressed: the
unjust wickedness of the whore of Babylon, in this verse; her cursed pride
opposing it self against God, which is the fountain of all evil actions,
verse 7. and her most just damnation by the sentence of God, verse. 8.
Reward her, eue^ as she has rewarded you; and give her double according to
her works: and in the cup that she has filled to you, fill her double.

7 So much as she has glorified her self, and lived in pleasure, so much give
ye to her of torment and sorrow: because she says With herself.
in her heart, I sit as a queen, and am I am full of people and mighty.
no widow, and shall I shall taste of none.
see no mourning.

8 Therefore shall her plagues come in Shortly, and at one instant.
one day, death, and sorrow, and famine; and she shall be burnt with fire: for the
Lord God which condemns her is mighty.

9 Then The circumstances following the fall of Babylon, or the consequents
thereof (as I distinguished them verse. 4.) are two. Namely the lamentation of
the wicked, unto the 19. verse: and the rejoicing of the godly, verse. 20. This
most sorrowful lame^tation, according to the persons of them that lament; has
three members, the first whereof is the mourning of the kings and mighty men
of the earth, in two verses: The second is, the lamentation of the merchants
that traffic bv land, thence unto the 16. verse; The third is, the wailing of
those that merchandise by sea, verse. 16. 17. 18. In every of these the cause
and manner of their mourning is described in order, according to the condition
of those that mourn: with observation of that which best agrees unto them.
the Kings of the earth shall bewail her, and lament for her, which have
committed fornication, and lived in pleasure with her, when they shall see the
smoke of her burning,

10 And shall stand a far of for fear of her torment, saying, Alas, alas,
that great city Babylon, that mighty city: in one hour is thy judgment
come.

11 The lamentation of those that trade by land, as I distinguished immediately
before.
Also the marcha^ts of the earth shall weep and wail over her: for no man
buyeth their ware any more:

12 The ware of gold and silver, and of precious stone, and of pearls, and of
fine linen, and of purple, and of silk, and of skarler, and of all manner of
Thine wood, and of all vessels of yuorie, and of all vessels of most precious
wood, and of brass, and of iron, and of marble,

13 And of cinnamon, and odours, and ointments, and franckensence, and wine, and
oil, and fine flower, and wheat, and beasts, and sheep, and horses, and
charets, and servants, and souls of men.

14 An apostrophe^ or turning of the speech, by imitation, used for more
vehemency, as if those mercha^ts, after the manner of mourners, should in
passionate speech speak unto Babylon, though now utterly fallen and
ouerthrown. So Esa. 12. 9. and in many other places.
And the By this is meant that seaso, which is next before the fall of the
leaf, at what season fruits ripen, and the word signifies such fruits as are
longed for.
apples that thy soul lusted after, are departed from thee; and all things
which were fat and excellent, are departed from thee; and thou shall find them
no more.

15 The merchants of these things which were waxed rich by her, shall stand a
far of from her, fo fear of her torment, weeping and wayling,

16 And saying, Alas, alas, that great city, that was clothed in fine linen
and purple, and skarlet, and glittered with gold, and precious stone, and
pearls! That in one hour are so great riches come to desolation.

17 The manner of mourning used by the^ that trade by sea.
Also every shipmaster, and all the people that occupy ships, and shipmen,
and whosoever traffic on the sea shall stand a far off;

18 And cry, when they see the smoke of her burning, saying, what city was like
unto this great city?

19 And they shall cast dust on their heads, and cry weeping, and wayling, and
say; Alas, alas, that that great city, wherein were made rich all that had
ships on the sea by her costlinesse, is in one hour made desolate.

20 The other consequent upon the ruin of Babylon, is the exultation or
rejoicing of the godly in heaven and in earth, as was noted verse, 9.
O heaven, rejoice over her, and ye holy Apostles and Prophets; because God
has punished her, to be revenged for your sakes.

21 The third prediction (as I said verse 1.) standing of a sign, and the
interpretation thereof; the interpretation thereof is in 2. sorts, first by a
simple propounding of the thing it self, in this verse; and then by declaration
of the events, in the verses following.
Then a mighty Angel took up a stone like a great millstone, Ier. 51. 63.
and cast it into the sea, saying, So shall that great city Babylon be cast
with violence, and shall be found no more.

22 The events are two, and one of them opposite unto the other for
amplification sake; There shall be (says he) in Babylon no mirth nor joy at all,
in this and the next verse: but all heavy and lamentable things, from the
bloody slaughters of the righteous, and the vengeance of God coming upon it
for the same.
And the voice of harpers, and musicians, and of pipers, and trumpetters shall be
heard no more in thee; and no crafts-man, of whatsoever craft he be, shall be
found any more in thee: and the sound of a millstone shall be heard no more in
thee.

23 And the light of a candle shall shine no more in thee and the voice of the
bridegroom and of the bride shall be heard no more in thee: for thy merchants
were the great men of the earth: and with thine inchantme^ts were deceived al
nations.

24 And in her was found the That is, shed by bloody massacres, and calling
for vengeance.
blood of the Prophets, That is, proved and found out, as if God had appointed
a just inquiry concerning the impiety, unnaturalness, and injustice of these
men.
and of the Saints, and of all that were slain upon the earth.

CHAP. XIX.
1 The heavenly company praise God, for auenging the blood of his servants, on
the whore. 9 They are written blessed, that are called to the Lambs supper. 10
The Angel will not be worshipped. 11 That mighty King of kings appears from
heaven. 19 The battle, 20 wherein the beast is taken, 21 and cast into the
burning lake.

1 This chapter has in sum two parts: one transitory or of passage unto
the things that follow, unto the tenth verse: an other historical of the
victory of Christ gotten against both the beasts, unto the end of the chapter:
which I said was the second history of this argument chapter 17. 1. The
transition has two places; one of praising God for the overthrow done unto
Babylon in four verses: and another likewise of praise, and prophetical, for
the coming of Christ into his kingdom, and his most royal marriage with his
Church, thence unto the 10. verse. The former praise has three branches,
distinguished after the ancient manner of those that sing: (...), that is, an
inuitation or prouokement in two verses: (...) a response or answer, in the
third verse: and (...) a close or joining together in harmony: all which I
thought good of purpose to distinguish in this place, least any man should with
Porphyrius, or other like dogs object unto S. John or the heavenly Church, a
childish and idle repetition of speech.
AFter these things I heard a great voice of a great multitude in heaven,
saying, Praiseye the Lord.
The proposition of praise with exhortation in this verse, and the cause
thereof, in the next verse.
Hallelu-iah, salvation, and glory, and honor, and F. JUNIUS.
power be to the Lord our God.

2 For true and righteous are his judgments: for he has condemned that great
whore, which did corrupt the earth with her fornication, and has avenged the
blood of his servant at her hand.

3 And again they said, The song of the Antiphonie or response, containing an
amplification of the praise of God, from the perpetual and most certain
testimony of his divine judgment: as was done at Sodom and Gomorrha. Genes
19.
Hallelu-iah: and her smoke rose up for evermore.

4 And the four and twenty Elders, and the four beasts fell down, and
worshipped God that sits on the throne, saying, Amen, Hallelu-iah.

5 The second place of praise (as I said verse. 1.) which first is commanded
from God in this verse: and then is in most ample manner pronounced of the
creatures, both because they see that kingdom of Christ, to come, which most
they desire verse. 6, also because they see that the Church is called forth to
be brought home into the house of her husband by holy marriage, unto the
fellowship of his kingdom verse. 7. 8. Wherefore S. John is commanded to write
into a book the Epiphonema, or acclamation joined with a divine testimony
verse. 9.
Then a voice came out of the Out of the Temple from God. as 11. 19.
throne, saying, Praise our God, all ye his servants, and ye that fear him,
both small and great.

6 And I heard Without the Temple in heaven.
like the voice of a great multitude, and as the voice of many waters, and as
the voice of strong thundrings, saying, Hallelu-iah: for the Lord that almighty
God does now reign.

7 Let us be glad and rejoice, and give glory to him: for the marriage of the
Lamb is come, and his wife has Namely, unto that holy marriage, both her
self in person in this verse, and also furnished of her spouse with marriage
gifts princely and divine, is adorned and prepared, in the next verse.
prepared her self.

8 And to her is granted, that she should be arrayed with As an ensign of
kingly and priestly dignity: which dignity Christ bestows upon us, chap. 1.
6.
pure fine linen and shining; for the fine This is a gift given by the husband
for marriage sake, and a most choice ornament which Christ bestows upon us as
upon his spouse.
linen is the Good works which are lively testimonies of faith.
righteousness of the Saints.

9 Namely the Angel, as appears by the next verse.
Then he said unto me, Write, Matthew. 22. 2.
Blessed are they which are called unto the supper of the marriage of the
Lamb. And he said unto me, These words of God are true.

10 The particular story of this verse is brought in by occasion, and as it
were besides the purpose, that Saint John might make a public example of his
own infirmity, and of the modest sanctimonie of the Angel, who both
renounced for him self the divine honors, and recalled all the servants of
God, unto the worship of him alone: as also 22. 8.
And I fell down before his feet, Chap. 22. 2.
to worship him: but he said unto me, See thou do it not: I am thy fellow
servant, and of thy brethren, which have the Which are commanded to bear
witness of Jesus.
testimony of Jesus. Worship God: for the testimony of For Jesus is the mark
that all the prophecies shoot at.
Jesus is the spirit of prophecy.

The second place of this Chapter (as I said verse 1.) is of the victory
gotten by Christ against both the beasts: in which first Christ is described as
one ready to sight, unto the 16. verse: then is showed the battle to be
begun, thence unto the 18. verse: lastly is set forth the victory, unto the
end of the chapter. In this place do shine forth most excellent properties of
Christ, as our heavenly judge and revenger, according to his person, company,
effects and names
After I saw Properties belonging to his person, that he is heavenly, judge,
faithful, true, just, in this verse: searching out all things, ruling over
all, to be searched out of none, verse 12. the triumpher, and the very
essential word of God, verse 13.
heaven open, and behold, a white horse, and he that sat upon him, was called,
faithful and true, and he that judges and fights righteously.

12 And his eyes were as a flame of fire; and on his head were many crowns:
and he had a name written, that no man knew but him self.

13 And he was clothed with a garment dipped in blood, and his name is called,
THE WORD OF GOD.

14 The company or retinue of Christ, holy, innumerable, heavenly, judicial,
royal and pure.
And the hosts which were in heaven, followed him upon white horses, clothed
with fine linen white and pure.

15 The effects of Christ prepared unto battle, that with his mouth he strikes
the Gentiles, rules and destroys.
And out of his mouth went forth a sharp sword, that with it he should smite
the heathen: for he shall Psalm. 2. 9.
rule them with a rod of iron: and, he it is that shall tread the wine press
of the fierceness and wrath of almighty God.

16 The name agreeing unto Christ according to the former properties, expressed
after the manner of the Hebrews.
And he had upon his garment, and upon his thigh a name written, Chap. 17. 14.
1 Timothy 6. 15.
THE KING OF KINGS, AND LORD OF LORDS.

17 The second member, as I said verse 11. A reproachful calling forth of his
enemies unto battle: in which not themselves (for why should they be called
forth of the king of the world, or provoked being his subjects: for that were
not comely) but in their hearing, the birds of the air are called to eat their
carcasses.
Then I saw a certain Angel stand in the That is openly and in sight of all:
as Number. 25. 4. and 2 Samuel 12. 11.
sun, who cried with a loud voice, saying to all the souls that did fly
through That is, through this inferior heaven, and which is nearer unto us: an
Hebrew phrase.
the midst of heaven, Come, and gather your selves together unto the supper of
the great God,

18 That ye may eat the flesh of kings, and the flesh of hie Captains, and
the flesh of mighty men, and the flesh of horses, and of them that sit on
them, and the flesh of all freemen, and bondmen, and of small and great.

19 The third member (as was said verse. 11.) of the victory obtained by
Christ. Unto this appertains two things, his buckling with the beast, and his
forces, in this verse: and the event most magnificent, described after the
manner of men in the verses following. All these things are plain.
After I saw the beast, and the Kings of the the earth, and their hosts
gathered together to make battle against him that sat on the horse, and
against his army.

20 And the beast Namely that beast with seven heads, of which before, chap.
13. 1. and 17 3.
was taken, and with him that That is, that beast with two heads, of which 13.
11 Look more chapter 16. 14.
false prophet that wrought miracles before him, whereby he deceived them that
received the beasts mark, and them that worshipped his image: These both were
cast alive into a lake of fire, burning with brimstone.

21 And the re^nant were slain with the sword of him that sat upon the horse,
which comes out of his mouth; and all the fowls were filled with their flesh.

CHAP. XX.
1 The Angel 2 binds Satan for a thousand years: 8 Being loosed, he
stirs up Gog and Magog, that is, privy and open enemies, against the
Saints, 11 but the vengeance of the Lord cutteth off their insolency. 12 The
books are opened, by which the dead are judged.

1 Now follows the 3. place, of the prophetical history, which is, of the
victory whereby Christ overcame the dragon, as I noted chap. 17. 1. This place
must necessarily be joined with the end of the 12. chapter, and be applied unto
the just understanding thereof. This chapter has 2. parts: one of the dragon
overcome, unto the 10. verse: the other of the resurrection and last judgment,
unto the end of the chapter. The story of the dragon is double. First of the
first victory, after which he was bound by Christ: unto the 6. verse. The
second is of the last victory, whereby he was thrown down into everlasting
punishment, thence unto the 10. verse. This first history happened in the first
time of the Christian Church, when the dragon thrown down from heaven by
Christ, went about to molest the new birth of the Church in the earth. chap.
12. 17. 18. For which cause I gave warning that this story of the dragon, must
be annexed unto that place.
F. JUNIUS.
AFter I saw an Angel come down from heaven, having the key That is, of
hell, whither God threw down the Angels which had sinned, and bound them in
chains of darkness to be kept unto damnation. 2. Pet. 2. 4. Iud. 6.
of the bottomless pit, and a great chain in his hand.

2 And he took the dragon that old serpent, which is the devil and Satan, and
he bound him for The first where of (continuing this history with the end of the
12. chap.) is the 36. year from the passion of Christ, when the church of the
Jews being ouerthrown Satan assayed to invade the Christian Church gathered of
the Gentiles, and to destroy part of her seed chap. 12. 17. The thousandth
year falls precisely upon the times of that wicked Hildebrand, who was
called Gregory the seventh, a most damnable Nicromancer and sorcerer, whom
Satan used as an instrument, when he was losed out of bonds, thence forth to
annoye the Saints of God with most cruel persecutions, and the whole world
with dissentions, and most bloody wars: as Benno the Cardinal reports at
large. And this is the first victory gotten over the dragon in the earth.
a thousand years.

3 And he cast him into the bottomless pit, which he shut up, and sealed upon
him, that he might deceive the people Namely with that public and violent
deceit which he attempted before. chap. 12. and which after a thousand years
(alack for woe) he most mightily procured in the Christian world.
no more, til the thousand years were fulfilled: for after that he must be
loosed for Which being once expired, the second battle and victory shall be;
of which verse. 7. 8.
a little season.

4 A description of the common state of the Church of Christ in earth, in that
space of a thousand years, for which the devil was in bonds: in which, first
the authority, life, and common honor of the godly is declared, verse. 4.
secondly newness of life is preached unto others by the Gospel, after that
space verse 5 finally he concludes with promises. verse. 6.
Then I saw For judgment was committed to them, as to members joined to the
head: not that Christ, office was given over to the^
This was a type of the authority of the good and faithful servants of God in
the Church: taken from the manner of men.
thrones: and they sat upon them, and judgment was given unto them; and I saw
the souls of them that were Of the Martyrs, which suffered in those first
times.
beheaded for the witness of Jesus, and for the word of God, and which did Of
the Martyrs which suffered after that both the beasts were now risen up. chap.
13. for there these things are expounded.
not worship the beast, neither his image, neither had taken his mark upon
their foreheads, or on their hands: and they shall live, and reign with Christ
a thousand year.

5 Whosoever shall lie dead in sin, and not know the truth of God.
But the rest of the dead men They shall not be renewed with that newness of
life by the inlightning of the Gospel of the glory of Christ. For this is the
first resurrection, by which the souls of the godly do rise from their death.
In the second resurrection their bodies shall rise again.
shall not live again, until the thousand years be finished: this is the
first resurrection.

6 Blessed and holy is he, that has part in the first resurrection: for on
such the That whereby both body and soul, that is, the whole man is addicted
and delivered unto eternal death. So chap. 2. 11.
second death has no power: but they shall be the Priests of God and of
Christ, A return unto the intended history by resuming the words which are in
the end of the 4. verse.
and shall reign with him a thousand year.

7 The second history, of the latter victory of Christ, as was said verse. 1.
in which are summarily described the work, overthrow, and eternal punishment
of Satan.
And when the Of which I spoke verse 2. Then therefore shall be given unto him
liberty to rage against the Church, and to molest the Saints for the sins of
men; unto whom the faithful shall have associated them selves more then was
meet, tasting with them of their impuritie of doctrine and of life.
thousand years are expired, Satan shall be loosed out of his prison,

8 The work or act of Satan (which is the first member as I distinguished in
the verse before going) to deceive the whole world, even unto the uttermost
nations thereof: to arm them against the people of God, in this verse, and to
besiege and oppress the Church, with his whole strength, in the verse
following.
And shall go out to deceive the people, which are in the four quarters of the
earth: even Ezekiel. 39. 2.
Gog and Magog, to gather them together to battle, whose number is, as the
sand of the sea.

9 They went up therefore into the As if he said, insomuch that the whole face
of the earth, how great soever it is, was filled.
plain of the earth, and they compassed the tents of the Saints about, and the
beloved city: but The wrath of God, consuming the adversaries, and
overthrowing all their enterprises, Heb. 10. 27. And this is the second member,
mentioned verse. 7. the overthrow of Satan.
fire came down from God out of heaven, and devoured them.

10 The third member is, eternal destruction against those that are overcome:
as I noted in the same place.
And the devil that deceived the^, was cast into a lake of fire and brimstone,
where that beast and that false prophet was; and they shall be tormented day and
night for evermore.

11 The second part of this Chapter, in which is described the judge, in this
verse, and the last judgment in the verses following.
Then I saw a great That is, a tribunal seat most princelike and glorious:
for so does the Greek word also signify.
white throne, and That is, Christ, before whom when he comes unto judgment,
heaven and earth shall perish for the greatness of his majesty, 2. Pet. 3. 7.
10. etc.
one that sat on it, from whose face fled away both the earth and heaven, and
their place was no more found.

12 And I saw the dead, both great and small stand before That is, Christ the
judge. 2. Cor. 5. 10.
God: and the As it were our books of reckening or accounts: that is, the
testimony of our conscience, and of our works, which by no means can be
avoided. This is spoken after the manner of men.
books were opened; and Chap. 3. 5. and 21. 27. Philip. 4. 3.
another book was opened, which is the book The book of the eternal decree
of God, in which God the Father has elected in Christ according to the good
pleasure of his will, those that shall be heirs of life. This also is spoken
according to the manner of men.
of life; and the dead were judged by those things, which were written in the
books, according to their works.

13 This is a prevention or an answer unto an objection: for happily some man
will say, but they are dead, whom the sea, death, and the grave has consumed:
how shall they appear before the judge? Saint John answers, by resurrection
from death, whereunto all things (howsoever repugnant) shall minister and serve
at the commandment of God, as Dan. 12.
And the sea gave up the dead, which were in her; and death and hell delivered
up the dead, which were in them: and they were judged every man according to
their works.

14 The last enemy which is death shall be abolished by Christ (that he may no
more make any attempt against us) 1. Cor. 15. 26. and death shall feed upon the
reprobate in hell for evermore; according to the righteous judgment of God, in
the next verse.
And death and hell were cast into the lake of fire: which is the second death.

15 And whosoever was not found written in the book of life, was cast into the
lake of fire.

CHAP. XXI.
2 He describes new Jerusalem descending from heaven. 9 The bride the Lambs
wife, 12 and the glorious building of the city, 19 garnished with precious
stones: 22 whose temple the Lamb is.

1 Now follows the second part of the history prophetical, (as I said chap.
1. and 11. 1.) Of the future estate of the church in heaven after the last
judgment, unto the 5. verse of the next chapter. In this are two things
briefly declared: The station, seat, or place thereof verse. 1. Then her state
and condition, in the verses following. Before the state of the church describe
(...) set down the state of the whole world: that there shall be a new heaven
and a new earth, as Esaias 65. 17. and 66. 12. and 2. Pet. 3. 19. and this is the
seat or place of the church, in which righteousness shall dwell.
F. JUNIUS.
AFter I saw Esaias 65. 17. and 66. 22.
a new heaven, and a new earth: for the 2. Pet. 3. 13.
first heaven, and the first errth were passed away; and the sea was no more.

2 The state of this glorious Church, is first described generally unto the 8.
verse, and then specially and by parts, in the verses following. The general
description consists in a vision showed a far of, verse 2. and in speech
spoken from heaven. In the general these things are common; that the church is
holy, new, the workmanship of God, heavenly, most glorious, the spouse of
Christ, and partaker of his glory, in this verse.
And I John saw that holy city the new Jerusalem come down from God out of
heaven, prepared as a bride trimmed for her husband.

3 The church is described by speech first of an Angel in two verses, then of
God himself, in four verses. The Angels speech describes the glory of the
church by the most familiar cohabitation of God therewith, by communication of
all manner good things according to the covenant, in this verse: and by
removing or putting far away of all evil things, in the verse following.
And I heard a great voice out of heaven, saying, Behold, the Tabernacle of God
is with men, and he will dwell with men: and they shall be his people, and God
himself shall be with them, their God.

4 Chap. 7. 17. Esaias. 25. 8.
And God shall wipe all tears from their eyes: and there shall be no more death,
neither sorrow, neither crying; neither shall there be any more pain: because
the first things are passed.

5 In the speech of God himself describing the church, is first a certain
exordium or entrance, verse 5. Then follows a magnificent description of the
church, by the present and future good things of the same, in three verses
following. In the exordium God chalengeth unto himself the restoring of all the
creatures, of which verse 1. and witnesses the calling of Saint John unto the
writing of these things, in this verse.
And he that sat upon the throne, said, Esaias. 43. 19. 2. Cor. 5. 17.
Behold, I make all things new: and he said unto me, Write: for these words
are faithful and true.

6 And he said unto me, The description of the Church is of three sorts; by
abolishing of old things: by the being of present things in God, that is, of
things eternal: and by the communication of all good things with the godly,
verse 6. If so be they shall strive manfully, verse. 7. But the reprobate are
excluded from thence, verse 8.
they were; I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end. I Chap. 1. 8. and
22. 13.
will give to him that is a thirst, of the well of the water of life freely.

7 He that overcomes, shall inherit all things, and I will be his God, and
he shall be my son.

8 But the fearful and unbelieving, and the abominable, and murderers, and
whoremongers, and sorcerers, and idolaters, and all liars shall have their
Their lot, and inheritance as it were.
part in the lake, which burns with fire and brimstone, which is the second
death.

9 A transition unto the particular describing of the heavenly church: by the
express calling of Saint John in this verse, and his rapting up by the
Spirit, in confirmation of the truth of God, in the verse following.
Then there came unto me one of the seven Angels, which had the seven vials
full of the seven last plagues; and he talked with me saying, Come: I will show
thee the bride, the Lambs wife.

10 And he carried me away in the spirit to a great and He means the place
and stately seat of the church, shadowed out in a mountain.
and high mountain, and showed me A type of that church which is one, ample or
catholic, holy, celestial, built of God, in this verse: and glorious, in the
verse following. This type propounded generally, is after particularly declared
verse 12. etc.
that great city, that holy Jerusalem, descending out of heaven from God;

11 Having the glory of God: and her shining was like unto a stone most
precious, as a Jasper stone, that is clear as crystal,

12 A particular description (as I noted verse 2.) of the celestial church:
first by the essential parts of the same) under the similitude of a city,
unto verse 22. Secondly by foreign accidents, unto the end of the chapter.
Thirdly by the effects in the beginning of the next chapter. the essential
parts, are noted the matter and the form in the whole work; of these the
superficies and foundation of the wall are entire parts (as they use to be
called:) which parts are first described in figure, unto the fourteenth verse,
and afterward more exactly.
And it had a great wall and high, and had According to the number of the
tribes, of which chapter 7. For here the outward part is attributed unto the
old testament, and the foundation unto the new testament.
twelve gates, and at the gates He means the Prophets, who are the messengers
of God, and watchmen of the Church.
twelve Angels, and names written, which are the names of the twelve tribes of
the children of Israel.

13 On the East part there were three gates, and on the North side three gates;
on the South side three gates, and on the West side three gates.

14 And the wall of the city had That is, foundation stones, according to the
number of the gates, as is showed verse 19.
twelve fou^dations; and in them the Names of the twelve Apostles of the Lamb.

15 A transition unto a more exquisite description of the parts of the church,
by finding out the measure of the same, by the Angel that measured them.
Also he that talked with me, had a golden reed, to measure the city withal,
and the gates thereof, and the wall thereof.

16 The measure and form most equal: in two verses.
And the city lay A four squared figure has equal sides, and oueright
corners, and therefore the Graecians call by this name those things that are
steadie, and of continuance, and perfect.
four square, and the length is as large as the breadth of it; and he measured
the city with the reed, unto twelve thousand furlongs: and the length, and
the breadth, and the height of it are equal.

17 And he measured the wall thereof, an Which number is twelve multiplied by
twelve.
hundredth forty and four cubits, by the measure of a man, that is, of the He
adds this, because the Angel had the shape of a man.
Angel.

18 The matter most precious and glittering, which the presence of God makes
most glorious.
And ye building of the wall of it was of Jasper: and the city was pure gold,
like unto clear glass.

19 And the foundations of the wall of the city were garnished with all manner
of precious stones: the first foundation was Jasper: the second of Sapphire: the
third of a Chalcedonie: the fourth of an Emeraude:

20 The fifth of a Sardonix: the sixth of a Sardius, the seventh of a Chrysolite:
the eight of a Beryl: the ninth of a Topaze: the tenth of a Chrysoprasus: the
eleventh of a Iacynth: the twelfth of an Amethyst.

21 And the twelve gates were twelve margarites, and every gate is of one
margarite, and the By street, he means the brodest place of the city.
street of the city is pure gold, as the shining glass.

22 And I saw no temple therein: for the Lord God almighty and the Lamb are
the Temple of it.

23 The second form of particular description (as I said v. 12.) from foreign
and outward accidents: which are these, Light from God himself, in this ver.
glory from men, verse 24. perfect security from all harm, verse 25. Finally
such truth and incorruption of glory (verse 26.) as can bear and abide with
it, nothing that is inglorious, verse the last.
Esa. 60. 19.
And this city has no need of the sun, neither of the moon to shine in it:
for the glory of God did light it: and the Lamb is the light of it.

24 Esa. 60. 3.
And the people which are saved, shall walk in the light of it: and the Kings
of the earth shall bring their glory and honor unto it.

25 Esa. 60. 11.
And the gates of it shall not be shut by day: for there shall be no night
there.

26 And the glory, and honor of the Gentiles shall be brought unto it.

27 And there shall enter into it nothing that infecteth, neither whatsoever
works abomination, or speaks lies: but they only which are written in the
Lambs Esa. 3. 5. and 20. 12. Phil. 4. 3.
book of life.

CHAP. XXII.
1 The river of water of life is showed, 2 and the tree of life. 6. 7. Then
follows the conclusion of this prophecy, 8 where John declares, that the
things herin contained are most true: 13 And now the third time repeateth these
words, All things come from him, who is the beginning and the end.

1 F. JUNIUS.
Here is absolved and finished the description of the ecclestiall Church (as I
showed before, chapter 21. 12.) by the effects in five verses, and then this
book is concluded, in the rest of the chapter. The effects proceeding from God
who dwells in the Church, are these: the everlasting grace of God, in this
verse; the eternal living of the godly, as chap. 2. 7. the eternal fruits
which the godly bring forth unto God, them selves, and others, verse 2.
freedom and immunitie from all evil, God him self taking pleasure in his
servant, and they likewise in their God, verse 3. The beholding and sight of
God: and sealing of the faithful for all eternity, verse 4. the light of God,
and an everlasting kingdom and glory, verse 5.
AFter he showed me a pure river of living water, clear as cristall,
proceeding out of the throne of God, and of the Lamb.

2 And in the midst of the open place thereof, and on either side of the river,
was the tree of life, bearing twelve manner of fruits; and bringing forth
fruit every month, and leaves to heal the nations with.

3 And there shall be no more any cursed thing; but the throne of God and of the
Lamb shall be in it; and his servants shall serve him:

4 And they shall see his face; and his Name shall be in their foreheads.

5 Esa. 60. 19.
And there shall be no night there, and they need no candle, neither light of the
sun: for the Lord God gives them light; and they shall reign for evermore.

6 This whole book is concluded and made up, by a confirmation, and a
salutation. The confirmation has 3 places; The words of the Angel unto the
15. verse; the words of Christ verse 16. 17 and the obtestation made by Saint
John from druine authority, thence unto the twentieth verse. By the speech of
the Angel this prophecy is confirmed, unto the eight verse: and then he
speaks of the use of this book, in the verses following. The prophecy is
first confirmed by the Angel from the nature thereof, that it is faithful and
true: Secondly from the nature of the efficient cause, both principal which is
God, and isntrumental, which is the Angel in this verse. Thirdly, from the
promises of God concerning his coming to effect al these things, and
concerning our salvation, verse 7. Fourthly from the testification of Saint
John himself, verse 8. The rest of the speech of the Angel tending to the same
end, Saint John interrupted or brake off, by his unadvised act of worshipping
him, in the same verse: which the Angel forbidding, teaches him that adoration
must be given not to him, but only to God: (...) for himself, that he is of
such nature and office, as he may not be adored: which thing also was in like
manner done chap. 19. 10.
And he said unto me, These words are faithful and true: and the Lord that God
of the holy Prophets has sent his Angel to show unto his servants the things
which must shortly be fulfilled.

7 Behold, I come shortly. Blessed is he that observes the words of the
prophecy of this book.

8 And I John am he which saw and heard these things: and when I had heard and
seen, Chap. 19. 10.
I fell down to worship before the feet of the Angel which showed me these
things.

9 But he said unto me, See thou do it not: for I am thy fellow servant and of
thy brethren the Prophets, and of them which observe the words of this book:
worship thou God.

10 The Angel returns unto his former speech: in which he teaches the use
of this book both toward our selves in this and the next verse: and in
respect of God for declarations of his truth, thece unto the fifteenth verse.
Moreover he said unto me, That is, propound this prophecy openly unto all,
and concoale no part of it The contrary whereunto is commanded Esa. 8. 16. and
Dan. 8. 26.
Seal not up the words of the prophecy of this book: for the time is at hand.

11 An objection prevented. But there will be some that will abuse this
occasion unto evil, and will wrest this scripture unto their own destruction,
as Peter says. What then? says the Angel, the mysteries of God must not
therefore be concealed, which it has pleased him to communicate unto us. Let
them be hurtful unto others, let such be more and more vile in them selves,
whom this scripture does not please: yet others shall be further co^formed
thereby unto righteousness and true holiness. The care and information of
these may not be neglected, because of the voluntary and malicious offense of
others.
He that does hurt, let him do hurt still: and he which is filthy, let him be
filthy still: and he that is righteous, let him be righteous still: and he
that is holy, let him be holy still.

12 The second place belonging unto the use of this book, as I said verse 10.
Also (says God by the Angel) though there should be no use of this book unto
men: yet it shall be of this use unto me, that it is a witness of my truth,
unto my glory; who will come shortly to give and execute just judgment, in
this verse; who have taught that all these things have their being in me, in
the thirteenth verse; and have denounced blessedness unto my servant in the
Church, verse 14; and reprobation unto the ungodly, verse 15.
And behold, I come shortly; and my reward is with me, Rom 26.
to give every man according as his work shall be.

13 I am Chap. 18 17. and 21. 6. Esa. 41. 48 12. 4. and 44 6.
Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end, the first and the last.

14 Blessed are they, that do his commandments; The bleslednesse of the
godly, set down by their title and interest thereunto; and their fruit in the
same.
that they may have interest in the tree oflife, and may enter in through the
gates into the city.

15 But without shall be all dogs, and enchanters, and whoremongers, and
murderers, and idolaters, and whosoever loves or makes lies.

16 The second place of confirmation (as I said verse. 6.) is the speech of
Christ ratifying the vocation of S, John, and the authority of his calling and
testimony, both from the condition of his own person, being God and man, in
who^ all the promises of God are Yea and Amen. 2. Cor. 1. 20. and also from the
testification of other persons: as by the acclamation of the holy ghost, who
here is as it were an honorable assistant of the marriage: of the Church as
the spouse: and of every of the godly as members: and finally from the thing
present, that of their own knowledge and accord, they are called forth unto the
participatio^ of the good things of God, verse. 17.
I Jesus have sent mine Angel, to testify unto you these things in the
Church: I am that root and that of spring of David, and that bright morning
star.

17 Both the Spirit and the bride say, Come. And let him that hears say,
Come: and let him that is a thirst, come: and Esa. 55. 2.
let whosoever will, take of the water of life freely.

18 The obtestation of S. John (which is the third place of the confirmation,
as was noted ver. 6.) joined with a curse or execration, to preserve the truth
of this book entire and uncorrupted, in two verses.
For I protest unto every man that hears the words of the prophecy of this
book; If any man shall ad unto these things, God shall ad unto him the
plagues, that are written in this book:

19 And if any man shall take away from the words of the book of this
prophecy, God shall take away his part out of the book of life, and out of
the holy city, and out of those things which are written in this book.

20 A divine confirmation or sealing of the obtestation: first from Christ
auouching the same, and denouncing his coming against all those that shall put
their sacrilegious hands thereunto: then from S. John him self, who by a most
holy prayer calls Christ to take vengeance of them.
He which testifies these things, says, Surely; I come quickly, Amen. Come
therefore Lord Jesus.

21 The salutation Apostolical, which is the other place of the conclusion, as
I said verse. 6. and is the end almost of every Epistle: which we wish unto the
Church, and to all the holy and elect members thereof, in Christ Jesus our Lord,
until his coming to judgment. Come Lord Jesus and do it. Amen, again Amen.
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all. Amen.

God only be honor and glory.

FINIS.

