A very excellent and profitable Book containing six hundred four score and
odd experienced Medicines, apperteyning unto Physic and Surgerie, long time
practysed of the expert and Reverend Master Alexis, which he terms the
fourth and final book of his secrets, and which in his latter days he did
publishe unto a universal benefit, having unto that time reserved it only
unto himself, as a most private and precious treasure.

Translated out of Italian into English by Richard Androse.

Humilia la anima tua a Dio: a gran signori fa riuerentia, and al gridar del
pouero inclina le orecchie.

Imprinted at London by Henry Denham. 1569.

The glory of the Honorable, is, the fear of God.

QVI MAL Y PENSE HONI SOIT



Alla sommita della virtu siperuene, non per grandezza, ma per humilita. Dio
contrasta a gli superbi, and agli humili dona la sua gratia

TO THE RIGHT HONOrable, Fraunces Lord Russell, Earl of Bedford, one of the
Queens Majesty's privy Counsel, and Knight of the most Honorable order of
the Garter: Richard Androse wysheth health, long life, with much increase of
virtue and honor.
ALTHOUGH (Right Honorable) on the one side the excellency and worthiness of
your calling tells me that I may not presume to crave defense of this my
poor travail at your Lordships hands: and on the otherside, the means and
baseness of mine own estate in such sort fear me, that I cannot without red
cheeks offer so small a Mite unto so Noble a personage: yet the common report
and opinion of your singular clemency and marvelous affection toward the
advancement of good letters and godly exercises, do not a little move and
provoke me to commit this my simple translation unto your Honorable
protection. For as the Soldier which has been trained, and of long time
practiced in martial feats, and warlike affairs seeks commonly for his
own credit, to serve under some noble and valiant Captain, whose
experience excels therein: even so he that has been brought up in the
study of knowledge, and means by manifesting some proof to benefit his
Country thereby, endeuoreth to procure the pratronage and defense for the same,
of such as are known to be fauores and mainteyners of such professions.
Wherefore being most assured not only by common report, but also by certain
knowledge (right honorable) that those good and commendable exercises which are
to our Country beneficial, and to our bodies needful, are of your Lordship
especially commended, I am the bolder to dedicate the fruits of my weak pains
in this simple travail to your honorable patronage and defense. An old rule
that I read (my good Lord) in Cicero, being a young scholar, which was, that I
must accommodare sermone^ ad personam, makes me to cut of all my ynckhorne
terms, and flattering insinuations in writing to your honor, knowing that I
have to do with such a one as has out of Christ's precepts learned to seek
for verity, and not for vanity, for substance of matter, and not for
superfluous eloquence in words. I had rather (my singular good Lord) too be
somewhat cold in praising and be adjudged ungrateful, then your honor should
be to whot in reading, and condemn me for a biting flatterer, and so deal
with me as I have read that Noble Emperor Sigismond sometime dealt with his
kingly Dog, to whom he gave a good round box on the ear, because he flattered
him to his face: the Parasite saying, why strike you me Emperor? the Noble
Prince answered, why bytest thou me flatterer? There be my very good Lord,
many such nippers, nay rather byters in Princes and noble houses in these
days, that have not Sigismonds reward as a buffet for their adulation: but
rather yearly stipends for their doggishe fawning and flattering of Noble
personages, but these Regios Canes (for so the Philosopher terms them, I
commit either to the mercy of God to convert, or to his justices as biting
Dogs to be entreated. In the dedication of this my rude translation unto your
honor, I seek not to illustrate your excellent virtues, which were an infinite
travail, or to paint out mine own skill or cunning which were vain, but
rather to benefit my Country, and to ease my Countrymen of their griefs and
maladies, by converting that which before was only known unto Physicians and
Italians into their own native speech and mother tongue. Although the
translator be simple, and his knowledge not great, yet I doubt not but the
worthynesse of the matter shall counteruayle the simplicity of the person, if
there be any carping Momus that will sooner reprehend, then take pains to
amend this my simple exercise, let him remember the old Proverb. Ne suitor
vltra crepidam. I beseech your honor to accept and receive this my small
travail, as a testification of the singular good affection I bear unto your
Lordship, and it shall not only provoke me to take pains and occupy my self
in weightier matters, but also bind me continually to pray unto the almighty
for the preservation of your Lordships health, with the daily increase of virtue
and honor, to his heavenly pleasure, and your singular contentation.

Your Lordships Orator, R. Androse.

Master Alexis of Piemont unto the Reader.
IT has been a very ancient opinion of Philosophers (worthy Readers) that
there is given unto man of nature, a desire to understand, for they supposed,
that our souls in taking imperfection, through the uniting with yt substance,
by the mean of understanding, should approach the nearer to recover their
wings already lost, and to return unto their pristinate perfection: but
forasmuch as diverse of them, were inclined to sundry ways of understanding,
some refer the occasion unto the stars, other unto the predomination in our
bodies, more of one humor then of an other. Aristotle distinctly
notwithstanding, seems to attribute every thing in this, unto our election,
which through the pretext of some felicity, or profit, does dispose us to
practice rather one thing then an other. But verilye which of them soever is
true, the inclination of my nativity, I have always known to have been
given to the understanding of diverse things, and especially of those, which
apperteyne unto the cure of men's bodies. And to put it in execution, I disposed
my self to travail diverse Countries, and to be conuersaunt with diverse sorts
of people, not omitting with all industry thoroughly to search out the
understanding of the secrets of many nations, and with them likewise to make
experience, by putting them into practice, by reason whereof in short space,
through the recovery of health, which the people did feel, I became so famous,
that I obscured the names of the most expert Physicians that were, through
which occasion I have been resorted unto as it were with infinite kinds of
Nations, with exceeding reverence, unto my great credit. And although for all
things, I rendered thanks unto the divine bounty, yet my iuuenile mind was
not void of every sparkle of ambition and glory. I wrote them in the years
passed, certain tryfling things, part whereof were of my secrets (although
weak) belonging unto physic, part unto the bewtifying of women, and part unto
other practices, to manifest unto the world that I had knowledge in mystical
things, whereby I conceived to obtain greater glory, then much to help,
having always reserved in the priuiest parts of my heart as a most precious
treasure, the profound secrets of the Art of healing, and the true experience
of the same, for the which I have been always had in especial veneration.
Neither was their any (although a most dear friend) that might get of me any
small intelligence of my secrets, so much I desired not to have any part of my
glory or reputation deminished. And because every man's operations, are
directed unto some laudable end, or that we account worthy of commendation, I
being incited long since, and of my dear friends requested, that I would for
a universal benefit unto all the world, reduce into light, these my
secrets, to the end they might profit the absent, and those which are far
distant from the Region where I inhabit. I refused to accept any one part of
their persuasions, accounting him unwise, which to benefit other, would deprive
himself of his degree, and dignity, so much was I blinded in worldly glory.
But being now come to that age, in the which it is necessary by the course of
nature, to yield my soul unto God, being now impotent, and thinking it the
duty of one man to do good unto another, and most of all in matters of
physic, which are communicated unto us of God for a universal commodity: I
have esteemed it not my part or duty to prefer my peculier profit, before
that of all the world, for in so doing I must have supposed and believed to
have committed a great error, if I had not yielded my self culpaple, and
repented me, to have hidden from the whole world, such a benefit unto this
present. And therefore calling unto memory the persuasions once made unto me,
of the noble and worthy knight master Francuccio Mongio, touching this
matter, and also examming mine own conscience, I could no longer absteyne
from writing and publishing them to adorn therewith the world, because
otherwise dying, I should worthily have been accounted not inferior unto an
homicide: as also to eschew the crimes of auaritious persons, who having hidden
their treasures in the ground, and Death surprising them, remain buried
together with their substance, and depart out of the world, in the displeasure
both of God and man. Therefore if my first conclusion and purpose to write, was
of ambition and vain glory, as is the property of young minds, little
regarding yt which they are bound unto: This other shall not dissent from the
duty of a christian, and one full of compassion toward mankind: that is to
publish and dispoyle my self of all those secrets, unto an universal commodity
which hither unto I have kept with my self as most dear and precious, and being
desirous to accomplish the said decree, having gathered al my experienced
medicines, I have thought good to join them together, with those which were
printed in time passed, which although they were not of such importance,
nevertheless they are things both of skill, and credit, whereof having gotten
a volume, and read it sundry times, I have found them so altered and
corrupted, that with difficulty I might be persuaded to believe that they were
mine, they were so wholly altered, except only in name. And having in part
corrected the volume of the superfluous, and things of little account added
unto it, being well perused, I have joined therewith this my last labor of the
fourth and final Book of my secrets, which all, are things apperteyning unto
sundry and diverse diseases of man's body, having reserved it as a treasure
unto this present, wherein may be read six hundred four score and odd, very
excellent and most approved experiences, all true, and every of them proved as
it were infinite times, with infinite sorts of people, and have always been
found effectual. Neither look you for any other thing of me in time to come:
First, because in these my trauayles (as I have already said, I have spoiled
my self of all that ever I experienced: secondly, in that I am so old, as
within short space, you may suppose to understand rather of my departure out
of life, then to receive of me any other thing, if their be not written
somewhat under my name, of some malicious person to deceive you withal, and to
increase the volume without any profit. I will not omit to advertise the
Readers, that they deceive not themselves through my examples, working these
medicines without the counsel and wholesome aduertisements of some expert
Physician, for I never wrote them to that end, since from my tender age,
contynually I have applied the study of good letters, in such sort that the
secrets of sciences are not hidden unto me, neither is there any Cannon of
Physic that I have not very well understood: and therefore have known with
the age, with the seasons, and with convenient time to apply and use them:
Besides the knowledge to advertise one if need were to be let blood, and an
other to be purged, and having proceeded in this manner, there was never any
Pacient of mine, that has not obtained his due remedy. You therefore (unto
those I speak which understand not the cannons of Physic) when occasion
happens to use my secrets, take the counsel of some expert Physician, to
the end you may attain the benefit. Because in not knowing to compound,
apply, and minister them as you ought to do, you may slander the Physician
that has healed many. Accustom therefore to take counsel of such Physicians
as are honest, and that practice the Art without fraud: for there are seen of
that profession many, which being given to prattle, and tell febles to deceive
the people, do vitupcrate the experiences, with saying that they are wicked,
and such like. Not considering that sick persons are not cured with trifles,
as affirms the worthy Cornelius Celsus, but with experimented medicines, not
newly found out (if well they understood the Art.) And assure your selves,
that by practicing these secrets which I set openly forth (as is convenient)
and preparing them with diligence, and with chosen simples, always they will
work according to your intent, for in this book there is nothing mentioned,
which has not been many times practiced, and found true, through the grace
of Almighty God, unto whom be given all praise, and glory, world without
end.

A brief Table or demonstration to find out all such secrets or medicines as
are contained in this last and fourth part of Alexis.
A Remedy against mistes or clouds, and other impediments which offend the
sight. Fol. 1. To kill worms that gnaw and eat the hear. fol. 1. To destroy
scurfe or scales in the head. fol. 1. Against the falling away of the hear
from the bearde or head, called in Italian Tigna. 2. To heal Ringwormes. 2.
Another for the same. 2. A remedy against the Itche. 2. Another for the same.
2. Against rubbing, or itch, which comes in the night. 3. Against the
chapping of the lips. 3. Against the chapping of the feet. 3. Another for
the same. 3. For the same. 3. Against sweat which stincketh. 3. Against the
stinch of the toes. 4. Against bruses of or about the ears. 4. Another for the
same. 4. To heal a West that rises upon the eye liddes. 4. To take away
blewnesse or blackness of the eye liddes. 4. To make nails which are rotten
to fall. 4. Another for the same. 5. For the same. 5. Against bruses of the
nails. 5. A plaster to heal burgeons or pushes. 5. A remedy for such as
have out their fundament. 5. To remedy the crampe in children. 5. A remedy
against the falling sickness. 6. Against the griefs of the skull. 6. To
comfort the heart. 6. For the tooth ache. 7. To mitigate every kind of grief.
7. Another for the same. 7. To heal the disease called Gonorrea: 7. Against
the flixe of the body. 8. A medicine to heal the flixe of the liver. 8. To
stop the flowers of a woman. 8. Against the disease Gonorrhea. 9. And excellent
sirope to heal the French pockes. 9. A plaster to heal the dropsy. 9.
Against red spots in the skin. 10. To stay hear that it fall not away. 10. A
remedy against pimples or spots in the face. 10. To remedy a fretting itch
and rough or scaly spots. 10. To make hear to grow again. 11. A remedy
against the falling away of hear, called in Italian Aree. 11. A remedy to
heal Chilblaines which are properly in the joints of the fingers through
cold, called in Italian, Buganze, or the itche. 11. To heal beatings or
brusings. 11. To purge the fleume of the Matrix. 11. A remedy against the
pestilence. 12. To heal the Ptisicke. 12. To remedy the diseases called
Dissinteria and Diarrhea, and the bloody flixe of women. 12. Against the
redness of the face and nose. 12. To heal the Pleurisey and putrefaction of
the matrix. 12. Against the difficulty of taking breath, and opilation of the
liver and lunges, and a vehement cough. 13. To make hear grow again where it
is fallen away. 13. To provoke sweat and to heal the plague. 13. Against the
pain of the liver, stomach and milt. 13. To heal Ringwormes, or the Morphew.
13. Against the disease called Nausea. 14. To cause the natural places of
women to purge. 14. To heal the hoarcenesse and straightness of the breast
occasioned of evil humors. 14. A remedy to cause a woman, to bring forth the
dead creature, or the skin that the child is wrapped in, called in Italian
Secunda. 14. To cure the distillation of urine. 14. Against redness and
dropping of the eyes. 15. To remedy the broken coddes of children. 15. Against
the bitings of mad dogs. 15. To remedy the intemperate heat of the liver.
15. To expel sadness. 15. To remedy an old inueterated cough. 16. Against
the pain of the stomach, and the disease called Nausea. 16. To remedy the
stinking or chappes of the toes. 16. Against the pain of the stomach. 16. To
heal the perilous flix and excoriation or rasing of the bowels, called
Dissintiria. 17. Against the Cholike. 17. A remedy for him whose fundiment is
out, to cause it to abide in. 17. To heal broken Kibes. 17. To draw out
thorns or any other thing fastened in the flesh. 18. To take away Wartes. 18.
To remedy the stinking of the mouth. 18. To remedy the pain of the loins.
18. To remedy the difficulty of pyssing, and pain of the Bladder. 19. To
heal one that cannot keep his water. 19. To remedy the coming out of the
matrix. 19. To heal the itch and hardness of the matrix. 19. To remedy the
windiness of the Matrix. 20. To heal the pain of the head, occasioned
through the French disease. 20. To cause hear to grow where it is fallen away.
20. To remedy eyes that be blood shot. 20. To heal the flix of the body and
spitting of blood. 20. To remedy the Ptisicke. 21. An ointment to heal the
stiffenesse or shrinking of Sinowes, called Spasmus, coming of a wound taken
of some venomous beast. 21. To make milk come into a woman's breasts. 21. To
remedy the disease called in Italian Fuoco Saluatico, and in English S.
Anthonies fire. 21. A very excellent remedy against wind in the left side,
called in Italian Melancholia mirachiale. 21. Another for the same. 22. To
remedy the want of sleep through frenzy. 22. To heal the falling sickness.
22. To heal the trembling or shaking of the members. 22. To remedy the
tears, or itch of the eyes. 23. To heal the sounding of the ears. 23. To
remedy the yoxe or hicket. 23. To remedy the beating, trembling of the body,
and the disease called Sincope. 23. To dry up the milk of the breasts. 24. To
make soft or flagging breasts to become hard. 24. To remedy the vomiting of
children. 24. To remedy the pain of the stomach which happens with sharp
belkings. 24. To remedy the blood or milk engendered in the stomach. 24. To
remedy the opilation of the liver. 25. To heal the Iaundice. 25. To remedy
an old pain of the liver, and of the bellye and sides, with the short ribs
called Hypochondrium. 25. To remedy the hardness of the Livers, with the
Iaundice. 25. To heal the flixe of Urine. 25. To provoke urine. 26. To remedy
the burning of the urine. 26. To remedy the pain of the Bladder. 26. To heal
the Colic. 27. To remedy the flixe of the body. 27. Another for the same.
27. To remedy the strainings called in Italian Pondera. 28. Another. 28. To
provoke the flowers, and Secunda unto women. 28. Another for the same. 28. An
other most excellent remedy for the same. 28. To remedy the pain of the
Matrix appostumated through gross humors. 28. To heal the pain of the
Matrix, happened through wind. 29. To heal the prefocation of the Matrix. 29.
To remedy the coming out of the Matrix. 29. To remedy the itche of the purse
of the testicles. 29. To heal the pain of the Hemerhodes. 29. To remedy the
hardness or stiffness of the joints. 30. To heal the Sciatica. 30. To
remedy the griefs, and inueterated swellings of the knees. 30. To take away
swellings after the Gout cease. 30. To drive away venomous Beasts. 31. To
take away spots out of the skin. 31. To heal Ringwormes. 31. To remedy
the wanne specks, or pimples of the face. 31. To remedy the opilations of the
liver and of the milt. 32. To remedy the baldness of the head. 32. To stop
bleeding at the Nose. 32. Against the excoriations, and griefs of the body.
32. To heal the flixes of the stomach and bowels. 33. To heal the issuing
forth of the Fundiment. 33. To heal streynings. 33. Against the belkings of
the stomach. 33. Against Chilblaynes, or Kibes. 33. Against hardness of the
Milt, and of other members, and the Palsy. 33. To remedy the grief of the
loins and belly. 34. To heal the pimples in the face, 34. Against windiness
of the Belly. 34. To cause a woman to avoid the skin that the child is
wrapped in, called in Italian Secondina. 34. An excellent preservative against
the Pestilence and dropsey. 35. To remedy the yexings of the stomach and
vomitings, and loss of appetite, occasioned through cold humors. 35. To heal
the Quarterne ague and all agues, which by nature continue long time. 35.
Against the Pestilence. 35. To heal the flix called Dissinteria. 36. To
restore the appetite that is lost. 36. To take spots away that grow in the
eyes. 36. Against the pleurisey. 36. A medicine for women which through
fatness can not conceive. 36. Against the Hemerodes. 36. To take away Wartes.
37. To remedy the infection of the skin. 37. To accelerate the birth. 37. To
remedy the Quinsey. 37. To heal the Cough. 37. To make a lean person become
fat. 38. To make a fat person become lean. 38. To heal Wartes or hard
knobbes. 38. To heal the Cough. 38. To remedy the cough of children. 39. To
take white spots from the nails. 39. To remedy the flegmaticke humor in the
bladder and reins. 39. To remedy the flixe of urine. 39. To remedy the
dropsey. 39. To remedy the griefs and blood retained in the matrix. 40 To
heal the burnings or inflammations of the gout. 40. To heal the Ptisicke, or
an old Catarre, the cough and other defectes of the lunges. 40. To procure the
birth of dead Creatures, and to remedy the stingings of venomous beasts. 40.
To remedy all the passions of the sinowes. 40. To heal the itch. 41. To
remedy the pains of the stomach and of the milt, and the windiness of the
body. 41. To heal the griefs and hardness of the milt. 41. To comfort the
brain, or to heal the Apoplexia, and the Colic. 41. To remedy the white
flixes, and coldness of the matrix. 42. To heal the Colic and difficulty
of pyssing. 42. To heal the coming out and prefocation of the matrix. 42. To
drive away the heaviness of the mind, to accuate the senses, and to make a
good memory. 42. To remedy the congelation of the milk within the breasts.
43. To heal the falling of the Vuula. 43. Against the fullness of the stomach,
and Ptisick. 43. To remedy the retention of the skin called Secunda, and to
cause the avoiding thereof. 43. To heal Warts. 43. To stop the flix of blood
in women. 43. To stop the white flix of the matrix. 44. To heal a Quarterne
Ague. 44. Against the Ptisick. 44. To remedy the redness of the face. 44. To
heal the Sciatica. 44. Against wheales or blisters of the face. 45. To recover
a lost appetite. 45. To take away moles and spots which children take in
their mothers belly. 45. To heal the yelowe Iaundice. 45. To remedy the
griefs of the head, which through the beating of the artiers, do not suffer
one to take sleep. 46. To heal the Ptisicke occasioned of gross and viscous
humors. 46. Against gravel or any other viscous matter engendered in the
raynes. 46. To dry up the milk of the breasts. 46. To heal children that
have worms. 47. To mittigate all kinds of griefs. 47. To cause milk to
discende into the breasts. 47. Against yexings occasioned through cruditie of
the stomach. 47. To remedy the stinking of the breath, happened by eating of
Garlic, or such like meats. 47. To heal the bitings of mad dogs. 48. To
provoke the flowers unto a woman. 48. An excellent remedy against the dropsey.
48. Against the falling sickness. 48. Against the weakness of the stomach
through cold. 48. To remedy the desire to vomit, and to restore the appetite
that is lost. 48. Against the bitings of all venomous beasts. 49. Against the
mistes, droppings, and redness of the eyes. 49. Against the hardness and
swelling of the liver or milt. 49. To purge the matrix of a woman. 49. Against
the Ptisick. 49. To remedy old inueterate griefs of the head. 50. Against
Hemerodes that appear not. 50. Against dry choughes. 50. To remedy the
griefs of the Hemerodes, and the chappings of the Fundiment. 50. Another for
the same. 51. To heal the windiness and other passions of the Matrix. 51. To
remedy the disease of the pleurisey. 51. To heal the disease called Tigna.
51. To remedy the grief of the breasts, and to cause milk to descend 52.
Against water and windiness in the testicles of children. 52. To heal scabbed
hands occasioned through the french disease. 52. To stop the superfluous blood
of the flowers. 52. To heal shronken and stiff sinowes. 52. To remedy the
evil countenance which proceeds of the dropsey. 53. To remedy the evil
color of the face. 53. Against the inflammation of the liver. 53. To remedy
the mistes or dimnesse of the sight. 53. To remedy the want of hearing. 54.
Against the trembling of the heart. 54. Against the impediment of smelling. 54.
Against worms in children. 55. Against great and swollen gummes. 55. Against
the opilations or other defectes of the liver. 55. To remedy Moles or signs
which children have when they are borne. 55. To heal the coming forth of the
Nauill of children, and the ruptures within them. 55. To remedy the retention,
and to cause a woman to avoid the skin called Secundina. 56. Against the
griefs and swellings of the Matrix, accasioned through ventositie after the
birth. 56. Against the prefocation of the Matrix. 56.
Here begins the Table for the second book.
Against putrified or rotten wounds. 1. To remedy bruses or stripes of the
joints. 1. To heal a Fistola. 1. To remedy moist sores or scabbes in
childrens heads. 1. To heal the Itche. 2. To remedy old sores of the legs.
2. Against the hardness and stiffness of sinews occasioned through wounds. 2.
To take away thorns or any other thing fastened in the flesh. 2. To dissolve
dead blood, happened through stripes, or falling from some high place. 3. An
other which works the same effect. 3. Against impostumes and griefs of the
Hemerodes. 3. To stop the bleeding of wounds. 3. To dissolve the blood
congealed in the body, caused through wounds or other accidents. 4. To remedy
festred and inflamed wounds. 4. To heal wounds wherein are fastened thorns,
or other such like things. 4. To remedy cankers in wounds. 4. To remedy the
kings evil. 4. Against the kings evil in children. 5. Against all sores and
angry pushes, as the Canker or the disease Phadagena. 5. To wash away spots
and red pimples or wheales in the face. 5. To heal ruptures within one,
happened through falling from an high place, or of some other cause, and to
dissolve the congealed blood. 5. Against sores of the nose, and of the mouth,
and also of the french pockes. 6. Against wounds that penetrate. 6. To take
away the blackness of wounds. 6. Against griefs occasioned through rupture,
or vnplacing of bones, or in the members. 6. To dissolve the blackness of the
skin happened through stripes, or other cause, and for to heal the sores of
the natural places of women, and swellings of the breasts. 6. Against all
kinds of flixes of blood, and to heal the hurtes of the bowels and of the
bladder. 7. Against the swelling and grief of a man's yard. 7. Against the
kings evil. 7. Against putrified gummes. 7. To take away the putrification of
wounds. 7. Against vicious humors, which are caused of the itch, or like
effects between the flesh and the skin. 8. To heal wounds quickly. 8. To
heal that kind of breaking out that is like unto a Leprosy. 8. To heal
broken bowels of children. 8. Against pimples or knobbes of the legs, and
natural places of women, with redness and burning. 8. To remedy the gallings
of the feet and cankers. 9. To heal old sores. 9. To remedy a blit or
blast, and to heal cankers. 9. To cause nails that be scaly to fall away. 9.
A remedy against the infection of the lunges and the Ptisick. 9. To heal the
sores of the mouth, and throat. 9. To heal Ringwormes, Corns, and sores of
the feet. 10. Against the flix of the blood of Emerodes, and sores of the
privy members. 10. Against the putrefaction of the gums, and sores of the
mouth. 10. Against blites and waterie scabbes that are in the heads of
children. 10. Against wounds and all putrified old sores. 10. Against
Colericall impostumations, as blytes and blastes, and such like. 10. To remedy
the griefs of the bowels, and watery ruptures. 11. Against the griefs of the
joints. 11. To heal the broken bowels of children. 11. To heal the scorchings
made with fire, and fretting sores. 11. To remedy the hurts of the scull. 11.
To heal corrosiue hurtes called commonly the Wolf. 12. Against wounds and
ruptures of the natural places of women, and to stop the flix of bleeding of
the nose. 12. For to heal one that falls from some high place. 12. To stop
the blood of the Matrix, and of the urine, and of wounds, and to heal the
black pimples of wheales in the legs. 12. To stop the bleeding of wounds. 12.
Against the flix of the blood of the Emerodes. 13. Against the Hemerodes and
crestie swellings of the fundiment and redness of the face. 13. Against
spitting of blood. 13. Against the reptures of the feet and of the hands,
occasioned through the French disease. 13. Against the burnings of fire. 13. To
heal ears that avoid matter. 14. Against scabbes and itche. 14. Against the
Leprosy. 14. Against itch and swelling of the Hemerodes. 14. To heal Cankers.
14. To heal the sores of the natural places of women. 14. To heal griefs of
the eyes, and to make clear the sight. 15. Against the gladness of the feet,
or other parts of children. 15. To mundifie purified wounds. 15. Against
griefs of the Neck through strips, or other occasions. 15. To remedy the
disease Panaritio. 16. Against the chaps of the Fundiment, and spots in the
face. 16. Against the swellings and sores of the Hemerodes. 16. To remedy the
flix of the blood of the Hemerodes. 16. To heal the swellings of a man's
yearde. 16. To heal deep sores in the legs. 17. Against the griefs, sores,
putrifection and stinch of the ears. 17. To heal chappes in the heads of the
breasts or teates. 17. To heal sores of the legs happened through scaldings.
17. To heal a west growing on the eye lids. 17. To take away the grief of the
eyes which happens of astripe. 18. Against chappings of the lips, and of the
heads of Women's breasts. 18. Against chaps under the tongue. 18. Against a
Fistola growing in a woman's breast. 18. To remedy the impostumation of a man's
yard, and windiness of the bottom of the belly. 18. Against hot
impostumations of the testicles. 19. Against cold impostumations of the
testicles. 19. Against the discending of the intrels into the purse of the
testicles. 19. To remedy a rupture or breaking. 19. To draw blood from the
Hemerodes. 20. To stop the flix of the blood of the Hemerodes. 20. Against
rupture of the hands and feet caused through cold. 20. To close up wounds.
20. To generate flesh in wounds. 21. Against brusings within the flesh and
arms. 21. Against the shrinking of sinowes. 21. Against the hurts of the
sinews and arteries. 21. To heal the pricking or cuttings of sinews. 22.
Against pain of the sinews. 22 To ease the pain of wounds. 22. Against the
superfluous flesh of wounds and worms of the same. 22. To take away the
blackness of wounds. 22. To remedy the disease Panaritio. 23. To open ripe
impostumes. 23. Against festred cankers. 23. To heal sores that are moist and
hard to close. 23. Against fretting sores. 24. To heal sore tetters. 24. A
very excellent water for tetters. 24. Against burnings or scurfes in the face,
which appear like unto a Leprosy. 25. An other. 25. To heal sore legs. 25.
To heal legs that are hard, swollen, and sore. 25. To heal the burnings of
fire before they bladder. 25. To heal one that is fallen from some high place.
26. To heal one that with a fall has hurt one of his members. 26. To preserve
a member that is stricken, from impostumation. 26. To take away the signs that
remain of blows or stripes. 26. To heal brusings of the nails. 26. To heal
sores proceeding of itche in the natural places of women. 27. Against the
sores of the mouth of the matrix happened in procreation. 27. Against burning
sores of the matrix of women with child. 27. Ao heal the prickings of
sinews. 27. An excellent and precious ointment to heal the rupture of the
seull. 29. To molifie hardness. 29. A most precious oil to heal a wound
in.xxiiij. hours. 29. Against spitting of blood, through ruptnre of a vain.
30. To heal sores of the legs. 30. An other for the same. 30. Against all
inflammations of the raynes, and the running of them. 30. To heal sores that
are inflamed. 31. Against stripes or brusings. 31. To heal Panaritio, and
every other grief which happens unto the ends of the fingers. 31. To heal
scurse or scales in the head, beard, or brows. 32. To remedy the
scortications of children through occasion of urine, or of some other sharp
humor. 32. To remedy the running of the raynes occasioned of a sharp cause,
and to heal the scortications which they make. 32. To remedy spots and
marks, and to take away all superfluous growing of flesh in any part of the
body. 32. To heal sores of the breasts. 33. To make oil of Balm, which has
these virtues following. 33. To heal wounds of the legs happened of scaldings.
34. To close up wounds. 34. To heal sores which through dry distemperature of
those parts can not be healed. 34. To remedy dolorous sores of the joints.
35. To remedy brusings and sores happened of strypes, or otherwise. 35. To
heal the hardness of the feet. 35. To remedy dolorous sores happened
through cold distemperature. 35. To take away superfluous flesh which grows
in wounds 36. To heal sores that happen through worms. 36. To heal sores
happened of broken bones. 36. To remedy the gummes of the French disease. 37.
To kill worms in children. 37. An other for the same disease. 37. A very
precious water for diverse infirmities. 37. An oil like unto Balm, very
profitable for diverse sores. 38. Against superfluous wind in the left side,
called in Italian Melancholia mirachiale, and the disease called Sincope. 39.
To preserve from the pestilence. 39. A Ceare cloth for sore and swollen legs.
40. To remedy the commotion of the brain through falling from some high
place, or through other occasions and cuttes, when through the blows men lose
their speech. 40. To remedy the falling sickness in children. 41. To heal
the evil habit, and to cure them that have the splen. 41. A preservative
against the pestilence. 41. To remedy the discending of a Catarre through
coldenesse of stomach. 42. To remedy the Kings evil. 42. To heal many
infirmities with oil of Sulphur. 42. To heal scaly or rough hands happened
through the French disease. 44. An other for the same. 44. Against Melancholy.
44. To mittigate the pains of the french disease in any member. 45. To remedy
the milt that is hardened. 45. To preserve from the gout. 45. To heal the face
of scurfe or scabbes. 46. Against the chappes in the hands through heat of the
liver. 46. To heal one that is stiptike of body. 46. To heal one that cannot
piss through fleugme. 47. To purge the head by the nose, after the universal
purging of the whole body. 47. To stop the flix of a Catarre. 47.
Here begins the Table for the third book.
To heal a windy impostume. 1. To remedy the joints that are out of their
place. 1. To mollify hardness. 1. To heal a rupture of the guts. 1. To
remedy the grief of the Matrix. 2. A marvelous powder for the weakness of
the sight. 2. To heal ruptures, or burstings. 3. To stay the hear that
falls. 4. To heal swelling of the arm through letting of blood. 4. To
remedy the swelling of the legs. 4. To heal the swelling of the body, and
of the legs, through cold humors. 4. To cause good flesh to grow in wounds. 4.
To heal sore legs. 5. To heal the disease called in Italian, Fuoco
saluatico. 5. To heal bones that are broken in the head in few days. 5. To
mollify hardened sinews. 5. To mundifie Fistuloes, and other putrified sores.
6. A most precious oil to remedy all sores and griefs. 6. To heal the
cloutes or spots in the face. 6. To make the sight clear. 7. To heal sore
breasts. 7. To heal little red speckes in the face. 7. A most excellent powder
to comfort the sight, and all the defects of the head, of the stomach, and
the disease called Scoromia and Vertigo, and the palsy, and all inward
diseases. etc. 8. To heal the grief of the raynes, of the loins, of the
head, and the diseases of the Matrix. 8. To heal those that have the Ptisick.
9. An odor against the same disease. 9. A fumigation for the same disease. 9.
To stop a hot Catarre. 9. To stay a cold Catarre 9. To heal the same
disease. 10. To heal those that be Melancholic, and are in a fury or rage.
10. An ointment to remedy the sores of the nose. 11. To separate or divide a
corrupted bone from the sound. 11. To heal one which by scratching with his
nails has made a sore. 11. To remedy the burning of the urine. 11. An other
for the same disease. 12. An other for the same disease. 12. To revive one that
is fallen through the falling sickness. 13. A more excellent remedy against
expoisments than is common Triacle. 13. To heal a thin Catarre. 14. To cause
a pellet of a Dagge of Pistolet which is in the flesh to come forth. 14. To
remedy a swelling or pain that happens after a wound is healed. 14. To purge
a wouude, and to draw out that which was fastened therein. 14. To heal
brusings of the head with broken bones or without. 15. To draw out things
fastened in the flesh as thorns and such like. 15. To heal the kings evil
and other hard impostumes. 15. To remedy the pain of the back. 15. To heal
the redness of the nose. 16. To heal one that spitteth blood through the
rupture of a vain. 16. To heal the evil color of the face, and the Ptisick.
16. To heal sores in the natural places of women. 16. To heal the knobs
which remain in the joints after the paiue of the gout. 16. To remedy the
stinch of the mouth. 17. To heal the crestie growings of the fundiment. 17. To
heal the colic. 17. To heal the palsy of the tongue. 18. To remedy the
pain of the head proceeding through a hot or cold cause. 18. To remedy the
griefs of the head and neck. 18. To remedy the dimnesse of the sight. 18. To
heal the pain of the flank. 19. To heal a burning canker called in Italian,
Fuoco saluatico. 19. To purge the Matrix of women. 19. To stop the flix of the
blood of the Hemerodes. 19. To heal the coldness of the matrix. 20. To dry
up the superfluous humiditie of the Vuola and of the gummes. 20. To take spots
from the face. 20. To heal a Ringworme. 20. To heal the flix of the belly.
21. To heal the pain of the loins. 21. To heal those that piss in their
beds. 21. To heal the sores of the feet. 21. To kill worms in the ears. 22.
To remedy the hurts of the ears happened through entering of water into them.
22. To heal sores that are engendered in the ears. 22. To dissolve impostumes
under the ears. 22. To heal the stripes of the eyes. 23. To remedy the loss
of appetite unto meat. 23. A marvelous remedy against sores and wounds. 23.
To preserve one from poisoning. 23. Against the bitings of venomous beasts.
23. Against the stinch of the nose. 24. To heal the griefs of the fundiment.
24. Against the impotencie of the Genetale member. 24. To heal an impostumed
colic. 24. Against the biting of a mad dog. 23. Against indurate impostumes,
perished Condilomi and hardened breasts. 25. To dissolve an impostume under
the ear. 25. To dissolve the kings evil, and every hard impostumation. 26.
Against trembling through some melancholy humor. 26. A confection to heal
mistes or dimnesse of the sight. 26. Against the weakness of the sight. 27.
An other for the same purpose. 27. To keep the belly sollible in the
infirmity of the eyes. 27. Against the inflammation of the eyes. 28. To heal
the grief of the eyes. 28. An other for the same effect. 28. To heal stripes
of the eyes, and extention of the nuck. 29. To other for the same. 29. To
remedy the Litargie. 29. To heal the incontinencie and dropping of urine. 29.
Against the hardness of the spleen. 30. To heal an old flix of an woman's
flowers. 30. Against stinging of Bees. 30. To heal the inflammation of a man's
yard. 30. A remedy against coldness, and debilitie of the raines, the pain
of the back, and want of appetite unto a woman. 30. To remedy vomiting
occasioned of cold humors. 31. Against the streynings when a man cannot go to
the stool. 31. To rmedie deafness or want of hearing. 31. To heal bruses
about the eyes without launciug or incision. 31. To heal watrie or dropping
eyes. 32. An excellent powder for the same disease. 32. To heal the griefs of
the eyes. 32. To heal the sores of the ears that offend the hearing. 32.
Against the grief of the loins and of the eyes. 33. Against difficulty of
taking of breath through coldness. 33. To heal a dry cough. 33. Against the
hardness of the matrix. 33. Against the falling of the Vuola, and swelling of
the pallet. 33. Against the coming out of the nauill of children. 34. To heal
the palsy. 34. Against the debilitie of sinews. 34. Against redness of the
legs. 35. To remedy the printes of blows that remain. 35. Against swellings
of the face. 35. To keep hear from growing white. 35. To heal the itch of
children. 35. An other for the same. 35. Against trembling or shaking. 36.
Against stinch of the mouth through rotten teeth. 36. To heal the white flixes
in women. 36. To heal the relapsation of the gummes. 36. To heal chaps in the
fingars. 36. To heal a windy impostumation. 37. To heal the evil
disposition which comes before the dropsey, and the abstruction of the
Mesaraicall veins. 37. Against the flix of urine. 37. To remedy the impotencie
of the Genitall member. 38. To heal sores of the Bladder. 38. To heal the
diseases of the raines. 38. To heal rupture within the body. 39. To take away
the blackness of skarres. 39. To kill worms in the body. 39. To preserve one
that has taken poison. 39. A medicine to heal the Qninsey. 39. To remedy the
unquietness of agues and to provoke sleep 40. To heal the flix called
Disenteria. 40. An other glyster most precious for the same disease. 40. An
other for the same. 40. An other for the same, of very great efficasie. 40. To
cause Hemerodes to open. 41. Against scorchings of fire. 41. To preserve one
from the gout. 41. Against the belkings of the stomach. 41. To cause a woman to
bring forth a dead creature. 41. To heal the dropsey and opilation of the
liver. 42. An emplaister to heal the rupture of the scull. 42. An other for
the same. 42. Against the pain of the Colic. 42. To heal the itching or
scabbes of the fundiment. 42. To remedy the pains and burnings of the
fundiment 42. To heal the disease called Iliaca passio. 43. An other remedy
for the same disease. 43. To remedy the issuing out of the fundiment. 43. To
heal one that cannot keep his urine. 43. To remedy the coming out of the
matrix. 43. Against the growing of flesh out of the nails. 44. To cause skalie
nails to fall. 44. To take away the blackness that remains in skarres. 44.
Against blood that is congealed within one. 44. Against the difficulty of
taking breath. 44. To remedy the congelation of milk within the breasts. 45.
Against the subversion of the stomach. 45. For one that has lost his voice.
45. To remedy the hardness of the spleen. 45. Against empoysonments. 45. To
heal the flixes Disentericall or Lientericall. 45. To draw out thorns or
arrow heads out of the flesh. 46. For women that be barren. 46. Against the
Colic. 46. Against the infection of the skin. 46. To cause a woman to bring
forth a dead creature. 46. Against the crestes of the piles in the fundiment.
46. To remedy a tongue aggrauated, which through overmuch moisture pronounces
not well. 47. To heal the pain of the Collicke. 47. To dry up milk in the
breasts. 47. To diminish the fleugme of the body and to augment blood. 47. A
remedy to cause conception. 47. To heal pain in the feet. 48. To heal
Wheales. 48. To heal inward ruptures. 48. To remedy griefs proceeding
through going out of the joints and to heal swellings. 48. To heal the pain
of the spleen and the Ptisick. 48. To remedy the puntures of bones or
stingings of dead Serpents. 49. To take away weariness after great labor and
grief of members. 49. To heal one that lotheth meat. 49. To heal
percussions of the eyes 49. To remedy the pain of the spleen. 49. Against the
griefs of the body. 49. To heal the plurisey. 50. To remedy the stinking at
the nose, and difficulty of hearing. 50. To heal the scorchings of fire. 50.
To dissolve the crestes of the French disease. 50. Against swellings of women's
bellies that make them to seem with child. 51. To cleanse the face from spots.
51. To heal the torsions and griefs of the belly. 51. To remedy the burning
or heat of urine. 51. To remedy percussions or falling upon the ribs or
back. 52. Against burning occasioned of cold. 52. To heal wheales or blisters
in the face. 52. To make skarres become fair of color. 52. To take away the
bleachnesse of blows. 53. Against the swellings of Percussions. 53. To heal
those that have pain in their liver. 53. To heal the pain of the breasts,
which happen after the birth of a child. 53. Against the scurfe of the head.
54. To heal a plurisey by spitting 54. Against moist sores. 54. To heal
wounds, which after they are whole burst out a new, by reason of a putrified
bone. 54. To heal the crestie swellings of the piles. 54. Against evil
disposition through coldness of the stomach. 55. To heal the loss or
diminishing of smelling. 55. To cause that hear shall not grow again. 55. To
heal cleftes or chappings of the fundiment. 55. Against retention of urine in
Agues. 56.
Here ends the Table.
Of the fourth and last part of the Secrets of the Reverend Master Alexis of
Piemount.
The first Book
A remedy against mistes or clouds, and other impediments which offend the
sight.
TAke Eyebright water, Fennel water, red Rose water, and Celendine water, of
each an ounce: of the juice of Rue, and of Rosemarie, of each two drammes, of
Gum Serapine half a dram, of the gaul of a Partridge or Kite, two scruples,
mingle them, and make your medicine according to Art, and use to put of it
many times into the eye.

To kill worms that gnaw and eat the hear.
TAke a quantity of the seeds or roots of marshe Mallows, and boil them a
little, then let it cool, and of the Mucillage which shall be taken thereof, you
shall annoint the hear. The like effect is seen by anointing the hear with
the Mucillage made of the leaves of Willowes.

To destroy scurfe or scales in the head.
TAke a quantity of the flower of Cicers, and of the seeds of marsh Mallows
bruised and dissolved with vinegar, then annoint the head, and afterward wash it
with the decoction of Beetes, and tops of Mulbery trees. Or else take of the
berries of Ben, and of the flower of beans, of each like quantity, boil them
in water, with the which you shall wash the head.

Against the falling away of the hear from the bearde or head, called in
Italian Tigna.
TAke of the powder of the roots of Ireos, called Flowerdeluce, and of the
soote of a chimney, of each like quantity, mix them with old oil, and
annoint the head: or else take of Aristologia, of Verdegrese, of Sal Armenick,
of Bdellium, of mustard seed, of Gum Dragant, of each like quantity, braye
them and mingle them with the oil of wheat, and vinegar, of both as much as
suffices, and add thereunto a little Honye.

To heal Ringwormes.
TAke of yellow brimstone, of the berries of Ben, of each a like, and being
brayed, mix them with Turpentine, and so anoint the sore.

Another for the same.
TAke of the Ashes of Garlic burnt, and mixed with honey, annoint the place:
or else take Styrax liquida, mingled with vinegar, and annoint the sore: It
helps also to annoint it with the Gum of bruised Almondes. If the Ringwormes
shall be vlcerous, take of Incense, of Gum Dragant, of Brimstone, of Aloes, of
each a dram: of Gum Arabicke two drammes, mix them with vinegar, and so
anoint.

A remedy against the itche.
BRay the tops and heads of Poppie, and mix them with vinegar, and so
anoint the place: or else dissolve Aloes being beaten with Endive water, and
it will do the like.

Another for the same.
TAke of the leaves of Seen one handful, boil them with water of Roses, and
Smallage, and a little vinegar, and wash the sore. It helps also to wash it,
with Sea water warmed: or else with the decoction of wild Cucombers, reduced
into water.

Against rubbing, or itch, which comes in the night.
AFter that the euacuation of the body is made with purgation, or by letting
of blood: you shall anoint it with Aloes, and Myrrh dissolved in water of
honey. It helps likewise to take Aloes, with the flowers of Lentilles, and
mix them with vinegar and honey: or else wash the place where ye itche is,
with water of Smallage: or with the lees of vinegar by it self alone.

Against the chapping of the lips.
TAke dried lees of white wine called Tartar, and burn them in the fire, and
temper them with Rosin and grease of an Hen, or Ducke, meddled with a little
honey, and so use it.

Against the chappings of the feet.
Anoint them with the grease of a Goat, or of a Cow, or with the oil of an
Hind, and you shall be healed.

Another for the same.
TAke of wax, of oil Sisamine, of Turpentine, of Stirax liquida, of each like
quantity: mix every thing together, and lay thereof upon the sore.

For the same.
TAke of Gum Dragant poudred, three drammes, of Polipodie roots one dram and
a half, of Charabe, of Incense, of each half an ounce, of Turpentine six
drammes, bray every thing, and with the oil of an Heart make an ointment.

Against sweat which stincketh.
Annoint the body with water of Mirtels, drawn through a Lembicke: or with
water in which Alum is dissolved. It works the like effect, to anoint the
body with the powder of saunders, or with the powder of Ciperus and Roses. Or
with the ashes made of the leaves of Lillies and Myrrha.

Against the stinch of the toes.
TAke ofred Roses one pound, of Galls, of Spicknard, of Ciperus, of Myrrha,
and of Alum, of each ten drammes, make thereof little cakes, or Pastelli, with
rose water. And after dissolve them, and so anoint when need requires.

Against bruses of or about the ears.
YOu must mark if it be needful to draw blood from the bruise, then anoint
the place with this ointment. Take of Teruce, of Smalledge seed, of each like
quantity, bray them and with honey make an ointment.

Another for the same.
TAke of quick Brimstone, called Sulphur viuum, of Myrrha, of Incense, of each
like quantity, powder them, and being mixed with liquide Pich, lay it upon the
sore.

To heal a West that rises upon the eye liddes.
TAke wax, and being well warmed, put thereof oftentimes upon the grief. Or
else take flies, the heads of them being plucked of, and with the bodies rub
the sore.

To take away blewnesse or blackness of the eye liddes.
TAke of green Cheese newly salted, and being cut in slyces, lay thereof upon
the grief, or else stamp Wormwood, and make thereof a plaster with the juice
of a Radish, and then use it.

To make nails which are rotten to fall.
TAke Sulphur being poudred, and mix it with hogs grease, and put it upon the
place.

Another for the same.
TAke liquide Pich, Wax, Colofonie, Rosin, of quick Sulphur, and of Salt, of
each like quantity, and make thereof a plaster.

For the same.
TAke Propolios, Bitume, otherwise called, Aspalto, is a kind of natural lime
or claye.
Wax, Bitume, of each two drammes, of quick Sulphur one dram, and make a
plaster.

Against bruses of the nails.
TAke leaves of Mirtels when they are tender, and leaves of a Pomegranate tree,
and being well brayed, put of it upon the nail, and bind it fast.

A plaster to heal burgeons or pushes.
TAke of Camomill flowers a handful, of the flowers of marsh Mallows, of
green Rue, and of Mallows, of each two handfulles, of Leven one ounce, of
Pepper a dram, of common Salt one ounce and a half, of Figs three, boil
the aforesaid things, then bray them, and put thereunto of the oil of Camomill
six ounces, and being well incorporated, make thereof a plaster.

A remedy for such as have out their fundament.
TAke of Mumia, of Hipoquistidos, of Licium, of Galls, of the shells of Oisters
being burnt, and make a fine powder, but anoint first the fundament with oil
Olive, and afterward you shall put of the aforesaid powder upon the gutte.

To remedy the crampe in children.
TAke of Marigoldes, Ligustru^ is that which we call Priuet or Pimpret.
and boil them in water until they be tender, and with the said decoction
wash the child, and then anoint him with oil of Lillies, or Ligustrum.

A remedy against the falling sickness.
TAke of white Incense called Olibanum, of Masticke, of Spiknarde, and of
Squinant, of each three ounces, of Galbanum, of Oppopanack, of each half an
ounce, of Vischus quercinus, one ounce, of Amber half a scruple, of Pionie
seeds half a dram, of the seeds of wild Rewe one dram, of Labdanum two
drammes, of Nutmegs, of Cubebes, of each half an ounce, of Castor, of
Coperous, of each half a dram, bray every thing very well, then dissolve
the Gums with the oil of Rue, and incorporate them with the Vischus, working
them well with your hands, and meddling therewith the pouders, and in the end
add thereunto the Amber: Of which, take as much as shall be sufficient, and
spread it upon Lether, or a new linen cloth, and the hears being shaven away,
lay the plaster upon the crown of the head.

Against the griefs of the skull.
TAke of the Rosin of a Pine tree that is white, ten drammes, of the powder of
Aloes one ounce, mix them together, and boil them with a soft fire: and after
add of Gum Elemi one ounce, and make a Cerote, which you must lay upon the
place where the grief is.

To comfort the heart.
TAke of white and red Saunders, of red Roses, of red and white Coral, of
Spodium, of Camphora, of each a dram, of the flowers of Borage, of Buglosse,
of Violets, of Mirtels, and of Rosemarie, of each half a handful, of the
parings of Ceder apple, of white and red Ben, of each one dram: of Nutmegs,
of Spicknard, of yt bone of a Hearts heart, of Cloves, of Cubebes, of Laurel
leaves, of Setwall, of Baulme, of Lignum Aloes, of Basil seeds, of each half
a dram, of Musk, of Amber, and of Saffron, of each half a scruple: braye
every thing and make a little bag of Crimosine sarcenet, and use to wear it
under the left breast.

For the tooth ache.
TAke of long Pepper, white pepper, Cubebes, Staphisager, of the rindes of ye
roots of Mulberie trees, of the rindes of the roots of Mandrake, of the rindes
of the roots of Caphers, of Pelitorie, of Henbane, of each two drammes, braye
all these together, and boil them in fiftene ounces of red wine, until one
half of the wine be consumed: then strain it, and with the said decoction
being warm wash the teeth.

To mitigate every kind of grief.
TAke of oil of yellow Violets, of oil of sweet Almonds, of oil of
Sisamine, and fresh butter, of each one ounce and a half, of poudred Saffron one
ounce, of white Wax one ounce and a half, of Dill seeds, of Camomill
flowers, and of the fat of a Duck, of each two ounces, three whites of raw
Eggs: dissolve the oil and the wax with the fat, and after mix with them
the other ingredience being poudred very subtly, and so make an ointment.

Another for the same.
TAke of oil Olive six ounces, of Saffron two drammes, six yelks of raw
Eggs, mix them altogether, and then take of Barley flower, of the flower of
Amidum, of each three drammes, of fresh butter half an ounce, of Bdellium, two
drammes, of wine that is sodden, four ounces: boil all these said things in
a Leaden vessel, Gonorrea, signifies the flux of natural seed of man or
woman going away unwittingly.
until they become thick, and apply thereof hot unto the grief.

To heal the disease called Gonorrea.
TAke of Fenegreke seeds, and boil them in water unto the consumation of the
third part. And give unto the pacient for the space of three or four days,
four ounces thereof to drink every morning, and he shall be cured.

Against the flixe of the body.
TAke of Origanum, of Sumack, of Mirtels, of Corianders, of Camomill flowers,
of each one handful: of Pomegranate flowers, with the ryndes and fruit, of
the seeds of Roses, of each half a handful: of the pills of Ireos roots,
of the roots of Mulberies, and of the roots of Virga pastoris, of each two
handfuls: bray every thing a littell, and cause them to be boiled in red wine
so long, that the wine be clean consumed: these things being put into a fine
little bag, let the diseased person set himself thereon, and let the bag
be as hot as he may suffer it.

A medicine to heal the flix of the liver.
TAke of Agrimonie one handful, of Squinant two handfuls, of Spicknard, of
Liqueris, of each half a handful, of Mace, of Masticke, of each half an
ounce: of Lignum Aloes three drammes of Myrobolani Emblici, Myrobolani, a kind
of fruit growing in India, like unto plummes, of which be diverse sorts, they
are to be had at the Apothecaries.
and Chebuli, of each one dram and a half, of Bole Armenia, of Lapis
hematitis, of Terra sigillata, of each six drammes: of Coriander seeds
preperated one ounce and a half, of Spodium, two drammes, of dry Roses one
ounce, of the flower of Barlie two ounces, of the filings of Iron preperated
one dram, of the compound of the three kinds of Saunders made without
Camphora, half an ounce, of oil of Masticke, and of Mirtels, of each as much
as suffices. Powder the aforesaid herbs and parch the Myrobolani a little, and
being finely beaten, take the other things being also in powder, and adding
thereunto the oils, put them altogether in a vessel on the fire, and make
therewith a plaster, which you shall apply unto the right side, so that it
may reach from the breast unto the stomach.

To stop the flowers of a woman.
TAke of vnhusked Lentilles, one pound, of Bursa pastoris, and of Plantine, of
each three handfuls, of Asses dung, and of Gotes dung dried, of each one ounce
and a half, of Olibanum, and of Dragons blood of each twelve drammes, of dry
Mints, of Acatia, of Hipoquistidos, of Licium, of each one ounce, of Gessum,
four ounces, of whites of Eggs five, of Bean flower three ounces, Gesso, a
kind of plaster called in Latin Gypsum.
of the juice of Plantine as much as suffices, make a plaster in this manner:
take the Lentils and the dungs grossly beaten, and mix them with the juice,
but let the Gessum remain infused in vinegar a whole day, and after mix it
with the other ingredience.

Against the disease Gonorrhea.
TAke of mundified Liqueris, of Alchechengi berries, of Iuiubes, of the roots
of marsh Mallows, of each half an ounce, of Mellon seeds one ounce, of the
juice of Liqueris five drammes, braye them a little, and boil them in four
pintes of water of Mellons, and Alchechengi, until the fourth part of the
water be consumed, and being streyned, keep it to give unto the sick to
drink.

An excellent sirope to heal the French pockes.
TAke of the wood of Lignum vitae four ounces, and of the bark nine ounces,
of Reubarbe two drammes: of Cardus benedictus, two ounces, of the water of
Bettony, of Lupils, of Barlie, and of old Malmesie, of each four pounds: of
Seen of Alexandria, four ounces, bruise the foresaid things, and let them
stand infused in the waters and the Malmesie a whole night: then let them
boil unto the consummation of the third part, and being taken from the fire
let it be strayned, of which decoction you must drink four ounces morning and
Evening, four hours before meat: always provided that the party which is
sick be purged before he observe the diet.

A plaster to heal the dropsy.
TAke of the Dung of a Goat dried one pound, of Commin two drammes, of the
roots of wild Cucombers, of Nightshade, shade, of each two ounces, of Barlie
meal one pound, of Vinegar wherein Iron is quenched, as much as suffices,
make a plaster with boiling the roots in Liee, and lay it on the belly.

Against red spots in the skin.
DIstill water of Cresses in the end of May, and being mixed with honey. Dip
therein pieces of Linen cloth, and lay them upon the foresaid spots, and as
they dry, dip them again and lay them on the spots, and you shall see the
effect. If you bray the seed, and mix it with vinegar, and put it upon the
said disease, it does the like.

To stay hear that it fall not away.
TAke the juice of Cresses, and annoint the roots of the hears and they will
not fall. The like effect shall you see if you wash them with the decoction of
the roots of Nightshade, and of Mustard seed boiled in wine: or else the
washing of them with the juice of the stalks of Phillirea, which also causes
where it is fallen, to grow again.

A remedy against pimples or spots in the face.
TAke a quantity of the seeds of Nigella well brayed, and mix them with
flower and honey, and make thereof a liniment, wherewith you must annoint the
spots at night when you go to bed, and in the morning wash them with Persly
water.

To remedy a fretting itch and rough or scaly spots.
TAke a quantity of Nigella seeds, a little bruised, and boil them in vinegar
until the decoction come to a substance of thickness, then add thereunto of
oil of Nuts, and make it in manner of an ointment, with the which annoint the
place at night when you go to bed. The like effect is seen by using the meal
of Orobo mixed with the juice of the roots of Pionie.

To make hear to grow again.
TAke of the Kernels of Hasill nuts, and being well stamped, mix them with the
grease of a Swine, and of a Bear, and annoint the bare place.

A remedy against the falling away of hear, called in Italian Aree.
TAke of the meat of Walnuts, and chewe it well in your mouth, then take it
out, and presently lay it on the place.

A remedy to heal Chilblaines which are properly in the joints of the fingars
through cold, called in Italian, Bugunze, or the itch.
Boil in water the seeds of Orobo a little bruised, and if with the decoction
you bath the Chilblaines, they shall be healed, but if you wash the whole body,
it will take away the itche. The like effect to remedy the Chilblaines, is
made with the leaves of Verbene, brayed with the sewet or grease of a Swine.

To heal beatings or brusings.
TAke of Paritorie, of Mallows, of Wormwood, of Motherwort, of Percelie, of
hulled Beans, and boil them in water, and then being taken out, fry them in
a Frying pan, and in the end boil them in new wine sodden, and make thereof
a plaster. The like effect does the water of wild Time distilled through a
Limbeck, in the which you must wet pieces of Linen cloth, and then apply them
unto the grief or sore.

To purge the fleume of the Matrix.
TAke the leaves and stalks of Paritorie in the end of May, and being brayed,
distill them through a Limbeck, and you shall give of the water unto the woman
to drink fasting three ounces morning and Evening continually by the space of
eight or ten days: it is an opener also of the opilations or stoppings of the
liuor, and milte, and purges the reins and bladder.

A remedy against the pestilence.
TAke of the roots of Dog Fennel, and make them in powder, and give thereof
unto the sick person, the quantity of a crown to drink, being dissolved in
vinegar if he feel a great heat, but if he feel rigor or coldness, give it
him with Wine, and it will drive away the poison: which is supposed also to be
done by Pympernel, if the roots be boiled in wine, and given unto the sick
person to drink.

To heal the Ptisicke.
TAke of Pimpernel brayed in powder two ounces, of the water of green
Pimpernell newlye distilled, and of sugar as much as shall be sufficient, and
make a Lectuarie, which the sick person shall use, by taking two drammes at a
time. Unto the like effect is given the water of Veruene, and for the
difficulty of taking breath.

To remedy the diseases called Dissinteria and Diarrhea, and the bloody flixe
of women. Dissinteria and Diarrhea, are perilous flixes with excoriations and
rasing of the bowels, called bloody flixes.

TAke of the stone called Hematitis, of Boale Armenia, of each a dram, let
them be finely poudred and grinded upon a Marble stone, and being well meddled
with two ounces of Plantine water, you shall give it unto the sick to drink.

Against the redness of the face and nose.
DIstill in Balneo Mariae, the flowers of Applegrefts, which you must gather
when they are well opened, and with the water which shall be distilled thereof,
you shall Morning and Evening wash the places.

To heal the Pleurisey and putrefaction of the matrix.
TAke and distill in the end of May the herb called Burnet, and of the water
which you shall make, cause the sick person to drink Morning and Evening
four ounces, and within short space he shall be healed.

Against the difficulty of taking breath and opilation of the liver and
lunges, and a vehement cough.
TAke of the herb called Liuerwort, or Lungwort, and dry it, and put
thereunto of Anise seeds, of the lunges of a Fox dried in the air, and of
Fennel seeds, of Liqueris, of Enula, of Gynger, of each like quantity, the
aforesaid things being well brayed, you must searce them finely, and put
thereunto of sugar the weight of them all, and make thereof a Lectuarie,
whereof the pacient must drink morning and Evening.

To make hear grow again where it is fallen away.
TAke of the leaves of Radishes, and boil them in water with as much more of
the roots of Dog Fennel, until they be well sodden, and with the decoction,
you shall wash the places from whence they be fallen.

To provoke sweat and to heal the plague.
TAke of the herb called Rape, with the roots of Plantine the lesser, and knot
grass, of each half a handful, braye them well, and boil them in vinegar,
and strain them through a linen cloth, whereof being given unto the sick
person to drink when he goes to bed, causes him to sweat out all evil
humors.

Against the pain of the liver, stomach, and milt.
TAke of the oil of Roses four ounces, of Raponticum, in powder half an
ounce, of Wax as much as suffices, and make thereof a plaster, which you
must apply hot unto the place of the grief.

To heal Ringwormes, or the Morphew.
TAke of the leaves of Elders, of Eleborus niger, and of Wine tempered with
vinegar and honye, and adding thereunto a little of a squill, boil them, and
then anoint the grief.

Against the disease called Nausea. Nausea, disposition or will to vomit,
lothing or abhorring of things.

TAke of the herb called Sauorie, being finely beaten, and let it be supped
fasting with a new laid egg rearely roasted, and it will do the effect.

To cause the natural places of women to purge.
Dry of the herb called Tansey, and being very finely brayed, give thereof to
drink in Wine the quantity of half an ounce.

To heal the hoarcenesse and straightness of the breast occasioned of evil
humors.
TAke of Taxus barbatus, of Fennel, and of Liquerice, of each like quantity,
and boil them in water or wine, until they be tenderlye sodden, then strain
them through a Linen cloth, and mix them with sugar, and give thereof unto
the sick person to drink.

A remedy to cause a woman to bring forth the dead creature, or the skin that
the child is wrapped in, called in Italian Secunda.
TAke the roots of white Diptamus, of Gentian, of Aristologia rotunda, of each
like quantity: bray them into powder, and mix therewith the juice of Diptamus,
and put thereunto of Artemesia poudred, and making thereof suppositories,
apply them unto the neck of the Matrix.

To cure the distillation of urine.
TAke of Epithimus what quantity you think good, and boil it in good wine,
and oil olive, and then taking it out of the vessel, lay it hot between the
Nauil and the privy members, and he shall be healed.

Against redness and dropping of the eyes.
TAke of the blossoms which grow out of the plants of the Beans before they
be yellow, and distill them in Balneo Mariae, and take of the said water, and
drop thereof into the eyes at night, and it will dry up all superfluous
humiditie, and remedy the redness. The water of Taxus barbatus works the
like effect in washing the eyes therewith. It helps likewise to wash the
eyes with the water of Tormentill, into which is put a little of preparated
Tutia.

To remedy the broken coddes of children.
TAke of the roots of Enula in the end of May, or between the midst of
Iulie and September, and of the water of them, being distilled through a
Lembick, cause the sick to drink two or three ounces, both morning and Evening.

Against the bitings of mad Dogs.
TAke of the roots of Gentian one dram, of Mirrha two drammes, of the eyes
of burnt Crabbes two drammes, boil altogether in wine, and being strayned,
give a cup full thereof three mornings continually unto the party that is
bitten. Then wash the wound with sea water: but first you must lay some of the
powder thereon to draw out the putrified blood.

To remedy the intemperate heat of the liver.
TAke of Liuerwort, of Garden and wild Endive, of each a handful, of Maiden
hear half a handful, boil them in water with a little sugar, and being
clarified, put unto the decoction a little of the wine of Pomegranates of an
indifferent taste, and give the party to drink thereof certain days.

To expel sadness.
TAke of the herb called Cranes beke, of Rue, of Pulegium, of each like
quantity, bray them into powder, and with sugar make little morsels and use
them.

To remedy an old inueterated cough.
TAke of dried Horehounde three pounds, put it into a new glased earthen pan,
and put thereunto ten pounds of fountain water, and boil it until the
third part be consumed, then strain it into another pan, and put thereunto of
good honey one pound and a half, and of the powder of pepper half an ounce:
and then boil it again so long that the third part be consumed, and it
become thick. Keep it in a vessel of glass, of the which the sick person
shall take morning and evening, and at middaye, a spoonefull at a time.

Against the pain of the stomach and the disease called Nausea.
TAke of Rue, of Smallage, of Dill, and of Comin, of each like quantity: boil
them in a pound and a half of wine, then put thereunto of old oil three
pound, boil it again, and being taken from the fire, you shall dip therein so
much of unwashed wool as shall be sufficient to compass the stomach: and the
diseased person being laid upright, you shall lay it upon him, and after one
hour you shall take away the said wool, and make it clean, and anoint the
pacient again with Oleum Nardinum, and then cause him to walk a little.

To remedy the stinking or chappes of the toes.
TAke and boil fresh Veale in Vinegar, and put it into the chappes, or else
rub the place with the powder of Mirrha, or Beniomin finely brayed.

Against the pain of the stomach.
TAke a quantity of green Peach leaves well brayed, and mix therewith old
grease being very well purified, then spread it upon a linen cloth, and
apply it unto the stomach in manner of a plaster.

To heal the perilous flix and excotiation or rasing of the bowels, called
Dissintiria.
TAke the spinie part of an hedgehog, and burn it, then beat it into powder,
and if the sick person be without an Ague, give him it to drink with wine,
but having an Ague give it with water, and by the space of six days
continually you shall cause him to drink one of the said heads, and he
shall be hole: or else take of the rennet of an Hare the quantity of an Hasill
nut dissolved in wine or Goats milk, and give it the sick person to drink:
or else take a live Hare, and having cut the throat thereof, take that hot
blood, and boil it in broth, and cause the sick to eat thereof, considering
notwithstanding, that if the sick person avoid blood downward, to braye the
tops of Male Nettels, and of the juice mixed with cold water or Vinegar, you
shall give thereof to drink three days continuallye unto the sick person.

Against the Cholike.
TAke a green Plouer, and burn it with his feathers, and of the ashes you
shall give the sick to drink: or else take of Mintes as much as you may hold
in three fingars, of Fennel seeds two ounces, powder them, and give thereof
to drink unto the sick person one dram in six ounces of warm wine.

A remedy for him whose fundiment is out, to cause it to abide in.
Wash it as often as it comes forth with warm wine, in the which is boiled
Veruene, and mix it with a little Lie, which is not very strong. It helps
also to anoint it with liquide Pich, and so put in.

To heal broken Kibes.
TAke and lay upon them the lunges of a Ram: or else the ashes of Battes, or
Rattes, or of carthwormes mixed with oil and laid upon the sore. It helps
also to take the ashes of the teeth of an horse, and lay it on them. If they be
not broken, lay upon them Alum brayed with vinegar.

To draw out thorns or any other thing fastened in the flesh.
Lay upon the place a sponge or lock of wool washed in hot urine, and it
shall do the effect: or else take the body or head of a Lucert opened in the
midst, and laid upon the place. To do the like effect, take nettle roots
brayed with salt, and lay them on the hurt: or else the roots of Agrimonie
brayed and laid thereon.

To take away Wartes.
WHen you kill a Pigge, wash the Warts with that hot blood, letting it dry
upon them, then presentlye after wash them, and they will be hole.

To remedy the stinking of the mouth.
Accustom to take of this mixture following, that is to say, of Pulegium
dried, of Serpillum or Origanum, of each like quantity, cause them to be
finely poudred and mixed with Honey, and when you go to bed, wash your mouth
with good wine, in the which Masticke is boiled, or else wash it with good
wine, in the which are sodden the leaves of Cinquefolie.

To remedy the pain of the loins. Ferola, is an herb like unto big Fennest,
it may be called Fennel Giant, or herb Sagapene.

TAke of quick Sulphur what quantity you think good, and being brayed into
powder mix it with the fat, or sewet of what beast you shall think good,
and then anoint. It helps also to take the seeds of wild Mintes brayed,
and mixed with Wheat flower, lay it on them: or else to bray the green leaves
of Ferola in wine, and to lay them thereon.

To remedy the difficulty of pyssing and pain of the bladder.
TAke of Pulegium, of Spikenarde, of Folium, of each like quantity: being
somewhat brayed, you shall put them into a little bag, and being warm, apply
it unto the grief. It helps also to take Horehounde, boiled it wine and
water, and being strayned, give it unto the sick person to drink.

To heal one that cannot keep his water.
TAke of Snayles called Africani, that is, such as are without their shelles,
and being burned, give the party oftentimes to drink thereof in wine. It
helps also to drink the brains of an Hare in wine, and to eat the reins
of the said beast.

To remedy the coming out of the Matrix.
FIrst you must dissolve with the juice of wormwood Aromatical spices, as
Gallia muschata, and Lignum Aloes, and therewith anoint under the Nauil. Then
take Rue, Castor, Artemesia, of each like quantity, boil them in good wine
until two parts be consumed, and being strained, give thereof the drink. Then
cause the Matrix to be put in with ones hands very softly, and cause her to
be set in a bath in the which are boiled, of Roses, of Pomegranat flowers,
called Balaustie, of Sumack, of the rindes of Pomegranates, of Galls, of
Mirtels, of the leaves and inward bark of an Oak, and of Cipres nuts.

To heal the itch and hardness of the Matrix.
TAke of Camphora, of Litharge, of Baye berries, as much as you think good,
and with the white of an Egg, make a suppositorie, and put it into the Matrix.
The powder of Fenegreke mixed with the blood of a Goose, and anointing the
place therewith, heals the hardness of the Matrix.

To remedy the windiness of the Matrix.
TAke of Mallows, of Pellitorie of the wall, and being boiled in water, make a
bathe for the woman, and after you shall put upon her body this plaster
following being warm.

Take of the juice of Taxus barbatus, and of Rapes, and being mixed with the
Meal of Barlie, make thereof a plaster.

To heal the pain of the head, occasioned through the French disease.
TAke of Aloes Epatice, one ounce, of the roots of Pimpernell, and Buglosse,
of each a handful, boil all these in three pintes of water, until two parts
thereof be consumed, and that which remains, you shall divide in four parts
to give him in stead of a sirop, it will purge him, and cease the pain.

To cause hear to grow where it is fallen away.
TAke and burn Acornes of an Oak, and mix the powder with the fat of a Bear,
and anoint the place.

To remedy eyes that be blood shot.
TAke of the milk of a Goat that is blood warm, and therewith fomentate the
eyes: or else bray the leaves of Verbena, with a little salt, and therewith
emplaister the eyes, that all the night they may be shut, and the day following
take it away, and continuing thus certain days, he shall be hole.

To heal the flix of the body and spitting of blood.
TAke of Gum Dragant, Gum Arabicke, of Sanguis Draconis, of Bole Armenia,
Amidum, of Spodium, of each four scruples: of the stone called Hematitis
grounded upon a Marble, of the juice of Plantin, of Poppie, of Mumia, of
Acatia, of Hipoquistidos, of each three drammes, of sirrop of Roses as much as
suffices, meddle them well together, and make thereof a lectuarie.

To remedy the Ptisicke.
BRaye Bettonie, and mix it with Honey, and make thereof a lectuarie: or else
beat Pine Apple kirnels, which are clean and new, and with soden wine, and
clarified Honey, labor them so long in the Mortar, that they come unto the form
of Honey, and use to take thereof. It helps also, to take the lunges and heart
of a wild goose boiled, and to eat thereof.

An ointment to heal the stiffenesse or shrinking of sinowes, called Spasmus,
coming of a wound taken of some venomous beast.
TAke of the meal of Line seeds, of the meal of Barlie, and of Orobi, of
each three ounces, of the meal of Beans one ounce, of Honye a pound: of
white vinegar three ounces: of hard Pitch six ounces: of Swines grease three
ounces, mix all together, and make thereof an ointment.

To make milk come into a woman's breasts.
TAke Dill and boil it well in water, and of the decoction you shall give unto
the woman to drink morning and evening four ounces at a time, and it will do
the effect.

To remedy the disease called in Italian Fuoco saluatico, and in English S.
Anthonies fire.
TAke of Burre roots, and of Sage leaves, and braye them very well, and make
thereof a plaster which you must lay upon the sore.

A very excellent remedy against wind in the left side, called in Italian
Melancholia mirachiale.
TAke of red Rose leaves six ounces, of Ciperus five drams, of Cloves, of
Asarum, of Mastick, of Spicknarde, of each six drammes, of Mace, of
Cardamomes, of Nutmegs, of each one dram, braye and mix them together: Then
take of Myrobolanes called Emblici one pound, the which you must boil in
seven pintes of water, until two parts thereof be consumed, strain it and put
unto the decoction one pound of Honey, then boil it again, until it be as
thick as Honey, then put it unto the spices before mentioned, and mix them
together with a spatter made of Willow, or of a Pomecitron tree, and aromatize
it with half a scruple of Musk, and use it in electuarie.

Another for the same.
TAke of Capillus Veneris, called in English Maiden hear, of Buglosse, of
Reisons, of each one handful, of Lignum Aloes, of Spicknarde, of Masticke, of
each two drammes, of Epithimum, of Polipodie, of Borage, of each half an
ounce, of the juice of Pome royals, one ounce and a half, of Sugar two pounds,
make thereof a sirop, and aromatize it with white Amber, and use it.

To remedy the want of sleep through frenzy.
Shave away the hear with a Raser, and anoint the head with the froth or
foam which swimmeth upon Cream, and be shall sleep forthwith.

To heal the falling sickness.
TAke of the Lungs of a Wolf, and wash them with good red wine, then boil
them, and dress them with Cordial spices, and give it in meat unto the sick
person, and he shall be healed: or else take of Opoponack, of Castoreum, of
Sanguis draconis, Castoreum in English signifies the Beuer stones much used in
medicine.
of Antimonie, of each like quantity, bray them and give thereof unto the sick
person two scruples, in what manner you will, and this shall be the quantity
whenever he takes it, and you shall see the success thereof to be marvelous.

To heal the trembling or shaking of the members.
Annoint the crown of the head and the places that are grieved with oil of
Cinnamonde, and cause the diseased person to take two drammes of the water that
is made of man's or Swines blood, brought unto putrefaction with Aqua vitae, and
after distilled, and of this you must give him to drink many times in a Month.

To remedy the tears, or itch of the eyes.
TAke of Aloes Epatici, two drammes, infuse it in sweet wine, and of Rose
water, as with the rest will fill a Cup: and therewith wash the eyes, or else
fomentate them with the water of Stecados.

To heal the sounding of the ears.
TAke of the leaves of Nightshade, and taking out of the juice distill thereof
into the ears. Also take ye oil of Irinum, mixed with Vinegar, and put
thereof hot into the ears. Likewise take Eleborus half sodden in Vinegar,
and being put into the ears, it heals the pain. Also take the juice of
white onyons, and mix it with like quantity of honey, and put thereof into the
ears. The like effect is done with the juice of Leekes mixed with woman's
milk, and put thereof into the ears.

To remedy the yoxe or hicket.
TAke of the juice of Quinces, and of honey, of each one pound and a half, of
Vinegar thirtene ounces and a half, boil them together, and put thereunto of
Ginger three ounces, of white Pepper one ounce, and use it. Or else braye Rewe
and dissolve it in white wine, and drink it. It helps also to take Comin
seeds, or Daucus, or Spica Celtica, or Pulegium, given in drink.

To remedy the beating, trembling of the body and the disease called Sincope.
TAke of Costus, Sincope signifies swounding,
of Folium, of Calamus Aromaticus, of Cloves, of each one ounce, of Galls, of
Acatia, of Rose leaves, of Spodium, of the Nuts of India, of Olibanum, of each
half an ounce, beat them and searce them, and with the juice of Quinces well
sodden make thereof a lectuarie with sugar, of the which you shall give unto
the sick person the quantity of an Hasill nut at a time.

To dry up the milk of the breasts.
BAth the breasts with the decoction that is made with ye leaves of Coleworts:
or else anoint with the juice of Plantine the heads or teates of the breasts,
and it will dry them presently.

To make soft or flagging breasts to become hard.
TAke the shelles of a Partridge eggs, and braye them well, and mix them with
yellow wax, and anoint the breasts: or else anoint the heads of the breasts
with the first menstruous blood of a woman, and it will have effect.

To remedy the vomiting of children.
TAke a quantity of dried Rue, and half as much Incense, mix them and make
thereof a powder, and give it to be drunken with sirrop of Roses, or Wine.

To remedy the pain of the stomach which happens with sharp belkings.
CAuse the sick person to take a dram or two of Agarici trocischati in form
of Pills, or otherwise, then let him drink a little wine, and he shall be hole.

To remedy the blood or milk engendered in the stomach.
Give the party a quantity of ye juice of Smallage with honey: Posca, a drink
made of Grapes after they be pressed.
or else give him to drink Assa fetida, with Gum Serapine in wine well
watered, the quantity of half a dram at a time. Above al remedies this
helps, to drink the milk or rennet of an Hare: or else the flowers of the
herb Heliocriso, or Posca.

To remedy the opilation of the liver.
CAuse the sick person to eat amongst his meats dry figs with Pepper: or
else give him to eat the seeds of Cuscuta, preserved with fine sugar.

To heal the Iaundice.
TAke Iuie when it has flowers, and boil it in white wine, which is neither
to sower nor to sweet, and give it the sick person to drink seven mornings
fasting. It helps also to give him to drink four ounces of the herb called
Cinquefolio:

To remedy an old pain of the liver, and of the belly and sides, with the
short ribs called Hypochondrium.
TAke Wormwoode and boil it in wine, Hypochondrium, the fore part of the
belly and sides, about the short ribs, and about the nauill, under which lies
the Liver, and spline.
and put unto the said wine, oil of Nuts, or of Spiknarde, and anoint the
place.

To remedy the hardness of the Livers, with the Iaundice.
TAke of oil of Roses one ounce and a half, of the juice of Wormwoode, of
Olium nardinum, and Masticke, of each half an ounce, of the powder of
Squinantum of Spodium of Cassia lignea, and of Cauda equian, of each two
drammes, of wax as much as suffices, and make thereof an ointment, with the
which you shall anoint upon the liver, with your hand, being first washed
with vinegar: and your stomach with your hand, being anointed before with
oil of Mastick.

To heal the flixe of Urine.
TAke of Spodium of Lignum Balsamum of Costus, of saunders, of Porcelane
seeds, of gum Dragant, of gum Arabic, of Amidum, of the rotes of Rubea
Tinctorum of Berberies, of the seeds of Endive, of bole Armenick, of each
four drammes, of Sugar one ounce. Beat all these things and searce them, and
make a lectuarie thereof with honey of Roses, as much as suffiseth, of the
which you shall cause the person to take every morning, one ounce. Then
annoint the back, and the place of the raines with Triacle, and Rose water,
mixed together. To remedy this grief is commended also, Porcelane,
Pomegranets, and Bursa Pastoris given in meats.

To provoke urine.
Give the seeds of Serpillum unto the sick person to drink in white wine: or
else boil in water the roots of Carlina, Serpillum is wild Time.
and make him to drink thereof. It helps presently to give him to drink in
wine the roots of Filipendola, Carlina is wild Hartichokes.
or else the seeds of Trifollie.

To remedy the burning of the urine.
TAke of the seeds of Citrons, and Gourdes the husks taken away, of each
four drammes, of Lettice seeds, and Porcelane seeds, of each two drammes, of
the juice of Liqueris one dram, of Roses half a dram, of Acorus one
dram, of the fruit of Mirtelles, and of Lentils mundifielde, of each one
scruple. Braye all these together, and with the juice of Porcelane make little
round cakes, waying a dram a piece, of the which you must give one at a time
unto the sick person to drink. It helps also to use Sebestians in meats:
or else the seeds of Lettice and of Porcelane eaten in good quantity with
Sugar, or given in drink.

To remedy the pain of the Bladder.
Boil in water the leaves of Laurel, and being taken out, put them in a
bag, upon the which the sick person must sit as long as it is hot. Or else
boil smallage, and strain it, and give him four ounces thereof to drink with
the flowers of wild Commin, and he shall be healed.

To heal the Colic.
TAke of Sentorie the lesser, of Camomill, of Rue, of Dill, of each one
handful, of Annis seeds, of Fennel, of Commin, of Carawaies, of Ameos, of
Bay berries, of each half a handefull, of the pulpe of Coloquintida bound in
a piece of Linen cloth two drammes, of sault Gemma one dram and a half,
boil all those aforesaid things in as much water as shall suffice: then take
of the decoction being strayned one pound, of oil of Rue three ounces, and of
oil Benedictum one ounce, and make thereof a Glister. It helps also to take
fasting one dram of this confection following. Take of dried Rue ten drammes,
of Ameos, of Commin, of Origanum, of Perseley, of bitter Almonds, of Pepper, of
Calamint, of Daucus, of long pepper, of Calamus Aromaticus, of each two
drammes, of Bay berries, of Castor, of gum Serapine, of Opoponacke, of each
three drammes, make a lectuary with honey: the which has not his like to
dissolve windiness, or ventositie.

To remedy the Flixe of the body.
TAke a quantity of the middle red bark or rynde of a Chestnut tree, and
boil it in water until two parts of the tree be consumed: and give that
which remains unto the sick person to drink.

Another for the same.
TAke of Myrtle berries finely beaten twelve drammes, of Rose leaves, of
Spodium, of Sumacke, of the three kinds of Saunders, of Balaustie, of gum
Arabic, of each one dram and a half, of the ryndes of Pomgranats burned seven
drammes of Coriander seeds infused in Vinegar and burned four drammes of
Sorell seeds, of Plantin, of Roses, of each two drammes, bray them and wash
them with the juice of Agresta, or of Quinces, and Vinegar, then dry it and
after mix the powders with the ^iua of Quinces and Vinegar, and make thereof a
Lectuarie.

To remedy the strayninges called in Italian Pondera.
TAke Coleworts, Pondera, signifies a great desire to go to the stool without
effect.
and boil them in water, then take them out and fry them in oil, and cause
the sick person to sit over it.

Another.
TAke and put upon coals in a hole, a Basin in the which is Colophonie,
Frankincense, and Tyrpentyne, of each like quantity: and let him sit over it,
to receive the fume which proceeds from under him.

To provoke the flowers, Secunda or Secundina, is the skin wherein the child
is wrapped in.
and the Secunda unto women.
TAke the heads of Garlic, and boil them in water, and cause the woman to
sit over it, to receive the fume from beneath.

Another for the same.
TAke Cassia Lignea, and Rubea Tinctorum, and the black rynde of Cassia
Fistula, beaten into very fine powder, and give the quantity of a dram
thereof to drink at once. The flowers of Policaria brayed, and dissolved in
white wine, being given to drink work the like effect.

An other most excellent remedy for the same.
TAke of Gentiana, of Pulegium, of each two drammes, of Nigella one dram, of
dry Figs as much as suffices: make a suppositorie and put it into the place
of nature, and it will provoke the flowers without grief.

To remedy the pain of the Matrix appostumated through gross humors.
TAke and boil the roots of Aristologia Longa, in water, and with the
decoction bath the place of the grief: It helps also to do the like, the
roots or fruit of Ieneper.

To heal the pain of the matrix happened through wind.
Annoint the place with oil of Cinamond, myxed with oil and common wax, or
else give unto the woman to drink, of the roots of Doronici or of Ciperus,
with good white wine, the quantity of a dram at a time.

To heal the prefocation of the matrix.
Annoint the neck within the matrix with oil of Margerum, or with Olium
Mustellinum, or with the oil of white Lillies, in the which is dissolved a
little Musk.

To remedy the coming out of the matrix.
EMplayster the matrix with the leaves of Netles, and it will bring it unto his
place: Bitume, is a certain glewie earth found in the pr^tes about Bahilon,
which is called also Aspaltum.
or else take of Bitumen, that is, of Aspaltum two parts, of Ox dung one
part, bray them and make a fumigation under it.

To remedy the itche of the purse of the testicles.
Annoint the place first with the juice of Walwort which is warm, and when it
shall be dry of it self, upon it annoint with oil of Roses wrought a long
space upon a plate of lead with a pestell of lead. Or else take of gum
Dragant, of Sulfur Citrine, of Litarge, of each like quantity, bray them well
and mix them with Vinegar, putting thereunto a little Opium, and therewith
annoint the diseased place.

To heal the pain of the Hemerhodes.
Annoint the place with Liquide Vernice, and presently it will help, or else
take the yolke of an egg, and of the fat of an Hen which is made liquide,
with a little oil of Roses and Saffron, and mix them all in a Potinger which
must stand in cold water, and therewith annoint the place.

To remedy the hardness or stiffness of the joints.
TAke of the dregs of Olium Irinum, and of the oil of Lynseades, of the
Muscillage of Fenegreke, of the fat of a Ducke, of the marrow of the shankes of
a Calfe, of the roots of wild Cucombers, of the grease of a black Hen, of
Armoniacke, of each like quantity, dissolve the Armoniacke with oil and wax,
and putting thereunto the other things, make an ointment. It helps also to
annoint the diseased with the oil of Trifolie when it is ripe.

To heal the Sciatica.
AFter the purging of the body, it is very good to draw blood from the foot
of the diseased side by the vain Malleole, which is upon the instep, and then
to put upon the Sciatica a piece of linen cloth bathed in Aqua vitae. It
helps also to annoint the place with oil of Iuie drawn out by Alchemistri.
The disease is also cured by eating fried Iuie in Frytters the space of nine
days fasting. The like effect is seen by taking the roots of Tormentill
being finely brayed, and ministered in the Winter, with Iuie water, and in the
Summer with conserve of Roses. It is in use also to take two parts of sea
water, and one part of good white Wine, and a dram of the powder of the rynds
of sour Pomegranates, and being mixed to make thereof a glister, and it will
heal the grief.

To remedy the griefs, and inueterated swellings of the knees.
TAke of Goats dung, and mix it with the meal of barley, and make a plaster
with Vinegar and water, and put it upon the swelling.

To take away swellings after the Gout cease.
TAke of the ashes of burned Oyster shelles, and of the ashes of Spongies, and
of Dodder, as much as you think good, boil them in sharp wine with a little
water, and therewith wash the feet: but first you must fomentate them with a
piece of a millstone burned and quenched in vinegar. It helps also to
fomentate the place with the decoction of stichwoorte and to emplaister the
same.

To drive away venomous Beasts.
TAke Bdelium, Serapine, Piche, Hearts horn, or the hoof of a Goat, or
Brimstone and Incense, and perfume the place: the like effect is done by
smoking the place with the hoof of an Ass.

To take away spots out of the skin.
Annoint them with the warm blood of a black Hen, and they shall be hole:
or else take Eleborus, of Incense, of Liquide piche, of each like quantity:
braye them, and mix them with oil of Ceder apples, and Vinegar, and work
therewith. It remedieth also to rub the spots with the roots of Mandragora
standing in the Sun five days continually. It heals likewise to take the
water of Radishes distilled through a Limbecke, and therewith to wash the
spots, or else to annoint the skin with the meat of Orobo mixed with Honey.

To heal Ringwormes.
BVrne a piece of course Linen, and when it is kindled, put it upon a plate of
clean Iron: or else in a dishe, and there it will leave a certain humiditie,
with the which, annoint the Ringwormes, and it will heal them. Or else take of
the Gum of a wild Pineapple tree, and put thereunto Honey, and Vinegar, and
anoint the place.

To remedy the wanne speckes, or pimples of the face.
TAke of a Hare new killed, and with the blood thereof while it is warm
annoint, and it will help. Or else annoint them with Cinamond beaten, mixed
with honey. Also take the grease of a Ducke in the which is mixed washed
Litarge, and annoint the place, and it works the like effect.

To remedy the opilations of the liver and of the milt.
TAke of Calomus Aromaticus one pound, bray it a little, and infuse it in a
sufficient quantity of Vinegar, and then boil it in that same Vinegar until
half thereof be consumed: then strain it well through a linen cloth, and put
unto the decoction of good honey six ounces, and boil it until it come to the
substance of a sirrop: whereof you must use to take morning and evening fasting,
the quantity of an ounce and a half, at a time, and you shall have your
desire.

To remedy the baldness of the head.
TAke a quantity of Sothernwoode, and put it upon kindled Coals to burn,
and being made in powder, mix it with Oil of Radishes, and annoint the balde
place, and you shall see a great experience.

To stop bleeding at the Nose.
TAke of the yelow seeds which grow in the midst of Roses, of Sanguis
draconis, of Terra, Sigillata, of Armenick, of each one dram, of the hears
of an Hare burned, one dram and a half, beat all these into fine powder,
and make a bag bathed in the white of an Egg, with some of the foresaid
powder being put therein, and so put it into the nose, and it will do the effect.

Against the excoriations, and griefs of the body.
TAke of the herb called Alchimilla, Gallitricon is an herb that makes one
neese.
braye it and take out the juice by a linen cloth, then take of Gallitricon,
and of Hipericon made in powder, and being meddled, give thereof to drink. Or
else take of chosen Agrick two drammes, bind it in a linen cloth, and boil
it in water, with Mallows, Violet leaves Paritarie, and Porcelane, of each one
handefull: Then take a pound of the said decoction, of oil Olive, three
ounces, and make a Glister, which you shall find marvelous good.

To heal the flixes of the stomach and bowels.
TAke of good Vinegar a possenet full, and boil therein of Aristologia rotunda
half an ounce, of Cloves half an ounce brayed grosely, and with a sponge
infused in the decoction, you must bath the stomach and the nauill.

To heal the issuing forth of the Fundiment.
TAke of Taxus Barbatus, and of the flowers of Pimpernell, of flower Deluce, as
much as you please, boil them in wine, and being taken out, emplayster the
place about his Fundiment, and it will return unto the place.

To heal streynings.
TAke of Basil, and boil it in Vinegar, and Oil, until it be very tender,
and with the decoction bath the place.

Against the belkings of the stomach.
TAke of the flowers and rindes of Pomegranets, and beat them into powder,
then boil them in Vinegar, in the which you must infuse a sponge, and with
bathing the stomach the pain will cease.

Against Chilblaynes, or Kibes.
TAke the rines of Pomegranets, and braye them well, then boil them in wine,
and being well beaten, put it upon the grief, and you shall see a very trim
effect.

Against hardness of the Milt, and of other members, and the Palsy.
TAke of the green leaves of Bearefoote, eight ounces, of Sauine, of Sage, of
Mallows, of Margerome, of Rosemarie, of Pulegium, of Motherwoort, of
Wormewoode, of Sothernwoode, of each two handfulles, of cloves six ounces, of
Cinamonde half an ounce, of Commin two ounces, of Galingale, three drammes, of
Incense, and of Masticke, of each four drammes, of white Wax, eight ounces,
of good wine three pintes. Boil all these a foresaid things until the wine
be consumed, then take it from the fire, and put unto it the wax, and make an
Ointment, with the which annoint where need requires.

To remedy the grief of the loins and belly.
TAke water Mintes and dry them, and make powder thereof, and give two drammes
of that unto the sick person to drink in three ounces of the water of
Radishes, and you shall see a happy success.

To heal the pimples in the face.
Anoint the face with the oil of the seeds of Bombace, and it will cleanse
the face from the speckes or pimples.

Against windiness of the Belly.
TAke of Annis seeds, of Fenell seeds, and of the roots of Bruscie, and of
Sugar, of each like quantity, make powder thereof, and give unto the sick
person a sponefull to drink in good wine, and it will heal him.

To cause a woman to avoid the skin that the child is wrapped in, called in
Italian Secondina.
TAke of the flowers of Marigoldes, and being dried make powder of them, and
put thereof about a great wax candell, and being lighted make therewith a
fumigation unto her place of nature, and it will do the effect.

An excellent preservative against the Pestilence and Dropsey.
TAke one ounce of the juice of green nuttes, of the juice of Agrimony half
an ounce, of the juice of Rue three drams, of the juice of Isope three ounces,
of the juice of Hemp four ounces, meddle them together, then take of the
said mixture half an ounce, of Mumia half a dram, of Sugar Candy half an
ounce, of Sugar Rosate one dram, make a lectuarie, of the which, dissolve in
good wine the quantity of a Chestnut, or else in Buglosse water, or of the
flowers of Marygolds, and many nights when you go to bed, use to drink thereof.

To remedy the yexings of the stomach and vomitings, and loss of appetite,
occasioned through cold humors.
TAke of the seeds of Cardamomes, and of Lignum Aloes, like quantity, and
being finely beaten, drink a dram thereof in good sweet wine two hours
before you eat meat, and if you add thereunto Annis seeds, it will restore
the appetite which is lost.

To heal the Quarterne ague and all agues, which by nature continue long time.
TAke of Cardus benedictus, one dram, and being made in powder, you shall
cause the pacient to drink it a quarter of an hour before his fit take him,
then cover him well in his bed, and you shall see a marvelous effect: or else
give him to drink three ounces of the water of the same herb distilled in
May, it will cause him to sweat abundantly, and cease his pain.

Against the Pestilence.
TAke of the roots of Tormentill finely poudred, one dram: of Triacle half a
dram, dissolve it in Sorrel water, and give it unto the diseased to drink.

To heal the flix called Dissinteria.
Give unto the sick person one dram of the powder of Tormentill roots to
drink with good red wine, and in taking it oftentimes he shall be healed.

To restore the appetite that is lost.
TAke of the seeds of Spire Trifolie, and boil them in wine, and give the
sick person to drink thereof three days continually, morning and evening, and
presently after, give him to drink a dram of powder of Ginger, dissolved
with vinegar, then cause him to be well covered in his bed, and he shall be whole.

To take spots away that grow in the eyes.
Boil in wine the flowers and roots of Valerian, and distill of that wine
being cold into the eyes, and you shall see a present success.

Against the pleurisey.
DIstill in the midst of August through a Limbeck the roots of Valerian, and
bathe in the water pieces of Linen cloth, and put them hot upon the evil:
also if you give the pacient thereof to drink, it will heal him.

A medicine for women which through fatness can not conceive.
TAke of the herb Bettonye, and make it into powder, and give unto the woman
one dram to drink thereof, in half an ounce of the water which is distilled
of the same herb, and it will do the effect.

Against the Hemerodes:
TAke of the wood of Vines and make ashes thereof, and being dissolved in
vinegar, annoint the place oftentimes and it will heal them, or else take of
the stope, or caulking which they take out of old ships with the Piche, and
being put into a hole with coals make thereof a smoke, and cause the sick
person to sit thereon and he shall be whole. It helps also to boil the
leaves of Colewortes with water and butter, and let the pacient sit over it to
receive the fume, and he shall be healed.

To take away Warts.
TAke of the water which distilleth from the Vines, at such time as they be
cut, and with that mix the water which is wont to remain in the leaves of
Oaks, and wash them often therewith.

To remedy the infection of the skin.
TAke of the roots of Vines, and boil them in water with the seeds of
Fetches and Fenegreke, and therewith wash the place.

To accelerat the birth.
TAke out the juice of Vine leaves, or else boil them in good white Wine, and
give four ounces thereof unto the woman to drink, either of the one, or other.

To remedy the Quinsey.
TAke out the meat of an Orange, and fill it with Hens dounge, then put
thereunto oil of Roses and a little Saffron, and boil it upon a fire of
coals, and when you have taken it from the fire, bray it and make thereof a
plaster, and bind it under the throat, having first well purged the body.

To heal the Cough*
TAke of Tyrpentine, and of clarified Honey, of each like quantity, and being
mixed with an Egg somewhat sodden, give it unto the pacient to drink.

To make a lean person to become fat.
TAke of the seeds of Orobo, and after you have dried them at the fire braye
them, and mix them with Honey: and of the mixture you shall give unto the sick
person every morning the quantity of a Nut fasting, or else take of the meal
of Amidum, and of Sarcocolla of each five ounces, mix them with Butter and
make thereof a paste, the which you shall bake until you can make powder
thereof: of the which powder for the space of many days, give ten drams at a
time unto the person to drink.

To make a fat person become lean.
TAke four ounces of warm Vinegar, and put therein a quantity of the powder
of Pepper, and give it unto the party to drink many mornings fasting, and he
will become lean, or else give him to drink every morning of the Wine of
sower Pomegranates, Oximel is a medicine made of honey and water sodden together.
two scruples with Oximell, or water.

To heal Wartes or hard knobbes.
TAke of the ashes made of the wood of a Wyllowe, and mix it with the sower
pulpe of a Ceder apple, and make thereof a plaster, and lay it upon them and
they will be healed. It helps likewise to annoint them with the blood or
dounge of a Ratte dissolved in vinegar, or else with water of the wood of
Vines, that comes of them when they are burnt in the fire: or else rub them
oftentimes with the leaves of Porcelane.

To heal the Cough.
TAke of Lyneseedes, and put them into a warm Cup that they may dry, of
Reysons the stones being taken out, of each four ounces: of sweet and bitter
Almondes, of Pine kernels mundified, with two ounces of roasted Nuttes, of the
roots of Ireos, of Rosyn, of each two drammes: of Incense, of Mastick, of
Myrrha, of Saffron, of each one dram, braye them all, and with the milk of
an ass, make little round cakes or rolls and being dried make powder thereof,
and with honey make a lectuarie, of the which you shall give unto the pacient a
dram at a time with a littell small wine, morning and evening, and let him
keep a little thereof continually under his tongue.

To remedy the cough of children.
TAke of sweet Almonds blaunched, as many as you please, braye them well, and
dissolve them with Fennel water distilled through a Limbecke, and putting
Sugar thereunto, boil it until it become thick, and give it unto children to
eat.

To take white spots from the nails.
TAke of quick Sulphur, and being brayed, mix it with Turpentine and Pitch,
and put it upon the nails: or else put thereon of Myrrha beaten with liquide
Piche, and it will do the effect.

To remedy the flegmaticke humor in the bladder and reins.
TAke of the herb called Linarea, the roots and flowers, and boil them in
water, and give the sick person to drink, of the decoction four ounces,
morning and evening, and it will consume the fleume in those parts,
considering notwithstanding, that such a remedy helps when the discending of
the humors in those places, happen through a cold cause, and not of a whote.

To remedy the flix of urine.
TAke the roots of the herb aforesaid, and bray them well, and put them in
manner of a plaster between the nauill, and the lower place of the belly, and
it will heal it.

To remedy the Dropsey.
TAke the roots of the herb called Hirundinaria, of some it is called
Asclepiade, and being brayed, infuse them a whole night in wine: then boil
them until the third part be consumed, and give unto the diseased party
every morning four ounces thereof to drink, and causing him to be well
covered in his bed that he may sweat, you shall see a marvelous good effect.

To remedy the griefs and blood retained in the Matrix.
Boil the foresaid herb in white Wine, and taking the fume thereof from
beneath, as soon as the woman shall be taken from the fire, you shall see an
expedite proof.

To heal the burnings or inflammations of the gout.
TAke a quantity of the meal of Barlie, of the seeds of Quinces half as
much: bray them and mix them with vinegar, and lay it upon the grief.

To heal the Ptisicke, or an old Catarre, the cough and other defectes of the
lunges.
TAke of Isope one handful, of dry figs four, of Rewe a little, boil them
together in water and a little honey, and of the decoction being warm, give a
glass full unto the sick person to drink fasting.

To procure the birth of dead Creatures, and to remedy the stingings of
venomous beasts.
IN the beginning of September gather the berries of Juniper, when they be
ripe, and being a little bruised, distill them through a Limbeck, and give the
woman four ounces to drink thereof, and you shall see the effect.

To remedy all the passions of the sinews.
TAke Lauander, and cut it very small with his flowers, and being distilled
through a Limbecke, give two ounces at a time to drink of the water that shall
be gotten thereof: washing the head also with the said water, then dry it, and
it will help very much the sinews.

To heal the itch.
TAke of Lapacium acutum, or of Sorell, and boil it in water, and wash
therewith the diseased person: or else take of the roots of Laurel, and being
well brayed with Salt and bread, anoint therewith the body. The like effect is
done with the decoction of Agrimonie and Sage, made with rain water, and
washing therewith the sick person.

To remedy the pains of the stomach and of the milt, and the windiness of
the body.
TAke of the seeds of Louage, of Cinnamond, of Rapontici, of Galangale, of
each like quantity, and with Sugar make a confection into little tablets, and
give thereof unto the sick person, making him to drink a little wine after it,
and it will work a very good effect.

To heal the griefs and hardness of the milt.
TAke of the roots of white Lyllies, of Bear foot, of marshe Mallows, of
each three ounces, braye them and boil them in half a pynt of oil Olive,
Apoplexia is a sickness engendered of gross humors, filling the receptories of
vessels of the brain, and therefore depriueth of feeling, speech and moving.
until it become thick, then strain it through a linen cloth, and putting
thereunto Wax, make an Ointment, with the which you shall annoint the place of
the grief or swelling, warming it morning and evening.

To comfort the brain, or to heal the Apoplexia, and the Colic.
TAke of the flowers of Lyllies that grow in the playnes, such quantity as you
will, and infuse them to become tender in Wine, by the space of four weeks,
then casting away the flowers, distill the Wine five times, of the which you
must drink a little with six graynes of Pepper, and a little Lauander water,
and you shall be safe from the Apoplexia. And washing therewith your forehead
and the hinder parts of your head it comfort the brain, and causes a good
memory, and the quantity of a sponefull thereof, being drunk heals the
pains of the Colic.

To remedy the white flixes, and coldness of the Matrix.
TAke Margerom and distill it in the end of May by a Limbeck, and cause the
woman to drink of the water that shall be gotten thereof three ounces at a
time, and she shall be whole.

To heal the Colic and difficulty of pyssing.
TAke of the leaves of Hoarehound, of the flowers of Rosemarie, of Liquerice,
of Persely seeds, of each half a handful, of Reysons, of Prunes, and of
Iuiubes of each one ounce, of the four common hot seeds five drammes, of
Radishes four ounces, boil them with water and a little wine of Pomegranates,
until half be consumed, then strain it, and with Sugar make it pleasant, of
the which, cause the sick party to drink two ounces at a time.

To heal the coming out and prefocation of the Matrix.
TAke a quantity of Balm leaves, and dry them, and cause the woman to drink
thereof in broth or wine, and she shall be healed. It helps also the
prefocation of the Matrix, to take the water that is distilled of the said
herb, and to drink thereof.

To drive away the heaviness of the mind, to accuate the senses, and to make
a good memory.
TAke Balm and braye it, and stipe it till it become soft in good wine in an
earthen vessel well covered and stopped, then distill it by a Limbeck, and
every morning give unto the sick person a spoonefull to drink.

To remedy the congelation of the milk within the breasts.
TAke of the leaves of Mintes, and boil them in as much wine, and oil as
shall be sufficient: and being taken out, braye them and lay them upon the
hardness in manner of a plaster.

To heal the falling of the Vuula.
TAke of Rue, and of Coriander seeds in powder, and boil them in water of
Mintes, and with the said water being cold, cause the sick person to
gargarise, and he shall be hole.

Against fullness of the stomach, and Ptisick.
TAke and boil a Capon, and with it a handful of the herb Mercury, and take
a potinger of the broth, and put therein some sugar, and give it the sick
party to drink, and it will heal the grief.

To remedy the retention of the skin called Secunda, and to cause the avoiding
thereof.
TAke a quantity of the herb Mercury, and bray it, and with oil of Roses or
white Lillies, mix it well, and make a Pessarie with a piece of fine Linen
cloth, and apply it unto the neck of the Matrix.

To heal Warts.
RVb the Warts with the herb Mercury, or with the juice thereof, and they
shall be healed, or else with the herb Purcelane.

To stop the flix of blood in women.
TAke a quantity of the herb Milfollie, and bray it, and being put into the
place of nature, you shall see a present remedy: or else put hot Millium into
a little bag, and cause the woman to hold it unto her hippes, and the pain
will cease.

To stop the white flix of the Matrix.
TAke of the flowers of the herb Eruca, and beat them into powder, and mix
therewith the like quantity of the herb called Mouse ear, or Chickweede, and
of Origanum, and with half the quantity of Sugar make a lectuarie in little
rowles, and cause the sick to eat thereof: or else boil the leaves of
Trifolie in wine, and give thereof to drink: or else of the water of the said
herb distilled in May. The water of dead Nettles, the quantity of three
ounces being drunk, does heal the like infirmity. The like also is done by a
fomentation made unto the lower parts with the decoction of the moss of trees.

To heal a quarterne Ague.
TAke of Asarabacca one dram, and make powder thereof, and give it unto the
sick party to drink in white Wine, one hour before his fit take him, for
within a short space it will purge him either vpwardes or downwards and heal
him.

Against the Ptisick.
TAke of Filipendola roots, and of Gentiane, of each one dram, beaten into
powder, use to drink thereof many times in water of Honey, and it will heal
you.

To remedy the redness of the face.
TAke of the leaves of young Fennel, of old Swines grease, of each like
quantity, mince them well together with a a knyfe, then braye them a little,
and at night annoint the face: and in the morning wash the face with Persely
water, and it will work a very good effect.

To heal the Sciatica.
TAke of Strawberies, four handfulles, boil them in as much water as shall
suffice, and bathe therewith the place of the grief, and after annoint it with
this ointment. Take of Vnguentum dealthea, one ounce, of Honey, half an ounce,
of Wax, one dram, mix them and make an ointment thereof, which by using
will make a marvelous effect.

Against wheales or blisters of the face.
TAke in the midst of spring time of the leaves of an ash tree, bray them, and
let them stand to mollify five days in Vinegar, then distill them in Balneo
Marie, and with the water wash contynually the face the space of three weeks,
and it will be whole.

To recover a lost appetite.
TAke of Galingale, of Pepper, of Parsely seeds, of each two drammes, make
powder thereof, and with new Honey make a Lectuary: of the which take morning
and evening, the quantity of a sponfull, two hours before meat.

To take away moles or spots which children take in their mothers bellye.
TAke in the Month of March the roots of Auens, together with the leaves, and
being brayed, distill them through a Limbecke, and with the water that shall be
drawn thereof, wash often the spots, or Moles, and they will be healed.

To heal the yelow iaundice:
TAke of Artemesia, of Scolopendria, of each one handful, of Wormwood the
third part of a handful, boil them in white wine that is not sharp, neither
sweet, until the third part be consumed, putting the Wormwood unto it in the
end, and adding thereunto of Sugar, cause the sick party to drink four
ounces thereof continually the space of nine days every morning in stead of a
sirop, and he shall be healed.

To remedy the griefs of the head, which through the beating of the artiers,
do not suffer one to take sleep.
TAke of Wormwood well brayed and boiled in water, and bind it unto his
temples upon the grief: which presently will mitigate the pain, and cause him
to take a pleasant sleep.

To heal the Ptisick occasioned of gross and viscous humors.
TAke of Gentian, of Calamus aromaticus, of each half an ounce, of Aristologia
longa, one ounce: beat them into fine powder, and mix therewith honye of
Roses, and make a lectuarie, of the which you shall give unto the sick person
a spoonefull, in the Morning two hours before he eat meat, and you shall see
a happy success.

Against gravel or any other viscous matter engendered in the reins.
TAke of marshe Mallow roots four ounces, of Butter one ounce and a half, of
honey three ounces, of rain water as much as suffices, braye the roots, and
putting every thing into a possenet, boil them until the roots be well
sodden, and being taken from the fire, strain it through a linen cloth, or
searce, and cause the sick person to drink six ounces thereof fasting, let
him use this certain days, and you shall see a very happy success.

To dry up the milk of the breasts.
TAke a new earthen pot to boil with, and anoint it with oil Olive, and put
therein as much Tyrpentine as you please, then set it to the fire, and let it
boil a little: after put into it two pieces of linen cloth, which may drink
up the Turpentine, then spread them upon a board, and put upon them of the
powder of Olibanum, and apply them unto the breast where the dugges begin, and
you shall have your purpose.

To heal children that have worms.
TAke of Aloes, of white Diptamus, of Gentian, of worm seed, of each one
scruple, of Butter as much as suffices, make therewith an ointment, with the
which you must fill half a Nuts shell, and bind it upon the nauill of the
child, and in one night it will remedy him, it is a thing well proved.

To mitigate all kinds of griefs.
AFter the Month of May is passed, take of the coddes that Elmes bring forth
among their leaves, and take out the water within them, and put it into a
vessel well stopped, and set it in the sun twelve days, then anoint
therewith every part that is grieved, and it will make a happy success.

To cause milk to discende into the breasts.
TAke of the herb and seeds of Dill, boil them with Lentils, and give the
broth thereof to drink, and it will cause a marvelous effect: or else give her
the oil of Annis seeds with Fennel seeds, and you shall have a good
success.

Against yexings occasioned through cruditie of the stomach.
Unto Annis seeds boiled in wine and then dried, put thereunto of Cinamond,
and of Masticke, of each like quantity: and being made into fine powder, use
it in your meats as a medicine that has been proved.

To remedy the stinking of the breath, happened by eating of Garlic, or
such like meats.
TAke a quantity of the roots of Beetes, and roast them in hot embers, and
being eaten, they will do the effect: or else for the like cause give the
party to eat raw Beans, or Rue.

To heal the bitings of mad dogs.
TAke of the leaves of Figtrees, of the flowers of Camomill, and of Garlic,
of each like quantity, braye them, and apply them plaster wise upon the
evil.

To provoke the flowers unto a woman.
TAke of Labdanum as much as suffices, make thereof a Pessarie: and mix
therein of the powder of Myrrha, and of the juice of wake Robin, and apply it
unto the place of nature, and you shall see a very good success.

An excellent remedy against the dropsey.
TAke of Assarum one ounce, infuse it in a little Barrel of sweet wine by the
space of three Months, then strain it, and cast away the Assarum, and give of
the wine to drink morning and evening unto the sick person, and you shall see
a marvelous success.

Against the falling sickness.
TAke of Labdanum, of Cassia lignea, and of the juice of Wormwood clarified, of
each one scruple: braye them together, and make thereof three pills to take
one hour after supper, and use to do the like many times.

Against the weakness of the stomach through cold.
TAke of Cassia lignea, of Masticke, of Fennel seeds, of each half a dram:
and being beaten together, make a powder, and give it to drink fasting, being
dissolved with the juice of Wormwood.

To remedy the desire to vomit, and to restore the appetite that is lost.
GAther Centorie the lesser, at such time as it begins to flower, that is in
the end of June, and being minced small together with the flowers, distill it
through a Limbecke, and of the water which shall be distilled, give three
ounces unto the sick person to drink thereof morning and evening fasting, and
it will heal him. It heals also the Colic, and causes the procreation of
dead creatures.

Against the bitings of all venomous beasts.
TAke an Onyon, and braye it with fresh Rewe, Salt, and Honey, of each like
quantity, put it upon the biting. And it is marvelous.

Against the mistes, droppings, and redness of the eyes.
TAke of the flowers of Cherie trees at their time, distill them in Balneo
Mariae, and put of the water into the eyes of the diseased, morning and evening
cold, and it will work the intent.

Against the hardness and swelling of the liver or milt.
TAke Iuie and make it tender by infusing it ten days in wine, until it
become rotten. Then boil it until the wine be consumed: strain the juice,
and mix it with oil Olive, and wax, and make an ointment, wherewith anoint
the swellings.

To purge the Matrix of a woman.
TAke of Gum Serapine, of Myrrha, of Cithorie, of each like quantity, braye
them, and with oil of Camomill, and honey, dissolve them, and make thereof a
plaster, and having made a suppositorie, put it into the place of nature.

Against the Ptisick.
TAke of Saffron one scruple, of Musk half a grain, mix them, and dissolve
them in good wine, and give it unto the sick party to drink.

To remedy old inueterate griefs of the head.
TAke of Gum Arabic, of Myrrha, of Saffron, of Euphorbium, of each three
graynes: braye them all together, and mix them with the white of an Egg well
beaten, then apply thereof unto the temples and forehead, and presently you
shall have help.

Against Hemerodes that appear not.
TAke of the herb Cinoglossa, and distill it by a Limbecke, and of the water
that shall be taken thereof, give unto the diseased to drink the quantity of
three ounces in the morning, and he shall be hole, but if they shall be apparent
and come forth, wash them often with pieces of cloth bathed in the same water,
and they will be healed.

Against dry choughes.
TAke wild Daucus, and boil it in wine with the roots also, until they be
thoroughly sodden, putting thereunto a little quantity of dry figs: then
strain it, and give the sick person to drink of the wine oftentimes, and he
shall be healed.

To remedy the grief of the Hemerodes, and the chappings of the fundiment.
TAke of Bole Armenick, of Gum Arabicke, of Masticke, of Sanguis draconis, of
Myrrha, of dry Roses, of the flowers of Pomegranates, of each three drammes:
make of all these a powder, then take of fresh butter one ounce, of oil of
Roses three ounces, of the juice of the leaves of Leekes three drammes, of the
juice of Filopendola four ounces: set the juices, butter, and oil unto the
fire, and boil them until the juices be consumed: then put thereunto the
other things being beaten into fine powder, and make therewith an ointment to
annoint the grief.

An other for the same.
TAke of the grease of a Ducke and of a Hen, of each one ounce, of oil of
Roses two ounces, of wax three drammes, of the yelkes of raw eggs one, of
Opium in powder one dram, of Saffron half a dram, mix them all together,
and make thereof an ointment.

To heal the windiness and other passions of the Matrix.
TAke of Gallia muschata, of Labdanum, of Nutmegs, of Castor called in English
a Beuer, of the rennet of an Hare, of Bdelium, of each two drammes, of Baye
leaves, of Spikenard, of Masticke, and of Mirtell beries, of each two ounces,
of Oleum Nardinum, six ounces, of oil of Nutmegs one ounce, of white wax
three ounces, dissolve the wax with the oil, and put thereunto the other
things being finely brayed, and in the end put unto it the Nutmegs, and make
an ointment without fire, and making rolls of Piche annoint them with this
ointment, and put them into the conceyuing place of the woman.

To remedy the disease of the pleurisey.
TAke of the flowers of red Poppie, which grow amongst Wheat, and dry them in
the Sun, and having made them into powder, give a little thereof unto the
sick in his meats and drinks. Then anoint the place of the grief with oil
of Lisartes being warm, and you shall see the effect.

To heal the disease called Tigna.
TAke Nuts with their shells, dry them upon a Hearth, Tigna, a disease which
causes the hear of the beard or head to fall away.
and make them into powder, then mix it with old Larde of a swine without
salt, and therewith anoint the grief, and presently it will be healed.

To remedy the grief of the breasts, and to cause milk to discende.
TAke of Percely roots, and of the rennet of an Hare, of each half an ounce,
of Storax calamite, three drams, of new oil of sweet Almonds three ounces, of
Barley meal one ounce and a half, make therewith a plaster, and lay it upon the
breasts.

Against water and windiness in the testicles of children.
TAke four roots of white Lillies, of Line seeds, of Bean flowers, of each
one ounce, of Comin, of Daucus, of each four drammes, of Brimstone one dram:
of the fruit of Ciperus half an ounce, of Bdellium dissolved in vinegar two
drammes, of oil of Camomill six ounces, boil the roots and bray them: and
with the water of the decoction boil the meal, and mixing all together, make
a plaster, and apply it cold unto the grief.

To heal scabbed hands occasioned through the French disease.
TAke of the leaves of Nettles one handful: of Cinamonde, and of Cloves, of
each two drammes: boil them in water, and bathing the hands in the fume
thereof, they will be hole.

To stop the superfluous blood of the flowers.
TAke of the herb called Virga pastoris, and make it in powder, and give two
drammes thereof to drink in a potinger of the broth made with Peason, and it
will stop: or else boil it in vinegar, and being brayed, apply it under the
nauill, in manner of a plaster, and it will work the like effect.

To heal shronken and stiff sinews.
TAke of Ceruce, of Rosin, of old oil, of each one ounce, of Gum Amoniack, of
Galbanum, of the confection Ciphodea, of each one ounce: of wax four ounces.
Make an ointment and use it.

To remedy the evil countenance which proceeds of the Dropsey.
AFter the body is well purged, the sick must take morning and evening before
meat, one of these morsels following. Take of the powder of Dia lacca, of the
powder of Dia curcuma, of each one dram, of the seeds of Southistle two
drammes, of Lignum Aloes, of Cloves, and of Saffron, of each half a scruple, of
Sugar five ounces: dissolve the Sugar with water of Agrimonie, and make the
confection into rolls, every one containing one dram and a half.

To remedy the evil color of the face.
TAke of the roots of Turnips, and of the roots of Acorus, and being washed,
distill them with a Limbeck, and of the water that shall be drawn thereof cause
the sick to drink five ounces at once, continuallye the space of fiftene
days before meat, and you shall see a very good success.

Against the inflammation of the liver.
TAke of the juice of Endive three ounces, of the juice of Liver wort two
ounces, of mundified Tamarindes six drams, of red Saunders in powder one dram
and a half, of fine Sugar as much as suffices, dissolve the Sugar, with the
Tamarindes, and make a lectuarie: of the which, the sick party must take one
ounce every day.

To remedy the mistes or dymnesse of the sight.
TAke of Rape seeds, and make Comfets therewith, as you do of Annis seeds, of
which the sick using to eat, shall find marvelous ease: or else take of the
ashes of the heads of Swalowes two drammes, of good Honey three ounces, of the
juice of Fennel one ounce: put them into a vial of glass covered close at
the top, then boil it in Balneo Mariae until half be consumed: and of that
which remains, drop into the eyes early in the morning, and a little before
supper, and at night when he goes to bed, let him use this every day.

To remedy the want of hearing.
TAke of white Eleborus, of Saffron, of Sal niter, of Castoreum, of each one
dram, of Vinegar, of good Honey, of each one ounce: boil all these together,
and dipping therein a lock of wool, put it warm into the ear.

Against the trembling of the heart.
TAke of Cloves, of Cinamond, of each two scruples, of white Ben and red, half
a dram, of Saffron half a scruple, of Grains, of Ginger, of Galingale, of
each half a scruple, of Iacints, of Smeralds, of Saphires, of the bone of an
Hearts heart, of each one scruple, of Gold leaves six, of Margarites preperated
two drammes, of Conserve of Roses, and of Buglosse, of each one ounce and a
half. Beat into powder every of the foresaid things by himself, then put
them altogether into a Mortar with half a pound of Sugar, and put thereunto
half a pound of the sirop of the rindes of Ceder apples, and make a lectuarie,
of the which, the sick must take early in the morning, and at after noone, and
one hour before he sup, the quantity of half a spoonefull at a time, and after
it, let him drink two spoonefuls of wine aromatized that is sweet and pleasant.

Against the impediment of smelling.
TAke of the seeds of Nigella infused in vinegar one ounce, being first dried
in the Sun: of Castor, of Nutmegs, of each one dram, of the seeds of white
Ben, and red Ben, of Galingale, of white Pepper, of Origanum, of Calamint, of
each two scruples: of Costus, of Serapine, of Rue, of Basil seeds, of each
one ounce. Make powder thereof, and bind it in a fine linen cloth, and smell
often unto it.

Against worms in children.
TAke of Gotes milk half a potinger, and quench therein a piece of burning
Iron. Which milk being given unto the child to drink, will cause him to
avoid the worms from beneath.

Against great and swollen gummes.
CAuse the party to keep many times in his mouth the juice of Purcelane: or
else the Brine of white Olives, which are not ripe, being warm: or else let
him hold in his mouth oil of Lentils. After this it avails to sprinkle the
gummes with the powder of the rust of Iron or Copper: or with the powder of
Plantine seeds.

Against the opilations or other defectes of the liver.
TAke and distill through a Limbeck Dodder, at such time as it brings forth
seeds, and give to drink three ounces of the water that is distilled, using
to take it morning and evening, and you shall see an excellent success.

To remedy moles or signs which children have when they are borne.
TAke of the roots and of the herb Auens, and distill them in the end of May
through a Limbeck, and with the water wash the child often in those places,
and it will heal him.

To heal the coming forth of the nauill of children, and the ruptures within
them.
TAke of the herb Perfoliaton, and braye it, and put it upon the nauill of
children oftentimes, and you shall see the effect. The like effect is seen, if
you take a piece of linen cloth and being burned, to lay it upon the nauill
with a little oil Olive. The powder of the seeds of the said herb given in
wine, or in milk unto children, heals the ruptures within them.

To remedy the retention, and to cause a woman to avoid the skin called
Secundina.
TAke and boil in white wine the flowers of Pulegium, and being stilled, give
the woman four ounces thereof to drink fasting, and if that be not sufficient,
put thereunto a little of the juice of Leekes. It helps to the like intent to
give the woman four ounces of the juice of Borage.

Against the griefs and swellings of the Matrix, occasioned through ventositie
after the birth.
IF she be without an Ague, and knows the grief to proceed of ventositie.
Take of Mustarde seeds, or of Rape seeds, and boil them in water, and
therewith make fomentation unto the place. But if it happen through
inflammation, or through evil purging, with an Ague, cause the woman to drink
a dram of the powder of Pionie roots in broth: or else boil in broth of the
flowers of Camomill, and cause her to drink thereof.

Against the prefocation of the Matrix.
MAke powder of the leaves of Gourdes, and take a dram thereof, and being
dissolved in good wine, give it her to drink, and at every time that she
drinks thereof, she shall find a marvelous effect.

The end of the first Book
Of the fourth and last part of the Secrets of the Reverend Master Alexis of
Piemount.
The second Book
Against putrified or rotten wounds.
TAke of the juice of bruised leaves one pound, of the juice of Semper viue,
and of Aristologia longa, of each three ounces, of Verderame, and Aristologia
rotunda, of each one ounce, of oil Olive three ounces, of Wax as much as
suffices: make an ointment, and work therewith, and you shall have your desire.

To remedy bruses or stripes of the joints.
TAke of the herb called Maudlenwort, and boil it in water, and being taken
out braye it, and apply it unto the bruised place, which with resolving the
blood that is there congealed, will heal it.

To heal a Fistola.
TAke of the roots of Gladiola one ounce well brayed, and put thereunto of
Verderame, and of oil of Tartar, of each one dram, and put thereof into the
sore.

To remedy moist sores or scabbes in childrens heads.
TAke of white Soap four ounces, of Paritarie three ounces, of Sulphur viuo,
three drammes, braye them altogether, and with the juice of the foresaid herb
make a liniment: and the hears being shaven away, annoint therewith the
childs head: and the next day following, wash the head with Soap, in the
which shall be mixed the foresaid herb, and using it thus certain times, he
shall be healed.

To heal the itch.
TAke of oil of Nuts, of the juice of Fumiterre, of each three ounces: with
Wax make an ointment, with the which, after he is washed, if the diseased be
anointed, he will be hole.

To remedy old sores of the legs.
TAke of Aristologia longa, and of Aloes Epatice, of each one ounce: make them
into powder, and with Honey of Roses work it into a paste, and put thereof upon
the sores, but before it be applied thereunto, mundifie them with oil of
Tartar, or with the decoction of Myrrha, and within few days he will be hole.

Against the hardness and stiffnesse of sinews occasioned through wounds.
TAke twelve Frogs, of Swines grease, one pound, of oil of Bays two
pound, of Bay berries made in powder two ounces, of white incense in powder
one ounce, boil all these together until the bones of the Frogs be
separated from the flesh, then strain them through a linen cloth, and make an
ointment. Wherewith annoint the diseased member at night when the party goes
to bed, and then wrap it with the skin of a dog. And in the morning wash it
with this decoction following. Take of the roots and leaves of Agrimonie, of
the roots of Mallows: boil them in water until they be tender, and wash the
member oftentimes therewith, and you shall have good success.

To take out thorns or any other thing fastened in the flesh.
TAke of the roots of the herb Narcissus, and of the meal of Cockell, as
much as you will, braye them and mix them with Honey, and put them on the evil.

To dissolve dead blood, happened through stripes, or falling from some high
place.
TAke of Commin and Salt of each one ounce, of Honey four ounces, make your
powder, and put it into a possenet, or earthen boiling pot with the Honey, and
let it boil a little, then annoint the grief therewith, and you shall see a
good success.

Another which works the same effect.
TAke of Wormwood that is green three handfulles, of the green leaves and
roots of Consolida two handfulles, of Camomill, of Mellilote, of each one
handful, of the meal of Fenegreke, and of Linseedes, of each three drammes:
of the meal of Beans four ounces, of the meal of Barlie, and of gross
Branne, of each one ounce and a half, of Daucus, of Annis seeds, of each one
dram and a half, of oil of Camomill, of white Lillies, of Roses, and of
Butter, of each six drammes, of Saffron one scruple, make a plaster and
apply it unto the grief, and you shall see a very excellent experience.

Against impostumes and griefs of the Hemerodes.
TAke a white onyon well roasted in the embers, make it very clean, and being
brayed, mix it with the meal of Fenegreeke, of Linseedes, and of Camomill
flowers as much as suffices, and put thereunto a little Butter, and four
graynes of Saffron, and lay it upon the grief. It helps also the pains of
the ears caused of cold or gross humors.

To stop the bleeding of wounds.
TAke of the herb called Alchimilla, and of Sanicola, of each one handful,
boil them in rain water: then take of earth worms brayed, and strained
through a linen cloth into the decoction. Of the which, the party drinking
four ounces at a time morning and evening, you shall see a good success.

To dissolve the blood congealed in the body, caused through wounds or other
accidents.
TAke of Alchimilla, of Fennel, of Sage, of Persly, of each one handful: of
Annis seeds, of Fennel, of Isope, and of Euula Campana, of each two ounces:
boil all these in two pintes of water until the third part be consumed, and
drinking oftentimes of the said decoction, you shall see a marvelous
experience.

To remedy festered and inflamed wounds.
TAke of the juice of the herb called Pimpernell and of Semperuiue, of each
half a pound, of oil Olive one pound: put them all into a vessel to boil,
until half be consumed, then put thereunto of Butter four ounces, of
Verderame half an ounce: make thereof a very perfect ointment.

To heal wounds wherein were fastened thorns, or other such like things.
TAke of the juice of Pimpernell that bears red flowers, and mix therewith of
Diptamus, and of the stone Calamitis, and make a plaster with Swines grease,
and apply it unto the wounds, and you shall have your intent.

To remedy cankers in wounds.
TAke of the roots of Brusci, and make powder thereof, which being put into the
wounds will heal them. Or else put upon them the juice of Marygoldes the
greater. Or the herb Taxus barbatus burned and made in powder, and so laid
upon the Cankers.

To remedy the Kings evil.
Wash the sore and wartes with the decoction of the rindes of Caphers: then
take a Serpent, and having cut away his head and tail, put the other part into
an earthen pot that has holes in the bottom, and being well luted both above
and beneath, put unto it an other pot as a receiver, which you shall cause to
stand upon a pot filled with water, which shall boil so long until the
Serpent be dissolved into oil, unto the which adding the powder of the roots
of Capers, annoint the grief eight days therewith, and it shall be healed.

Against the Kings evil in children.
TAke of the juice of Sothernwood, and of marsh Mallows, and of the Mucillage
of the kernels of unripe grapes, of each like quantity: lay them being all
mixed together upon the sore. But if it be hard, dissolve in the said juices,
of Gum Armoniack or of Bdelium, and use it as a plaster upon the evil, and you
shall see a happy success.

Against all sores and angry pushes, as the Canker or the disease Phadagena.
Phadagena is a running canker or pocke which in short space eats the flesh to
the bones.

TAke of the decoction of the roots of Liquerice, and in that boil the
leaves, seeds and roots of Matrisilua, until the decoction become as thick
as Honye, then lay it upon the wounds, and it will dry them maruelously, it
is a very approoned medicine.

To wash away spots and red pimples or wheales in the face.
DIstill with a Limbecke of glass in Balneo Mariae, the flowers of Matrisilua
in the beginning of June. And with the water that shall be distilled, wash the
face often, and he shall have his intent.

To heal ruptures within one, happened through falling from an high place, or
of some other cause, and to dissolve the congealed blood.
TAke of Cinquefoyle in the midst of May, with the roots, and being brayed,
distill in a Limbeck, of which water give four ounces to be drunk at one time
in the morning fasting, and also in the evening: and it is marvelous.

Against sores of the nose, and of the mouth, and also of the French pockes.
TAke of the juice of common Hounds tongue, and of the juice of Plantine, of
each three ounces: of Lyee two drammes. Make first your powder, and then
thicken it at the fire, and use it: but if they be the French sores or
swellings: take of the foresaid juices made thick, and putting thereunto of
Oximel squilliticum, work of it upon the sores, and you shall see a singular
effect.

Against wounds that penetrate.
TAke of the juice of Sanicola, and being dissolved with water of Cerfolium,
give the wounded to drink thereof, and within short space he shall be healed: or
else give the water of the same herb distilled in the midst of May to
drink, and it does the like effect.

To take away the blackness of wounds.
TAke a quantity of Rocket, and take out the juice, and being mixed with the
gall of an Ox, annoint therewith, it will cause the place to seem white.

Against griefs occasioned through rupture, or vnplacing of bones, or in the
members.
BOtle in water of ye roots of Rocket, and being brayed, make a plaster, and
lay it upon the place, and the intent will follow.

To dissolve the blackness of the skin happened through stripes, or other
cause, and for to heal the sores of the natural places of women, and swelling
of the breasts.
TAke of the herb called Craines bill, and distill it in the end of May, and
of the water which shall come thereof wash little bags of linen cloth, and
put them into the wounds three or four times a day. And for the breasts, the
herb Asclepiade brayed and laid upon them, is very good.

Against all kinds of flixes of blood, and to heal the hurts of the bowels
and of the bladder.
TAke out the juice of the herb called Cauda equina, and being mixed with a
little juice of Endive, give four ounces thereof unto the sick to drink every
morning. The like effect is done by drinking the water of the foresaid herb
distilled with a Limbecke.

Against the swelling and grief of a man's yard.
WIth the water of the aforesaid herb distilled through a Limbeeke, you shall
keep the member being (...) washed with linen clothes bathed in the same
water. (...) you shall have your intent.

Against the Kings evil.
TAke of liquide Piche, of wax, of urine of children, and of meal of Barley,
of each as much as you please: mix them together, and putting thereunto a
little oil Olive, lay thereof many times upon the grief.

Against putrified gummes.
TAke and boil Isope in water, with the which wash the gummes, and they will
be hole.

To take away the putrefaction of wounds.
TAke of the juice taken out of the roots of Incensaria, and mix it with
Turpentine and wax, and having made an ointment, lay it upon the wounds, and
you shall see the success.

Against vicious humors, which are caused of the itch, or like effects between
the flesh and the skin.
TAke of Alchimilla, of Camomill flowers, and of the herb Iaccea of each one
handful: boil them in good wine, of the which give to drink four ounces
eight mornings continually fasting, in which space let the diseased wash the
infected parts twice, and he shall be hole.

To heal wounds quickly.
TAke of the tops of the leaves called Coltes foot, and annoint them with
Honey, and lay them upon the wound, and as soon as they be dry, put on other
fresh ones. And continuing so three days, you shall see a good success.

To heal that kind of breaking out that is like unto a Leprosy.
TAke of the juice of Lapathum acutum, or of Sorell, mix it with oil of Nuts,
and Turpentine, of each like quantity, then boil it and strain it through a
linen cloth, and put thereunto of Tartar in powder the third part of one of
the foresaid parts, Tartar signifies dried leyes of wine, in English is
called Argill, whereof be.ij. sorts, white and red.
and make an ointment, with which anoint the grief, and it will do the
effect.

To heal broken bowels of children.
TAke of water of Lentils, and take out the juice, and wash therein little
bags of linen cloth, and lay them upon the rupture: putting first the bowell
into his place, and by drinking after it the powder of Alchimilla certain
days, he shall be hole.

Against pimples or knobbes of the legs, and natural places of women, with
redness and burning.
TAke in May the leaves and stalks of Louage, and being brayed, distill it in
a Limbecke, and with the water wash pieces of linen cloth, and lay them upon
the infected parts.

To remedy the gallings of the feet and cankers.
TAke of the fruit of Ligustrum, braye it, and take out the juice, with the
which wash the sores, and they will be hole. The water of the flowers of the
same fruit distilled and applied unto cankers, works a marvelous effect.

To heal old sores.
TAke of the juice of the leaves of white Lillies, with a little vinegar and
honey, unto the quantity of the juice, and being boiled, lay thereof on the
sores.

To remedy a blit or blast, and to heal Cankers.
TAke of Lunaria, and of Pimpernell, of each like quantity, take out the
juice, and wash therewith the infected parts, and they will be hole.

To cause nails that be scaly to fall away.
TAke of the seeds of wild Mintes, of Linseedes, of each like quantity: bray
them, and mix them with honye, and lay thereof oftentimes upon the nail, and
you shall see the success.

A remedy against infection of the lunges, and the Ptisick.
TAke of the leaves and seeds of marsh Mallows, and boil them in milk or
wine: of the which, give the sick to drink every morning, and he will be hole.

To heal the sores of the mouth, and throat.
TAke of the leaves of marsh Mallows, and boil them in wine and Honye,
putting thereunto Roche Alum, and being strayned, let it stand to cool, and
with that decoction cause the diseased to wash his mouth and his throat
oftentimes, and it will heal him.

To heal Ringwormes, Corns, and sores of the feet.
TAke liquide Alum, and boil it in honey, and with that anoint the foresaid
griefs, and it will heal them. Also the water of Honey distilled, heals and
mundifieth the wounds being laid unto them with pieces of linen cloth washed
in it.

Against the flixe of the blood of Emerodes, and sores of the privy members
TAke of Mellilote, of Fenegreeke, and of Linseedes, of each like quantity,
braye them and mix them with the white of an Egg, and make a plaster, and
lay it upon the sore.

Against the putrefaction of the gummes, and sores of the mouth.
TAke of the leaves of Mintes and boil them in wine, and a little vinegar, let
it cool, and with the decoction wash well your mouth, and it will help the
teeth, purge the corruption of the gummes, and make a sweet breath.

Against blites and waterie scabbes that are in the heads of children.
MAke of the juice of Mintes, and put thereunto of Brimstone and vinegar well
mixed together, and with a fether dipped in the said linement, annoint the
grief.

Against wounds and all putrified old sores.
TAke of Milfollie, and of Sanicola, boil them in water, and strain them
through a linen cloth, and with the decoction mix the meal of Fenegreeke,
with like quantity of the fat of a Got, and half as much oil Olive.
Dissolve them at the fire, and putting wax thereunto make an ointment.

Against colericall impostumations, as blytes and blastes, and such like.
TAke of the flowers of water Lillies, of Roses, and of Violets, boil them in
wine of Pomegranates, until the wine be consumed, and of the herbs being
brayed and cold, lay upon the sore.

To remedy the griefs of the bowels, and watery ruptures.
TAke water Lilly flowers when they are ripe and perfect, and distill them in
Balneo Mariae, and of the water give the sick to drink, two ounces thereof
morning and evening by the space of ten or twelve days, and it will heal him.

Against the griefs of the joints.
TAke of Reysons and mundifie them from the kirnels, and braye the polpe with
the leaves of green Rue, and apply it unto the evil.

To heal the broken bowels of children.
TAke of Paritarie, of Cinquefoyle, of Camomill, of Iermaunder, of each one
handful: boil them in water, with the which, make a bath for the child, and
has him therein three hours a day, by the space of three days, and let him
drink in the bath half an ounce of Perfoliaton, and being come out of the
bath, let him be anointed with this ointment. Take of oil of Camomill one
ounce and a half, of the seeds of Perfoliaton in powder two ounces, put
thereunto of Wax, and make an ointment, of the which annoynting the child by
the space of eight days, you shall have good success.

To heal the scorchings made with fire, and fretting sores.
TAke Perforata, and being brayed, put it upon the burnings and sores and you
shall have your intent.

To remedy the hurts of the scull.
TAke of the juice of Pimpernell, and wash therein pieces of linen cloth, and
put them oftentimes upon the hurt, and it will be quickly healed.

To heal corrosiue hurts called commonly the Wolf.
TAke of the leaves of Plantine one handful: of Pomegranate flowers, of the
nuts of Ciperus, of the wood and fruit of Balm, of Alum Zuccarino, of each
one ounce: of Mummia half an ounce, boil them together in Plantine water, and
in the end of the decoction put unto it of Camphora one dram, and with the
decoction wash the grief often. It helps likewise to wash the sore with
water of Radishes.

Against wounds and ruptures of the natural places of women, and to stop the
flix of bleeding of the nose.
DIstill in a Limbecke in June, the roots of Leekes, and in the water
distilled, wash pieces of linen cloth, and put them upon the sore. Wash
likewise Bombace in it, and put it into the nose, and it will stop the course
of the blood.

For to heal one that falls from some high place.
TAke of Tansey, of wild Tansey, and boil it in water and Salt, and give unto
the sick to drink of the decoction and you shall see a good success.

To stop the blood of the Matrix, and of the urine, and of wounds, and to heal
the black pimples or wheales in the legs.
IN the midst of May distill through a Limbecke the leaves of an Oak: and of
the water give six ounces unto the sick to drink, and he shall be healed of
the said griefs, and if in the said water you wet the Tow of Hemp, or pieces
of linen, and wash the pimples or red legs inflamed, the medicine will be
effectuous.

To stop the bleeding of wounds.
TAke of the doung of Pecockes, and dissolve it with water of Sage distilled
when it has flowers, putting thereunto a little Musk, and dipping a little
Bombace in the said mixture, bind it upon the wound.

Against the flix of the blood of the Emerodes.
BRaye Scabious and put it upon the Hemerodes, and it will do the effect. Or
else boil the foresaid herb with the roots of Taxus barbatus, and let the
pacient receive the fume from beneath.

Against the Hemerodes and crestie swellings of the fundiment, and redness of
the face.
TAke of the juice of blind Nettles, and annoint the places, and you shall
have your intent. Bath also the crestie impostumations of the fundiment with
pieces of linen cloth dipped in the juice, or in water distilled of the said
herb, and they will be healed. And so likewise a red face.

Against spitting of blood.
TAke and boil wild Time in vinegar and Honey, and give the diseased four
ounces of the decoction to drink every day: or else take the juice of the
said herb, and being mixed with vinegar, cause the sick to drink half an
ounce thereof, and it will heal him.

Against the ruptures of the feet and of the hands occasioned through the
French disease.
TAke a Squill, divide it and boil it in old oil until it be tender, then
braye it in a Mortar until it be brought to the form of an ointment, with the
which anoint the ruptures.

Against the burnings of fire.
BAthe oftentimes in the day the place of the burning with pieces of linen
cloth dipped in water of Taxus barbatus distilled through a Limbecke: or else
with Barbers lie, and it will be hole. The like effect is done by annoynting it
presently with Honey, which causes that the member become not full of bladders,
nor grow to be vlcerous.

To heal ears that avoid matter.
TAke a quantity of Turpentine, with the like of oil, and Honey mixed
together, and put thereof into the ear, and you shall see a marvelous effect.

Against scabbes and itch.
TAke of the leaves and flowers of Taxus barbatus, distill them in a Limbecke,
and in the water that shall be distilled, wash pieces of linen cloth, and put
them often upon the infected part.

Against the Leprosy.
TAke of Tapsia, of Eleborus niger, of Mustarde seeds, of Nigella, of
Paritorie, of each one dram, of Euphorbium, of Scammonie, of Sandarack, of each
fourtene graynes, of Costus, of Coloquintida, of Rue, of Mandrake, of
Staphisagria, of Sal niter, of each half a scruple: being well mixed, braye
them into powder, and being dissolved in vinegar wash the infected place, and
you shall see a good success.

Against itch, and swelling of the Hemerodes.
TAke of the leaves and roots of Tormentill, and being brayed, boil them in
vinegar, and therewith wash and emplaister the infected places.

To heal Cankers.
BRay the roots of Turbit into powder, and being mixed with Honey, lay it upon
the sores, and you shall have your intent.

To heal the sores of the natural places of women.
TAke Veruene, and distill it in the end of June, and with the water that
shall be distilled, wash those places, and keep therein a piece of linen
cloth bathed with the same water.

To heal griefs of the eyes, and to make clear the sight.
WAsh the eyes with the foresaid water, and distill of it into them many times
a day, and you shall see a trim success.

Against the galdnesse of the feet, or other parts of children.
TAke leaves of Semperuiue, and being well brayed with the larde of a Swine,
and oil of Roses being made liquide, strain it through a linen cloth, and the
juice which shall be gotten thereof boil with white wine, and in the end, put
thereunto, of Mastick, and of Incense, of each one dram: and therewith anoint
the places.

To mundifie putrified wounds.
TAke of dead Nettles beaten into fine powder, and of Aristologia, of each like
quantity: and the third part of one of these of Verderame: mix them together
with the juice of the herb Sanicola, and oil Olive, and make a plaster and
use it with good luck.

Against griefs of the neck through stripes, or other occasions.
TAke of Masticke two ounces and three drammes, of oil of Roses, and of wax,
of each one pound, of the marrowe of an Heart one pound, of the fat of Chickens
one pound, of the fat of a Goose one pound, of the grease of a Sow two pounds,
of the Mucillage of Fenegreke nine ounces, of Linseedes, and of the juice of
marsh Mallows as much more as of them all: of Camomill a little bundell, of
Dill seven little branches. Bray the Masticke, and being mixed with oil of
Roses, boil it with a soft fire, and mix the juices with the wax in an other
vessel, then strain them all, and put thereunto the Masticke with the oil of
Roses, and mix them at the fire, putting thereunto the wxxe. And being taken
from the fire, put the ointment into a vessel of glass. Which you must apply
in manner of a plaster.

To remedy the disease Panaritio. Panaritio, is a disease which often breeds
in ones fingars.

TAke of the leaves of an Oak, and braye them well with Soap, and lay them on
the grief: or else bray marsh Mallows with Barrowes grease and crummes of
bread, and lay thereof upon the evil. It helps also to anoint the place with
the filth of the ears. Also it heals to take Reysons, the kernels taken out
and brayed with Incense, and laid upon the grief.

Against the chappes of the fundiment, and spots in the face.
TAke of the oil drawn out of the seeds of Bombace, and bath often the place
of the fissures therewith. It helps likewise the blackenesse and spots of the
face. Also the powder of a dogs head burned and laid thereon, heals the
said grief.

Against the swellings and sores of the Hemerodes.
TAke of Terebinthe one ounce and a half, of Birdelime two scruples, of Tutia
of Alexandria three ounces, of Litarge of Silver, of Ceruse, of Coperous, of
each two ounces, of Plantin six drammes, of old oil one pound, braye those
things which are to be brayed, and then mix them together, and with the said
mixture anoint the place until it be healed.

To remedy the flix of the blood of the Hemerodes.
TAke the juice of Leekes and give thereof unto the sick to drink: or else
annoint the Hemerodes with the fat of a Swan. It helps also to burn a sponge
not washed, and being made into powder, to give thereof unto the sick to
drink: or else to cause him to drink of the rennet of an Hare or of an Heart
in strictiue water.

To heal the swellings of a man's yard.
TAke the fat of the reins of a sheep, and put thereunto the powder of a
Pummace stone burned, and of salt finely beaten in powder, and put thereof upon
the swollen and sore member.

To heal deep sores in the legs.
TAke the gall of a Swan, of Turpentine, and of Ceruse as much as you please,
and being well meddled, annoint the place often therewith: or else take the bones
of the Jaws of a Swanne, or of an Hog, burn them, and lay of the ashes upon
the sore.

Against the griefs, sores, putrefaction and stinch of the ears.
TAke of the juice of Rue, and boil it in the rind of a Pomegranate, and
distill thereof into the ears: or else mix the gall of an Ox, or of a Got
in a vessel of earth, and being made hot upon the embers, put thereof into the
ears. It helps also to take the gall of a Got mixed with the milk of a
Cow, and put warm into the ears.

To heal chappes in the heads of the breasts or teates.
TAke of the shell called Blatte Bizantie, and burn it, and mix the ashes
with Butter, washed with Rose water, and put thereof upon the sore, and in short
space it will heal them.

To heal sores of the legs happened through scaldings.
TAke of old oil three ounces, of white wax, and of Ceruce, of each two
ounces, of the fat of a Wether half an ounce, of Minium, of Lie, of each half
an ounce, of Sanguis draconis, and of Camphora, of each three drammes. Mix them
all together, and make a Cerote according to Art.

To heal a west growing on the eye liddes.
TAke dry figs and boil them in wine and Honey, then braye them well, and
put thereunto a little Galbanum, and lay thereof upon the evil: or else put
thereon of Castor dissolved with Honey: or of the ashes of a burnt Swallowe mixed
with Honey, and he shall have his intent.

To take away the grief of the eyes which happens of a stripe.
TAke the yolke of an Egg, and mix therewith ynke and oil of Roses, and
closing the eye, lay upon it a piece of lynnen cloth dipped in the same
mixture, and it will be hole: or else wash the eye with the water that
proceeds from green Willowes when they be cut, and it will work the like
effect.

Against chappings of the lips, and of the heads of women's breasts.
TAke the brain of a Goose, and meddle it with the brains of an Heart, and
annoint the lips: or else take of Litarge of Silver, of Myrrha, of Ginger, of
each as you please: and make thereof powder, and with Virgin wax, Honey, and
oil Olive, as much as suffices, make an ointment, which will be marvelous.
But before you lay on the ointment, wash the lips, with spettle, and then with
a little piece of linen cloth lay the ointment upon the grief.

Against chappes under the tongue.
TAke Ink and mix it with the powder of Hermodactiles, and lay it upon them.
And in the beginning take Sal Armoniack and beat it finelye, and lay of the
powder upon the grief.

Against a Fistola growing in a woman's breast.
FIrst wash it dailye with warm wine, wherein has been boiled Myrrha, then
take of Sarcacolla, and of Aloes of each as you please, and being brayed, mix
them with Honye, and having made therewith a little bag, put it into the
Fistola. Taking heed, that if it heal not, you put unto it the gall of an
Hen, or of some other creature, and leyes of old wine, and with this, most
certainly you shall have your purpose.

To remedy the impostumation of a man's yard, and windiness of the bottom of
the belly.
AFter you have done the universal regiment of letting of blood, annoint the
member with Aloes dissolved in wine. And to drive away ye ventositie of the
belly, use to fomentate the place with the water of the decoction of
Aristologia rotunda.

Against hot impostumations of the testicles.
TAke of the meal of Beans, of the meal of Barlye, the leaves of Henbane, of
each as you please, braye them and mix them with the said meals, and oil of
Roses, and lay them upon the sore.

Against cold impostumations of the testicles.
TAke of the pulpe of Reysons, of the meal of Beans, and of the powder of
Commin, meddle them with Honye, and make a plaster: or else take wild
Calamint brayed with Leven, Salt, and Butter, and make thereof a plaster. It
helps also to emplayster the place with the meal of white Cicers mixed with
Honey.

Against the discending of the intrales into the purse of the testicles.
TAke of Acatia, of the nuts of Cipres, of Marferon, of dry Rue, of Bay
berries, of Galls, of Gum Arabic, of each twenty drammes, bray them and
searce them finely. And if he be of a ripe age, make a plaster with the glue
of a fish dissolved in vinegar. If it be a child, make the plaster with the
Mucillage of Psillium. And let him drink wine tempered with the decoction of
Cipres nuttes.

To remedy a rupture or breaking.
TAke of the filing of Iron, of the hears of an Hare, of each one ounce and a
half, of Cipres nuts three drammes: of Mummia, of Sanguis draconis, of
Incense, of each one dram. Make Pills thereof with the juice of Millifollie: of
the which, give unto the sick person a dram or somewhat less at a time,
after his age. And at night when he shall take them, lay upon the rupture a
plain piece of Lapis calamitis.

To draw blood from the Hemerodes.
TAke a lock of wool and dip it in the juice of Ciclaminus, and lay it upon
the Hemerodes. It helps also to put thereon the juice of Onyons with the gall
of an Ox.

To stop the flix of the blood of the Hemerodes.
TAke an Ele, and having taken out the guts, cut of the head and tail, and
reserve only the middle part, and being well washed, bray it and put it into a
possenet well leaded, and let it boil, pressing it often down with a spatter,
and gather the fat which shall come thereof, with which annoint the Hemerodes,
and cast upon them the powder of Filopendola roots, but if the Hemerodes do
not appear, dip a lock into the said fat, and sprinkle it with the said
powder, and put it into the fundiment.

Against rupture of the hands and feet caused through cold.
TAke of the fat of a Bear, and anoint the grief therewith, or else take sea
Crabs and burn them into ashes, and mix therewith Honey, and anoint the sore.
It helps also to anoint with Honey mixed with the hoof of an Ass burned
into ashes. Sandarack dried is very good to remedy the same grief: or else
Charabe brayed and dissolved with oil of Roses. Charabe, is the true kind of
Amber, which serves for medicines.


To close up wounds.
Lay upon the wounds powder made of the leaves of an Oak, and presentlye they
will be hole: or else take the flowers of Taxus barbatus brayde and laid upon
the sore. It helps also to boil the tender tops of Iuye in wine, and being
brayed to lay them upon the wounds in manner of a plaster. Also the leaves
of Willowes brayed and laid upon the wounds, do heal them.

To generate flesh in wounds.
TAke dry Piche, and make thereof fine powder, and put it upon the sore. The
like effect does the powder of Incense, or Iuie, given by themselves: or the
powder of Polley of the mountain, or the leaves of the Pinetree, or of an Elm.

Against brusings within the flesh and arms.
TAke and boil Vecches or Orobo in wine, wherein first has been decocted
Saffron, and being brayed, use it as a plaster upon the stripe or bruise. It
avails also to annoint the place with oil of Reubarbe. Or else to lay the
leaves and roots of Enula upon it in manner of a plaster.

Against the shrinking of sinews.
TAke Salt and Brimstone brayed, and being meddled with Honey, lay thereof upon
the grief. It avails also to drink a dram of the juice of Gentian
tempered with water: or else to make an Imbrocation upon the place with the
decoction of Sumack. It remedieth also to make a plaster of meal and Honey,
and to lay upon the grief: or else the powder of the stones of Reysons mixed
with vinegar, and therewith to anoint the place. The like effect is done to
emplaister the diseased place with Rewe well brayed.

Against the hurts of the sinews and arteries.
TAke Oysters with their shelles, and braye them, and add thereto of Myrrh,
of Incense, and of Fig dust meddled together, and lay thereof upon the sore. It
helps also to take and braye the flesh of ground Snayles, and being meddled
with fig dust to lay it upon the hurt.

To heal the prickings or cuttings of sinews.
TAke Salt and boil it in oil, putting thereunto of Turpentine, and so lay
it upon the punture, and it will prohibit shrinking: or else lay upon it this
plaster following. Take of Diaquilon one pound, of Gum Ammoniack, half a
pound, of Masticke, and of Incense, of each one dram: of yelow wax half a
pound, and therewith make a plaster. It remedieth also the swellings of the
sinews, to take the flesh of a Ducke, or the gall of a Wolf laid upon them
in manner of a plaster.

Against pain of the sinews.
BAthe the place with warm lie, and give the party thereof to drink, and the
pain will cease.

To ease the pain of wounds.
TAke of the meal of Lupines, and of Barlie, of each like quantity, and with
warm water or lie, (if it be in a place of sinews,) make a plaster, and lay
it thereon.

Against the superfluous flesh of wounds and worms of the same.
Lay upon it the powder of Assa fetida, and it will take it away: or else
take the ashes of burned wool, and lay it thereon. It helps also to take the
powder of wild Calamint, or of Scordeon which will consume the flesh, and
cause the worms to die.

To take away the blackness of wounds.
TAke of the juice of Rue, and mix it with Honey, therewith anoint the place,
putting thereunto of the gall of an Ox. The like effect is done by taking the
fat of an Ass and anointing the place therewith: or else boil in Honey a piece
of fresh Cheese without Salt, and put it upon the wound.

To remedy the disease Panaritio.
TAke the blossoms of wild Vmes with Nigella, and therewith emplayster the
place. It helps also to lay upon it the juice of Liquerice.

To open ripe impostumes.
TAke green Nettle seeds, and Salt, and being brayed together, put it upon
the Impostume. The like is done by taking the yelowe part of the dung of a
Cock mixed with the yolke of an Egg and a little Saffron, and laid upon the
Impostume: or else take the root of Narcissus, and being brayed with Honey and
Meal of Orobo, make a plaster and use it. Also the dung of a wood Dove mixed
with Meal of Cockle, and boiled with wine, being laid upon an Impostume, does
open the same.

Against festred cankers.
TAke of Ink, of Auripigmentum, of quick Brimstone, and of Salt Gemma, of
each like quantity, dissolve the foresaid things in vinegar, and put them
into an earthen possenet that is not glased, and close it well that the fume
may not go forth, and boil it until it become ashes, then make powder of it,
and wash it with vinegar that is warm, and put of the said powder upon the
sore, presently at the quenching. And after, lay of this ointment upon the
sore. Take of red Honey clarified, of the fat of a Got, of the filings of
Copper mixed therewith, and so make an ointment.

To heal sores that are moist and hard to close.
TAke of the tops of Figtrees, burn them and make ashes thereof, or infuse them
in water certain hours. And being strained, put unto it fresh ashes, renewing
it in such sort diverse times. And with the said water wash the said sore
oftentimes a day, and put of this powder following upon it. Take of the ashes
of Oyster shelles two drammes, of Aloes Sicotrine brayed one dram, and put
thereunto of the ashes of Sea Vrchins, and meddle it together with Swines
grease, and you shall see a good success: or else put into the wound the
flowers or seeds of Dill burned, and they will do the like. Also it helps
to take the herb Virga pastoris, and bray it, and then to put thereof into the
wound.

Against fretting sores.
TAke of oil of Radishe roots, and of Salt, bray them together, and lay them
plaster wise upon the sore.

To heal sore tetters.
TAke of wax, Cinabrium is that which is called Vermilion.
of Cinabrium in powder, and of oil of Roses, as much as shall be sufficient.
Make thereof an ointment: Or else bray Cockle and Brimstone, and mix them with
Vinegar, and make an ointment.

A very excellent water for tetters.
TAke of Roche Alum, of Sal niter, of each one ounce, bray them into powder,
then strain them through a linen cloth, of quick silver one ounce, working
it very much with a pestell. Then put it into a Still of glass with a long
neck, and heat it at the fire, until it begin to boil, then close well the
mouth of the Still, and let it boil until it cease of it self. Then take it
from the fire, and let it cool, sprinkling it with strong vinegar, after set
it unto the fire again to boil, and breaking the vessel take out the powder
within it, and take of the juice of Celendine purified at the fire, and of
strong vinegar, of each half a pound. Meddle all together, and being boiled,
distill them through a Felt. And reserve the water to kill testers. The like
effect is done to wash the place of the Ringwormes or tetters in the evening
when you go to bed with water of Turpentine distilled, with holding at his face
a very fine cloth. In the morning wash it with warm Persly water, and then
with Rose water, and the effect will be marvelous.

Against burnings or scurfes in the face, which appear like unto a Leprosy.
TAke of quick Brimstone one ounce, of Camphire one dram, of the bones of a
Cuttle one ounce, of the marrow of a Calfe two drammes, braye them all
seperately by themselves, and meddle them in a pound of Rose water, and half
a pound of the water of Lillies, and set it in the Sun, stirring it every
day with a stick, and therewith anoint the sore.

An other.
TAke of Litarge one ounce, of Camphire and of Ceruce, of each one once and a
half, of quick Brimstone one ounce, of Camphire one scruple: of Swines grease
that is fresh and strained two ounces, of the juice of Quinces one ounce,
braye those things that are to be brayed by themselves, and then meddle them
all in a Mortar, and keep it in a vessel of glass until you will occupy it.

To heal sore legs.
TAke of Coltes foot, braye it, and lay it upon the sores: or else take the
juice of Agrimonie, and wash therein pieces of linen cloth, and put them upon
the sores, and presently you shall see the experience.

To heal legs that are hard, swollen, and sore.
WHen by the using of other medicaments the grief is not healed, make a
fumigation unto the leg with Vermilion and Incense, as they use to do unto
the French disease, filling your mouth with Wine, and keeping the leg covered,
that it may receive the perfume, and by using it to twyce or thrice at the
most, it will be hole.

To heal the burnings of fire before they bladder.
WAsh the burnt place often with cold lie: or else annoint it presently with
Honey, but if it be sore, anoint it with Ink, and it will be hole: or else
take ashes of the dung of Pigeons burned, and mixed with oil of Roses and
wax, as much as is sufficient, make thereof an ointment, and lay it upon the
sores.

To heal one that is fallen from some high place.
TAke cold water and drink thereof presently: or else take a dram of the
powder of Bittonie, and drink it with water. It helps also to take of Lacca,
of Myrrha, of Saffron, of each two drammes, of Fenegreeke, of Castor, of each
half a dram: of Bole Armenick three drammes, bray them into powder, and give
thereof to drink oftentimes with wine well mixed with water.

To heal one that with a fall has hurt one of his members.
TAke of Branne, and of Salt well brayed, and with Honye make a plaster, and
put it upon the sore: or else make powder of the bark of a Pine tree, and with
oil of Mirtels, and wax, make an ointment.

To preserve a member that is stricken, from impostumation.
LAy upon it Terra sigillata: or else emplaister it with the leaves of Sumack,
and you shall have your intent.

To take away the signs that remain of blows or stripes.
Annoint the place with the juice of Radishes, or else with Honey, in which is
dissolved the seeds of Radishes brayed. It helps also to annoint the place
with Honye and Salt meddled together.

To heal brusings of the nails.
TAke Onyons and mix them with the juice of Barlie boiled, and lay thereof upon
the sore: or else bray the seeds of wild Mintes, and with Honey make a
liniment, and if there be put unto it Linseedes well brayed, and laid upon the
nails that be bruised, they will be hole.

To heal sores proceeding of itch in the natural places of women.
TAke of the tender leaves of an Olive tree, and of Iuie, and of a Bremble, and
of sweet Pomegranates, braye them well and dissolve them with old wine, then
take a piece of fresh raw flesh, and cover it with the foresaid leaves being
brayed, and so let her keep it in her natural place one night. In the morning
let it be taken out, and wash the place within with the decoction of Mirtels
made with wine, and doing thus, within few days she will be hole.

Against the sores of the mouth of the Marrix happened in procreation.
TAke dry Rose leaves brayed, and wash them with wine, and anoint therewith a
suppositorie made of the hears of an Hare, and put it into the Matrix, and
wash it with a sharp Lotion.

Against burning sores of the Matrix of women with child.
TAke sweet Almonds brayed, and mix them with the marrow of an Ox, and boil
them in water, putting thereunto a little meal, and being cold, annoint the
Matrix within therewith. And after wash it with the decoction of Mirtels.

To heal the prickings of the sinews.
THe hurts of the sinews happen either through stripes, or because they are
pricked, or foyned with some sharp thing, or that they are cut with a sword
or knife, or some such like instrument, and through the sharp feeling thereof
they cause men to incur into very great pains. If therefore the sinew be
pricked or stricken, it is necessary to open the place with two strait
incisions, to the end the humor may issue out, and if the body be full of
blood, then must you let the vein blood, but if it be full of evil humors,
it is necessary to purge it, but if there be made no incision, the pain may
be mitigated, by giving issue unto the putrified matter, in using somentation
unto the place nigh unto the pricking, with oil of very ripe Olives that is
as hot as may be suffered: or else lay upon the place warm Turpentine, in
such persons as are of tender complections, but in strong bodies, and of hard
flesh, lay upon the place the powder of Euphorbium mixed with old oil: or
else take of vinegar nine ounces, of liquide Piche one pound, of Oppoponack two
drammes. Dissolve the gum in vinegar, and mix therewith the Piche, and lay it
upon the punture. It helps also to take quick Brimstone with old Leven, or
the juice of Wertworth with the said Leven laid upon the sore. Or the dung of
a wood Dove, or Serapine, put upon the punture. Taking heed, that if the
place of the punture do not putrify, to use this Cerote following. videlicet.
Take of old oil one ounce, of wax three drammes, of Euphorbium, one dram,
mix them and work therewith. You may also lay upon it Propolios by it self,
and it will much avail, if the sinews be vexed with inflammation, so that
they putrify, put upon them this Cataphasme. Take of Barlie meal, and of
Bean meal, or of Orobo, and boil them with Lie, and Oximel, and lay it upon
the inflamed member. If the member be uncovered through the wound, it can not
then sustain the said medicines because they are very sharp. It shall be
necessary therefore to put upon the wound Lime that has been oftentimes
washed, and dissolved with a good quantity of old oil: or else Turpentine of
the Fur tree, with the leaves of Centorie the lesser, brayed and mixed
together: or else put thereon the ointment called Tutia simplex, but if the
wound be dolorous, bath the places about it with old oil that is warm, and
lay upon it unclean wool, or oil mixed with vinegar. Mundifie the wounds
with wool dipped in sodden wine, or else use these rolls dissolved in sodden
wine. Take of Alum three drammes, of Incense half an ounce, of Mirrha one
ounce, of Vitriol two drammes, of the flowers of Pomegranates one ounce and a
half, of the gall of a Bull six drammes, of Aloes one ounce, and make thereof
little pastels with wine.

An excellent and precious ointment to heal the rupture of the scull.
TAke of Oppoponack, of Bdellium, of Ammoniack, of each three drammes, of
Rosen, of Gum Elemi, of each one ounce, of Olibanum, of Myrrha, of Sarcacolla,
of each one dram and a half, of oil of Roses four ounces, of Wax two
ounces. First dissolve the Gummes with Vinegar, and strain them: in the end
mix with them the other things finelye made in powder, and make thereof an
ointment.

To mollify hardness.
TAke of the residence of Oleum Irinum, of oil of white Lillies, of oil of
Sisamine, of oil of sweet Almondes, of each one ounce, of Saffron in powder
one dram, of the grease of a Badger one ounce, of white wax two ounces, of
Rosen four ounces. Make a Cerote according unto Art.

A most precious oil to heal a wound in xxiiii. hours.
TAke of the flowers of S. John's wort, of the flowers of Rosemarie, of each one
handful, put them together into a glass, and fill it with perfect oil, and
close well the mouth of the glass that no air go out, then let it stand in
the sun, the space of thirty days, and in clear nights also. And when the
oil shall have gotten the color of the flowers, strain it, and put unto it
of Gynger one dram, and a little Saffron dissolved in good wine, then set it in
the Sun again the space of. xviij. days, and annoint the wounds with the
said oil being warm, twyce a day, and you shall have your effect.

Against spitting of blood, through rupture of a vein.
TAke of the juice of Plantine, of the juice of Pimpernell, and of Bursa
pastoris, of each six ounces, of Eole Armenick one pound, of Gum Arabic
burned, and of Gum Dragagant, of each one ounce, of Amilum, of Sanguis
draconis, of Terra sigilata, of Acatia, of Spodium, of Hipoquistidos, of the
beries of Mirtels, of each ten drams, of glue of Parchment, made with ye juice
of sower grapes two ounces, boil the juices with the foresaid things brayed:
in the end put them into the Mortar, and work them a good space together,
putting thereunto the whey, and make an ointment thereof to annoint the breast.

To heal sores of the legs.
TAke of the sewet of a Wether six ounces, of oil of Roses, of each two
pound, of Vinegar eight ounces, of new Wax, ten ounces, of Litarge brayed
four ounces, of Terebinthe, of Rosin, of each two ounces, bray altogether in a
vessel until the vinegar be consumed, always stirring it with a stick,
until it become a Cerote.

An other for the same.
TAke of Turpentine thrice washed with Sorell water, four ounces, one raw
yelke of an Egg, mix them well, and put thereunto of the juice of Smallage
four ounces, and boil it until it come unto the form of an ointment. Then
take of Aristologia, of Centaurie the lesser, of Gentian, of each two drammes:
powder them and make an ointment.

Against all inflammations of the reins, and the running of them.
TAke of oil of Sisamine, of Violets, and of Roses, of each one ounce and a
half, of Ceruce, of Olibanum, and of Mastick, of each one dram, of Camphire
one scruple, of the meal of Amilum ten drammes, of Rose water one ounce, of
whites of Eggs twelve, of white Wax five ounces, of Bole Armenick ten
drammes: dissolve the Wax with the oils, and when it is cold, mix the other
things that are in powder, and make an ointment to anoint the reins.

To heal sores that are inflamed.
TAke of burnt Lead one pound, of Litarge brayed one ounce, of Ceruce washed
half an ounce, of vinegar, and Honey of Roses, of each one ounce, of oil of
Roses three ounces, of the yolks of raw Eggs three, make an ointment in the
mortar and use it.

Against stripes or brusings.
TAke of the roots of Consolida the greater and lesser one pound, of the meal
of Beans four ounces, of Camomil, and of Mellilot, of each two ounces, of
Butter three ounces, of the juice of Wormwood and of Comin, of each one ounce,
boil the roots until they be tender, then put unto them the other things,
and bray them well, and make a plaster, and lay it upon the sore.

To heal the Panaritio, and every other grief which happens unto the ends
of the fingars.
TAke of oil of Mastick, of oil Olive, of each two ounces, of Antimonie one
dram, of Ceruce washed, of Lead burned, of Tutia preperate, of each half a
dram, of white Wax one ounce, of white Turpentine of the Pinetree washed
thrice with white wine one ounce. Dissolve the Wax with the oil and
Turpentine, and then put unto them the other things that are in powder, and
make an ointment.

To heal scurfe or scales in the head, bearde, or brows.
TAke of the leaves of an Elm when they be tender, braye them, and with a
press get out the juice, with the which anoint the sore, and it will be hole
for certainty.

To remedy the scortications of children through occasion of urine, or of some
other sharp humor.
TAke of Litarge brayed one ounce, of oil of Violets three ounces, of the
whites of Eggs one, of the juice of Plantine, and of Semperuiue the lesser, of
each six drammes. Make an ointment and stir it well in the Mortar, and
annoint cold all the griefs that come of heat as rawnesse of skin and such
other.

To remedy the running of the reins occasioned of a sharp cause, and to
heal the scortications which they make.
TAke of the juice of Virga pastoris, of the juice of Plantine, and of the
juice of Compherie, of each two ounces, of Camphire one dram, three whites of
Eggs: of the meal of Amidum two ounces, of Ceruce one ounce, of Litarge half
an ounce, of Incense preparated with Rose water six ounces, make an ointment
in a Mortar of Lead, and being cold annoint the yard under the string.

To remedy spots and marks, and to take away all superfluous growing of flesh
in any part of the body.
TAke of the roots of wild Cucumbers, of white Nyll, of the roots of
Coloquintida, of each one ounce, of Ceruce, of Litarge, of Tartar, of each one
dram and a half, of the roots of Canes that are green, of Serapine, of
Pigeons dung, of each two scruples, of oil of Sisamine, of oil of wheat, and
of Juniper, of each one ounce and a half, of white wax two ounces, of the
juice of Orenges four ounces, of the whites of Eggs one, of Camphire one
dram. Braye the roots and boil them with the oils until they be almost
tender, and then strain them. Then take the juice of Orenges, and the
Camphire, with the white of the Egg, and mix well these three things
together, then put the wax into the said oil, and when it is dissolved, let
it stand to cool, and in the end meddle them altogether, braying those
things that are to be brayed, and make an ointment, with the which annoint the
place warm, and it will do the effect.

To heal sores of the breasts.
TAke of Honey six ounces, of the meal of Barlie one ounce and a half, of the
yolks of raw Eggs two, of Myrrha, of Sarcacolla, of dry Roses, of each one
dram, boil the meal with Honey, then put unto it the other things in powder,
and use it.

To make oil of Balm, which has these virtues following.
TAke of clear Turpentine one pound, of white Incense four ounces, of Gum
Elemi six ounces, of Bay berries four ounces, of Masticke, of Galingale, of
Cinamonde, of Cloves, of Nutmegs, of Cubebes, of each one ounce: bray the
foresaid things grossly, and mix them with Turpentine, and put them all into
a Stillitorie of Glass with the receyuer, and distill them with a little fire,
there will come forth the first water, and the second of much value called
Balm waters, in the end will come forth the most perfect called Balm. This
oil heals wounds, especially those of the sinews, the Canker, Fistolaes,
Leprosy, and the disease called Noli me tangere, in touching the place twice a
day with the said oil. It heals a Carbuncle or Boch, and all kind of
Poison. And being put into wounds, it brings out broken bones, and heals
ruptures, and anointing the temples therewith, it helps the memory.

To heal wounds of the legs happened of scaldings.
TAke of oil Olive three ounces, of white Wax, and of Ceruce, of each two
ounces, of the sewet of a Wether one ounce and a half, of Minium, of Lie, of
each half an ounce, of Sanguis draconis, and of Camphire, of each three
drammes, meddle them all together, and make an ointment, and lay it upon the
sore.

To close up wounds.
TAke of oil of Roses, of green oil Olive, of each six drammes, of oil of
Mirtils, of Vnguentum populeonis, of each three ounces, of Plantine leaves, of
Solatrum, of each two handfulles, bray the herb and mix every thing together,
stirring them well every day, in the end strain them through a Boulter or
linen cloth, and put unto the strayning, of wax four ounces, and dissolve it
at the fire, stirring it with the spatter, and while it is warm, put thereunto
of Litarge of gold and of silver, six ounces, of Brass burned three drammes,
of Ceruce two ounces, of Camphire one dram, of Tutia preparated two drammes,
of burnt Lead six drammes. Work them in a Mortar of Lead the space of two
hours, and make an ointment, using it with good success.

To heal sores which through dry distemperature of those parts cannot be
healed.
TAke of Barlie water six ounces, of Mallowe leaves boiled in water two
ounces, of meal of wheat half an ounce, of the polpe of Almonds brayed two
ounces, of clarified Honey one ounce, of Saffron half a scruple, of Swines
grease a little. Braye them all and make a plaster, then take of oil Olive
two ounces, of Turpentine half an ounce, of Wax as much as suffices, make a
liniment: first put of the liniment into the sore, with pieces of linen cloth,
and upon that put the plaster, and within short space you shall have your
intent.

To remedy dolorous sores of the joints.
TAke of oil drawn out of wax by Alcumistrie, and of oil of yellowe wax,
and put thereof into the sore, and it will work a marvelous effect: or else
put about the sore, cloutes dipped in oil of Brimstone boiled, and it will do
the effect.

To remedy brusings and sores happened of stripes, or otherwise.
TAke of Turpentine washed six ounces, of white Wax five ounces, of Mastick
two ounces, of Vernice, of Sarcacoll, of Rosen, of each one ounce, bray those
things that are to be brayed, and having made powder, dissolve the Turpentine
with the wax, and put thereto the pouders, and make an ointment.

To heal the hardness of the feet.
TAke of the Mucillage of marsh Mallow seeds, of the Mucillage of Colewort
seeds or Cabishes, of each one ounce, of the fat of a man, of the fat of a
Bear, and of a Greye, and of fresh Butter, of each half an ounce, of Wax as
much as suffices, make a soft ointment and annoint the knobbes.

To remedy dolorous sores happened through cold distemperature.
TAke of Turpentine two pound, of Brickes or boiled stones six ounces, of
Mastick, of Storax, of each one ounce. Burn the Brickes and quench them in
oil, and being brayed, mix them with the other things, and distill them by a
Limbecke, the first liquor that comes forth will be water, the second and
third will be oil apt to heal such sores: or else use in this case oil of
Turpentine by it self, and it will make a very happy operation.

To take away superfluous flesh which grows in wounds.
THe intent of the Physician is to dry it up with medicines which do not
fret, as with Tutia, Antimonie, Galls or bark of Incense, these said metals
being washed and decocted, bathe first the flesh with this decoction, and then
you may apply them unto it. Take of Incense, of Masticke, of each one dram,
of Rose leaves, of Mirtils, of Rue, of each half an ounce, of Sage half a
handful, of Roche Alum one dram, boil them in water and wash the flesh
therewith, and then put on the powder above written: and if you can not dry it
with the said remedies, take of water of Plantine, of Roses, and of Nightshade,
of each four ounces, of Opium one scruple, of crummes of bread two ounces, of
Argentum Solimatum, four scruples, work the Sublimate well upon a marble,
then mix all together, and boil them until half the water be consumed, then
strain it through a gross linen cloth, and put the thread or bags, and
locks into the said water, boiling them a little, and then express it
somewhat, and reserve it to put upon superfluous flesh that grows, until it
be consumed.

To heal sores that happen through worms.
TAke of Ceruce, of Polij montani, of each half an ounce, of liquide ship
Piche, as much as suffices, mix altogether in a mortar, and make a liniment,
considering that if the worms be generate through the evil habit of the
body you must use universal medicines to consume the superfluous humiditie,
as by letting of blood, and by drinking water of Guacum, and upon the sore put
Vnguentum Rosatum with Precipitate, or Vnguentum Apostolorum.

To heal sores happened of broken bones.
TAke and braye the roots of Dog Fennel dried, and making powder thereof, put
it into the sore. Likewise the roots of Ireos, of Aristologia rotunda made in
powder does help them: or else take Oppoponack with water of Sulphur, and
touch the broken bone therewith, and it will sequestrate it, and cause the bone
to come forth.

To remedy the gummes of the French disease.
TAke of the roots of wild Cucumbers, of the roots of Ireos, boil them
until they be tender, of the which take one pound. Then take of Ammoniack, of
Serapine, and of Galbanum, of each two ounces, of Storax liquida one ounce and
a half: of the fat of a Bear, of Butter, of each one ounce, of quick silver
not extinct two ounces, make a plaster and put it upon the gummes.

To kill worms in children.
TAke of red Coral, of the meal of Lupines, of the horn of an Hartburned, of
Nigella, of each one seruple, of oil of Roses, of oil of Wormwood, of each
one ounce. Put them all into an Orange, being made hollow at the top, and boil
them in hot embers: then express it, with the which expression annoint the
stomach and nauill of the child, and put upon it the rind of the Orange
roasted, and you shall see the effect.

Another for the same disease.
TAke of Aloes Cicotrine, of the roots of white Diptamus, of Gentian, of Worm
seed, of the seeds of Purcelane, of each half a dram, of the gall of a
Bull half an ounce, of Scammoney one scruple. Bray them and mix therewith
Butter: with the which fill the shelles of two Nuttes, and bind one upon the
stomach, and an other upon the nauill. It will kill the worms, and cause them
to avoid beneath.

A very precious water for diverse infirmities.
TAke of Cloves, of Nutmegs, of Ginger, of Maces, of Setwell, of Galingale, of
long Pepper, and of round, of the sprigges of Juniper, of the rindes of Ceder
apples, and of Orenges, of Sage, of Basil, of Rosemarie, of Margerome, of
Mintes, of Bay berries, of Pulegium, of Gentian, of Calamint, of Elder flowers,
of white Roses and red, of Spike, of Lignum Aloes, of Cubebes, of Cardemomes,
of Cinamond, of Camepitios, of grains, of Calamus Aromaticus, of Mastick, of
Olibanum, of Aloes Epatici, of dry figs, of Reysons, of the seeds and
leaves of Dyll, of the seeds of Artemesia, of Dates without stones, of sweet
Almondes, of Pine kirnels, of each one ounce, of Honey the weight of them al.
Bray them and mire them with Aqua vitae thrice the quantity of all the
residue, and put them into a Still well luted, and let them infuse the space of
two days, and put unto it the Recipient, and lute it well, putting it unto the
fire: then change the Recipient after ye have drawn the first and second
water, which have one self virtue, that is to heal the wounds being applied
unto them with pieces of linen cloth, they heal also the Cankers, the
Fistolaes, Carbuncles, and the disease called Noli me tangere. And putting a
drop thereof into sore eyes, within the space of nine days it heals them.
And a drop being drunk with white wine, heals the disease of the reins. It
helps also the Hemerodes, washing them with the said water. It helps the
griefs of the Matrix by drinking two drammes in broth, washing with the said
water all the places that are sore through any cold cause, and contraction of
the sinews, and it heals all cold infirmities. The third water that shall
be drawn, will be of a red color, and thereof must be ministered continually
the space of half a spoonefull at a time. It helps Leprosies, Dropsies,
Ptisickes and the cold Gout.

An oil like unto Balm, very profitable for diverse sores.
TAke of clear Turpentine.iij. pound, of Incense, of Lignum Aloes, of each
three drammes, of Mastick, of Cloves, of Galingale, of Cinamond, of Nutmegs, of
Cubebes, of Gum Elemi, of each two drammes, braye those things that are to be
brayed, and put them into a Still of Glass, and let it settle the space of
five or six days. Then distill it upon the embers, first with a soft fire,
then increase the fire so much that all the things be distilled. And taking it
out put it once again to distill in an other Stillitorie, causing it to stand
in infusion, and having set the Still in Balneo Mariae, you shall distill three
liquors: the first will be a clear water, and will swim uppermost: the second
liquor will be an oil through more distillation, and putting thereto a
sufficient quantity of fire, you shall get out the third oil. The said oil
with annoynting, helps sore sinews, and by anointing Cankers and Fistolaes
therewith, it helps them very much, and with touching the sores, it causes
them to close up. It helps the Leprosy, the Carbuncle, and drinking a drop
or two in broth or in wine, it heals the passions of the Matrix, and all
inward griefs, it draws out perished bones, being put into the wounds, it
heals them, and anointing the temples, it makes a good memory.

Against superfluous wind in the left side, called in Italian Melancholia
mirachiale, and the disease called Sincope. Sincope signifies swounding.

TAke of red Roses three ounces, of Ciperus two drams and a half, of Cloves, of
Mastick, of Spikenard, of Asarabacca, of each one dram, of Maces, of
Cardamomes, of Nutmegs, of each half a dram, bray every thing, and put
thereto of Myrobolanes Emblici half a pound, boil all together in four
pounds and a half of water, until two parts be consumed, then strain it, and
put thereunto of Honey half a pound, and boil it by decoction, and in the end
put in the spices, and make a lectuarie: of the which give unto the sick two
drams at a time.

To preserve from the pestilence.
TAke two Eggs and make a hole upon the top of each of them, then take out the
whites, and put into them so much whole Saffron, as they may be silled unto the
middle, and let them be covered with other half shelles of Eggs put upon
them, then let them boil upon the fire until they become red, then braye them
with all the shelles, and put thereunto of white Diptamus, of Tormentil, of
each three drammes, of vomiting nuts one dram and a half, of the seeds of
Rocket the quantity of the beaten Eggs. Braye them all once again, and put
thereunto of good Triacle the weight of all the receipt except the Eggs, and
make a Lectuarie. Of the which, give two drams in the morning when the pacient
rises, before he go to labor.

A Ceare cloth for sore and swollen legs.
TAke of Camphire one ounce, of Minium, of Litarge, of each two pounds, of
burnt Lead one pound, of Tutia six ounces, of oil Olive, of oil of Roses,
of each five pounds, of Aqua vitae six ounces, of wax as much more. Set the
oils unto the fire, and being warm, put unto them the Litarge, the Minium and
the Lead, and work it with a spatter, until it be come unto the height of
wax, in the end put in the Aqua vitae and the wax, and boil them, putting
in last of all the Camphire, and having made a Cere cloth, use to keep it
upon the sore, and you shall see a marvelous effect.

To remedy the commotion of the brain through falling from some high place,
or through other occasions and cuttes, when through the blows men lose their
speech.
TAke of red Roses, of the leaves and fruit of Mirtelles, of Pomegranate
flowers, of Calamus Aromaticus, of Gallia Muschata, of Lignum Aloes, of each
one dram, of Meal of Barlie, three ounces, boil them in red wine, and Rose
water, as much as suffices, and in the end put thereunto one grain of Musk,
and make a plaster to lay upon the head, cutting first away the hears with
a sharp rasor.

To remedy the falling sickness in children.
TAke of green Smiraldes, of red Coral, and of the seeds of Pionie, of each
three drammes, of Storax calamite, of Rosemarye flowers, of Bittonie, of
Cobwebbes, of each one dram, of Iuie berries half a dram, braye them, and
incorporte them with the gum of an Oak, and make a plaster, and put it upon
the cloasure of children, and cause it to be kept thereon until it fall away
of it self.

To heal the evil habit, and to cure them that have the spleen.
TAke of the filing of Steel preperate in vinegar six drams, of Citrack, and
of Gum Ammoniack, of each half an ounce, of sirop of Bisantius as much as
suffices, make a lectuarie, of the which, take half a spoonefull at a time
fasting.

A preservative against the pestilence.
TAke of Saffron, of Setwell, of Tormentil, of Diptamus, of each one ounce, of
Triacle, of Mitridate, of Sugar, of Buglosse, of each eight drammes, with the
sirop of the pills of Pome Citrons, make a lectuarie. Of the which, give to
preserve the party according to his age. Because if he be above the age of.xv.
years, give him two drammes in the morning before meat with white wine, and
after it, give him to mastice Coriander seeds. If he be of the age of.xiiij.
years, give him a dram and a half. And being under the age of.xiiij.
years, give him a dram, and when he goes out of the house, let him hold in
his mouth a little of the said lectuarie. In curing the plague, the foresaid
confection must be given, as soon as he feels himself to have the Ague,
within the space of.xxiiij. hours with the water of Sumack the quantity
aforesaid according unto age. It helps also all cold infirmities, or
griefs, ministered with wine, or with Aqua vitae, having first made the
universal remedies, as purging, letting of blood and such like.

To remedy the discending of a Catarre through coldness of stomach.
TAke of red Rose leaves one dram, of Spikenarde, of Spica Celtica, of each
half a dram, of chosen Cinamonde, of Maces, of Nutmegs, of each one dram, of
masticke, of very perfect Turpentine, of each two scruples, of clarified Honey
as much as suffices. Bray them, and mix every thing, and make thereof a
lectuarie.

To remedy the Kings evil.
TAke Vitriol and put it upon the coals, and let it boil and cast spume so
long, that it become red. Then braye it, and put it to dissolve in Aqua vitae,
and being taken out, let it dry. And thus do three times. In the end put it
into a fine piece of linen cloth, and let it hang in a moist place with a
potinger or some other Recipient under it, for it will cast oil like unto oil
of Tartar. Take as much of the said oil, as of Aqua vitae, and bathing
therein a sponge, bind it upon the sore, and in short space it will break it.

To heal many infirmities with oil of Sulphur.
TAke and give two drops of oil of Sulphur to drink in the decoction of
Pionie and Bettony the quantity of three ounces, it will heal the falling
sickness. If there be given of the said oil to drink in a little quantity
of Wormwood water, it will cause the appetite to come again. They shall be healed
of Agues which in the beginning of their fits drink of this oil with the
decoction of Rosemarie, and of Wormwood. Take and boil of the leaves of
Germaunder brayed in wine, and of Pimpernell, and mix therewith the roots of
Comphrey the greater, of S. John's wort, of Mirtels, of Centaurie, of Calamus
aromaticus brayed, and wash therein little bags, and put them into the
wounds, and you shall see a marvelous effect. Take and boil in water a
quantity of Agrimonie, and of Rye, and of the decoction give two ounces to
drink at once with a drop of the said oil: to kill the worms in children.
Take and boil Garlic in wine, of the which cause the pacient to drink two
ounces with a little of the said oil to provoke urine. Take and boil a Radish
in wine, and put thereto a little of the said oil, of Triacle, and of
Mitridate, and give it to be drunk, and wash the dolorus place, and it will
heal the plague. Boil of Rosemarie, of Celendine, of the roots of Calamus
Aromaticus, of Basil, of Saffron, of each a small quantity, in wine, with the
which wash the hands, the feet and the head thrice a day, it will heal
Melancholy, and adding thereunto a little of the said oil, give it to be
drunk. Likewise the oil being drunk with the decoction of Agrimonie, heals
the Ptisick, and given with the water of Ireos, and with Honey, it helps the
Dropsey. It conserueth the radical humiditie being ministered with Malmesey.
And being given to drink with water of Margerome, it heals all the defects
of the head, or with water of Balm, and of Buglosse. And also it heals the
griefs of the head, Vertigine, Scotomia, diseases of the head when with
dimnesse of sight all things seem to go round.
the disease Vertigine and Scotomia, if the body be purged, and then the said
oil be given to be drunk with water of white Lillies, it helps the
Litargia. It prohibiteth dreaming in sleep, being given to drink with water
of Gourdes and Poppy. It heals the Apoplexia given with Aqua vitae, the body
being first purged. Being ministered with Fennel water, and of Siler Montanus,
it heals the weakness of the sight. Being given with water of Quinces, it
prohibiteth vomit: and with water of Bursa pastoris, it stays the vomiting of
blood. Being given with water of Millifolie, and of Taxus barbatus, Litargia,
is a sore disease of the brains.
it helps the Hemerodes, and other defects of those places. Given to drink
with water of Tamarisci, it helps the milt. And being given to drink with
water of Radishes, and Sea brembles, it expels gravel, In touching
putrisied sores therewith, it heals them. And likewise anointing that part of
the head which aketh, therewith, and giving thereof to drink after and before
meat with Malmesie, or some other Capital water, it causes the pain to
cease.

To heal scaly or rough hands happened through the French disease.
TAke of Vitriol Romanum two drammes, of quick silver one dram, mortify the
quick silver with spettle, and being well stirred in the mortar, anoint the
palms of the hands, and being anointed with the said ointment, annoint them
after with Vnguentum Rosatum of Mesue, and the disease will be healed.

Another for the same.
TAke of Cloves two ounces, of Cinamonde as much more, of leaves of Nettles one
handful, put them into a vessel full of water to boil, until the fourth part
be consumed, and being taken from the fire make a somentation, covering the
sores with a linen cloth, and receiving the fume unto your palms as hot as
you can abide it, by the space of half an hour, that is in the morning when
you rise, and at evening when you go to bed, and in doing so the space of.xv.
or.xx. days you shall be hole.

Against Melancholy.
TAke of Lignum Aloes, of Cloves, of Cardamomes, of Spica Celtica, of each two
drammes, of Borage flowers, of Buglosse, of Roses, of each two drammes, of
roasted nuts two drams, of leaves of Seen, of sweet Almonds, of Iuiubes, of each
one ounce, of Lapis Armenia preperated three drams, of Annis seeds, Doromici,
is a root brought out of Mauritania good for the stomach.
of Fennel seeds, of each two ounces, of Saffron two scruples, of the bone of
an Hearts heart, of Doronoce, of Setwell, of Iacincts, of Smiralds, of Saphires,
of Basil seeds, of each one scruple, of Margarites preperated two drammes:
make a lectuarie with Honye of Violets boiled, as much as suffices, and decoct
it with the juice of Germaunder, of Iuie, and of Buglosse, of each one ounce
and a half, until the juice be consumed. Of which confection take a dram
and a half in a little white sweet wine aromatized, morning and evening two
hours before meat.

To mitigate the pains of the French disease in any member.
TAke of oil of Camomill, of oil of Dill, and Roses of each one ounce, of
Greppola, of Ceruce, of Litarge, of each one ounce, of quick silver extinct
with spettle half an ounce, of wax as much as suffices, meddle all together,
and make an ointment, with the which being cold, anoint the payned member,
and you shall have a happy remedy.

To remedy the milt that is hardened.
TAke of Gum Ammoniack, of Assarum, of the seeds of Agnus castus, of Rue, of
Citrack, of Calamus Aromaticus, of Isope, of the flowers of Tamariscus, of each
one ounce, of the rinds of Capparus roots, of Nettle seeds, of Annis seeds,
of Smalledge, of Cinamond, of each two drammes, of good Honey as much as
suffices. Make a lectuarie, of which let the diseased take half a spoonefull
in the morning two hours before meat, and you shall have your intent. Also
while he takes the lectuarie, let the milt be anointed, with this under
written ointment twice a day fasting. Take of oil of Capers, of oil of Rue,
of Camomill, and of sweet wine, of each one pound, Felce is the filthy oil
that is in the flanks or necks of sheep.
of the roots of marsh Mallows, of Mallows, and of Felce, of each half an
ounce. Bray well the roots, and boil every thing, until the wine be
consumed, and put thereunto of the roots of Rue well brayed, and of strong
vinegar, of each one pound: boil them once more, until the vinegar be
consumed. And being strained, put thereunto of Oppoponack, of Galbanum, of
Bdellium, and of Ammoniack, of each two ounces. Dissolve the Gummes in strong
vinegar, boiled a little, and with wax make an ointment.

To preserve from the gout.
TAke of Mirrha, and of Aloes Epatici, of Lignum Aloes, of Cinamond, of
Mastick, of Reubarbe, of each two scruples, of Musk one grain, of Oximel
simplex as much as suffices, make a paste of pills, of the which, take every
other morning one pill the quantity of a scruple, and you shall see a
marvelous effect.

To heal the face of scurfe or scabbes.
TAke of Camphire two drammes, of washed Ceruce, one ounce, of red Cicers half
a pound, of the pulpe of Melons one pound, of the eggs of Swallows ten, of
Margarites two drammes, of the seeds of Bombace three drammes, of common Salt
two drammes, of the juice of Limons four ounces, of the lies of white wine
half an ounce, powder those things that are to be poudred, and put them all to
be dissolved in ten pound of water of Lapacium acutum the space of two days,
then put them into a Limbeck, and draw out the water, with the which wash the
face three or four times a day, and it will make it clean.

Against the chappes in the hands through heat of the liver.
TAke of oil Olive, of yelow wax, of the fat of a Ducke, or of an Hen, of the
silth that is in wool before it be washed, of the Mucillage of Quince seeds,
of Sterche, of Gum Dragant, of each as much as you please, make an ointment,
wherewith annoint the palms.

To heal one that is stiptick of body.
TAke of white wine three pounds, of the leaves of Seen eight ounces, put them
to dissolve in the said wine the space of twenty and four hours, then
strain it, and in the strayning put unto it of Corranes two pound, of fine
Sugar one pound, boil it until the wine be consumed, and reserve the Coranes,
of the which give the diseased one ounce or a little more to eat before meat,
according as he shall be bound, and you shall see a marvelous effect without
any grief.

To heal one that cannot piss through fleugme.
TAke of the heads or shelles of Eggs, out of the which Chickens be issued,
and bray them finely, giving a dram thereof to drink in good white wine, and
presently he will make water.

To purge the head by the nose, after the universal purging of the whole body.
TAke of Margerome, of Sage, of each one dram, of white Pepper, of Nigella,
of Cubebes, of each two scruples, of Cloves, of Nutmegs, of Pellitorie, of each
half a dram, of Turpentine, of wax as much as suffices. Make as it were a
little bag or tente with a thread fastened unto it, that you may at your
pleasure put it and take it from your nose.

To stop the flix of a Catarre.
TAke of Cloves, of Cinamonde, of Mastick, of Maces, of Mirrha, of each one
dram and a half, of the fruit of Cipres, of red Coral, of Pomegranate
flowers, of each six grains, bray them, and with Rosen make a Cerote, and
shauing away the hears of the closure of the head with a Rasor, lay it thereon
certain days, and it will cause a marvelous ease, so that the intemperance of
the head proceed not of heat. Because in such a case the hot spices be
taken away, and thereon be laid only Cloves, Rose leaves, Myrtell berries,
and such like.

Against the debilitie of nature and all other infirmities.
TAke of leaves of Gold a hundred, of Margarites, of Maces, of Agarick, of the
flowers of Buglosse, of Borage, of unwrought silk, of Calamus Aromaticus, of
Sage, of Lignum Aloes, of Polipodie, of all the Saunders, of the roots and
seeds of Pionie, of each half an ounce, of the juice of Liquerice one ounce,
of chosen Reubarbe, of the pulpe of Pome Citrons, of each half an ounce, of
Pistaches, of mundified Pine kernels, of sweet Almonds, of Reysons, of
Pennets, of each five ounces, of the flesh of a Capon six ounces, of the
flesh of Partriges one pound, of Triacle, of oil of Turpentine, of each two
ounces, of red Roses fiftene drammes, of the juice of Roses, of the coddes of
Roses, of each six drammes, of the leaves of Seen ten drammes, of white
Tartar eight drammes, of the flowers of Stecados, of Bittonie, of Cinamond, of
Doronici, of Folium, and of the rindes of Pome Citrons, of all kinds of
Myrobolanes, of red Coral, of the fragments of Iacincts, of each three
drammes, of Ciperus, of Cardamomes the greater, of Lapis lasuli, and of the
stone Armenia preperated, of white Incense, of Margerome, of Myntes, of each
two drammes, of Balm, of red and white Ben, of Setwall, of each one dram and
a half, of Spikenard, of Saffron, of Amber, of Cloves, of Nutmegs, of
Ealingale, of each one dram, of Musk half a dram, of Sugar vii. pound
and a half, of perfect Aqua vitae, xv. pound. Dissolve the Margarites, and the
Iacincts in the juice of Limons, and reserve them in a Vial well closed: work
the leaves of Gold upon a Marble with Honey until they become as it were one
liquor, then preserve it also in a Vial well closed with putting into it a
little Aqua vitae. The other things which are to be made in powder, braye them
together, and putting them into a great Still of Glass with all the receipt,
close it with diligence, and bury it in Grapes that be pressed, or in Pigeons
dung, or Horse dung by the space of forty days, let only the neck thereof be
out uncovered, then distill it according to Art. And keep the water which
shall be distilled in a great Still of Glass well closed, as a precious thing
and of great value, because three or four drops thereof being drunk with wine,
heals all cold infirmities as well within the body as without. If the
infirmities proceed of a hot cause, being given with Endive water, to drink,
it heals all griefs. And giving six drops thereof with sweet wine, it
restores the defect or want of nature. It helps maruelously the plague, for
drinking thereof every morning when you go out of the house five or six drops
with a little strong wine, and washing your hands, nose, and face therewith, it
preserves from the pestilence, and being infected with the evil, yet by
touching the Boches, or Carbuncles therewith, it is of very great effect. It
helps likewise the Palsy, and the falling sickness, if with the said water
the nape of the neck be washed.

To remedy the falling away of the hear from the head or bearde.
TAke of sweet lie, that is, of that which is not strong, as much as you
think sufficient to wash your head, and put therein of Aristologia rotunda,
of the roots of Rue, of each half an ounce, of Gentiane, of Reupontici, of
each three drammes, of Centaurie two drammes, boil them until the third part
be consumed, and therewith wash the head. And after annoint it with this oil.
Take of the roots of Ireos, of Squilla one ounce, of Centaurie the lesser,
half an ounce, of Mirtels one ounce, of Cloves one ounce and a half, of oil
of bitter Almonds one ounce. Put all these things into a vessel of Glass, and
being well closed, boil it in Balneo Mariae, the space of six hours with a
soft fire, and set the oil in the sun, with the which, annoint the disease
after you have washed it with the lie aforesaid, and at night when you go to
bed.

To remedy the disease called Vertigo.
TAke of Nutmegs, Vertigo, is a disease of the head, wherein it seems to a
man that he sees things turning.
of Cloves, of each half a dram, of Setwall two scruples, of Gentian one
scruple, of red Roses, of yellowe Saunders, of each one dram and a half, of
Aloes Cicotrini six drammes, of chosen Reubarbe three drammes, braye every
thing seperately into powder by it self, and when they are meddled, wet it by
sprinkling thereon a little Rose water, and then let it dry, and thus do
seven times: then with sirop of Violets make a paste of Pills, of the which,
take a scruple in the evening one hour before meat, and you shall see a very
great ease.

To cause hear to grow again, and to keep them from falling away.
TAke of chosen Mirrhe, of Aloes, of Labdanum, of each two ounces, of Folium,
of Mirtell berries, of Capillus Veneris, of the flowers of Ligustrum, of each
two handfulles, braye them well and mix them: and take of oil of bitter
Almonds, of oil of Sisamine, and of Alchanna, of each two ounces, mix every
thing together, and being put into an earthen vessel glased, with a strait
mouth, and closed well with Lutum sapientiae, bury it in horse dung.xv. days:
then distill it and keep the water, and the oil that shall be drawn, to
annoint the roots of the hear, and it will make a very speedye and happy
effect.

Another remedy for the same disease.
TAke of Efftes five, of Piche six ounces, of Propolios or Virgins wax four
ounces, of Capillus Veneris, of Mirtell berries, of each six handfulles, of
Sothernwood eight ounces, put the Efftes into a vessel to dry in an oven,
then braye the things that are to be brayed, and dissolve those that are to
be dissolved, then take of the grease of a Bear one pound, and put all the
receite into a Still of Glass, and being well closed, set it in the Sun, or
else in horse dung thirtene days, then distill it according unto Art, and the
water and oil that shall be drawn, reserve to occupy as you do the other
aforesaid.

Another of like virtue.
TAke of Saffron two ounces, of Aloes, of Mirrhe, of each three ounces, of
Labdanum four ounces, of oil of bitter Almonds, and of the fat of a Bear, of
each six ounces, of the heads of flies made in powder eight ounces, mix them
all together, and do with them as is already said of the other, and of every
of them you shall see a marvelous effect.

To take away the spots and scurfe happened through the French disease.
TAke of white and black Elleborus, Elleborus albus, is an herb called
Lingwort, the root whereof is called neesing powder. Elleborus niger, is an
herb called Bears foot.
of each one handful, of the leaves of Lapatium acutum two pound, of wild
Cucumbers three ounces, of the pulpe of Melons with the seeds three pound, of
the pulpe of Limons, and of the juice of them four pound. Put them into a
Limbeck of glass, and let it stand to settle three days, and being
distilled, wash with the water the scurfe or spots, and it will heal them.

Another pleasant remedy for the same disease.
TAke of green Lupines one pound, of the roots of white Lillies six ounces,
of bitter Almondes two pound, of the juice of Paritorie three pound, put them
all into a Still, and presently distill them before they putrify, and the
water, and the oil that shall be drawn, use it as is said of the other before.

Another against the same disease.
TAke of Sal niter three ounces, of oil of bitter Almondes two pound, of
Squilla half a pound, of the meat of Limons one pound, distill them as is
aforesaid of the other, and work the oil with good success.

Against the dilatation of the sight of the eye.
TAke of Celendine water, of Fennel, of Eyebright and of Roses, of each four
ounces, of Sarcacolla, of Rue, of each one dram, of Gum Serapine half a
scruple, of the gall of an Ore one dram and a half, boil them all together,
and being distilled, put thereof twice a day into the eye.

To preserve the teeth from putrefaction.
TAke of the shelles of burnt Oysters made in powder three drammes, of
Sandarack four drammes, of the roots of Ireos two drammes, of the roots of
Aristologia, of Gentian, of Centaurie the greater, of each two drammes. Braye
every thing seperately, then mix them together, and with Oximel squilliticum
as much as shall be sufficient, make little pastils with the which you may rub
the teeth, and wash them with water of Squilles, dissoluing the little cakes in
wine, and you shall see a marvelous effect.

To fasten the teeth which are ready to fall through the French disease.
TAke Plantine water and mix it with oil of Brimstone, and touch therewith the
gummes, and after they be mundified, take of Plantine leaves, of the tender
leaves of wild Olive trees, of Sage leaves, of each half a handefull, boil
them in old white wine, and wash therewith the gummes of the sick many times.

Against the fluxes dissentericall in the French disease. Dysenteria is a flixe
and fretting of the guts.

TAke a potinger that may contain a pound of Gotes milk, and quench therein
two or three stones of the Sea being burned, and with that milk make glisters:
or else take of the juice of Plantine, of oil of Mirtels, or of Roses
Omphacine as much as suffices, and make thereof a glister.

To remedy the pains of the throat happened through the French disease.
TAke of the leaves of Ligustrum, of Plantin, of the tops and stalks of
Mulberies, of the tender leaves of the wild Olive, of each one handful, of
Roche Alum one ounce: boil them in as much water as shall be sufficient unto
the decoction of the herbs, then with that which is strained being cold, let
the pacient wash his mouth oftentimes, and he will be hole, nevertheless if
the disease cease not at these medicines. The^ take of Verderame the quantity
of a Bean, and of Roch Alum like quantity, and braye them well in a Mortar
of Brass so long with Rosewater, or Plantine water, that the water take the
color of Verderame, with the which, touching the sore with a little Bombace
dipped therein, you shall see a present remedy.

To remedy the pushes in the French disease.
TAke of the powder of Dill seeds, and of the scales of Brass preperated, of
each like quantity, and lay thereof upon the sore: or else take a dram of
Precipitate preperated, and mix it with an ounce of Vnguentum Rosatum of
Mesue, and lay it upon them: if they be malicious, and give not place unto such
medicines. Take of the grease of an Hog two ounces, of Incense, of Aloes, of
each one dram, of quick silver two drammes, mortify the quick silver, and bray
it in a mortar, making thereof an ointment, and work it. And for a final
remedy for those that are very malignant, use the ointment Egiptiacum with
Sublimate meddled therewith.

To heal knobbes in the natural places of women.
TAke of the powder of Scabiose, of Tormentill, of each one dram, of Iuorie
in powder and burned, of red Coral, of each two scruples, of Bole Armenick one
dram, of Incense one scruple, of Mel Rosarum, of sirop of Mirtels, and of
wine of Pomegranates, of each half an ounce, meddle them in a Mortar, and with
Bombace dipped in the said ointment, touch the diseased place: or else take of
Turpentine washed with Scabiose water, of Mel Rosarum, of each one ounce, of
powder of Scabiose, and of Tormentill, of each one dram, of Bole Armenick, of
Iuorie burned, and of Marts horn burned, of Aloes, of each half a dram, of
the meal of Cockell two scruples, meddle them, and dip therein a suppositorie,
and put it into the natural place, and if they be difficult to heal, with the
foresaid medicines, then mix with the pouders Vnguentum Isis or
Diapampholigos, or Diapalma, and put it into the natural place.

To heal the scurfe or scalles in the head, beard, or brows.
TAke of Ammoniack preperated in vinegar one ounce, of Assa fetida one dram,
of burnt Lime, or made red, two scruples, make a paste, and put it every day
upon the sore, and if it enduceth itche, use patience and scratch not. They use
also to heal them with oil of Sulphur or of Vitriol: or else take of Arsenick
and work it upon a Marble, and then pour it into a Basen with vinegar until
the vinegar remain uppermost, then set it in the sun to become dry, and
thus do three times. And as many times more infuse it in pure water and let it
dry. The which use, first washing with spettle a little Bombace, and putting
thereto a very little quantity of the said powder, touch once the scurfe or
scales. In like manner preperate Oripigment, but take heed that you lay a
very little of the powder upon the sore, that it may not fret or consume very
much.

Against knobbes or wheales of the French disease.
TAke of Plantine water, and of Rosewater, of each one pound, of Roch Alum, of
Argentum sublimatum, of each two drammes, bray the Alum and the Sublimatum, and
put it with the waters into a glass, and take a Cirdyron, and set it upon
fiery coals, and let the glass boil upon it until half the water be
consumed, then let the powder settle, and keep the water which will come forth
clear in a vessel of glass, and when you will use thereof temper a part of it
with a tripple portion of Rose water, or of Plantine, or more, and touch
therewith the knobbes or wheales, and if the wheales or knobbes be in the face:
first you must use easy remedies, as to annoint them with the scum of the
decoction of Guacum, or else with Soap by it self: or else with Precipitate
mixed with Vnguentum Rosatum Mesue, or with the oil of Scorpions, or with the
fat of a Got and of a Hen.

To take away the blackness of wounds.
TAke the green roots of Celendine the greater, and braye them with
Brimstone, and anoint therewith the place, and if the cicatrices or scarres be
red, take of Ceruce, of Litarge of Silver washed, and dissolve it with the
juice of wild Grapes, or with the juice of Limons, and at night anoint the
place.

To cause hear to grow.
TAke of Malmesey, of childrens urine, and of Cowes milk, of each one pound,
of Honey half a pound, mix them in a Limbeck, and draw out the water, with the
which, washing the head, it causes the hear to grow.

Against the prefocation of the Matrix.
TAke of the seeds of Pioney, of the seeds of Agnus, and of Calamus
aromaticus, of each one dram, of Siler Montanus, of dry Rue, of Commin, of
each two scruples, of Daucus, of Ameos, of Annis seeds, of Fennel, of
Carowayes, of Ciperus, of each half a dram, of Calamint, of the seeds of
Rocket, of each one scruple. Bray them into powder, and with the sirop of
Calamint, make of every dram seven pills, of the which, the woman must
take three at one time, in the morning one hour before she eat, she must use
to do it every other day.

To purge melancholy humors, and to remedy the pain of the head and stomach.
TAke of Polipodie two pound, of the leaves of Seen.xxv. ounces, of Tamarindes
one pound, of Reysons without kirnelles five ounces, of Damask Prunes.xxxv.
of Borage flowers, and of Violets, of each two handfulles, of Maiden hear
four handfulles, of Melon seeds four ounces, of chosen Cinamonde one ounce
and a half, of Ginger, of Salt Gemma, of each seven drammes, of the juice of
Lupines four pound, of the juice of Endive two pound, of rain water thirty
pound. Mix every thing together, and boil them according unto Art, until
the fourth part be consumed: then strain it, and make into the said decoction
twelve infusions of fresh Roses gathered in the morning, and for every
infusion put in seven pound of Roses, and in the end put thereunto of fine
Sugar eight pound, and make a sirop. The use of which is to give four ounces,
or more or less after the disposition of the person that shall use it,
dissolved with Cordial waters, or with water of Lupilles, and Fumiterrie.

An excellent remedy for to heal the French disease.
TAke of Nutmegs, of Cardamomes, of Masticke, of Cubebes, of Grains called in
Latin Grana Paradysi, of Cinamond, of Nuts of India, of each one ounce, of the
three sorts of Saunders, of red Roses, of Fumiterrie, and of the flowers of
Borage, of each two ounces, of the seeds of Buglosse, of Endive, of each one
handful, of all the kinds of Myrobolanes, of each one dram, of the seeds of
Coloquintida, of Bdellium, of Agarick, of chosen Turbit, of each two drammes,
of chosen Reubarbe half an ounce, of Manna one ounce and a half, of Camphire
two drammes, of Musk and of Amber, of each one dram. Braye those things
that are to be brayed, grossly, and put them to dissolve in.viij. pound of
Aqua vitae the space of.xxiiij. hours, and then distill it with a soft fire by
a Limbeck, putting thereunto two pound of Sugar, and in the end put to it the
Musk and Amber. Of the which water give unto the sick person three drammes
every day continually the space of forty days, if he be not weak, and you
shall see a marvelous effect.

To purge one that has the pain of the French disease.
TAke of Turbit half an ounce, of Diagredium one dram and a half, of
Diadragant one ounce, of white Ginger two drammes, of Hermodactills two
drammes, of Manna granata one dram and a half, of Carthamus seeds half an
ounce, of the juice of Quinces one ounce, of the juice of preparated Roses one
ounce, of the juice of Sage three ounces, of Iuy water two ounces, of fine
Sugar eight ounces, make a confection in morsels, of the which, give the
pacient to purge with half an ounce, in the morning early, and you shall see a
very good effect.

To cause the fevers Perhiodicae to cease after they be prolonged. Febres
Perhiodicae are Agues which come by course or fits.

INfuse the leaves of Wormwoode in water the space of ten hours, then take out
the said leaves, and cast them away, and set the said water to boil, until
the half be consumed, of the which, giving four ounces unto the sick, he
shall sweat in such sort that all the Fevers will cease which happen through
cold humors.

To heal those which have the eye liddes infected of sharp or salt humors.
TAke of rain water and fill an earthen pot therewith that contains in
quantity six pound, and set it upon the fire, and when it begins to boil,
cast into it of Sugar Candy, and of Verderame, of each one ounce, of common
Salt in powder as much more, and after they have boiled a little space, take
away the pot from the fire, and let it settle, and being strayned, reserve the
clear water to wash the eye lyddes, and put upon it this ointment, take of
Butter that is fresh one ounce, of Tutia preperated one dram, of Aloes half
a dram, of Ambergreece one scruple, make powder thereof, and the Butter being
heated, meddle therewith the other things, and make thereof an ointment.

Against the falling sickness of children, and to heal the head of Catarres,
happened through cold causes.
TAke of Mirrhe, of Labdanum, of each one dram, of Storax Calamite, one
scruple and a half, of Cloves two scruples, of Mastick and of Nutmegs, of each
two drammes, make a plaster, with braying those things that are to be brayed,
and mixing them with the Gum of an Oak, lay it upon the closure of the pacients
head, the hears being first cut away with a rasor.

To heal those which piss a bed.
TAke the bladder of a Got or of a sheep, burn it upon a tyle on the fire,
and give the pacient to drink with water and vinegar: or else boil the
testicles of an Hare in good wine, and give him to drink of the same wine. It
helps also to cause him to drink before supper, a little Ney or Mirrhe with
wine, and to anoint him under his yard with the earth of a Smithes mill.

To heal the choking of the Matrix when it can not return again.
TAke of green Rue, and bray it well, and mix it with Honey, and dip wool
therein made in form of a tent, and put it into the fundiment, and presently
it will be awaked, and return again into her self.

To purge the hot gout.
TAke of the Myrobolanes called Emblici, Chebuli, and Indi, of each two drammes,
of Reubarbe, of Scammoney, of each half a dram, of Aloes washed one dram,
of red Roses, of Mastick, of each two scruples. Make a paste of pills with the
juice of Roses. Of the which, give the pacient to take, in the morning made and
proportioned in three pills.

To remedy the difficulty of pissing through the impediment of fleume.
TAke of the herb Clinopodium one handful, of the worms called Horse flies
dried in an Oven, two drammes, boil them in good white wine, until the third
part be consumed, and give four ounces thereof unto the pacient to drink two
hours before meat, and you shall see a very good effect.

To heal sore and inflamed legs.
TAke of Ceruce, of Litarge, of each five pound, of white wax two pound, of
oil Olive twenty pound: boil it with a soft fire, and make a ceare cloth to
lay upon the sore.

To remedy the grief of the pleurisy when one is stopped that he cannot spit.
TAke of Loch de pino, two ounces, of Diapenideon one dram and a half, of
the powder of the roots of Enula Campana, and of the roots of Ireos, of each
two drammes, of the juice of Liquerice two drammes and a half, with as much
strop of Horehound as suffices, and to make it more stronger to purge the
breast, in stead of the Gum, put in Nettle seeds.

To purge the breast of the pleurisy and Ptisicke.
TAke of Gum Ammoniack one dram and a half, of Saffron half a dram, make
fiftene pills with Oximel squilliticum, of the which, cause the diseased to
take every morning one.

To heal the disease of the pleurisy.
TAke of Nettle leaves, of Mallows, of Camomill, of Flax seeds, of each two
handfulles, of Mirrhe two drammes, of Ammoniack one dram and a half, boil
them in two parts of water and one of vinegar, and make a fomentation unto the
diseased part. And it will resolve the impostume, it will facilitate the
spettle* and mitigate the pain.

A liniment to remedy the disease of the pleurisy.
TAke of white Lillies, of sweet Almonds, of each one ounce, of the grease of
a Hen, of fresh Butter, of each half an ounce, of Mucillage of Fenegreke, and
of the juice of Mallow roots, of each three drammes, of Storax Calamite two
drams, of the powder of Ireos roots, of Enula, of each three drammes, of
Saffron half a dram, of wax as much as suffices, make a liniment, with the
which let the sick anoint the place of his grief warm, morning and evening
fasting.

Another for the same disease.
TAke of oil of Linseede two ounces, of Ammoniack, of Mirrhe, of each one dram
and a half, dissolve the Gummes in vinegar, and with wax make an ointment.

Another very approved remedy for the same disease.
TAke of the white dung of a Dog one ounce, of Comin two drammes, of the fat of
a Goose, or of a Hen two ounces, of the juice of Coleworts as much as
suffices, braye every thing, and make a plaster, which being extended upon a
Colewort leaf, and being warmed, lay it upon the sore.

To remedy the pain and inflammation of the Milt.
TAke of the dung of wood Doves one handful, of Scolopendria, of the rindes of
the roots of Capers, and of Mellilot, of each half an ounce, of Camomill, of
Calamus aromaticus, of each one handful and a half, of Cloves two drammes, of
Euphorbium two scruples, boil them in an earthen pot with two parts of water
and one of vinegar, until the third part be consumed, and with Sponges or a
Felt dipped therein, fomentate the place with it warm.

To remedy or heal those that have the spleen or quarterne agues.
TAke of the ashes of a whet stone, or of the worms called Millepedi, in
English Sowes or Horse worms, of both one dram, of sirop de Bisantijs one
ounce, of Oximel squilliticum half an ounce, with aperetiue waters, cause the
pacient to receive it early in the morning, and you shall see a marvelous good
success.

To heal those that have the spleen, and pain in the liver.
TAke of the filinges of Steel preperated in vinegar six drammes, of Citrack,
of Gum Ammoniack of each half an ounce, of sirop de Bisantijs, as much as
suffices, make a lectuarie, and cause the sick to take the quantite of a
spoonefull at one time.

To heal the falling from some high place.
TAke of Camomill, of Wormwood, and of Wheat Bran, of each half a handful,
boil them in wine, and being brayed, boil them once again in Honey, and lay
it upon the bruised place.

To heal spots in the eyes.
TAke of the juice of Wormwood well strained, and put it into the eye: or else
take of the juice of Celendine, as much as you please, and put thereto of old
wine and of Salt, and being dissolved and well mixed, put thereof into the eye.
It helps also to distill into the eye of the gall of an Hare, for that takes
away all mistes or darkness from the eyes.

To remedy tears or droppings of the eyes.
TAke of Aloes one ounce, of Roses four ounces, of the juice of Wormwood two
ounces, of ye juice of Borage one ounce, of the juice of Plantine as much more,
of ground Iuie one ounce, and of scraped Liquerice the like weight. Distill
them in a Glass vessel in Balneo Mariae, then strain it through a clean and
fine linen cloth, and drop thereof into the eyes when you go to bed.

Another for the same disease.
TAke of the herb called Millifollie brayed, and mix it with a little powder
of Incense, let it stand to dissolve in good white wine the space of.vii.
days, and being strayned in the evening, distill one or two drops thereof into
the eye.

To renew the sight of old men.
TAke a little Honey, put it into a glass vessel, and put thereunto of the
galls of Corkes, of Hares, of Cles, and of Carmorantes, let them stand in the
sun the space of thirty days, and as many more nights in the air, and by
distilling of the said liquor into the eyes, you shall see a marvelous effect.

To remedy the redness and pain of the eyes.
TAke the lunges of a Ram, and lay it hot upon the eyes, and it will cease
the grief and redness.

To heal sore and bloudshotten eyes.
TAke of Tutia preperated, of Mastick, of Sarcacoll, of Gum Arabic, of each
like quantity. Make powder thereof and dissolve them with Rose water, Vertigo,
is a sickness in the head wherein it seems to a man that be sees things
turning.
and distill of the said water into the eyes.

To heal the disease called Vertigo, and swelling of the arm, by reason of
letting of blood.
TAke a quantity of white Horehound, of Rue, of Penyrial, and a little Salt,
put them to boil in an earthen pot with water until the third part be
consumed, then strain it, and put unto it a quantity of Honey, and boil it
again, until it become thick. Of the which, give the pacient to take one or
two spoonefuls the space of seven mornings, and he will be hole.

Against coldness of stomach, and to cause a good color.
TAke of Ginger, of Pepper, of Cinamond, of Peritorie, of Pionie, of Enula, of
each five ounces, of the filings of Iron preperated, the weight of all the
rest, braye them all together, and let the sick take thereof in all his meats.

To heal the diseases of the stomach.
TAke of Annis seeds two ounces, of Ginger one ounce, of Saffron half an
ounce, of Comin one ounce, of Cinamond as much more, of white Sugar two ounces,
bray them all into powder, and give thereof unto the sick to take with his
meats.

To heal the pain in the body called the Colic.
TAke of Sage, of Artemesia called Mugwort, of Smallage, of each like
quantity, boil them in good wine, until the third part be consumed, and
being strayned, give the sick to drink four ounces or somewhat more at one
time, and he will be hole.

To heal the flixe of blood.
TAke a Hens egg, and make an hole upon the top, and take out the white,
and fill it with beaten Pepper, then burn it in the fire, and make it into
powder, and being mixed with Wheat meal, make little fritters, and bake them,
give the sick party to eat twice a day thereof fasting.

To heal the flix and excoriations of the belly.
TAke of Cinquefoyle, and take out the juice, and give it the sick to drink:
or else dissolve the seeds of Carawayes in good wine, and give it the sick to
drink. The powder of the herb called Virga pastoris, given fasting in wine
does stop the flyxes.

To take away wrinkles out of the face.
TAke of Sothernwood, distill it in a Limbecke, and with the water wash the
face.

To heal the pain of the teeth.
TAke of the shauing of Hearts horn, and after it is well boiled in water,
keep thereof in your mouth: or else take of Pepper, of Pellitorie, of the rind
of Pomegranates, and Millifolie, boil them in strong vinegar, and being put
into a little bag, lay it warm upon the place of the grief.

To heal swollen gummes.
TAke of Rue, and being well brayed with Honey and Salt, put it upon the gummes,
and you shall see a very good effect.

To heal the stone in the bladder.
TAke of the urine of a Got, and give it the pacient to drink, the space of
nine days, and he shall be hole: or else give him to drink of the blood of a
Fox. It helps likewise to take the root of Cinquefoyle, of Enula, of
Capillus veneris, of Sancta Maria, of Saxifrage, and of the herb Stichwort
boiled in white wine, and given to drink: or else take green berries of Iuy,
of ground Iuy, of Percely of Alexandria, of each half a handful, bray them and
dissolve them in good wine, and give it to drink fasting.

The end of the second Book
Of the fourth and last part of the Secrets of the Reverend Master Alexis of
Piemount.
The third Book
To heal a windy impostume.
TAke of green Rue, of Commin, of Annys seeds, of Caraway seeds, of Ameos,
and of Smallage of each half an ounce, of old oil twice as much, put them all
into a vessel, and boil them in water, and with the oil that remains,
annoint the impostume, and bind upon it a little warm Towe, and every day
before you lay on the plaster, or annoint it, make fomentation unto the place
in this manner. Take of common ashes, of the leaves of Bays, of Camomyll, of
Commin, of Rue, of Annys seeds, of Fennel, of Carawayes, and boil them in
water, and put therein of raw yarne, and with that fomentate the place of the
impostume.

To remedy the joints that are out of their place.
TAke of the meal of Orobo, of french pease, of Fig dust, of each half an
ounce, of Mastick, of Gum Arabic, and of Dragant, of Ceruce, of each one
ounce, of Mummie, of Boale Armenick, of each half an ounce, having made powder
thereof, mix them with the white of an Egg, and lay thereof upon the joint.

To mollify hardness.
TAke of Bdellium, of Oppoponack, of each half an ounce, dissolve them in Wine,
and put thereto of Swines grease, three ounces, of the fat of a Goose, and of a
Hen, of each one ounce: of the meal of Fenegreeke, and of Linseedes, as much
more, of Incense, of Mastick, of each half an ounce, of the roots of marshe
Mallows, and of Hearts horn burned, and put into a glass with olie: and
being boiled in Balneo Mariae, dissolve the meals with the said oil and
grease, and stirring it with a little water, bray those things that are to be
brayed, and then meddle all them together, and make a plaster, putting thereto
of Wax.

To heal a rupture of the guts.
TAke of Comfrey the greater, of the fruit of Cipers, of Gum Dragant, of Gum
Arabic, of Mastick, of Boale Armenick, of Sanguis Draconis, of Mumia, of
Colophonie, of each two drammes, of the hears of an Hare finely cut, one
dram: of sodden Wine as much as suffices, bray the said things and mix
them with sodden Honey, then make a plaster and lay it upon the sore.

To remedy the grief of the Matrix.
TAke of Spiknard, of Squinant, of Nutmegs, of Cardamomes, of Galingale, of
Setwall of each half a dram, of Cinamond, of Gynger, of Cloves, of Maces, of
Folium, of Lignum Aloes, of Mastick, of Cubebes, of Saffron, of Carret seeds,
of Ameos, of Cassia Lignea, of all the Mirabolanes, of Calamus Aromaticus, of
each two drammes: of Annys seeds, of Carawaies, of Basyll, of Perselie, of
common salt, and of white Sugar, the weight of all the rest, and make thereof
pills, or lozenges, and cause the woman to use of them.

A marvelous powder for the weakness of the sight.
TAke of Caraway seeds, of Annys seeds, of Dyll, of Ameos, of Perselie, of
Smallage, of Fennel, of Bettonie, of Comin, of Calamint, of Penny Ryall, of
Isope, of Spiknard, of Gynger, Salgem, of Rewe, of Centrum galli, of eyebright,
of Incense, of Mastick, of Saffron, of all the Mirobalanes, of Folium, of
Basyll, of Cardamomes, of Galingale, of Sothernwood, of Sage, of Dittanie, of
Pimpinell, of the Berries of Geneper, of Myntes, of Origanum, of Celendine, of
the seeds of Psillium, of Cubebes, of Nutmegs, of each two drammes, braye them
all into powder, which, use with your meats, but greater quantity in Winter
then in Summer: the use of this powder heals all cold diseases in the head,
it does sharpen the wit, and make a good memory.

To heal ruptures, or burstings.
TAke of Pyche of Spain, two ounces, of Pyche of ships four ounces, of
Aloes Cicotrine, of red wax, of Henbane, of each two ounces, of Mastick, of
Incense, of Galbanum, of Oppoponack, of Gum Serapine, of each as much more: of
Pomegranat flowers, of Gawles, of Corrall, of Lapis hematitis, of each two
ounces, of Euforbium, of Aristologia Longa, and Rotunda, of Sanguis Draconis,
of Boale Armenick, of each one ounce, of Tyrpentine two ounces, of man's blood
ten ounces, boil the said blood as long as you would veale, and being taken
out, braye it, and mix it with Fish glewe, dissolved in water, and put unto
it the gummes dissolved also in water, with the other things made in powder,
and in the end the Tirpentine. Then let it stand and cool, and cast it upon
a Marble stone anointed with oil Olive, and make a plaster, and lay it upon
the rupture: Then cause the party to use this lectuarie morning and evening
before meat the quantity of half an ounce at a time. Take of Mastick, of
Incense, of Sandarack, of Annys seeds, of the leaves and roots of wild
Hartichokes of each one ounce, of Roses, of Pomegranat flowers, of each as much
more, of red Coral, of the hears of an Hare burned, of Gum Arabic, of Cipres
Berries, of Lacca of the roots of Geneper burnt, of each twelve ounces, of
Psillium burned, of Sanguis Draconis, of Boale Armenick, of Veeches, of each
one ounce, of fine Sugar two pound, make a lectuarie.

To stay the hear that falls.
TAke of Spikenard half an ounce, of the leaves of Mirtels, one handefull, of
Aloes, and of Beniomin of each two drammes, of the seeds of wild Myntes, one
ounce and a half: of the roots of Walwoort one handful: of the leaves of
Seen two drammes, boil all these in half a Kettle of old Wine, until the
third part be consumed, and with the decoction, wash often the roots of the
hears.

To heal the swelling of the arm through letting of blood.
TAke of wheat meal as much as you please, and with Honey and Milk make a
plaster, and lay it upon the sore, or else take the leaves of Brioney, and
being made warm with water, bind it upon the diseased arm.

To remedy the swelling of the legs.
TAke of the juice of Walwoort, of Wax, of Vinegar, of Barlie meal of each
like quantity, boil it and make a plaster, and bind it upon the sore.

To heal the swelling of the body, and of the legs, through cold humors.
TAke of Bittony, of Pimpernell, of white Hoarehound, of Fennel roots, of
Smallage, and of red Wax, of each like quantity, boil them all in a
sufficient quantity of water, until the third part be consumed, and give
the sick to drink four ounces thereof every day, putting unto the water two
pound of Honey.

To cause good flesh to grow in wounds.
TAke of the grease of a Hen, of a Goose, of a Swine, of honey, of each one
ounce, of wheat meal, and of the powder of Incense, of each half an ounce,
of Aloes, of quick Lyme a little, of the juice of Coalewortes as much as
suffices, make an ointment, and put it upon the sore, or else take of Incense,
of Mastick, of Aloes, of the Pytche of Spain, of Aristologia rotunda, of
Ireos, of each six ounces, make a powder of every thing, and with oil Olive
and Wax make an ointment.

To heal sore legs.
TAke of new Wax two ounces, of Tyrpentine half an ounce, boil them
together, and put into it the milk of a woman, that gives suck, and a little
strong Vinegar, and make an ointment.

To heal the disease called in Italian, Fuoco saluatico, is a disease wherein
it an exceeding burning.
Fuoco saluatico.
TAke of Incense half an ounce, of Ceruce, and of Wax, of each as much more,
of oil of Roses, and Violets of each one ounce, of Wax as much as suffices,
make an ointment and annoint the knobbes, or else take of oil Olive two
ounces, of Tirpentine, and of Butter, of each one ounce, of Wax half an ounce,
make an ointment and use it.

To heal bones that are broken in the head in few days.
TAke of Tirpentine one pound, boil it a little, and strain it, and put it
again upon the fire, and add thereto of strong Vinegar one pound, and being
made hot strain it again, then set it upon the fire, and put unto it of Wax
five ounces, of saint John's worte in powder two ounces, boil it well, and
strain it, and when it is cold take it out, and wash it with the milk of an
Ass, or of a woman that gives a child suck, and use it unto all broken
bones, and sores of the head.

To mollify hardened sinews.
TAke of oil of Foxes, and of Cammomyll, of each two ounces, of oil of
Linseedes, of Costus, of Ireos, of Euphorbium, of Nardinum, of Wormwood, and
of the filth of the oil that is in wool, of each one ounce, of Vnguentum
marciatom six ounces, of Swines grease as much more, of Wax one ounce and a
half: make an ointment, and annoint the place warm.

To mundifie Fistuloes, and other putrified sores.
TAke of Agrimonie in powder, and of a thin piece of lether finely burned of
each two ounces, of quick lime one ounce, of Verderame as much more, mix every
thing together, and having made an ointment use it.

A most precious oil to remedy all sores and griefs.
TAke of Gum Arabic, of Rubea Tinctorum, of Rosen, of oil of Bays, of
Incense, of Mirrhe, of the fat of an Hen, of oil of Juniper, of Gynger, of
long Pepper, of Cloves, of Cinamond, of common Pepper, of Imperatoria, of
Calamus Aromaticus, of Lignum Aloes, of Piche, of the Gum of a Damsin tree, of
a Pear tree, and of a Cherie tree, put all these things into a Still of
Glass, and distill the oil by Alcumistry: or else take of Tyrpentine one
pound, of Incense two drams, of Lignum Aloes one dram, of Mastick, of Cloves,
of Galingale, of Cinamond, of Saffron, of Nutmegs, of Cubebes, of each one
dram, of dry figs six drammes, meddle all together, after you have brayed
those things which are to be brayed, and put them into a Limbeck or Still of
glass, and close it well, then distill it with a soft fire, and then you may
put unto it of Lignum Balsamum, of Carpo Balsamum, and of Gum of Iuy, of each
one dram, and reserve the oil that shall be drawn, to use for the foresaid
evils.

To heal the cloutes or spots in the face.
TAke of Tutia preperated three drammes, of Camphire six drammes, of Cloves as
much more, of Aloes Epatice three drammes, of Sanguis draconis four drammes,
of Verderame one dram, braye those things that are to be brayed, and make
powder thereof, then meddle them with waters of Bittonie, of Roses, of Fennel,
and of Rue, of each six ounces, of good white wine five ounces, work them
well together the space of an hour, then set them in the sun in a glass
vessel the space of one day, and being strained, drop thereof into the eyes.

To make the sight clear.
TAke of Siler Montanus, of Fennel, of Rosemarie, of Rue, of Celendine, of
Bittonie, of each half an ounce, of Eyebright two ounces, of Sugar nine
ounces. Braye every thing into powder, and use morning and evening to take a
little thereof.

To heal sore breasts.
TAke of Sage, of Wormwood, and of Margerome, of each half a handful, boil
them in white wine, and with that wine wash the sores, and upon it lay the
ointment: Or else take of black Beans parched, and make powder thereof, and
mix it with raw Honey and use it.

To heal little red speckes in the face.
TAke of meal of Lupines, of bitter Almondes, of Baurack, of Radish seeds, of
Cabage seeds, of the milk of Figs, with the juice of Fenegreeke, and of
Linseedes, make a liniment, first wash the place where the speckes be with a
linen cloth dipped in warm water, and rub the place until it become red:
then morning and evening annoint them with the liniment. Speckes are healed by
annoynting them with the oil of the seeds of Bombace.

A most excellent powder to comfort the sight, and all the defects of the head,
of the stomach, and the disease called Scotomia and Vertigo, Scotomia and
Vertigo, are diseases of the head which make all things seem to go round.
and the palsy, and all inward diseases, it consumes the superfluous
humiditie of the brain, it helps the memory: it was used of Frederick the
Emperor.
TAke of Carawaye seeds, of Annis seeds, of Ameos, of Perslye seeds, of
Smallage seeds, of Fennel seeds, of Bittonie, of Comin, of Calamint, of
Pulegium, of Isope, of Spiknard, of Pepper, of Ginger, of Sage, of Rue, of
Centrum galli, of Eyebright, of Incense, of Mastick, of Saffron, of all the
Myrabolanes, but the greater quantity of the Citrines, of Cinamond, and of
Squinant, of each half an ounce, of Margerome, of Folium, of Basil, of
Cardamomes, of Galingale, of Liquerice, of each two ounces. Bray them into
very fine powder, of the which use to take in all your meats, but more in the
winter than in other parts of the year.

To heal the grief of the reins, of the loins, of the head, and the
diseases of the Matrix.
TAke of green Sauine five ounces, of the fruits of Cipres, lxv. drammes, of
Rosemarie flowers, of Millifollie, of Matricaria, of Fenegreke, of Linseedes,
of each six ounces, infuse the said herbs to become tender by the space of
three days in water, then put there unto of oil nine ounces, and boil it
until the water be consumed, and being taken from the fire, strain it through a
linen cloth, and put it unto that that is strayned, of Wax, of Piche of
Spain, of Turpentine, of Galbanum, of Mastick, of each five ounces, of Storax
Calamite, of Spiknard, of each one pound, of Balm four ounces. Bray those
things that are to be brayed, and mix every thing together, and working it
with the spatter, make an ointment.

To heal those that have the Ptisick:
TAke of Nigella parched, of Grana tinctorum, of each one dram and a half,
of the rindes of Pomecitrones dried three drammes, of Cloves two drammes and a
half, of Lignu^ Aloes two drammes, of Balm, of dried Margerome, of each one
dram, of red Roses two scruples, make powder thereof and lay it upon the
closure of the forepart of the head.

An odor against the same disease.
TAke of pure Labdanum, two ounces, of Storax Calamite, of Gallia Muschata, of
each half an ounce, of Lignum Aloes, of Cloves, of each one dram, with the
Mucillage of Gum Dragagant drawn with Margerome water, make as it were a
Nastalle, Nastalle, is a medicine to make one to neese.
and fasten a thread unto the top, that you may put it into, and draw it out
of the nose.

A fumigation for the same disease.
TAke of Aristologia rotunda, of Incense, of Mastick and of Cloves, of each
five drammes and a half, of yelow Arsnick three drammes, with butter or fat of
a Cow, make little Cakes in form of Lupines, of which put into the fire, and
receive the fume by the mouth and nose.

To stop a hot Catarre.
TAke of Sterche, of Gum Dragant, of hulled Beans, of the seeds of white
Poppie, of the rindes of Gum Arabic, of Bole Armenick, after you have brayed
them make Pills, with the Murillage of Psillium, and Quince seeds, in manner
of Lupines, and let the party hold often thereof in his mouth.

To stay a cold Catarre.
TAke of Storax Calamite, of Cipres nuts, of Mastick, of Incense, of Labdanum,
of Amber, of each one dram, of scraped Liquerice, of Reysons, of each one dram
and a half, make likewise Pills thereof like unto Lupines, and cause the sick
to keep thereof in his mouth as well by day as by night: or else make these
more stronger, take of Spiknarde one dram, of Mastricke two drammes and a
half, of Bole Armenick washed with Rose water two drammes, of Gum Dragant, of
Gum Arabic, of each one dram, of Sugar Candy one ounce, with the sirop of
Lillies make Pills in form of Lupines, and use them in manner as you do the
other aforesaid.

To heal the same disease.
TAke of Diadragantum frigidum, one ounce and a half, of Pennets two ounces,
of Loch de prino four drammes, of Dates two, of Reysons without kirnels half
an ounce, of Ireos two drammes, of the seeds of Mallows, of the seeds of
Bombace, of each one dram, with the sirop of Maiden hear, make a lectuarie, of
the which the sick person shall take often into his mouth, and shall from time
to time swallow it down by little and little.

To heal those that be Melancholic, and are in a fury or rage.
TAke of Borage flowers, of Buglosse, of Sorell seeds, of Scariola, of Endive,
of Violets, of Maiden hear, of Politricon, of Gallitricon, of each two
drammes, of Pistaches four ounces, make an infusion by the space of.xxiiij.
hours, in the juice of Borage, and put thereto of Pine kernels mundisted three
ounces, of the rinds of the Miriobolanes, called Indi, one ounce, of Iacinctes,
of Smeraldes, and of Saphires, of each one dram, of the boane of a Hearts
heart, of Doronnoci, of Setwall, of each two drammes and a half, of Lapis
armenis, of Lapis lazuli preperated, of each two scruples, of white Sugar one
pound and a half, boil the Sugar at a soft fire, with a pound of the juice
of Pome ryalls, until the juice be consumed: And when it begins to cool,
add unto it the powders, in the end, put unto it four graynes of Amber, and
of Musk two graynes, and make a lectuarie, of the which cause the sick party
to take morning and evening two hours before meat, having first made the
universal remedies, as purging, letting of blood. etc.

An ointment to remedy the sores of the nose.
TAke of Ceruce, of Lead burned, of each one ounce, make powder, and wash it,
and with oil of Mirtels make an ointment, and use to annoint the nose.

To separate or divide a corrupted bone from the sound.
TAke of green Figs two, of Rue one handefull, bray them together, and make
little cakes, and reserve them: And when it shall be needful to use thereof,
braye them, and put of the said powder into the sore, and it will cause the
good bone to become white, and the perished will appear black.

To heal one which by scratching with his nails has made a sore.
TAke of Litarge two ounces, of Ceruce, half an ounce, of Boale Armenick three
ounces, of burned Lead half an ounce, of Terra sigillata two ounces, of
vinegar, and of oil of Roses, as much as suffyceth to make an ointment.

To remedy the burning of urine.
TAke of Lettys seeds, of Porcellane, of each two scruples, of the seeds of
white Poppie, one ounce and a half, of the seeds of Scariola, of Sorell, of
Endive, of each one dram, of the pulpe of Damask Prunes, of the pulpe of
Sebestians, of each two ounces, of Barlie flower three ounces, of Pennets,
four ounces, of Spodium one dram, of Gum Dragant, of scraped Liquerice, of
Gum Arabic, of each two drammes, of Sugar Candy six ounces, of Sugar
Roset. viii. ounces, of Mucillage of Sebestians seven ounces. Make powder of
those things that are to be brayed, and mix them with the Sugar and Pennets,
and boil them all in four ounces of the juice of sweet Pomegranates, until
the juice be consumed, and make thereof a lectuarie.

Another for the same disease.
TAke of the juice of the flowers of water Lillies, of Violets, and of the
juice of Virga pastoris, of each two ounces, of Barley flower five ounces, of
red Saunders, of Violet flowers, of each half an ounce, of Endive seeds, of
Lettice, of Scariola, of Purcelane, of each two drammes, of Saffron, and of
Spike, of each one scruple, of whites of Eggs two, bray them all with the
flower, and with a little oil of green Olives, in a Mortar of Lead and a
Pestell of the same, meddling together the said things to make a liniment to
anoint the reins, and under the member: or else take of Vnguentum Sandalinum
of Populeon, of each half an ounce, of Camphire half a dram, mix them with
the juice of Semperuiue, and make an ointment: or else take of the yolks and
whites of Eggs three, of oil of Roses omphacine one ounce and a half, of the
flower of Barlie one ounce, of Saffron one scruple, of preperated Corianders,
of Sorell seeds, and of Mirtels, of each half a dram, braye all the things
in a mortar with a pestell of Lead, adding thereto in the end of Vnguentum
Populeon one ounce, and anoint therewith as is aforesaid.

Another for the same disease.
TAke the white of a new laid Egg, of Camphire half a scruple, of the milk
of a woman which has brought forth a daughter, of the mucillage of Psillium,
and of white Sief without Opium, of each as much as suffices, cause to be
squirted thereof into the pipe of the man's member. And then take of the flowers
of water Lillies, of Violets, and of Mallows, of each one handful, boil them
in water until the third part be consumed, and warm in the said decoction
the Gether of a Lamb, and lay it upon the lowest part of the belly, and about
the nether parts of his yard, until the ointment become cold, and working
thus certain times, you shall see a marvelous help.

To revive one that is fallen through the falling sickness.
TAke of the juice of Rewe half an ounce, of Castor one dram, mix them
together, and in the liquor bath little locks of wool, and put them into the
nose, and you shall see a present effect.

A more excellent remedy against empoysments than is common Triacle.
TAke of Juniper berries, of Cloves, of Nutmegges, of the roots of Enula, of
each two drammes, of the roots of Aristologia longa, and rotunda, and of
Gentian, of each six drammes, of Purcelane seeds, of Sorell, of Doronici, of
white Ben and red, of each one dram, of the bone of an Hearts heart, of Lignum
Aloes, of white and red Coral, of the shauings of Iuorie, of Bay berries, of
Mastick, of each two scruples, of Rue one dram, of dry Figs, of Reysons,
of the pulpe of Dates, of each one ounce, of Cinamond, of Liquerice, of each
half an ounce, of Tormentill, of Cardus sanctus, of white Dittanie, of each
three drammes, of sweet Almondes, of Pine kirnels, and of the common seeds,
of each one ounce, of Trosses of Agarick six drams, of Dog Fennel two drams,
of Terra sigillata, and of Terra Militense, of Bole Armenick, of each two
ounces, of common Mummia, of Setwall, of each one dram, of Camphire half a
dram, of Dia trion Sandalon, and of Diarhodon Abbatis, of each two drams, of
the rindes of Ceder apples, of the fragments of Smiraldes, of each one dram,
of Musk one scruple, of Mitridate two ounces.

To heal a thin Catarre.
TAke of Plantine water one pound, of Rose water three ounces, of red and
white Saunders, and of Cloves, of each one dram, of Camphire half a dram,
of vinegar of Roses four ounces. Make powder of those things that are to be
brayed, and meddle them together, then make hot a plate of Iron, and strewe
upon it some of the same powder in a close Chamber, that the sick person may
receive the fume by his nose and mouth.

To cause a pellet of a Dagge or Pistolet which is in the flesh to come forth.
TAke Bittonie and braye it well, and meddle it with the fat of an Hare,
reducing it into the form of an ointment, and cause it to be kept upon the
wound, and in short space you shall see the pellet issue forth.

To remedy a swelling or pain that happens after a wound is healed.
TAke of Oleum Nardinum, of oil of Castor, of oil of Turpentine, of oil of
Costus, of oil of Wormwood, of oil of Rue, of Vnguentum Aragon, of Althea, of
Marciaton, of the grease of a Raven, of each two ounces, of Ireos in powder, of
Linseedes, and of Fenegreke, of each one ounce, of Aristologia longa and
rotunda, of each half an ounce, of Wax as much as suffices, make a liniment
thereof, and use it with happy success.

To purge a wound, and to draw out that which was fastened therein.
TAke of Incense, of Mastick, of Spanishe Pich, of each one ounce, of the fat
of a Ram two ounces, of oil Olive as much more, of the juice of Plantine, of
the juice of Taxus barbatus, of Elders, and of Scabiose, of each one ounce,
mix all these with five whites of Eggs, and make an ointment.

To heal brusings of the head with broken bones or without.
TAke of Salt, of Honey, or old white wine, of Sulphur, and of Bittonie, of
each like quantity, braye them and make a plaster thereof, and lay it upon the
sore, and if there be a bone broken, that the blood be entered in at some small
fisure, then take of the meal of Rye, and of the meal of Otes, of each five
drammes, of the juice of Plantine one dram and a half, of Lapacium acutum
one dram, and make a plaster thereof with good Malmesey.

To draw out things fastened in the flesh, as thorns and such like.
TAke of the roots of Polipodie, and being well brayed with Barrowes grease as
much as suffices, Farfara, an herb called tussilago.
make a plaster, and lay it upon the place: or else take of Farfara, and braye
it with Barrowes grease as is before said, and lay it upon the sore, and
presently it will do the effect.

To heal the Kings evil and other hard impostumes.
TAke of Mustarde seed, of Nettle seed, of Sulphur, of the spume or foam of
the Sea, of Aristologia, of Bdellium, of Ammoniack and of old oil, of each
like quantity, bray all things that are to be brayed, and dissolve the Gummes
in vinegar and make a plaster.

To remedy the pain of the back.
TAke of the juice of Millifolie, and put it into a vial of glass well closed
and luted, then put it into an Oven to boil, and after it is taken out, you
shall find in the Vial oil, with the which, anointing the back, or any
other place that is grieved, you shall see a marvelous effect.

To heal the redness of the nose.
TAke of Borax two drammes, of the meal of red Ceche peason as much more, of
Camphire one dram, of the flower of Beans as much more, braye them into fine
powder, and with the juice of Onyons, or with clarified Honey make an ointment,
and anoint the place: or else, braye the stone of an Ox gall or Bulls, and
with the oil of Pech stones make an ointment for the said pain. It helps
also to infuse Beans to become tender in vinegar, the space of eight days,
and being taken out and dried, make powder thereof, then dissolve it with the
white of an Egg, and anoint therewith the nose.

To heal one that spitteth blood through the rupture of a vein.
AFter the diuersions or universal purgings as the cure requires, are made by
the Physician. Give the diseased to drink one dram and a half of Lapis
hematitis in powder, in as much Plantine water as suffices, and you shall see
the effect.

To heal the evil color of the face, and the Ptisicke.
DIstill from the Month of June until September, the roots of Pollipodie of
the Oak, and give the sick to drink at one time three or four ounces in the
morning, and you shall have your intent.

To heal sores in the natural places of women.
DIstill in a Limbecke in June the roots of Leekes, and with the water that
shall be distilled, wash the sores or ruptures, bathing therein pieces of
linen, or little bags, and put them into the place.

To heal the knobbes which remain in the joints after the pain of the gout.
TAke a Storke, and pull off the feathers, and the garbidge being taken out,
fill it with all the sorts of fatts that you may have, except the fat of a
Swine, and put them into the body of the said bird, then dress it, and lay it
to roast, keeping under it a vessel to receive the dripping which shall come
thereof, and if you take the said fat or drippings, and put it into another of
the said Storkes, and lay it to roste again, it will be the better, then put
it into a vessel of glass, or earth that is glased, and let it stand in the
sun the space of one day, then keep it as a precious liquor to anoint the
knobbes in the joints.

To remedy the stinch of the mouth.
TAke of Sage two ounces, of Rosemarie flowers half an ounce, of Cloves five
drammes, of Cinamonde one dram and a half, of Nutmegs one scruple, bray every
thing, and with Honey make a lectuarie, and give thereof in the morning half a
spoonefull, and then drink a little red wine, wherein is boiled a little Sage,
and thus do every day until you have your purpose.

To heal the crestie growings of the fundiment.
TAke of the herb Peritorie and bray it, with the herb Millifolie, putting
thereto a little Salt, and being brought to the form of a plaster, lay it
upon the place: or else bray an Onyon, and put thereto a little Capillus
Veneris, and of the roots of Aristologia rotunda, and being meddled together,
lay it upon the sore in manner of a plaster.

To heal the Colic.
TAke of the leaves of Dodder a handful and a half, of the leaves of wild
Mallows one handful, of the Larde of an old Hog one pound, braye every
thing well in a mortar of Marble, and being somewhat warm, make a plaster
upon the belly, where the pain is. And with this give him to drink five or
six ounces of oil of sweet Almondes, with which is mixed four or six drops
of perfect Aqua vitae.

To heal the palsy of the tongue.
TAke dry Figs and mundifie them from their skins, then take a dram of
their pulpe, and put thereto six grains of perfect Euforbium, and having
brayed it, meddle them together, and let the sick person hold the quantity
of a little Bean under his tongue, and let him spit often.

To remedy the pain of the head proceeding through a hot or cold cause.
TAke of the roots of Brionie and bray them, and boil them in old oil, and
a little wine, and with the said oil being warmed annoint the place of the
grief: or else take of the oldest oil you can get, and mix therewith three
or four grains of the powder of Euforbium, and annoint the sore place, the
body being first purged, and then purging the dead, by drawing up into the
nose the juice of Rue. Taking heed that if the pain do happen through a hot
cause, having first purged the body, or let it blood by the vein, annoint the
grief with this liuiment following. Take of the juice of sower Grapes two
ounces, of the dregs of ynek half an ounce, of Saffron five graynes, meddle
them together, and make a liniment.

To remedy the griefs of the head and neck.
TAke of the oil of sweet Almonds three ounces, of the meal of marshe
Mallows, half an ounce, of Wax as much as suffices, make an ointment at
the fire, with the which being warm, annoint the sick morning and evening.

To remedy the dimnesse of sight.
TAke of the roots of Radishes in the evening, taken at that present out of
the earth, and being made clean cut them in the middle with a knife, and put
them into a very clean dishe, and let the roots lie with their cuttes
downewarde, then let them stand a whole night in the air, and of the water
that shall distill from them into the dishe, drop into the eyes, and you shall
have great ease, or else making water of Gum Cerapine, drawn by Alcumistrie,
and distilling thereof into the eyes, it will make a marvelous effect in
taking away the dimnesse and other defectes of the eyes.

To heal the pain of the flank.
TAke of the liver of an old sea Vrchen and dry it, and being made in powder,
give the sick to drink thereof in warm broth the quantity of a dram
fasting, and you shall see a marvelous effect, and boil with oil Olive
nettle leaves, and putting thereto a little Saffron, lay it upon the place of
the grief in manner of a plaster.

To heal a burning canker called in Italian, Fuoco saluatico.
TAke of whole Beans one handful, of the Branne of Barley as much more, of the
leaves of Mallows two handfuls, boil them in as much water as suffices,
until the half be consumed, and with the said decoction wash the sore twice
a day, that is, morning and evening, and then annoint it with this ointment.
Take of Lytarge in powder one ounce, of oil Olive seven ounces, mix the
Lytarge with the oil in a Potynger, and put thereto of white Wine, always
stirring it with a spatter, until it come to the form of a liquide ointment,
with which annoint the sore.

To purge the matrix of women.
TAke of the leaves of Tansey, and dry them, and bray them into powder, of the
which cause the woman to drink half an ounce in good white wine, and it will
purge the matrix commodiously: the like effect does the juice of Paritorie
given do drink.

To stop the flixe of the blood of the Hemerods.
TAke of the flowers of Taxus barbatus, of the seeds of Bombace, and of
Plantine seeds, and boil them in sharp Wine, and wash often those parts, and
you shall see the effect.

To heal the coldness of the matrix.
TAke of Pulegium, in the time when it has flowers, and having distilled it by
a Limbeck, give to drink of the water that shall be drawn, two ounces for
every time, in the morning fasting, and last at night, and you shall have your
intent: it will also provoke the terms.

To dry up the superfluous humiditie of the Vuola and of the gummes.
TAke Pulegium, and boil it with dry figs in vinegar, and with the said
decoction gargarize, and wash often your mouth, and you shall see a happy
success.

To take spots from the face.
TAke of Alum Succarine three ounces, of fresh butter two ounces, of oil of
Tartar one ounce, meddle every thing together, and make it in form of an
ointment. With the which, the space of eight days, at night when you go to
bed, annoint the cloutes or spots: and in the morning wash them with warm
water wherein has been boiled Bran of wheat. It helps likewise to bray the
roots of white Lillies, and with Honey and white Wax to make an ointment, and
therewith to anoint the place: or else take a Bottel of glass, and fill it
with Rosemarie flowers, and close it with new Wax, and burye it half in
sand, and cover the upper part with a cup, and let it stand so the space of
one month, and you shall see the flowers turned into water, the which strain
and keep in a vessel well closed, as a precious thing to work the effect
aforesaid.

To heal a Ringworme.
AFter you have purged the body of colericke humors, put into the wound of the
juice of the tender leaves of a wild Olive tree, or the leaves themselves well
brayed: or else take two or three nestes of Waspes, and a handful of the
combs of Bees, with all the young in them, and braye them well, and putting
thereto a little Honey, make a liniment to put into the fore. And this of his
own nature does heal any such evil.

To heal the flixe of the belly.
TAke and drink the blood of a Ducke, and it will do the effect: or else
take the flowers of Filberds, and dry them in an oven, then braye them into
powder, and give the sick a dram thereof to drink in good wine. And the
livers of roasted Pullets given unto the sick to eat, do very much help.

To heal the pain of the loins.
TAke of the seeds of Asparagus, and of Commin, of each one dram, bray them,
and with good wine give the sick to drink. The like effect work the seeds
of Perseneps given to drink: or else two drammes of Enula Campana roots given
in wine. It helps likewise to make fomentation unto the place with liquide
Piche, Sulphur viuum, and Salt boiled together, and dip therein new shorn
wool unwashed, and as hot as you can suffer it, lay thereof twice a day
upon the sore: or else lay only upon it quick Brimstone brayed, mingled with
grease and made warm.

To heal those that piss in their beds.
TAke of the hoofes of a Bore or tame Hog, and give the pacient to drink
thereof in red wine, or in broth. It helps also so take the tongues of three
Geese, and being roasted to eat them. As also to give to drink being made in
powder of Snayles found out of their shelles in wine, and you shall find that
they will work a marvelous experience.

To heal the sores of the feet.
TAke a quantity of the Ashes made of Hens dunge, and being meddled with
Honey, make thereof an ointment, and it will heal those sores, or else take the
hard shell of a Tortys burned, and lay the ashes dissolved with Wine and oil
upon the said sores, and it heals them. As also does the like effect, to
take the ointment made of Sheep sewet dissolved with Wax, adding thereto a
little roche Alum.

To kill worms in the ears.
TAke of the seeds and green leaves of Hemp, and taking out the juice, put
thereof warm into the ears, and you shall see the effect. Or else, take the
Gawle of a Bull, of clarified Honey, of each like quantity, and boiling it in
an earthen vessel, meddle it well together, and reserve it in a Vial of
Glass, and when need requires, being a little warm, put thereof with wool
into the ear, first cleansing the ear from filthe.

To remedy the hurtes of the ears happened through entering of water into them.
TAke a quantity of Gum Iuy, and of the juice of black Beetes, and of the
juice of a Bremble, meddle them together, and being made warm, put thereof into
the ears, and it will cease the pain, and dry up the water, it helps also
the griefs of the ears, to take the gawle of a Swine, and being mixed with
the juice of Leekes, and warmed, to put thereof into the ears.

To heal sores that are engendered in the ears.
TAke a Pomegranat, and having taken out the meat within, fill it with Honey,
and let it boil well in the embers with a soft fire, and put of that being
whot into the ears.

To dissolve impostumes under the ears.
TAke of the meal of Lynseedes, as much as you think good, and boil it in
oil, and Honey together, putting thereto of Salt, and ashes made of a wild
Fig tree, and lay it upon the swelling in form of a pultace. The like
effect is done, to take Gladian roots being boiled, and brayed with salt, and
laid upon the grief.

To heal the stripes of the eyes.
TAke of Byttonie leaves very well brayed, and bind them upon the place of
the strype, and you shall see a very good effect. It helps also to meddle
with meal of beans woman's Milk, and to make it in form of a plaster, and
to lay it upon the sore eye.

To remedy the loss of appetite unto meat.
TAke of the seeds of Spear Trifalie, and boil them in wine, and by the
space of three days continually cause the diseased to drink half a Cup of
the decoction, then let him drink one dram of Gynger infused in Vinegar three
other days, at the same hour, and let him be well covered in his bed when he
begins to sweat, and you shall see a marvelous success.

A marvelous remedy against sores and wounds.
TAke of the oil of Momordica two ounces, of the oil of saint John's worte one
ounce, Bufalo, is a beast like to a horse.
of the marrow of a Bufalo half an ounce, put all these together into a still
of glass well closed, and being luted set it to the fire, and after it is
reduced to a form within ye still, work it with marvelous good success.

To preserve one from poisoning,
YOu must take heed that you eat not things of strong favor, or of a very
sweet taste, because that the bitterness and stinch of poisons in this manner
is wont to be covered, for the over sweet, sower or salt thing mixed with
poison does hide the bitterness of it. At what time therefore you shall have
any suspect to have drunk poison, drink presently after it of the seeds of
Turnips, or of the roots in Wine, or of Neppe, and you shall be safe.

Against the bitings of venomous beasts.
TAke of Onyons and braye them, and meddle therewith of Salt, and Honey, as much
as you please, and make it in form of an ointment, and lay it upon the sore,
and it will take away the pain, and remedy the poisoning.

Against the stinche of the nose.
TAke of the confection which is put into Triacle called Hedicroo, dissolve it
in wine, and annoint within the nose oftentimes, and you shall obtain your
intent.

To heal the griefs of the fundiment.
TAke of the tender leaves of Henbane, and of Purcelane, and of crummes of
bread infused in wine, the yolke of an Egg roasted hard, of each like
quantity, of oil of Roses as much as suffices, braye them all: then
fomentate the place with the decoction of Roses, and of Mellilot, and lay upon
it the Cataplasme aforesaid.

Against the impotencie of the Genitale member.
TAke of raw Cicers, of mundified Pine kirnels, of each two ounces, of the
seeds of Rocket, and of Pepper, of each one ounce, of Honey as much as
suffices. Make a lectuarie, and cause the sick party to take two drammes
thereof at a time in good wine. It helps likewise to take of Pepper, of Pine
kirnels, of Percely, of the Pisell of an Heart, and of Turpentine, of each like
quantity, being brayed, mix them with Honey, and use it as you do the other:
or else drink in the morning a potinger of Gotes milk warm, as it is milked,
and put therein two or three drammes of the powder of Cloves.

To heal an impostumed Colic.
CAuse the party to be let blood in the vein Basilica, and if by chance
there follow presently retention of urine, draw blood out of the vein Saphena,
and lay upon the grief this ointment. Take of wax five ounces, of oil of
Camomill two ounces, of oil of Roses as much more, of the meal of Beans
half an ounce, of the yolks of Eggs five, with the Mucillage of Linseedes,
make an ointment.

Against the biting of a mad dog.
TAke of Vinegar one pound and a half, of Pich one pound, of Oppoponack three
ounces, boil the Pich in Vinegar, with the which dissolve the Oppoponack, and
being laid upon the biting, it will not suffer the wound to close, and this is
a convenient medicine against knobbes of hard flesh. Wherefore unto women or
children you must make such a medicine liquide with Oleum irinum, and use it.

Against indurate impostumes, Condilomi, are certain things that fasten the
skin, which covers the child in the mothers belly.
perished Condilomi and hardened breasts.
TAke of Litarge of silver, of Lime, of each one pound, of Manna, of Incense
three ounces, of white wax as much more, of Galbanum one ounce and a half, of
Alum and of Turpentine, of each one ounce and a half, of Ireos and of
Coperus, of each six drammes, of Gawles, and of Mirrhe, of each eight drammes,
of Honey eyghtene ounces, of oil four pound and a half, put the Litarge and
the Lime unto the oil, and boil them, laboring them with the spatter, and
when it shall be thick, put thereto the white wax, the Turpentine, and the
Galbanum first sodden in honey: and being mixed, and taken from the fire, add
thereto the other things in powder: or else take of Bitume, of Litarge, of each
four pound and a half, Bitume, a kind of natural lime or Claye.
of oil Olive seven pound and a half, boil them together, and put thereto of
wax five ounces, of Galbanum, and of Mirrha, of each as much more. Make thereof
a plaster.

To dissolve an impostume under the ear.
TAke of swines grease six ounces, of Wax two ounces, of the whytes of raw
Eggs two, of Honey as much as of the Eggs, of Fig dust as much as suffices:
Dissolve the Wax with the grease, then put thereto the whytes of the Eggs by
little and little, then meddle therewith the Honey and meal and use it.

To dissolve the kings evil, and every hard impostumation.
TAke of Salt Peter one pound, of Lytarge of Silver, as much more, of the
filthe of oil vessels four pound, of Galbanum four pound and a half,
braye the Salt, and the Lytarge, and putting thereto the filthe, braye it
again, and set it to boil in an earthen vessel, laboring it often with a
spatter, and when it does not cleave to the fingers, take it from the fire, and
bray the Galbanum with a pestell of wood, and meddle and dissolve them
together, and being wrought upon Marble, keep it to use when need shall
require, it will be very marvelous.

Against trembling through some melancholy humor.
TAke of Pine kernels two drammes washed with warm water, of sweet Almondes,
of Reysons, of Pistaches, of each one dram, of Gynger, of Saffron, of white
and red Ben, of Setwall, of the ryndes of Pomecitrones, of Balm, of each one
dram, of Margarites, of red Corrall, of Cloves, of Maces, of Cardamomes, of
each half a dram, of yelowe Saunders, of Gum Dragant, of Eum Arabic, of
each two scruples, of Sugar sixtene drammes, dissolve the Sugar with Balm
water, and make a confection in morsels, of the which the sick must take every
evening the quantity of a Chestnut, two hours before supper.

A confection to heal mistes or dimnesse of the sight.
TAke of the juice of Fennel half a pound, of the juice of Rue, of the juice
of Selendine, and of Margerom, of each half an ounce, mundifie them all, and
take of clarified Honey one pound: boil them together unto a just height, and
put thereto of Eyebright one ounce and a half, of Fennel so do half an
ounce, of Maces, of Cubebes, of Cinamond, of long Pepper, and of Cloves, of
each two drammes, make them into powder, and meddle them and make a lectuarie,
of the which cause the Patient to take at night when he goes to bed half a
sponeful: notwithstanding let him leave to take it in the summer when the
weather is hot, or else temper it with ye greater part of Sugar Roset. Then
take of Fennel waters distylled through a Limbeck, of Margerom, of Celendine,
of Rue, of each two ounces: in the which waters dissolve of Saffron one dram,
and of Antimonie two drammes, distill it through a Felt, and of the water that
shall be drawn, drop into the eyes twice a day.

Against the weakness of the sight.
AFter the purging of the body, take of the leaves of Bettonie, of Rewe, of
Eyebright, of Annys seeds, of Cinamonde, of Gynger, of Cardamomes, of Fennel
seeds, of Percely, of ^ilermontanus, of Origanum, of Hissope, of Cubebes, of
Liqueris, of each one dram, of Sugar unto the quantity of the other things,
then make them all into powder, and being mixed together make a lectuarie, of
the which let the patient take half a sponefull, two hours after supper.

An other for the same purpose.
TAke the Eyebright two ounce, of Fenegreke five drams, of Mace, of Cubebes, of
Cinamond, of long Pepper, of Cloves of each one dram, then searce them, and
make a lectuarie with a pound of clarified Honey, and of the juice of Fennel,
and of boiled Celendine clarified, of each half an ounce, boil the juices with
the Honey, until they become thick, and in the end adding thereto the pouders,
make a confection.

To keep the belly sollible in the infirmity of the eyes.
Accustom to take diverse times, or often, that is to say, every day fasting,
a dram and a half of this confection: take of Mirabolanes emblici, and
Citrini, of each two drams, of good Turbith one dram, of Gynger, two drammes and
a half, of Cinamond one dram, of Nutmegs two drammes, of Annys seeds, of
Fennel seeds, of each three drammes, of Sugar the weight of them all, make a
powder thereof, and with Sugar dissolved in Fennel, or Eyebright, water, make
a lectuarie.

Against the inflammation of the eyes.
Having first thoroughly purged the body, take of mundified Barlie, of Quince
seeds, and of Camomill flowers, of each half an ounce, of Fennel seeds two
drammes, boil them in water until the fourth part be consumed, then strain
it, and therewith wash the eyes, and if with this you obtain not your intent,
put there unto of white Sief without Opium, and use it.

To heal the grief of the eyes.
TAke of the Buddes of Vines, and taking out the juice meddle therewith the
yolke of a raw Egg, and being well tempered wash the Temples, and lay it
upon the eye. This also helps. Take of Tutia of Alexandria half an ounce, of
Mastick, of Incense, of Aloes Epatici, of each one dram, of Camphire one
scruple: of the juice of sower Grapes one pound, having made powder of those
things that are to be brayed meddle them together, Collirion is a medicine for
the eyes.
and make a Collirion, and apply it unto the eye.

An other for the same effect.
TAke of Boale Armenick half a dram, of Sanguis Draconis, of Gum Dragant, of
Gum Arabic, of each two drammes, bray them finely, and searce them, and meddle
them with half a pound of Rose water, and being put into a Vial of Glass,
boil it in Balneo Mariae, that it touch not the bottom of the vessel, the
space of an hour: then take it from the fire, and letting it stand so the
space of a day, strain it, and put thereof into the eyes, washing them also
often with water of Fenegreeke distilled through a Limbecke, and it will be of
a marvelous effect.

To heal stripes of the eyes, Nucae, is the uppermost part of the head, and
some take it for the rough of the mouth.
and extention of the nuck.
TAke of Tutia, of Saffron, of Mirrhe, of each one dram, with the juice of
Rewe, and of Margerom, make a Collirion, and put thereof into the eyes.

Another for the same.
TAke of Boale Armenick one ounce, of Tutia, of Sanguis draconis, of Gum
Arabic, of each half an ounce, bray them, and searce them, and meddle them
with a pound of Rose water, and put it into a Vyall of Glass, and suspend it
in Balneo Mariae, that it touch not the bottom of the vessel, nor the sides
about the bottom, and cause it to boil by the space of half an hour, and
being taken from the fire, put thereto two drammes of the Wine of Pomegranates
that is clear, and letting it stand so a whole day, put thereof afterward
into the eyes.

To remedy the Litargie.
TAke of the seeds of Agnus castus, of Smallage seeds, and of Sage leaves, of
each one handful, of Salt water as much as suffices, boil them and fomentate
the hinder part of the head with the decoction.

To heal the incontinencie and dropping of urine.
TAke of Balm and of water Mintes, and boil them in good wine, and being
given to drink, it remedieth the making of water by drops, and if of the said
herbs boiled, you make a plaster, and lay thereof between the nauill, and
the bottom of the belly, it is unto those that cannot keep their water an
excellent remedy.

Against the hardness of the spleen.
CAuse the sick to drink often in good white wine of the seeds of Ben,
called Ghianda vnguentaria, and you shall see a very good success.

To heal an old flix of a woman's flowers.
THe juice of Barberies given to drink, purges a woman's Matrix, and stops
old flixes, but if the Farberies be given a woman to drink, they will do the
like effect, and also help all the other flixes of the body.

Against stinging of Bees.
TAke a piece of linen cloth, and wash it in distilled Borage water, and lay
thereof often upon the stinging, and it will take away the pain.

To heal the inflammation of a man's yard.
TAke of the leaves of Bruscie, braye them, and boil them with Rose water, and
a little wine, then take them out, and make a plaster, laying it upon the
member, and you shall see the effect.

A remedy against coldness, and debilitie of the reins, the pain of the
back, and want of appetite unto a woman.
TAke of Persenep roots as many as you please, let them be fair and great,
and cut away the tops, and take double as much of Sugar, and put them into an
earthen pot of water, and boil them with a slow fire until they begin to wax
tender, then lay them upon a Gyrdion that they may cool, then pare them and
take out their pithes, and after put them into a new carthen pot glased, and
put thereto as much good clarified Honey as will cover them, then boil them
until the Honey do thoroughly penetrate every part of them. Then take them from
the fire, and put into them of Cloves two parts, of Cinamond, and of Ginger one
part, bray them and meddle them with the roots, of the which the sick party
eating fasting one ounce at a time, shall find a marvelous effect.

To remedy vomiting occasioned of cold humors.
TAke of sweet Pome rials, and boil them well in two parts of water, and one
of Honey, and being taken out, boil them once again in Honey only, and then put
them into a vessel of glass, and pour upon them as much clarified Honey,
that they may be covered, and add unto them these Spices. Take of Cloves, of
Cinamond, of Ginger, of Cardamomes, of Pepper, of each a like, such quantity
as you think convenient for the quantity of the apples, and use to eat of
them, and they will be very effectual.

Against the streynings when a man cannot go to the stool.
TAke of Maudlen wortes, and boil them in tart wine, and make fomentation from
beneath. It helps also to stop the blood of the Hemerodes.

To remedy deafness or want of hearing.
TAke of ground Iuy, bray it, and take out the juice, and being a little
warmed, distill thereof at diverse times into the ears.

To heal bruses about the eyes without launcing or incision.
TAke of Saffron half a dram, of oil of Roses one ounce, one yolke of an
Egg, bray the Saffron, and meddle them, and lay thereof upon the eye.

To heal watrie or dropping eyes.
AFter the body is thoroughly purged, take of the rindes of Incense, of Tutia
well preperated with Margerome water, of Mirrhe, of each one dram, of red
Coral as much more, with Fennel water as much as suffices, braye those
things that are to be brayed, and make a Collirion, with the which wash the
eyes.

An excellent powder for the same disease.
TAke of burnt Antimonie five drams, of Tutia of Alexandria preperated three
drammes, of Lignum Aloes burned half a dram, of the stones of Dates burned
into coals three drammes, bray all these things into very fine powder, and
having tempered them with Rose water, dry them in the sun: then take of
Musk one grain, of Amber as much more, temper them with Rose water, and being
dried, beat them with the foresaid things, and braye them into a very fine
powder, which you shall use after unto the eyes.

To heal the griefs of the eyes.
TAke of Incense well brayed half an ounce, wash it in warm water, and let
it stand so the space of two hours, then with Fennel water make a Collirion
and use it. It helps maruelouslye to take a dram of the vitriature or
glasing of vessels made in powder, and being meddled with oil of the seeds of
Bombace, to put it into the eye.

To heal sores of the ears that offend the hearing.
Having purged the body thoroughly, take of small wine somewhat sweet, of
childrens urine, of each one ounce, boil them with one ounce of Honey meddled
therewith, and put thereof into the ears. After the sore is mundified, take of
Incense, of Sarcacoll, of Mirrhe, and of Aloes, of each one dram, dissolve
them in wine, and dip therein tents, and put them into the ears: or else use
this remedy. Take of the dross of tried Iron often washed with vinegar, and
made into powder, of Bole Armenick, of the bark of Incense, of Sarcacoll, of
Mirrhe, of Aloes, of each one dram, dissolve them in wine and use them.

Against the grief of the loins and of the eyes.
TAke of the oil made of Nuts of India that is old, and with that anoint the
sick person, and it will do the effect.

Against difficulty of taking of breath through coldness.
TAke dry Figs and boil them in wine, and meddle therewith of the powder of
Nuttes of India, and give to drink thereof every day, and it will work
maruelously. Also the water of Origanum being drunk by three ounces at a time,
helps.

To heal a dry cough.
TAke a quantity of Beetes, and boil them, and put thereto of sweet
Almondes, and of the juice of sweet Pomegranates, of each like quantity, and
give thereof to eat, and you shall find a marvelous help.

Against the hardness of the matrix.
TAke of the herb called Origanum, and boil it in Wine, and meddle therewith
of oil Olive, and bathe therein pieces of linen cloth, and put of them often
into the natural place of the woman.

Against the falling of the Vuola, and swelling of the Palate.
TAke of Origanum in the month of June, and braye it, and dystill it through a
Limbeck, and with the water let the patient Cargarize, and wash his mouth
three or four times a day.

Against the coming out of the nauill of children.
TAke of the herb called saint John's wort, and make a plaster braying it
very well, and bind it upon the Nauill, and you shall see health ensue.

To heal the palsy.
TAke of Calamus aromaticus, two ounces, of Stecados Arabice one scruple, of
Calamint, of Origanum, of Annys seeds, of Fennel seeds, of Cinamond, of each
three drams, of Hissope, one ounce, of Fennel roots, of Persely roots, and
of Sparagus, of each half an ounce, of Sage, of Balm, of Bettoney, and of
Auens, of each one handefull, of Sugar one pound, make a sirop, according unto
Art, of the which cause the diseased to take one ounce and a half at a time,
with water made of the infusion of Nutmegs.

Against the debilitie of sinews.
TAke a Goose, and pull it, and having taken out the guts, wash it within,
then take half a Fox, and half a Catte, that are fat, and break the bones of
them both, and bray them well, and put thereto of Tyrpentine, of Serapine, of
Bdellium, of Rosyn, of earth worms dried, of each half an ounce, meddle every
thing, and fill the body of the Goose, putting thereto of Sage, of Rosemarie,
of each one handefull, of Castor one dram and a half, of Geneper berries
half an ounce, and if a Goose be not able to conteyne such a quantity fill
two, and sow them well, and roste them with fire made of the wood of Bays, or
of Geneper, or of Vines, let the first that droppeth be cast away, but that
dropping which afterward follows keep to annoint the parts that have
sinews, and also the uppermost part of the head.

Against redness of the legs.
IN the Month of May take of the leaves and stalks of Lonage, and braye them,
and distill them through a Limbeck, and bathe pieces of linen clothe in the
water, that shall be distilled, and lay it upon the legs, and you shall see
a present success.

To remedy the printes of blows that remain.
TAke a quantity of dry leaves of Margerom, and making powder thereof, meddle
therewith Honey, and annoint the swollen or rankled place. The like effect is
done with the juice of the same, if the place be anointed, for it will
dissolve the dead blood under the skin.

Against swellings of the face.
TAke wild apples, or crabbes in the end of June, and distill them through a
Limbeck, and with the water that shall be distilled wash often the face, and
the intent will follow.

To keep hear from growing white.
IN the end of May take of the herb called Balm, and distill it through a
Limbeck, and of the water that shall be distilled, drink twice a day two
ounces at a time, and likewise wash the hear, and you shall see the effect.

To heal the itch of children.
TAke and braye a handful of green Myntes, and lay it in Lie one whole day
to become tender, and with the said Lie washing the children, and you shall
heal their itch.

Another for the same.
TAke of oil of Roses one ounce, of Storax liquida, half an ounce, of common
Salt one scruple, and a little of the juice of Limons, meddle them all well
together with a spatter, and anoint therewith.

Against trembling or shaking.
TAke of the oil of Gum Iuy, of the oil of Cherua, of each one ounce, of oil
of Roses, of Bdellium, of Serapine, of Oppoponack, of Masticke, of each half
an ounce, of oil of Foxes and of Bays, of each one ounce and a half, of the
fat of a Ram, and of a Goose, of each two ounces, dissolve the fat with Rose
water and Vinegar as much as suffices, and mixing therewith the other things,
make an ointment, with the which, anoint the uppermost part of the head, and
the other weak members.

Against stinch of the mouth through rotten teeth.
DIstill through a Limbeck in the midst of May the tops of wild Mintes,
and with the water that shall be distilled, wash often the mouth of the
diseased.

To heal the white flixes in women.
TAke of the flowers of Rocket, and of Mouse ear, and of Origanum, unto a just
quantity, beat them into powder, and add thereto of Sugar half the
quantity of them all, and make thereof morsels, of the which, let the woman
eat, and it will work a marvelous effect.

To heal the relapsation of the gummes.
TAke of Mirrhe as much as you please, and being dissolved in wine and oil
Olive, wash therewith the gummes, and you shall see a most true experience, if
you use it oftentimes. It helps also to take the water of wild Mintes
distilled through a Limbeck, and often therewith to wash the gummes.

To heal chappes in the fingars.
TAke of the roots of Pollipodie, and bray them very well, and meddle them
with Honey, and anoint the sore, and you shall see the effect.

To heal a windy impostumation.
TAke of green Rue, of Fennel, of Comin, of Annis seeds, of Ameos, of
Carawayes, of Smallage seeds, of each five drammes, of old oil five pounds,
put them all into a Vial of Glass, and boil them very well in Balneo
Mariae, and with that oil annoint often the place.

To heal the evil disposition which comes before the Dropsey, and the
obstruction of the Mesaraicall veins.
TAke of the juice of Wormwood half a pound, of Spiknard one dram, of
Cinamond two drammes, of Sugar half a pound, make powder of those things that
are to be poudred, and being well meddled together, give two ounces thereof unto
the sick person at a time with Wine or broth.

Against the flix of urine.
TAke of Prunes five, of Corianders, of Mirtels, of each two drammes, of Roses,
of water Lilly flowers, of each four drammes, boil them in water, and take
of the said decoction, and of the juice of the buddes of Vines, of each four
ounces, of Sugar six ounces, make a sirop, of the which take two ounces: or
else make this other which is of a marvelous effect. Take of the roots of
Vngula Cabalina, of Vmbelicus Veneris, of Virga pastoris, of Plantine, of Burfa
pastoris, of Liuerwort, of Rue, of Scariola, of each one handful, of Violet
flowers, and of Nenuphar flowers, of Lettis seeds, and of Purcelane seeds, of
each one ounce, of white Poppie seeds half an ounce, of Ieiubes, and
Sebastians ten, of red Roses, of red Saunders, of each half an ounce, of
hulled Barlye two ounces, of Sugar two pound. Make a sirop according to Art,
of the which, give unto the diseased person every morning the quantity of one
ounce before meat, at least by two hours.

To remedy the impotencie of the Genitall member.
TAke of the seeds of white Onyons, of Satirion, of Date flowers, of Olibanum,
of the brains of Sparrowes, of each two ounces, make pills thereof with hot
water, unto the quantity of a Cyche pease, of the which give the patient to
take five or six at a time, and no more, and you shall see a very good effect.

To heal sores of the Bladder.
TAke of mundified Pine kernels dried one ounce, of mundified Pistaches half
an ounce, of the powder of Liqueris two drammes, of the seeds of white Poppie
half an ounce, of the common seeds mundified as much more, of Lettis, and
Endive seeds, of each one ounce and a half, of Reysons three ounces, of
Cinamond two drammes, of Sugar the weight of them all, make losenges, or
morselles, the weight of half an ounce a piece: of the which let the sick
person take one at a time before meat, and let him drink after it a little
wine.

To heal the diseases of the reins.
TAke of Fylberds, of Pine kernels mundified, of Gum Dragant, of Gum Arabic,
of the juice of Liqueris, and of Pennyts, of each ten drammes, of the seeds of
Mercury, of bitter Almondes, of the four greater cold seeds, of each five
drammes, of the seeds of Quinces, of Mallows seeds, of Porcellane seeds, of
the seeds of white Poppie, of red Roses, and of the seeds of Plantine of each
three drams, of the seeds of wyld Fennel, of Smallage, of the Garden and of
the Mountain, of Annys seeds, of Henbane, of Rocket, of Saffron, of Apium, of
each two drammes, make a confection with sodden Wine, mixing therewith of
Musk, and of Saffron two Crown weight, of the which let the diseased take the
quantity of a Bean, with Plantine water.

To heal ruptures within the body.
FRom the Month of Iulye unto September, the roots of Enula are to be
distilled, the leaves are to be distilled in the end of May, the water of the
roots being distilled, and given the sick to drink morning and evening, two
or three ounces at a time, will do the effect, of the water of the leaves
there is not accustomed to be given to drink, except only as much as may be
contained within an Eggs shell.

To take away the blackness of skarres.
TAke of the juice of Rocket, and of an Ox Gawle of each like quantity,
meddle them together, and annoint the skarres many times, and you shall see a
very excellent success.

To kill worms in the body.
TAke of Fern roots, and having made fine powder thereof take a dram, and
being dissolved in Wine give to drink thereof, and it will kill them all.

To preserve one that has taken poison.
TAke Filipendola and distill it in the end of May that is the herb and the
roots a little bruised, and of the water drink four or six ounces at a time,
and it will preserve you from danger. It helps also against the pestilence.

A medicine to heal the Quinsey.
TAke of the juice of Strawberies, and of Plantine water, of each eight ounces,
of Honey of Roses two ounces, of the juice of Mulberies one ounce, of Dogs
dunge that is white, of Pomegranat flowers, of each one dram, meddle every thing
together, and cause the sick to gargarize himself often therewith.

To remedy the unquietness of agues, and to provoke sleep.
TAke in the beginning of May, the plants of Mallows, and bray them with the
stalks and roots, and distill them through a Limbick, and with the water that
shall be distilled, rub the sick parties feet, and it will induce rest, and
take away drithe.

To heal the flixe called Disenteria.
TAke four ounces of the juice of Plantine, and meddle it with water of Taxus
Barbatus, and being made warm make a glyster. Then give him to eat of old
sugar Roset six drams, of conserve of Quinces made with spices one ounce, of
red Corrall two drammes, of Charabe one dram, meddle every thing, and give the
sick person six drammes thereof fasting, and so you shall obtain your intent,
perseuering to use it certain days.

An other glyster most precious for the same disease.
TAke of white Incense, of Sanguis draconis, of Terra sigillata, of Boale
Armenick, of each one dram, of Saffron half a dram, make fine powder of the
foresaid things, and meddling them with four ounces of the juice of Plantine,
and a little of the water of parched Barlie, make thereof a glyster.

Another for the same.
IT helps the Disenteria, to drink the juice of Sorell with wine, and the
juice of Marsh Mallows also being drunk does the like effect. To drink also
in the morning fasting three ounces of Borage water, Terra Samia, is that which
the Apothecaries call Terra Sigillata.
helps the said disease: also it helps with more efficacy to drink the
juice of Bursa pastoris.

Another for the same, of very great efficacy.
TAke of Hipoquistidos, of Psillium, of Terra Samia, of unripe Gawles, of
Acatia, of each eight drammes, with rain water make little Cakes, of the
which, give the sick to take two drammes at a time with the decoction of Rise:
or else make a glister.

To cause Hemerodes to open.
TAke the gall of Got, or of a Cow, and meddle it with the juice of
Anagardus, and annoint the place, and the intent will follow: or else infuse
raw Onyons in vinegar of Squilles, and lay thereof upon the place.

Against scorchings of fire.
IN the end of June take Rapes with the roots and braye them, and distill
them through a Limbeck, and with the water wash the scorchings, and although it
will engender scurfe or scabbes, let it not be taken away, but with continuance
of washing you shall see a manifest remedy.

To preserve one from the gout.
TAke of the roots of Rosemarie, and having boiled them very well in vinegar,
if with the said decoction you wash your feet, it will preserve you from the
Gout.

Against the belkings of the stomach.
TAke Rue leaves and distill them in the midst of May, and of the water let
the pacient drink morning and Evening two or three ounces, and you shall see
the success: and also it will expel the ventositie of the body.

To cause a woman to bring forth a dead creature.
TAke Willow leaves in the midst of May, and having distilled them through a
Limbeck, give the woman to drink thereof the quantity of four ounces, and it
will cause her to be delivered of the dead creature.

To heal the Dropsey and opilation of the liver.
TAke of Elder flowers that are very ripe, and distill them in Balneo Mariae,
and of the water that shall be distilled, cause the diseased to drink morning
and evening three ounces at a time, and you shall see an excellent success.

An emplaister to heal the rupture of the scull.
TAke of Plantine seeds three ounces, of Lapacium acutum four ounces, of the
meal of black Beans as much as you please, braye them into powder, and boil
them with very strong wine, and lay thereof twice a day upon the wound.

Another for the same.
TAke of Gum Elemi three drammes, of pure Rosen four ounces, of wax six
ounces, of oil of Roses two ounces and a half, of Armoniack two ounces, of
Tirpentine three ounces and five drammes, of Rye meal as much as suffices,
with wine and wax make a plaster.

Against the pain of the Colic.
TAke of Origanum one scruple, and being made into powder, give it to be drunk
in good wine, and you shall see the effect. It helps also to give to drink
of the wine made of the decoction of Horehounde the quantity of three ounces.

To heal the itching or scabbes of the fundiment.
TAke a quantity of a Brick that is in the top of a furnace, that has been
burned a long time, bray it into powder, but first wash it with common water,
and then with Plantine water, and after meddle it with oil of Mirtels and
white wax, and having made thereof an ointment, use it unto the fundiment.

To remedy the pains and burnings of the fundiment.
TAke the yolke of a roasted Egg that is hard, and being brayed, dissolve it
with white wine, and oil of Roses, of each as much as shall suffice, and lay
it upon the sore. It helps also to take three drammes of the powder of Rose
leaves, two yolks of roasted Eggs brayed, and incorporate them with white
wine, and being meddled therein Vnguentum Rosatum, therewith to anoint the
place.

To heal the disease called Iliaca passio.
TAke of Sumack, and of Common, bray them together, and meddle them with
Oximell, and give the diseased to drink a dram thereof.

Another remedy for the same disease.
TAke a quantity of the juice of the leaves or budds of vines, and cause the
appassionated to drink thereof.

To remedy the issuing out of the Fundiment.
TAke a quantity of Lentill leaves, and express the juice from them, and
annoint therewith the fundiment, or else take green gawles, and boil them in
wine, and being sodden make them into powder, and put thereof into the
fundiment.

To heal one that can not keep his urine.
TAke of the brains of an Egle the quantity of a pease, of the fat of a Goose
as much more, of Gum Arabic unto the same quantity, being meddled together
swallow thereof, as you would do a pill: or else, take the Testicles of an
Hare, and boil them in good sweet Wine, and give thereof to drink. It
helps also to take a little Calamint, and Mirrhe brayed, and give thereof
unto the sick to drink in good wine.

To remedy the coming out of the matrix.
Wash the matrix with the juice of Acatia, or of Rubea tinctorum, or of
Lentilles, or of Sumack, and it will return it into her place.

Against the growing of flesh out of the nails.
TAke of Gawles, of the ryndes of sower Pomegranats, of the dross of red
Brass, of dry Figs burned, of each like quantity, bray every thing, and
mix them with honey, and put thereof into the sore, morning and evening.

To cause skalie nails to fall.
TAke of the Gum of an Oak, of Sandaraca of Fenegreeke, of each two ounces,
Cantarelle, a vermin like unto Bees that sing, called of the Apothecaries
Cantarides.
of Cantarelle, of Tapsia of each one ounce, of vinegar as much as suffiseth,
meddle them, and make a plaster, braying those things that are to be brayed,
and put thereof into the nails.

To take away the blackness that remains in skarres.
TAke a quantity of the root of white Brione and black, and boil it in oil,
as long as it yields juice, and therewith annoint the place: the skarres that
remain of Kingwormes annoint with the grease of an Ass: or else with the
seed of Rocket brayed and dissolved in the Gawle of a Got, or of an Ox.

Against blood that is congealed within one.
TAke a quantity of the rennet of an Hare, or of any other beast, and give
thereof to drink in vinegar, it helps also to take Time, or Sauorie, given
to drink with the like liquor.

Against the difficulty of taking breath.
TAke of the powder of the roots of Aristologia rotunda, and give thereof the
sick to drink with water. It helps also to take a quantity of silk
worms, and being put into an earthen pot well closed, to set it into an Oven
until the worms be dry, and being brayed meddle honey therewith, and give the
sick to drink thereof a sponefull at a time.

To remedy the congelation of milk within the breasts.
TAke a raw Egg, and being meddled with Vnguentum rosatum, annoint the
breasts. It helps maruellously the bynding of the body, if being dissolved
with Oil of Roses, the breasts be often anointed therewith.

Against the subversion of the stomach.
TAke three parts of the juice of sower Pomegranates, of the juice of Mintes
one part, boil them in a vessel of earth glased, working it always with a
spatter, until it become thick, and being taken from the fire, give the
pacient a sponefull thereof to eat before meat.

For one that has lost his voice.
TAke of the juice of Coalewortes meddled with honey, and give it unto the sick:
or else take of Linseedes burned and brayed and finely searced, of fat Reysons
without the stones, of mundified Pine Kernels parched, of clean Nuts, of each
like quantity, braye them and meddle them with honey, of the which hold often
under the tongue.

To remedy the hardness of the spleen.
TAke of the fat of a Crane, and meddle it with vinegar of Squilles, and after
the sick person is come out of the Baine, anoint the region of the spleen, and
it will help maruelously.

Against empoysonments.
TAke of Rape seeds, of Calamint, and of Terra sigillata, a little of every
one, and having meddled them together, give thereof to drink, and the poison
or biting of any venomous beast will not hurt him.

To heal the flixes Disentericall or Lientericall.
TAke a fish called a Gogin roasted, without salt, and give of it the sick to
eat many times, and you shall see health follow.

To draw out thorns or arrowe heads out of the flesh.
TAke a quantity of a Cuttle, and being well brayed, lay thereof upon the
grief in manner of a plaster, which through a secret virtue that it has, will
draw them forth, as also Sea Crabbes do, being brayed and laid upon the
griefs.

For women that be barren.
TAke the nature of a female Hare made into powder after it is dried, and give
it the woman to drink in good wine, and presently after let her company with
her husband, for she will be apt to be conceived with child.

Against the Colic.
TAke of the fat of a Peacock, of the juice of Rue, and of Honey of each like
quantity. Meddle them and with Wine give them the pacient to drink: or else
being dissolved in oil, or broth, make a glister, and presently you shall see
the remedy.

Against the infection of the skin.
TAke the bones of a Peacocke and burn them, and being brayed, dissolve them
with vinegar, and annoynting the place often therewith, you shall see the effect.

To cause a woman to bring forth a dead creature.
TAke of the roots of Enula in the end of May, or else from the Month of
Iulie unto September, and distill them through a Limbeck after they be brayed,
and of the water that shall come forth, you shall give morning and evening unto
the pacient to drink two or three ounces at a time, and the effect will follow.

Against the crestes of the piles in the fundiment.
TAke of Millifolie, and of Paritorie, and being meddled with salt, braye it
very well, and lay it upon the sore. It helps also to take of Capillus
veneris in powder, of Onions, and of Aristologia rotunda, of each as much as
you please, and being brayed together, lay them upon the sore.

To remedy a tongue aggrauated, which through overmuch moisture pronounces
not well.
TAke of Mustarde seed, and bray them, and being meddled with good Honey, give
the sick thereof to hold in his mouth the quantity of an Hasell nut, and
giving it to be sucked for an old cough, it is of a marvelous efficacy.

To heal the pain of the Colic.
TAke a quantity of the liver of a Porpose, and being boiled, take the oil
thereof, with the which anointing the place where the passion is, it is of a
very excellent operation, and it is known to work the like effect in all
other griefs occasioned through coldness.

To dry up milk in the breasts.
CAuse the woman to use in her meats the seeds of Smalage, and likewise the
herb sodden after what manner you please. The like effect is done, by taking
the seeds of Nigella sodden in wine, and given to drink.

To deminish the fleugme of the body, and to augment the blood.
LEt the party that is in such sort eat every morning fasting, seven
drammes of small Reysons fasting, and the effect will follow.

A remedy to cause conception.
SOme Physicians affirm, that Oriental Amber helps unto conception,
notwithstanding I esteem, as by experience also I have proved, that it is but
a weak remedy. Therefore annoynting a pencell with Oil of Balm, and touching
the mouth of the matrix therewith, it is a very perfect medicine unto
generation, taking heed notwithstanding, that it be not a counterfeit oil,
but true, which you shall know in this manner, take a drop thereof and cast it
into a Cup of water, if it go unto the bottom it is perfect, or if you drop it
upon a woollen cloth it will make no spot.

To heal pain in the feet.
TAke of the leaves and flowers of Mugwort, and meddle them, braying therewith
Swines grease, and emplaister the place of the grief, and you shall see the
success.

To heal Wheales.
TAke a quantity of wild Mintes, and with leven as much as suffices, being
brayed together, make a plaster, and lay it upon the sore, and in a short
space, it will make it ripe and hole.

To heal inward ruptures.
TAke of Germander, brayed in a Mortar with a pestell of wood, and infuse it in
good white or red wine, that is a stringent, and give the patient thereof many
times to drink, and certainly it will work a marvelous effect unto all
ruptures within the body.

To remedy griefs proceeding through going out of the joints, and to heal
swellings.
TAke Agrimonie and braye the tender parts thereof very well, and lay them
upon the sore place in stead of a plaster, and you shall see it work a fair
and quick success.

To heal the pain of the spleen and the Ptisick.
TAke of the juice of Strawberies, and meddle it with honey, and adding thereto
a little quantity of white Pepper, give it unto the sick party.

To remedy the puntures of bones or stingings of dead Serpents.
TAke of the upper parts of Gladian, and making powder thereof meddle it
together with wine, and bind it upon the stingings, and it will deliver you of
the poison.

To take away weariness, after great labor and grief of the members.
TAke Hoarehound, and having taken out the juice thereof, meddle it with Oil
of Roses, and with the linement annoint the parts, and presently you shall be
whole.

To heal one that lotheth meat.
TAke of the leaves of Dyll and boil them in water, of the which give the
party to drink four ounces and a half, and it will heal the lothsomnesse,
and ventositie of the stomach, and smelling unto the herb newly gathered with
the seed, it will cause the yoxing to go from him that is molested therewith.

To heal percussions of the eyes.
TAke fresh Bettony and boil it, and being taken out and strayned, braye it,
and with the said herb make a Cataplasme upon the place of the Percussion.

To remedy the pain of the spleen.
TAke Cammomyll flowers and make them into powder, of the which give the
diseased to drink morning and evening, one dram at a time, in three ounces
of white Wine, and a little of a childs urine, not as yet come to pollution,
and continuing this certain days, it will restore the spleen unto his former
health.

Against the great griefs of the body.
TAke of Sinckfoyle, of Pulegium, and of Poppie leaves, of each like quantity:
boil them in Wine, and fomentate the place of the grief, and the intent will
follow.

To heal the plurisey.
TAke of the leaves of wild Mallows, and boil them in Oil, and being taken
out, bray them in a Mortar, and put them into a piece of linen cloth, and
apply it unto the place of the grief, and presently it will cause the pain
to cease.

To remedy the stinking at the nose, and difficulty of hearing.
TAke of the juice of Iuy leaves, and put thereof into the nose, and it will do
the effect: or else, for hearing, distill the said juice meddled with wine, and
of the liquor that shall be distilled drop into the ears, and you shall see
within a little space, a marvelous help.

To heal the scorchings of fire.
TAke of Serpillum one ounce, of Litarge of silver three ounces, of Roses as
much more, braye them in a Mortar, and put thereto wax, of Bears grease, and
of Hearts grease, half a pound of them all, boil every thing, and being
strayned, keep it for a liniment.

To dissolve the crestes of the French disease.
TAke the grease of an Hen, and of a Ducke, of each five drammes, of the marrow
of a Calves bones, of the marrow of a Cowes bones, and of fresh butter, of each
three drammes, of Storax liquida four drammes and a half, of the fat of a
Calfe ten drammes, of Hisopus humida one ounce and a half, of oil of
Camomill, of Oleum irinum, of sweet Almonds and of Mastick, of each five drams,
of Mucillages made of the roots of marsh Mallows, of Enula, and of the roots
of Ireos, of each one ounce, of Armoniack, of Bdellium, and of Serapine, of each
one dram and a half. Boil these roots with the Gummes in water, and a little
vinegar, until the Mucillages be consumed, then strain it, and make a
Mucillage. The which you shall meddle with the other things, except the Hisopus
humida, and the Storax. And boil them until the Mucillages be consumed, then
strain them all, and meddle therewith of Turpentine one ounce and a half: of
Saffron one dram, of wax as much as suffices, and put thereunto the Hisopus
and the Storax, and one ounce of extinct Quicksiluer, and make a Cerote, and
use it, and you shall find it marvelous.

Against swellings of women's bellies that make them to seem with child.
TAke of Parsenep seeds, and being brayed, make powder of them, and with wine
give the woman thereof to drink, the quantity of one dram at a time morning
and evening fasting, and it will do the effect.

To cleanse the face from spots.
TAke of the roots of Ireos two drammes, of the roots of Eleborus niger one
dram, bray them into powder, and meddle them with Honey, and at evening when
you go to bed anoint the face, and wash it in the morning with warm water.

To heal the torsions and griefs of the belly.
TAke half a dram of Ireos powder, and being meddled in sharp or sour wine
give it the sick to drink, and if it be put into the medicines that purge the
body, he shall feel no torsions as long as he is a purging.

To remedy the burning or heat of urine.
TAke of yolks of Eggs with their whites, three, of Oil Onfacine one ounce
and a half, of the flower of Barlie one ounce, of Saffron one scruple, of
Corianders preperated, of Sorrel seeds, of Mirtell berries, of each half a
dram. Bray every thing in a Leaden Mortar with a pestell of the same,
meddling therewith of Vnguentum populeon one ounce, and make an ointment, with
the which being cold, annoint the parts betwixt the testicles and the
fundiment, and it will be of a marvelous efficacy.

To remedy percussions or falling upon the ribs or back.
TAke of Litarge, of Rosen, of each one ounce, of Gum Armoniack, of Ceruce, of
each half an ounce, of Galbanum, of Incense, of each three drammes, of oil of
Roses and of Mirtels, of each as much as suffices, of wax a little, meddle
them and make a Cerote, and being laid upon the bruise, you shall see a sodeine
and marvelous effect.

Against burning occasioned of cold.
TAke of the juice of a Mulberie tree, and meddle it with like quantity of
oil Olive, wherewith annoint the burnt places, and they wilt be hole. It
helps also to boil the leaves of Rue in oil, and being strained to anoint
the place.

To heal wheales or blisters in the face.
TAke of Mirrhe, of Costus, of Cassia lignea, of each like quantity, after
they be brayed, meddle them with Honye, and anoint the sore at evening when
you go to bed, and in the morning wash it with water made with Branne that is
hot: or else anoint it with the meal of Orobo meddled with water and Honey.
The Meal of Otes dissolved in vinegar, and the place anointed therewith does
the like effect. It helps also to anoint the place with the blood of ones
arms fasting.

To make skarres become fair of color.
TAke of the grease of an Ass, or of a Calfe, and putting thereto of Mirrhe, of
oil, and of Saffron, meddle them and keep it in a brazen vessel, and being a
little warmed, annoint therewith the skarres. It helps also to annoint the
skarres with the Gawle of a Sea Scorpion, and you shall see a very happy
success.

To take away the bleachnesse of blows.
TAke the pyll of a Radishe, and being brayed and dissolved with Honey, annoint
the place. It avails also to braye grene Smallage, and being meddled with the
white of an Egg to lay it upon the place. The juice of Tapsia, is of a present
efficacy, meddled with the powder of Incense, and Ceruce, and so applied unto
the sore.

Against the swellings of Percussions.
TAke of the gawle of an Ewe, and being meddled with the milk of a woman, lay
it upon the sore: or else take the doung of a Swine, and dry it between two
dishes in an Oven, then bray it, and mix it with Oil, and it will work the
effect being applied unto the sore.

To heal those that have pain in their liver.
CAuse the sick to drink of the juice of Cicorie, or of Endive in brothe, or
with water of Honey: even so likewise the said herb does help being dried and
the powder given to drink. Also Iuy brayed with Endive into powder and given to
drink dot^ the like effect. And so do the roots of a Maple tree braied and
given to drink the quantity of an ounce and a half, with sweet wine: or
else a quantity of Spica Celtica given in drink, works a manifest remedy.
It helps to take the flesh of three Snayles, and being brayed and dissolved
with four ounces of red wine, to give it to drink.

To heal the pains of the breasts, which happen after the birth of a child.
TAke a quantity of Egg shelles, and being brayed into powder, meddle
therewith of the yolks of sodden Eggs three: of Saffron, and of oil of
Roses, of each a little, make a Cerote, and lay it upon the breast.

Against the scurfe of the head.
TAke of Oil of Nuts, and of Oil Olive, of each like quantity, and having
first washed the head, annoint it with the said Oil, and with twice
annoynting, the scurfe will be consumed.

To heal a plurisey by spitting.
TAke a quantity of the shelles of Hasell Nuttes, and being brayed into powder
with Oximel simplex, and Iulep of Violets as much as suffices, it will cause
the sick person to avoid ye plurisey by sucking thereof so that you shall see
the effect.

Against moist sores.
TAke of the roots of Ciperus, and being brayed into powder, put of the powder
into the wound. It helps also to burn the ryndes of dry Gourdes, and to put
of the powder into the sores: so likewise does the powder of Dyll flowers: or
else, the powder of (...) leaves of a Cipres tree, or the fruits thereof brayed
with Wine, and laid upon the sore.

To heal wounds, which after they are whole brust out a new, by reason of a
putrified bone.
TAke of the powder of the roots of Dog Fennel, and put it therein, and it
will cause the shiuers of bones to issue forth. Also the seeds of Henbane
brayed with Lime do help. Or else take the leaves of Figs brayed with wild
Poppie, and boiled in Potage, and laid upon the sore.

To heal the crestie swellings of the Piles.
TAke of Verdegrease, of Alum, of the dross of Brass double the weight of
the other things, braye them, and make them liquide with vinegar, and make
thereof a liniment. Also it helps to take of the heads of Menewes burned and
roasted Onyons, meddled together and laid upon the sore.

Against evil disposition through coldness of the stomach.
TAke of the roots of Enula two ounces, of Fennel seeds one ounce and a
half, of Pepper one ounce, of Persly seeds half an ounce, of Rocket seeds
one ounce, of Seselios one dram, of clarified Honey one pound, meddle them and
make a lectuarie, of the which give the pacient two spoonefuls in the morning,
and at evening when he goes to bed with good wine.

To heal the loss or diminishing of smelling.
CAuse him to smell often unto strong sauors, purging the body notwithstanding
universally, let him smell therefore unto Origanum meddled with vinegar and
Salt: or else unto Castor, or Beniomin dissolved in vinegar: or Mustarde (...)
with vinegar or Ptarmaca, or Elleborus niger, or the (...) of the herb
Ciclamen put into the nose.

To cause that hear shall not grow again.
Anoint the place where you would not have hear to grow with the warm blood
of an Hare as soon as it is killed, and upon that annoint with wild Nettle
seeds brayed, and dissolved with oil Olive: or else with the brains of
Battes brayed and dissolved with woman's milk, anoint the place.

To heal cleftes or chappings of the fundiment.
TAke of Vermilion and of Mirrhe, and make fomentation under it. It helps
also maruelouslye to take Vermilion brayed, and meddled with Pomata, or with
oil of Roses, and therewith to anoint the fundiment in the chappings.

Against retention of urine in Agues.
TAke a quantity of the leaves of Garden Violets, and make a plaster with
them after they be sodden, and lay it upon the bottom of the bellye: or else
roste an Onyon, and being hot, lay it upon the said place, and your intent
will follow.

FINIS.
^^printed at London by Henry Denham, dwelling in Paternoster Row, at the
sign of the Star.

OS HOMINI SVBLIME DEDIT



Anno Domini. 1569.


