A SERMON PREACHED AT THE CHARTERHOVSE, before the Kings Majesty, on Tuesday,
the tenth of May. 1603.

By D. Blague, Deane of Rochester, the Kings Chaplain.



Imprinted at London by Simon Stafford, dwelling in Hosier lane, near
Smith-field, 1603.

To the Reader.
BOnum, quo communius, eo melius. Few persons in respect heard this Sermon, the
place would not otherwise afford it: But one being present at that time, took
the notes of it, and supposing it to be so comfortable a doctrine to others, as
he found it delightful to himself, as well in regard of the matter delivered,
as the grave and methodicall delivery thereof, was hold to make many others
partakers of it, hoping there is little, or no difference betwixt the
publishing of it now, and the preaching of it then: Howsoever, accept his
endeavor, being willing that all the Lords people should prophecy, and reap
wholesome instruction and comfort thereby.

Farewell in the Lord, H. H.

A Sermon preached at the Charterhouse, before the Kings Majesty, the tenth of
May, 1602. by D. Blague, Deane of Rochester, the Kings Chaplayne.
Psalm. 1. 1 Blessed is that man, which walks not in the counsel of the
ungodly, nor stands in the way of sinners, nor sits in the chair of
scorners.

2 But his delight is in the Law of the Lord, and in his Law will meditate day
and night.


THis Psalm has no title, because (as Basil says) it is as the foundation to
the house, the keele to the ship, and as the heart to every living creature: so
this is the key to all the rest. The matter of this Psalm, is, touching the
blessedness of the righteous. This blessedness he proves ab Antithesi,
negatively in three steps; affirmatively in two points, etc.

ASHREI: that is, O the blessedness of that man! THe Prophet begins with an
exclamation and sigh, sorrowing that so few do tread in the paths of
righteousness. Ye know there is but one God, but many Legions of Devils: and we
find, that the devil has more friends in the world, then God. For Christ our
Savior had only Pilats wife to entreat for him: But all the multitude cried
out, Set Barrabas the murderer at liberty.

Likewise, the soul is but one; yet does an army of lusts fight against it;
and who can tell how often they prevail? When this Scripture is verified, that
the single woman has more children, then she which has an husband; is that
sin barren? Preciosa non sunt numerosa. Good men are odd men. Help, Lord,
cries David, for good men decay. The righteous perishes, who lays it to
heart? Wasps and Hornets swarm: the Adders eggs are many: there is an harvest
of Vices cries to the Lord for a sickle: Sin ouerflowes like water, who
seeks to stop the stream? Ask the earth: it will say, I yield much matter to
make pots of: but little dust, that Gold comes thereof. Ask the Gardener: he
will say, I have more weeds then flowers, more nettles then Roses, more
brambles then Vines. Ask thine own conscience: and it will answer, There is
great plenty of men, magna solitudo bonorum, which walk undefiled in the way
of the Lord. Cherish therefore such as fear God; there are but few of them.
Let a vile person be despised in your eyes; there are too many of them.

And this I take to be the reason why the Prophet does sigh, that so many
seem blessed in show, and so few indeed.

HAISH: that is, that man. IN the Scriptures, Man has three names: Adam, in
respect of his substance, Red earth: Aenosh, in respect of his fall, Wretched:
for nothing makes the people wretched, but sin. And here he is called, ISH; a
virtute, which is, Blessedness. Hereof comes Ishah: virago, a woman of Virtue.
Happy he that meets with such a match; Pearls and precious stones are not
comparable to her.

ISH, is a man of Virtue and Wisdom. Wisdom is the gray hair; the
undefiled life is the old age; to depart from evil, this is understanding.
Ishachar, is a great boned Ass; seldom lodges Wisdom there. Behold, the Be
is little, but his fruit is sweet. The Oak is great and tall, and his fruit is
fit for hogs. The Peacock is fair, but proud. The Vine is low, and creeps by
ground: but it yields wine acceptable to God and man.

Ingenio pollet, cui vim nature a negauit.

The power of God is declared in weakness. Blessed therefore is that man of
virtue and wisdom.

The first step to blessedness, negatiuely; is, not to walk in the Counsel of
the ungodly.
Counsel, as S. Basil says, is Hieron ti, a divine thing: like the water
spring, the deeper ye draw it, the sweeter. Like a sweet perfume, comforting
all the spirits. Where many are that can give good counsel, there is safety.
Blessed is he, that has grace to follow it. Counsel in Hebrew, is Gnatsa, of
the root Gnets, A tree. For as a good tree brings forth good fruit, and an
evil tree brings forth evil fruit: so all men resemble the manners of their
Counselors. There is no sin almost done without counsel.

Would Achab have wrung by violence the Vineyard from Naboth, but for the
wicked counsel of Iesabel? Would Absolon have continued his Rebellion against
his father, but for the pestilent counsel of Achitophel? Could Amnon have
compast his sister Thamar, but for the advice of his Attendants, Make thy self
to be sick? Such dead Flies corrupt sweet ointments, infect many young men and
Maidens. Would God there were none such in Israel.

The root of all actions, is counsel in the heart. The heart is like a Mill,
ever grinding good or ill thoughts. Necessary therefore is this prayer: Make me
a clean heart, O God, and renew a right spirit within me. Our Savior says,
that from the heart, come the things that defyle a man. Once the Lord sent a
flood to wash it: now there needs a fire to purge it. The first step to
murder, is anger. Where lurketh anger? In the heart. Christ says, that to
look, and to lust after a woman, is adultery. Where rests lust? In the
heart. If the Fountain be thus corrupted, can the river be wholesome? If the
Conscience be polluted, no puddle, no sink so unsavory as it. Blessed is he,
that resists the first motion and entisement to evil. The Poets counsel is,
Venienti occurrite morbo: before sickness, take Phisike: resist a mischief in
the beginning. Would you have instance hereof? A spark of fire in the end of a
straw, is easily put out: but if it catch the trusse, it hazardeth the house.
The seed of sedition and heresy being but in one, is easily suppressed: but if
it be spread, it will require Hercules labor to root it out. The heresy of
Arrius was first asparke; being neglected, it so spread, that as S. Jerome
says, Totus orbis ingemuit, miratus sefactum Arrianum. Therefore little things
are not to be despised. And though some say, De minimis non curat lex: yet a
little prick of a rapier, may make a deadly wound. A great tree grows up of
the least grain of Mustard seed. A drop of water is a small thing, yet many
drops will sink a ship. A hair is less, yet has it choked a big man. So the
lusts seem trifles, but by continuance get dominion, to the danger of the
soul, Go not therefore after thy lusts, for it will make thine enemies which
hate thee, to laugh thee to scorn. Resist a mischief in the beginning; admit
of no ill counsel: and this is the first step to Blessedness.

Ungodly.
THe persons that give counsel, are here called Reshangim, of Rashang, to be
stirring, to compass their purpose by hook, or by crook. The counsel of
busybodies is ever dangerous. Such in Law, are called Pettifoggers; they
breed multiplicity of suits and actions. In the Church, such are the sactious;
they break all good order. Order is called by Zachary, Beauty. Beauty in
Greek, is Kalon apo tou Kalein; it allureth every one to the gaze: and so does
good order. Disorder is like a blemish in the face. Cauendum ab his quos nature
a consignauit: so, a quick eye must be set on such as break order, for they
are dangerous. In a private house, what does one repining servant? he sets all
the rest in an uproar.

Such amongst neighbors are Carrytales; they lode and unload news from table
to table, and breed much heart-burning. These are Reshangim, Ungodly stirring
heads: By nature, they are like the wind, unquiet, ever in motion: if it be
enclosed, it will shake both sand and sea to break out. The devil eggs them
on; Cast thy self down headlong, do somewhat to be famous. Esaias compares them
to the sea, ever working, foming out their own shame, Chrysostom deriues
ponaerian apo tou ponou. Ungodliness is ever full of toil; Virtue breeds
quietness and rest unto the soul. Ravening beasts, when their bellies are
full, do couch in their dens: but these muse upon mischief in their bed,
and cannot be quiet, till they be made a gazing stock to the world, to Angels,
to all men. Blessed therefore is the man, which walks not after the counsel of
such pragmaticall and busy heads.

Walks not.
TO walk, is to delight in: Look what company we frequent, for such shall we
be deemed and esteemed: for experience teaches, that Birds of a feather do
flock together. Malt-wormes seek out their like. Catholics, such as seed
their humors. Swine had rather wallow in the mire, then in clean waters: and
wantons rather dally with light huswiues, then be amongst grave Philosophers.
What can be more dangerous to Gods children, then this? Do not evil words
corrupt good manners? Does not a little leaven sour the whole lump of dowe? A
little viniger will sour a great vessel of wine. A little wormwood will make
a great deal of honey bitter: but a great deal of honey cannot make a little
wormwood sweet. Good men are corrupted by the society of the evil, and learn
to swear by the life of Pharao: but evil men are seldom amended by the
conversation of the good. For this cause was antiquity so severe: for it was
not lawful for a Jew to connerse with a Samaritane. If an Hebrew did eat
with an Egyptian, it was counted abomination. Therefore has the Church
ordained excommunication. If any that is called a brother, be a whore-master, a
drunkard, or a covetous person: with such do not eat or drink, receive him
not into thy house, say not, God speed, Iend him no countenance. Can thou not
shun him with thy body? yet be severed from him in thy mind: for pure devotion
is this, to keep our selves undefiled from this wicked world. Wretched is that
man, which delights in the counsel of the ungodly.

The second step to blessedness, negatiuely, is, not to stand in the way of
sinners.
THe Scripture sets down a twofold way. 1. The narrow way of Virtue, like
litera Pithagorae, at the first, painful: but when ye have got the habit of
it, it sets the heart at much liberty.

2. The broad way leads to hell directly. Therefore Pithagoras, in the light of
nature, gave this percept: per viam popularem ne gradere: which S. Jerome
interprets, Follow not the errors of the multitude. S. Paul in the light of
grace, teaches: Fashion not your selves to this evil world. S. John observes
the fashions of this world, to be, in the Iusts of the flesh, the lust of the
eyes, and the pride of life.

Haec tria pro trino Numine mundus habet: This is the trinity, the world does
worship. No marvel then, though Cusais reason be so predominant: Where the
multitude runs, there will I be. Hereby they verify the Posie of Aristotle:
Plurima pessima: The most are the worst.

THe way of sinners, is the way of all flesh. All flesh is grass, full of
frailties.

There is no corn, but may be blasted: no soul, but may be corrupted.

In a red Rose it is not hard to find a Canker. The holiest man has his gifts
with sundry imperfections. Mark the place ye stand on, it is slippery; the
stowtest may take a fall. The Just man falls seven times a day. Whosoever then
amongst you is without sin, let him cast the first stone at another.

There are two sorts of sinners; the Penitent, and the Infamous: the one sins
of Infirmity, the other of Maliciousnes: in the one, sin remaynes; in the
other sin does reign.

The Penitent sinner cries with David, Heal my soul, for I have sinned
against thee. Humbles himself with the Prodigal child, I have sinned against
heaven, and in thy sight, and am unworthy to be called thy son. Knocks his
breast with the Publicane, and sighs, God be merciful to me a sinner. Sic cum
homo agnoscit, Deus ignoscit: Whensoever we do unfeignedly acknowledge our
sins, GOD does presently blot them all out of his remembrance.

The Infamous sinner is he, which knows nothing but sin. Such were those in
the Gospel. Would God there were none amongst us. Jeremy describes them thus,
They blush at nothing; they have a harlots forhead. The book of Wisdom thus;
They leave tokens of their pleasure in every place they come. S. Peter thus;
They wonder and howt, that you run not at riot as they do. Blessed is that
man which stands not in the way of such Infamous sinners.

Stands.
TO stand, is to fall again and again to the same sin, being warned and
punished, yet nothing to amend, that's an infamous sinner. The scripture exhorts
thus: Have thou sinned, my son? Do so no more. Bind not sin to sin: for one
shall not escape unpunished. Who will return to his enemies prison, whence he
has escaped? such a one is worse then a brute beast: for if it stumble at a
broken bridge, ever after it shunneth the place. The Bird escaping the fowlers
gyn, flies aloof. Piscator ictus sapit: Shall not the sinner take heed? The
counsel of our Savior to one and all is: Now thou art made whole, sin no
more, left a worse plague light upon thee. Who scapeth shipwreck, and bids
not both ship and sea adieu? How often has sin brought us to the shipwreck
of a good conscience, and yet will we not forsake it? To this end Saint Paul
moves: Ye that are dead unto sin, how can ye live any longer therein? Sirac
presses this point: He that washes himself because of a dead body, and
touches it again, what auailes his washing? If my sweet Savior Jesus say to
me: All thy sins are forgiven thee; and I will not part with them, who is to
blame? Relapse into sickness is dangerous, much more into sin. Being delivered
from the hand of the devil, and possessed again; the latter end of that man
is worse then the beginning. Therefore if ye have bin seduced by evil
counsel, yet stand not in the way of sinners. Wretched is he that stands.

The third step to blessedness, negatiuely, is, not to sit in the chair of
scorners.
THis is the highest degree of sin. And to sit, does note an obstinate
contempt of all religion and honesty. Zachary says, Their heart is hard as
the Adamant. The Adamant stone is dissolved in Goats blood: but neither the
precious blood of Christ, nor the vnque^cheable fire of hell can make their
heart to yield. The Gospel compares them to a common high way, where nothing
will grow: to unsavory salt, nothing can season it. We know that wine being
sour makes viniger. A tree being rotten, becomes firewood: and of rags is
paper made: but unsavory salt is good for nothing, but hurtful to all. Sweet
words are lost to such, because they are resolute: ou peisaes can peithaes:
thou shall not persuade me, though thou do persuade me. This is the sin of
presumption, against which David prays, Lord keep thy servant from
presumptuous sins, that they never get dominion over me.

This obstinacy makes men scorners, Laetsim. Scorning is bewrayed 3. ways,
gestu, verbo, actu.

1. By gesture.
BY scornful behavior, as girning, giering, spitting, poynting and wagging the
head. With the flatterers are busy mockers, the very abiects made mowes and
ceased not. Christ forbids Racha: that is, a gesture of the nose. This
seems a small matter, but in Gods sight it is murder. How scorns have been
revenged, woeful examples have declared it.

2. By uncivil words.
SO was Joseph nicknamed a Dreamer: Paul a Babbler, and Christ a Carpenter.
Libanius the Sophister thought to break a jest upon a Christian: Sir, what is
Christ the Carpenter now doing? He answered, He is making a coffin for Julian
thy master, and so it fell out in deed. Lucian scoft, that he had got nothing
by his Christendom, but a syllable to his name: For before, he was called
Lucius, and now Lucianus. Mark his end: he was torn in pieces with dogs.
Ismael scoft at Isaac: Saint Paul calls it Persecution. These are Flabellum
Diaboli. The devils bellows: And Flagellum Iustorum, the scourge of the
righteous. From such scourges good Lord deliver us. The tou^g in Hebrew is
Kaeuod: that is, glory: because it always ought to be an instrument to set
forth Gods glory. But these scorners, with their tongue do rent and tear the
holy Scriptures, and call Genesis an allegory. Epiphanique in Ancorata
answers all such thus: If there be no Paradise, but in an allegory, then
there are no trees, but in an allegory: if no trees, then no eating: if no
eating, then no Adam: if no Adam, then no men: then all is allegories, and the
truth is a tale of a tub. Thus said the fool once in his heart; but these
daily bray it out with their toungs: ought such be tolerated amongst us?

3. By unlawful act.
WHat is more precious then a good name? all the treasure and gold of Arabia is
not comparable to it. Look what orname^t hair is to the head, sight to the
eye, and green leaves to a tree: the same is a good name to every Christian. Of
this thing so precious, drunkards make rimes, reprobates cast Libels, to
trample under foot the honor of the Best.

I hope the last Sundays motion is so well remembered, that I need not harp
on that string.

THese skorners have their chair: for they will be Apes of God and good me^, to
cover their hypocrisy. There is a three fold chair: magisterij, iustitiae, and
pestile^tiae.

The first, is the Doctors chair. The ancient custom was, that Doctors did
preach sitting. Our Savior in Nazareth after the Lecture of Esaias, sat down
and taught. The Scribes and Pharisees did sit in Moses chair. Hereof Cathedral
churches have their name, where there is ordinary teaching. GOD. forbid that
any chair should be without a teacher, or any Bishops seat long void; for then
the people will mourn.

THe second is the seat of Justice, to defend the good, to punish the wrong
doer. Sweet is that melody consisting of these 2. points, mercy and judgment:
for summum Ius is summa iniuria: extremity of law, is open injustice. He that
blows his nose too hard, wrings out blood. As Gregory said in another place
may be applied to this: Mammillam Scripturae durius premitis: ye wrest the
Scripture and Justice too violently, and so instead of milk and succor, ye
wring out blood and oppression. So, too much pity spilles a city. There is
misericordia puniens, and crudelitas parcens. He that spares a woolfe, and
pardons a wilful murderer, does hazard the whole flock. Aurea mediocritas.
It is an honor to the seat of Justice, to minister it without respect of
persons.

THe third is the seat of pestilence: so the Greek text enforces, which is,
Loimoon. In the time of pest, we follow the Physicians rule: Cito, long,
tarde: God forbid that any should embrace or countenance a pestilent fellow.
Can there be any greater glory to a King, then with the testimony of a good
conscience to say, All my delight is in the Saints that are in the Land, and
such as excel in virtue? I am a friend to all such as embrace the Gospel of
Christ Jesus. Whosoever is faithful, and fears God, he shall be my servant. As
for pestilent fellows, I hate and abhor: such bring a Realm into thraldom.
Therefore if you will be partakers of true blessedness, beware of busy heads,
infamous sinners, but specially of skorners: delight not in their counsel,
stand not in their ways; least of all be resolute in their desperate courses:
Hac itur ad Inferos: this is the high way to hell.

The affirmative part is, But his delight is in the Law of the Lord, and in his
Law will meditate day and night.

THe Lord is here called Iehoua, the King of Kings, and Lord of all Lords, to
whom all the Kings of the earth must bow their scepters, and do homage; for of
him they hold in chief. This name the Jews hold to be unutterable: that is,
true in respect of the essence: for the nature of GOD is infinite, therefore
they expressed it by Tetragrammaton. Superstitious this was, yet it condemns
our lack of reverence unto it: For Princes and Magistrates we remember with
their style and titles of honor, but the name of God passes with contempt,
and too often with blasphemy: Call ye this Religion?

THis Lord has his Law, in which he will have no competitors, aut solus, aut
nullus. S. Peter calls it Gala adolon: pure milk, without any mingle-mangle.
It is called Thora, of Iara, to teach: because it instructs every one what to
choose, what to refuse. Honey is sweet to a sound taste: but the Law of God to a
sound Professor is sweeter then the honey and honycombe. Gold is precious: but
to me, the law of my God is dearer, then thousands of gold and silver.

Life is sweet: yet the Martyrs of Christ respected not their lives, to keep
the testimony of a good conscience. Therefore that which is sweeter then honey,
more precious then gold, and dearer then life, that ought all men to delight
in: But such is the law of the Lord.

Blessed is the man whose delight is in it: that is the first step to
blessedness affirmatively.

YOu know there is no life withoutsom delight, the error is in the choice: but
where delight is, there is cherefulnes: so the Hebrew word Chephets enforces,
a readiness, a willingness to all good.

Amor meus, pondus meum: Where love does lean, both wit and will do bend
themselves. A little plucking draws a man, whither he willingly goes. A little
wind drives a great ship with the stream. Where God writes his Law in any man's
heart, there is cherefulnesse. This made David to run in the way of Gods
commandments: and when his footesteps failed, he wished, O that I had wings
like a Dove to perform it! Gods servants must be like to Angels, most swift in
their service. To a willing mind nothing is hard or heavy: for love makes all
things light. To such Christ's yoke is sweet; his commandments are not
grievous; because their delight is in them.

FRom this delight proceeds Meditation, the second step to Blessedness
affirmatively. This Meditation is like to digestion: for unless the meat
digest in the stomach, it nourishes not the body. unless the wheat corn dye
in the ground, it springs not up again: so, unless the Word take root in
your hearts by meditation, it profits not.

S. James compares an idle hearer, to a man that looks his bodily face in a
glass, and with the turning of a hand forgets it. Which of you walks through
a green meddow, and gathers not a flower? Who comes into an Orchard, and
tastes not the fruit thereof? So, bring home somewhat from a Sermon, that ye
may be the better for it.

THis delight and meditation must not be for a spurt, but day and night: for
godliness is a iourny, wherein must be no faynting. It is not sufficient to
begin well, but ye must continue in well doing. In Christianis non initia, sed
fines petuntur: With what earnestnes do men run in a race? yet but one
receyues the price. In the spiritual race, run all, that all may obtain:
for in heaven is room enough.

Hence may the Preacher learn this: Attend lectioni: for cursed is he, which
does the Lords work negligently. Capite h^s praedones, said Eschines the
Orator, qui nauigant in mari verborum. Katch me these Pirates, which sail in a
sea of words, and run a sentence out of breath.

Hence may the King gather a sweet meditation, that so long as the Law of God
is his Counselor, all things shall prosper with him: God will be his Lord
Protector, and keeper, whithersoeuer he goes. He will keep all his bones, so
that not one of them shall be broken. He will preserve his going out, and his
coming in, from this time forth for evermore.

Generally, God has promised to all the faithful, I will give my holy fear
into your hearts, that ye shall never depart from me. And I do assure you with
the Apostle: That God, which has begun this good work in you, will perfect it,
even to the day of Christ. Hac itur adsuperos: This is the high way to Heaven.

God for his mercies sake write these lessons in our hearts, and teach us to
frame our lives thereafter, that in the end we may obtain that Kingdom,
which he has prepared for all his elect people, through Jesus Christ our alone
Savior. To whom with the Father and the holy Ghost, be all honor and glory
both now and ever. Amen.

FINIS.

