THE SVRVEY OF CHRIST'S SVFFERINGS FOR MAN'S redemption: AND OF HIS DESCENT TO
HADES OR HELL for our deliverance: By THOMAS BILSON Bishop of Winchester.

The Contents whereof may be seen in certain Resolutions before the Book, in
the Titles over the Pages, and in a Table made to that end.

ROMANS 6. v. 10. In that (Christ) died, he died to sin ONCE. ROMANS 10. v. 6.
and 7. Say not in thine heart, Who shall descend to the bottomless deep? That
is to bring Christ back from the dead. AUGUST. Epist. 99. Quod fuerit anima
mortificatus Jesus, quis audeat dicere?

That Jesus was dead in soul, who dare avouch?

Quis nisi Infidelis negauerit fuisse apud Inferos Christum?

Who but an Infidel will deny Christ was in Hell?

Perused and allowed by public Authority.

LONDON, Printed by Melchisedech Bradwood for John Bill. M. DC. IIII.

TO THE HIGH AND MIGHTY, WISE, AND RELIGIOUS PRINCE, JAMES by the grace of God
King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland, Defender of the true and
Christian Faith etc.
MOst religious and renowned Prince, if the Heathen, reaching no farther than
the light of Nature could lead them, saw those Commonweals would soon
flourish, whose Governors were given to the study of Philosophy; how much
rather must Christians ascribe that to heavenly Wisdom, which they did to
earthly, and confess those Realms to be blessed indeed, where the chief
Rulers are careful to seek first the Kingdom of God, and to prefer the love
of true piety before all respect of humane policy? For since Gods purpose and
promise is to honor them 1. Sam. 2.
that honor him; and no good thing can be wanting to those that rightly
worship him according to his will; how liberal benedictions and merciful
protections may those Princes hope for at Gods hands, who set their hearts
wholly to seek him, and make all their ways straight in his sight? This
favor from heaven, to be guided by good and godly Princes, the Realm of
England has tasted a long time, to their no small comfort; whiles for these 45
years by the Christian care of a most mild and gracious Queen, (now with
God) they have been directed to the truth of the Gospel of Christ; and
defended in peace from the violence of all impeachers and impugners of either.
And after her decease, though our unthankfulness had provoked the wrath of
God, and our unfruitfulness well deserved, the Kingdom of God should be taken
from us; yet he that is rich in mercy toward all that call on him, respecting
more the glory of his name, lest his enemies should blaspheme, than any
worthiness of ours, not only continued, but increased his accustomed
goodness to us; and gave your Majesty, being the lineall and rightful heir
to the Crown of this Realm, a present and peaceable entrance with the
greatest applause of all states, sorts, and sides, that has been seen these
many ages; and specially of the godly, who saw the happiness of the former
government would be doubled by the manifold gifts and graces of your Christian
and Princely integrity, clemency, bounty, wisdom, and piety. And surely their
hope has not deceived them: for who so has rightly discerned, and duly
considered your be^ignesse of nature, your ripeness of judgment, your
deepnesse of wisdom, your uprightness of justice, your readiness to mercy,
your bounteousnesse to the best, your evenness to all, your desire of peace,
your care of your people, your favor to your Clergy, and respect to your
Church; your promptness in professing, and steadfastness in establishing the
true service of God amongst us, which your Highness has constantly showed
since you came to the Crown, can not but acknowledge that to be justly applied
to your Majesty, which was first said of Solomon: Blessed be the Lord your
God, which loved you to set you on the Throne (of all Britain) because the
Lord loved this land, and made you King to do equity and justice: happy are
those your servants, which stand ever before you, and hear your wisdom.
Whereof, because it pleased God and your Majesty, I should attend you as well
at your Table in your first Progress into these Countries of Surrey and
Hampshire, as at your conference for matters of Religion, and assembly of
States for the welfare of this Realm, I can bear certain and assured
witness; as likewise can the rest of your Nobles and Bishops then present; who
all, with no less admiration than contentation, heard, with what sharpness of
understanding, maturenesse of knowledge, soundness of reason, firmness of
memory, and aptness of speech, your Highness entered, debated and resolved
the greatest and hardest points of divine and humane wisdom; showing in every
of them such dexterity, perspicuitie, and sufficiency, as I profess before
God without flattery, I have not observed the like in any man living. As
therefore I judge the whole Realm blessed and beloved of God for giving them a
Prince of such rare prudence, intelligence, and experience; so do I after the
example of the Apostle think my self happy, that I shall this day Acts 26.
bring these matters in question before so learned, religious, and judicious a
King, no less skillful in the sacred Scriptures, than careful to continue the
true Christian faith thorowout his Dominions, without dissenting from the will
of God revealed in his Word, or departing from the primitive Church of Christ
in her best and purest times.

May it then please your excellent Majesty to be informed, that upon some men's
too much forwardness to innouate as well the doctrine as the discipline of the
Church of England, (they thinking those devices always best, which are newest)
it was rife in Pulpits, and usual in Catechismes, that the death of Christ
Jesus on the Cross, and his bloodshed for the remission of our sins, were
the least cause and mean of our redemption; but he did, and must suffer the
death of the soul, and the very same pains which the damned do in hell,
before we could be ransomed from the wrath of God; and this was that descent of
Christ to hell, which we are taught by the Creed to believe. This opinion began
to prevail so fast, that children were trained to it, and the people led to
control the Scriptures, as not rightly delivering the true cause of our
redemption by Christ, in that they mention no mean to ransom us from death
and hell, but the blood of his cross, and death admitted in the body of his
flesh; and therefore in all such places we must (as they say) by a kind of
Synecdoche conceive the death of the damned to have been suffered for a season
in the soul of Christ, and that to be the full and perfect price of our
redemption. I was much grieved, I confess to your sacred Majesty, to find
this so often in Catechismes, and frequent in Pulpits, and without just ground
in the Word of God to be so confidently blazed, whiles the doctrine of this
Realm, proposed by public authority to the people in the Book of Homilies,
was neglected and loathed: And upon conference with the most reverend Father
the late Archbishop (now with God) was advised in open audience to deliver,
what the Scriptures teach touching our redemption by the death and
bloudshedding of Jesus Christ the Son of God. Which accordingly I did,
declaring by occasion of the Apostles words, Be it far from me to rejoice, but
in the Cross of Christ, first the Contents, and then the Effects of Christ's
cross. In the Contents of Christ's cross I The sermons
showed what Christ suffered by the witness of holy Scripture, and what he
suffered not; and there joined this issue; That no Scripture does teach the
death of Christ's soul, or the pains of the damned, to be requisite in the
person of Christ, before he could be the Ransomer of our sins, and Savior of
the world. And because the proofs, pretended for this point, might be three;
Praedictions, that Christ should suffer those pains; Causes, why he must
suffer them; and Signs, that he did suffer them: I likewise insisted on all
three, and showed there were no such Praedictions, Causes, nor Signs of the
true pains of hell to be suffered in the soul of Christ, before he could save
us. Wherein, his Agony in the Garden, and Complaint on the Cross were
examined, as well by the rules of holy Scripture, as by the maine consent of
all the Fathers. And lest the death of Christ suffered in the body of his
flesh on the altar of the Cross, as it is described in the Scriptures, and the
shedding of his precious blood should be disabled or distrusted of any, as no
sufficient means or price of our redemption; in the Effects of Christ's cross,
I proved the merits of Christ's suffering to be infinite in respect of his
person, who was God, and of the perfection of his obedience unto the death of
the Cross; the manner of his offering to be bloody foreshewed by the
Sacrifices of the Law, and sealed by the Sacraments of the Gospel; the power
of his death to be mighty as able to conquer Sin, Hell, and Satan; the
comfort of his Cross to be necessary to which we must all be conformed to
suffer with him, before we can reign with him; the victory thereof to be
heavenly, in that he rose the third day into a celestial and eternal life,
having all his enemies under his feet. Yet for peace sake I yielded, the name
of hell-paines might in some sort be tolerated in the sufferings of Christ, if
we meant thereby great and intolerable pains, as the word is sometimes
metaphorically taken in the Scriptures, at the least by our vulgar translation:
for the word indeed was Sheol, which is used as well for the grave, as for hell;
and so those speeches of David, That the pains of Sheol found him out or
compassed him, might import the pains of death, which brought men to their
graves.

And concerning that Article of our Faith, Christ descended to Hell; I taught,
it might not by the course of the Creed be referred to Christ living, but to
Christ dead, and safely note the conquest which Christ's manhood after death had
over all the powers of darkness, declared by his resurrection, when he rose
Lord over all his enemies in his own person; Death, Hell, and Satan not
excepted; and had the Keys (that is, all power) of death and hell delivered
him by God, that those in heaven, earth, and hell should stoop unto him, and
be subject to the strength and glory of his Kingdom. These things were first
uttered by speech, and after committed to writing, that as well the parts as
proofs of every point might more plainly appear to all that would examine
them. My care was in either of these to join with the doctrine prescribed by
the book of Homilies to be taught in the Church of God to the people; That
there is none other thing, that can be named under heaven, to The first and
second Sermon of the Passion.
save our souls, but this only work of Christ's precious offering his body
upon the Altar of the Cross. For so great was Gods wrath and displeasure
toward sin, that he could be pacified by no other means, but only by the
sweet and precious blood of his dear Son. And so pleasant was this sacrifice
and oblation of his Sons death, which he so obediently and innocently
suffered, that God would take it for the only and full amends for all the
sins of the world. As for Christ's descent to hell, I delivered the same ends
and intents, which the book of Homilies does, where it says; Christ's death
destroyed death, and overcame the Devil. The Sermon of the Resurrection.
His death destroyed hell with all the damnation thereof. Christ passed through
death and hell, to the intent to put us in good hope, that by his strength we
shall do the same. He destroyed the Devil, and all his tyranny, and openly
triumphed over him, and took away from him all his Captives (meaning all the
Elect) and has raised, and set them with himself amongst the heavenly
Citizens above.

These things thus preached and printed by me, it may please your excellent
Majesty to understand, were first impugned by an hasty and humorous Treatise,
whiles my Sermons were yet under the Press; and after by a larger and warier
Defense, which is this that I now refute. The Treatiser sliding The Trea^ise.
from the things proposed by me, (wherein he could not open his mouth but with
as many untruths as words) did bear men in hand the question was, Whether
Christ suffered for us the wrath of God, or no; whereas I moved no such doubt,
but rather acknowledged, That all which Christ suffered in soul or in body,
was the wrath of God against our sins; if we speak as the Scriptures do of
punishments provided ^or this life, where Christ did suffer, and not of the
wrath to come, which is the vengeance prepared for the Devil and the damned in
another world. And because in this Treatise I found more distempered pangs of
erroneous folly, than advised steps of learning or religion, I refelled the
chief reasons thereof in a Conclusion added to my Sermons, as they The
Conclusion of the Sermons.
were in printing; not thinking it worth my time or pains to make any longer
resutation of him, that remembered so little of that I had uttered, and reasoned
so loosely for that which he would establish.

No sooner were those Sermons and that Conclusion published, but the curious
Brethren, seeing their kingdom of conceits impugned, made their observations
on both, and sent their collections and reasons to the Treatiser, that he might
make a fresh Defense; correcting in many things his The Defense.
former rashness, and now leading him rather cunningly to cavil with the
Fathers speeches, than so proudly to disdain their testimonies: which makes
him not only to change his mind in many matters from that he said before, but
often to cross himsel^e in the self same leaf, whiles he does not mark what
he says out of his own heart, and what he brings out of other men's supplies
and papers. In this Defense (for so they call it) they labor more to impeach
my proofs, than to justify his former reasons; and as it were slipping their
own necks out of the collar, they invade my Sermons with their whole might,
making the world believe, I have not only proved nothing, but uttered such
strange positions, as no Divinity will endure. Howbeit in their hoatest onsets
I might soon perceive, they still wrested my words from their right sense, as
they did both Scriptures and Fathers; and shrouded themselves under certain
general and ambiguous phrases, as, That Christ suffered the proper wrath and
mere justice of God, and full punishment of sin, in substance, though not in
circumstance; with which they seek to blind the Reader and entangle the
Opponent, that he should never find their exact and particular Assertion, but
they would always be sure to have a refuge to their large and unknown
couerts; from which they step not an inch, and without which they say nothing,
for fear to be taken tardie with heresy or open impiety.

To waste time, and enter brabbles about words, my manifold businesses and
public services did not suffer me; and had not my late Sovereign (now with
God) at her last being at the Castle of Farnham taken knowledge of the things
questioned betwixt me and them, and directly commanded me neither to desert
the doctrine, nor to let the calling, which I bear in the Church of God, to be
trampled under foot by such unquiet Refusers of truth and authority, I
confess to your excellent Majesty, I had made far shorter work with them,
and not spent a quarter of the paper which now is bestowed on the cause. Upon
her appointment, which was sacred to me (notwithstanding my sickness, which
detained me two years from study, whiles I was forced to seek the recovery
of my health, and many other affairs and attendances, which continually called
me away) I began to reuiew the whole; and since there was neither order nor
method in their writing, to trace them in their confusion, which has been
most tedious; and in the end to let them see, That neither for themselves, nor
against me, in that whole Defense they have uttered one true sentence; though
the waightiest and most of their matters, besides their dark and deceitful
generalities, be proposed with as it were, in a sense, it seems, after a
sort, and such like wavering and perplexed speech. I have open^d to your most
sacred Majesty, most prudent Prince, the cause and course of this large
Survey, which it has pleased God to reserve to your Princely view, my late
Sovereign being taken out of this life the beginning of that Summer, wherein I
meant to commit it to the Press; and so had I done the first year of your
Majesty's entering into this Realm, had not the infection of your principal
city, and my attendance on your Majesty (as my duty bound me) here in this
country stayed me.

The points handled in the former Sermons, and justified in this later Survey,
are many, and those very material; the chief heads whereof, though they
appear as well in the Titles over ^ch Page, as in the Table prepared of purpose
to help the confusion of their Defense, yet I will summarily contract and
annex to these presents, that your Princely wisdom may with more ease perceive
in every of these things controuersed, what I defend; and censure the same,
when it has pleased your Highness at your leisure to view the particular
parts and proofs, as it seems best to your learned and religious judgment.
My only desire, and humble petition to your most sacred Maiestic, as becomes
a Christian Bishop, is, That in the foundations of our faith, I mean the work
and mean of our Redemption and Reconciliation to God by Jesus Christ, men be
not suffered, under your godly government, to preach or publish their unwritten
fancies, and by their continual Synecdoches, which are manifest additions to
the Word of God, to alter and inuert the Truth, so plainly, fully, and
frequently delivered by the Apostles of Christ in the sacred Scriptures: lest
if they get this liberty, with unnecessary figures where they list to interlace
the Word of God in these maine points of Salvation, they leave neither doctrine
nor discipline sound in the end.

And as in the first question they add to Christ's sufferings the death of the
soul and of the damned, though there be no such thing warranted or witnessed
in the Scriptures; so in the second they outface Christ's Descent to Hell with
phrases and figures, when it is plainly professed in the Creed, (where not
phrases of speech, but Articles of faith are delivered) and expressed in the
Scriptures, That Christ's soul was not left (or forsaken) in hell; and that
very place alleged by Peter, as properly pertaining to Christ, and no way
common to him with David, who being a Prophet, knew that God had sworn with an
oath to raise up Christ, to set him upon his Throne, and to make him Lord (of
all) and Christ, that is, the anointed Savior of his people from Sin, Death,
and Hell. And though all the Fathers Greek and Latin from the Apostles times,
have received, believed, and delivered that to be the sense of Peter's words; as
likewise of Paul's: That Christ, who ascended on high, descended first to the
lower parts of the earth; yet they stick neither at Scriptures, Creeds, nor
Fathers, but wrench and wrangle with them all, subiecting every thing to their
sleights and shifts, that they may reign as they will in the Word of God.
Where likewise they shame not to condemn all the Fathers Greek and Latin, as
conspiring against the Truth, and perverting the Scriptures, by altering the
authentike use of words; for which they appeal to Plato and profane Poets.
This the Treatiser blusheth not to write: This Iaffirme; It is only the Fathers
abusiue Treat. page 95.
speaking, and altering the ancient sense of Hades, that has bred this ^rrour
of Christ's descending into Hell; their unapt and perilous translating it into
Latin, Inferi; and our naughty and corrupt translating in English, Hell, has
confirmed the same. And note here this first; It is a thing too rife with the
Fathers, yea with some of the ancientest of them, to alter and change the
authentike use of words, whereby consequently it is easy for errors and
gross mistakings to creep in. This loud and lewd Proclamation he makes
against all Christian Writers, Greek, Latin, and English, since the first
foundation of the Church, and yet therein erreth most absurdly and shamefully.
For the Greek Fathers use the word Hades, as the Apostles and Evangelists did;
for the place where torments after this life are prepared for the wicked; and
the profane Graecians (one conceit of Socrates excepted) did always take it
for a place of darkness under the earth, whither they thought good and bad
descended; the wicked to punishment, the better sort to such delights, as
carnal men dreampt of after death in their Elysian fields. In both these
questions I have not spared (most religious Prince) as well to examine the
Scriptures with all diligence, as to show the confession and resolution of
Christ's Church long before our times, that all the world may see, I maintain
none other grounds of Faith, nor sense of Scripture, than have been anciently,
constantly and continually professed, and believed in the Church of Christ for
these fifteen hundred years, till this our present Age; and the same allowed
and ratified by the public laws of this Realm, which your Majesty in your
most Princely wisdom and courage profess to uphold and continue.

God for his holy Names sake bless your most sacred Majesty, and prosper all
your virtuous and Christian cares, that as in learning and wisdom, in
clemency and piety, he has made you the Mirror of this Age; so in peace and
prosperity, in concord and unity, in all happiness and felicity, he may
exalt you above all your neighbor Princes; and having united the two Realms
of England and Scotland in one subjection under your Princely right and
regiment, he will knit the hearts and hands of both to honor and serve you,
love and obey you, and your royal issue after you, to the worlds end.

Your Majesty's most humble subject and servant THO. WINTON.

THE CHIEF RESOLVTIONS OF THIS Survey.
THe cleerenes and fulness of the Scriptures in the work of our Redemption is
exactly to be reverenced; so as no man ought to teach or believe any thing
touching our redemption by Christ, which is not expressly witnessed in the
sacred Scriptures: much less may we distrust the manifest words of the holy
Ghost to be impertinent or insufficient in declaring the true price and mean
of our redemption.

The maine ground of the Gospel, which the Apostles preached, the faithful
received, wherein they continued, and whereby they were saved, was this; That
Christ died for our sins according to the Scriptures, and was buried, and
rose the third day; according to the Scriptures. Since then we are reconciled
to God by the death of his Son, we must acknowledge none other death of
Christ then that which he suffered in the body of his flesh, after which he
was buried, and from which he rose the third day, which death the Scriptures
most apparently describe to be the death of Christ's body.

If we were redeemed by the blood of Christ, and God proposed him (to be) a
Reconciliation through faith in his blood, which was shed for the remission of
sins; we may not presume to appoint a new price of our redemption, or new
mean of our reconciliation; since by the blood of his cross Christ has
pacified both the things in earth, and things in heaven; and the blood of Jesus
Christ cleanses us from all sin.

The Scriptures do no where teach, nor mention the death of Christ's Joule, or
the death of the damned, which is the second death, to be needful for our
redemption. We must not therefore intrude our selves into Gods seat to ord^ne a
new course for man's redemption.

If the Spirit do quicken, and the just live by faith, and he that abides in
love, abides in God, who is life; it was utterly impossible, but the soul of
Christ in that abundance of Spirit, evidence of Faith, assurance of Hope, and
perfection of Love, which he always retained, should always live to God.

Life and death being opposed as priuatiues, and so not to be found in one and
the same subject at one and the same time; the soul of Christ always living,
could never be dead. Neither could a dead soul be pleasing to God, (who is
whole life, and therefore hates death as contrary to his nature;) when yet he
was always well pleased with Christ.

Where some imagine extreme pain in Christ's soul may be called the death of
his soul; that position is repugnant to the Scriptures: for the greater the
pain which the soul feels, and endures with innocence, confidence,
obedience, and patience, (such as were all Christ's sufferings) the more the
soul lives and cleaves to God, for whose glory it suffers so much smart;
as appears in Martyrs, whose souls do most live in their greatest torments.

The late device of hell-paines in Christ's passion is not only false, but also
superfluous: for the true pains of hell neither are, nor can be suffered in
this life, where, by Gods ordinance extreme pain drives the soul from the
body: much less can man or Angel endure them with obedience and patience, as
Christ did all his pains. And what need was there of hell-paines in the cross
of Christ, since God can by every means, or without means raise more pains
in body or soul, than any creature can endure.

Christ's soul could not be strooken with any horror of Gods displeasure
against him, since in his greatest anguish he professed God to be his God, and
his Father, and by prayer prevailed for his persecutors (as appeared after by
their conversion) and gave eternal life to the soul of the Thief hanging by
him, and believing on him. Now to give life is more than to have life; and
restore others to favor he can not, that himself is in displeasure.

Hellfire, which the damned and devils do and shall suffer, is a true and
eternal fire prepared by the mighty hand of God to punish as well spirits as
bodies; and this error, That the fire of hell was only an internal or
spiritual fire in the souls and consciences of men, was long since condemned
in Origin by the Church of Christ.

Reiection therefore, desperation, confusion, horror of damnation, external
and eternal fire, which are the torments of the damned, and true pains of
hell, can not without blasphemy be ascribed to Christ. Christ therefore
suffered neither the death of the soul, nor the pains nor horrors os the
damned, or of hell.

Every sin is common to the whole man, who is defiled even with thoughts that
be evil; not only because the body is the Seat, wherein, and the instrument,
whereby the soul works; but also for that the first infection of sin
comes to the soul by the body, and the first information and provocation to
sin rises from the senses and affections, which are moved with corporal
spirits; and all the parts and powers of the body attend the will with most
ready subjection to have each sin (which the soul conceiueth) impressed on
them, and executed by them. And therefore the suffering for sin in the person
of the Mediator, must be common both to body and soul in such sort, that as
in transgressing, our souls are the principal Agents, so in the suffering for
sin, his soul was the principal Patient.

Christ would use no power to assuage the force and violence of his pains,
(though he wanted none, as appears by his overthrowing them with a word, that
came to apprehend him;) but submitted himself to his Fathers will with greater
obedience and patience, than any man living could. We may therefore safely
believe, That the justice of God condemning sin in (Christ's) flesh,
proportioned the pains of his body, in which he bare our sins, to the
strength of his patience; and so both his pains and his patience far
exceeded all men's. The rather for that Christ's sense did not fail him by
degrees, as ours does, when the pains of death are extremest, which drive our
souls from our bodies; but he did in most perfect sense feel the sting and
bitterness of pain to the last breath; by reason he was of his own accord,
at an instant appointed by his Father, to breathe out his own soul, and so
did, to the great admiration of the Centurion that observed it; and
consequently he retained firmness of voice, and exactness of sense, all the
while his pains were at sharpest.

The soul is punished in this life by her understanding, will, affections, and
senses, according as their objects, directed and strengthened by God, make
violent and vehement impressions; the torment of hellfire being the judgment
of another world. Neither is God the tormenter of souls in hell with his
immediate hand, but by his wisdom and power has ordained everlasting fire, as
an external Agent above nature, to take vengeance of damned men and devils
according to their deserts.

No Scripture does teach, That God with his immediate hand tormented the soul
of his Son on the Cross, or in the Garden; notwithstanding Christ's soul
was full of fear and sorrow in the Garden, and of grief and pain on the
Cross: all which outward and inward passions ne did, ne could pervert Christ's
will, nor oppress his power; but they must all be voluntary, that they might
all be meritorious; and the more Christ's power was to admit them, when he
would, as he would, and because he would; the more his obedience was to the
will and hand of God, who forced nothing on Christ against his will, but by
that which was offered and suffered, tried the obedience of his Son, and
accepted all from him as a most willing Sacrifice.

The wrath of God punishing our sins in the person of Christ, was neither
such as the Damned in hell, nor as the Reprobate in earth do suffer; but
rather common to the members of Christ, who must drink of this Cup, have
fellowship with his afflictions, and be conformed to his death, though they
never feel the true pains of hell, nor have their souls tormented by Gods
immediate hand. Neither was it any other wrath, than such as might stand with
Gods love toward his Son, (who did not hate him for our sakes, but loved us
for his) and was Fatherly tempered to the strength of Christ's manhood, and
graciously ouerruled and quenched by the favor that God bare to the person of
his Son. And therefore the terms of mere and proper wrath (if they mean
proper to the damned) are false and impious in Christ's sufferings, which
neither in manner, measure, nor purpose, did agree with the torments of the
damned.

The true and full satisfaction for our sins, must not be derived from the
singularity and infinity of Christ's pains, longer and greater than which
the damned and devils do every one suffer; but from the dignity of the
person, who being the only and eternal Son of God that made us, humbled
himself in our stead, and in our nature to restore us, and offered recompense
for our sins, which was his submission and obedience unto the death of the
Cross, more pleasing to God than our condemnation to hell could have been:
for in this balance between the wrath of God against our sins, and the love
of God toward his Son, neither was his justice neglected, nor his love over
swayed; but a sweet and wise temper of both was provided for the manhood of his
Son, first to suffer with patience, and then to reign with glory; that all
the sons of God might be the more willing and ready by his example to obey
the will, and abide the hand of God, before they did enter into his Kingdom.

The Scriptures witnessing, that the Sacrifices of God are a troubled spirit,
this might not want in Christ's Sacrifice for sin; but he approaching the
presence of God with and for our offenses, lawfully might, and exceedingly did
fear the greatness and justness of Gods anger against our iniquities; and as
deeply sorrowed, that Gods holiness was so carelessly despised, and highly
displeased with our manifold iniquities. Which inward sacrifices of fear and
sorrow for us, and our sins, in the person of the Mediator, were no less
acceptable to God than the simple suffering of pain.

Since Gods power is despised, where it is not duly feared, and sin is
justified, where the displeasing of God is not thoroughly sorrowed; in presenting
us and our cause to God, Christ was to yield for us, and in our behalf that
infinite submission and fear to the power of God provoked, and contrition and
sorrow to the holiness of God offended, which we could never have done. And
without these to offer to bear the burden of our sins, was to make light
account of our sin against God, and of Gods wrath against our sin, which
was far from the Son of God.

There might therefore in Christ's sacrifice for sin not without just cause
appear exceeding fear and sorrow, yet both religious, and measured by the
rules of obedience and humility, though passing grievous to the soul of
Christ. Neither were these submissions and afflictions of Christ's soul
answerable to his perfection, and our transgression, if they did not reach to
the highest degree of fear and sorrow, that man's nature in Christ was capable
of, without distrust of Gods favor, or dislike of his justice.

Christ did not pray in the Garden contrary to his Fathers known will, but
made an express and special reservation thereof even in the first part of his
prayer. Neither was he amazed and confounded in all the powers of his soul and
senses of his body, as these Presumers teach, but he prayed with faith, and
suffered with obedience; both which require perfect understanding, will, and
memory.

Many things might concur to increase Christ's sorrow in the Garden, as the
reiection of the Jews for spilling his blood, the dispersion of his Church,
all flying and forsaking him; the continual rage of Satan against his weak
and fearful members; Christ now in his temptations and afflictions beholding
theirs with great compassion and grief of heart: which is it that Hilarie
says; Et tristitia de nobis est, and oration pro nobis est. Christ sorrowed for
us, and De Trinitate li. 10.
prayed for us.

An Agony is properly a vehement contention of mind to prevail in that we
undertake, rightly weighing and striving to remove the difficulties and
impediments objected to hinder the event.

Christ's bloody sweat, if it were natural, must proceed rather from zeal
and intention of mind, than from fear and sorrow; which cool the blood, and
quench the spirits; whereas the spirits must be mightily kindled, and the
blood much heated and thinned, before it can issue forth by sweat. And since by
the words of Saint Luke, Christ fell into an Agony after an Angel appeared
from heaven, and comforted or strengthened him (with a message from God) it
seems rather an effect of Christ's intentive prayer which the Scripture there
mentions; than a consequent to any other passion or pain.

Christ's intentive prayer, after comfort received by an Angel from heaven,
might proceed from his ardent desire, care, and zeal of our redemption from
the wrath of God, and protection from the rage of Satan. And therefore, as the
Prophet foreshewed he should not only bear the sins of many, but pray for
the Trespassers, Christ might spend all the spirits and powers of body and
soul in most vehement and fervent prayer, even unto a bloody sweat, to have
all his members pardoned their sins, and reconciled to God by the sacrifice
of his body, which he would offer for them; and also to have Satan cast out
from accusing them, and in the end trodden under their feet.

If Christ's bloody sweat were supernatural; we must ask no cause thereof,
but leave it to his sacred will, who could above nature do what he would. That
it was no proof of hell pains, appears plainly, because Christ after in
greater pains on the Cross did not sweat blood; and of all those, whom these
men imagine suffered hell pains in the Scriptures, no one can be produced,
that ever sweat blood.

The word (forsaking) used by Christ in his Complaint on the Cross, does not
in all the Scriptures infer the pains of the damned; but in the wicked it
notes reiection, desperation, and fear of damnation; and in the godly it
argues want of protection, or decrease of consolation in their troubles. In
Christ it might show the time, the cause, the manner, or the grief of his being
so long forsaken, and left to the rage and reproach of his persecutors, without
any sensible sign of Gods love toward him, care for him, help in his
troubles, or exse in his pains; but it does not prove, that Christ thought
himself forsaken of Gods favor, grace, or spirit; which fear or doubt could
not be in him without a manifest touch of error, and want of faith.

Christ never feared nor doubted, that he should or could perish under the hand
of God persuing our sins in the body of his flesh; but for the joy set
before him, endured the Cross, and despised the shame; and as S. Peter says
of him at the time of his suffering, he always beheld God at his right hand,
that he should not be shaken; and therefore his heart rejoiced, and his tongue
was glad, and his flesh rested in hope, because his soul should not be
forsaken in hell, nor his flesh see corruption.

Christ was made a curse for us, in that he suffered the temporal and
corporal curses of the Law threatened unto sinners, as all sorts of afflictions
belonging to this life, and in the end, a painful and shameful death, by
which he abolished the spiritual and eternal curse of God due to us for
sin; but he was never inwardly, truly, nor eternally accursed of God, since
by tasting of our external curse for a time, he made us partakers of his
spiritual and celestial blessedness for ever.

Christ who knew no sin, was made sin for us, that is, either the
punishment of, our sins, or the sacrifice for our sins: for we were healed
by his stripes, and he gave himself for us a sacrifice of a sweet smell to
God. Being then an holy and acceptable sacrifice to God for sin, he was
neither defiled nor hateful to God with our sins: but suffered, the just for
the unjust; that is, he took upon him the punishment of our sins, though he
were most innocent; and by the holiness of his person, submitting himself to
the death of the cross, purged our uncleanness; by his innocence, covered
our guiltiness; and by his favor with God, reconciled us that were enemies.

Christ bare the full punishment of our sins; that is, not all which we
should have borne; for then he must have been ever lastingly rejected,
confounded and condemned to hell fire, which are most horrible blasphemies; but
he bare so much of the punishments of this life, where he suffered, as in his
person by the just judgment of God was most sufficient for all our sins.

TOuching Christ's descent to hell, the words are plainly cited by Peter out of
David, that Christ's soul (after death) should not be left in Hades, which
Saint Luke in his Gospel uses for the place where torments are prepared for
the wicked after this life. And in that sense is the word used thorowout the
New Testament; as likewise the Greek Fathers took it for the place under the
earth, whither the souls of all men were condemned for sin, and where the
Devils detain and torment the wicked. That Christ likewise descended to the
lower parts of the earth, and to the (bottomless) deep after death, is
vouched by Saint Paul; whereupon the whole Church of Christ from the beginning
has confessed his descent to hell to be a point of Christian piety.

Peter's Sermon (in the second of the Acts) intended not simply to prove that
Christ was risen from the dead, as Lazarus and others were; but affirmed farther
of him, That God raised him up, to set him on David's Throne; that is, to make
him King of Glory. This he proves, In that Christ's flesh could not see
corruption, nor his soul be forsaken in hell; which was verified in none, no
not in David (who were all dead, and saw corruption) but only in the Messiah.
It was therefore impossible, that either death or hell should detain Christ,
but he was to rise Lord of death and hell, and the Savior of all his from
both; as appeared by his ascending to heaven, and sitting at the right hand of
God. Neither was this strange to the Jews, who were taught to expect that to
be performed by the Messiah, which God promised by his Prophet; O Death, I will
be thy death: O Hell, I will be thy destruction.

Sheol in the Old Testament signifies the Grave, and Hell; that is, the
places whither the dead bodies of all men went, and whither the souls of the
wicked dead in sin descended after death. And therefore where it is
distinguished from the death of the body, or referred to the soul after
death, as it is in David's words applied by Peter to Christ, it apparently
signifies Hell.

The ends of Christ's descent are likewise derived from the Scriptures, as the
destroying of the Devils kingdom, and triumphing over powers and
principalities, and making an open show of them, spoiling them by delivering
all his Elect, dead, living, and yet unborn, from the right, power, and fear
of eternal death; taking into his hands the Keys of Death and Hell, that he
might be Lord of all, in Heaven, Earth, and Hell.

The Creed is not a Collection of Greek or Hebrew phrases unknown to the
people, but a short sum of the Christian faith provided for the simpler sort
of men to learn by heart. And therefore, as nothing is superfluously repeated,
so nothing is obscurely covered in it. And though this Article, He descended to
hell, wanted for a time in some Churches, even as some part of Scripture did,
yet was it retained by all Christian Writers, as a ground of true religion from
the Apostles time; and professed in some Churches very anciently in their
Creed, and at last generally received in all places.

All the Fathers of Christ's Church with one consent teach this as a point of
the Christian faith, That Christ after death descended to hell; insomuch that
Austen resolutely says, Who but an Infidel will deny, that Christ was in
Epistola. 99.
hell?

Where Abraham's bosom was, neither was, nor is agreed amongst the learned:
only Austen rightly infers out of Christ's words, That being a place of
comfort, and far off above Hades (where the rich man was tormented) with a
great Gulf settled betwixt those two places, it could be no part, nor Epistola.
99.
member of hell.

The rest, which are very many, appear by the several Titles over each Page,
or by the Table provided to find the same with more facility.

THE SVRVEY OF CHRIST'S SVFFERINGS FOR MAN'S REDEMPTION.
IT may seem somewhat strange to thee (Christian Reader) as it does likewise
to me, that one and the self same cause, being twice now debated and discussed
in writing on either side; we should at the last be farther from agreeing on
the true state of the controversy than we were at the first entering into the
matter. If the fault be either in the doubtfulnesse of my words proposing it;
or in the diuersnesse of my mind defending it; I refuse no reproach of folly,
and inconstancy; but if I keeping close to the points which I first
propounded, and calling upon the adverse part, with as great vehemency and
importunity as I could, to go directly to the issue, and no way to digress
from the things in question; the Impugner trusting more to the covert of his
words, than to the soundness of his proofs, will of purpose shun the mark
prefixed, and roue at pleasure with doubtful and deceitful terms, to hide
the nakedness of his side, and to make the Reader believe he has matter of
moment, when indeed he does not so much as understand himself, or take any
knowledge of the chiefest things which I object or allege; then is he worthy
to bear the blame who best deserves it, and thou (Christian Reader) may
soon perceive, and as soon pronounce both for thine own ease, and for an end
to be had in this strife; (for to thee the Confuter refers himself, and so
do I) whether of us flies the touchstone of truth, and fails in the due
proof of his doctrine, as near as God shall give thee wisdom to discern
light from darkness, and grace to prefer truth before falsehood.

In the Preface of my Sermons published, I much misliked, and openly charged
the over hasty Discourser, that called himself H. I. for Praefat page 9. lin.
2.
clean changing the state of the first Question: and to the maine division of
his Treatise, where he says, The whole controversy has in it two points; the
first, That Christ suffered for us the wrath of God, etc, I replied in my
conclusion, ^ Conclu. pa. 243. l. 5.
It was too much boldness to outface the world in print, that this was the
position which I impugned. There were too many witnesses there, for me to
deny, or for him to belie the Question, he knew it well enough, but he could
not tell how to prove that which I then reproved, and therefore he shranke from
it, and dallied with general and doubtful terms. And lest either the patient
Reader, or strict Examiner, should be forced far to seek for the chief
points by me denied or affirmed in those Sermons; I purposely and plainly
numbered and delivered them in such sort, as none could mistake them, but he
that would wilfully ouerleape them. My words thou will pardon me to repeat
(good Christian Reader) that thereby thou may see whether I alter or new
frame my first questions and resolutions, as this Prater pretends, by his
every where complaining of my manifold ambiguities, fallacies, and
contr^rieties; or he rather dissembleth the weakness, and covers the
badnesse of his cause under certain perplexed and confused phrases, as anon
thou shall hear more at large. These are my words in the foresaid Page 2. l.
10.
Preface.

I labored (in these my Sermons) to prove these four points: First, That it
was no where recorded in holy Scriptures, nor justly to be concluded by the
Scriptures, that Christ suffered the true pains of Hell. Secondly, That as the
Scriptures describe to us the pains of the Damned and of hell; there are many
terrors and torments, which without evident impiety can not be ascribed to the
Son of God. Thirdly, That the death and blood of Christ Jesus were evidently,
frequently, constantly set down in the writings of the Apostles, as the
sufficient price of our Redemption, and true mean of our Reconciliation to
God, and the very same proposed in the figures resembled in the sacrifices of
the Law, and sealed with the Sacraments of the New testament, as the very
groundwork of our salvation by Christ; and so have been received, and
believed in the Church of God, fourteen hundred years, before any man ever
made mention of hell-paines to be suffered in the soul of Christ. Lastly,
where the Scriptures are plain and pregnant, That Christ died for our sins,
and by his death destroyed him that had power of death, even the devil, and
reconciled us when we were strangers and enemies in the body of his flesh
through death: besides, That the Holy ghost in these places by express words
names the bodily death of Christ, as the mean of our Redemption and
Reconciliation to God; no considerate Divine might affirm or imagine Christ
suffered the death of the soul; for so much as the death of the soul must
exclude Christ from the grace, spirit, and life of God, and leave in him
neither faith, hope, nor love, sanctity, nor innocence, which God forbid any
Christian man should so much as dream. And if any man to maintain his device,
would invent a new hell, and another death of the soul, then either Scriptures
or Fathers ever heard, or spoke of, they should keep their inventions to
themselves: it sufficed me to believe what I read, and consequently, not to
believe what I did not read in the Word of God, which is and ought to be the
foundation of our faith. Whether there be any darkness or doubling in my
speech, I leave it to thy censure, good Christian Reader. I affirm touching
our redemption and reconciliation to God, what the Scriptures affirm, and as
near as I could in the selfsame words: I denied the late additions of some
men in matters of so great weight, which the Scriptures by their perpetual
silence deny, and by their open and evident consequents disprooue and impugn.
If any man think my Sermons in these points less evident, or pertinent to the
purpose than my Preface; let him look to the places where these things are
hand^ed, and judge in Gods name, as he finds cause; remembering that he which
withstandeth or neglects the truth, withstandeth and neglects his own
salvation.

First that no Scripture does witness or warrant Christ's suffering the true
pains of hell in his soul; see either the Sermons. p. 8. lin. 22.
proposing of their opinions that so think; or the examining of their Sermon. p.
11. l. 24.
proofs which are brought for that conceit; or the shutting up of that part,
which shows the sum of all aforesaid, which I close in this wise: Sermon. pa.
41. l. 14.
Then are there in the sacred Scriptures neither any praedictions that Christ
should suffer the pains of hell in his soul here on earth; nor causes why he
must suffer them; nor signs that he did suffer them; and consequently, what
soever is pretended, no proof, that these sufferings must be added to the
Cross of Christ, before the work of our salvation can be perfect. Secondly,
that such pains of hell, as the Scriptures express and avouch, may not be
applied to Christ, without apparent impiety, read what I Sermon. pa. 48. l. 34.
write concerning the particulars, and settle thy judgment (gentle Reader) as
thou likest best. I desire not to prevail, where I bring not sufficient
proof: empty words on either side, are slender means to quiet thy
conscience, or settle thy faith, if thou seek to be religious. Thirdly, where
the whole course and tenor of the sacred Scriptures do plainly and fully
ascribe our Redemption and the remission of our sins to the death and blood
of Christ Jesus; I dare not delude the words of the Holy ghost, as if they were
every where improper or imperfect, but by the four first Sermon p. 42. l. 2.
effects of Christ's cross, I make it appear how sufficient our salvation is
by the blood of Christ, without any supply of hell pains to be suffered in
the soul of Christ. Lastly, since no Christian man may doubt, but we are
redeemed and saved by the death of Christ, how Sermon. p. 73. li. 13.
far it is from all sense and show of holy Scripture to subject Christ to the
death of the soul, and how repugnant to the mouths and minds of the ancient
and catholic fathers, I insert a special discourse, and thence observe, that
where and whenever the Holy ghost speaks of the death of Christ, he
means the death of Christ's body suffered on the altar of the Cross, and by
no means the death of Christ's soul.

These things being thus sensibly and plainly set down to the view and reach
of all men, were they never so simple, if they were Christians; what reason had
you, Sir Refuter in your Treatise to slide from all this, and to delude your
Reader by telling him that the whole controversy had in it two points:

1 That Christ suffered for us the wrath of God: 2 That after his death on the
Cross, he went not into hell in his soul:
as if I proposed or proved nothing in the first part of my Sermons, but that
Christ did not suffer for us the wrath of God? did I, or could I make or move
any such question, that in preci^e words taught the Sermon. p. 133. li. 13.
wrath of God against our sins was very great in the Cross of Christ? did I
not in plain terms ascribe to Christ Ibidem. li. 30.
a double sense of Gods wrath: the first l. 14.
pursuing our surety being innocent and obedient, and even his own and only
son with all manner of corporal and temporal scourges unto death, before it
could be pacified? the next a l. 34.
serious contemplation of that eternal and intolerable v^ngeance, which the
Justice of God had in store for us, by reason of our manifold sins, whose
danger and destruction touched him as near, through the tenderness of his
love and pity, as if it had been imminent over his own head? But this you
will say is not the wrath which you mean. Sir whatsoever your meaning be,
which is scant known to your self, as anon we shall better perceive, the words
of your Treatise setting the very question, to which your Reader must look,
ouerlashed with two palpable untruths, unfit for a man of that care and
conscience which you would seem to have. For first this could be no question
with me, whether Christ suffered for us the wrath of God, who exactly affirmed
that Gods wrath was great in the Cross of Christ, and admitted in the soul of
Christ a sight and sense of Gods temporal wrath inflicted on his body, and of
Gods eternal wrath prepared for our sins. Again, had I moved that question,
which I never meant, does the first part of the controversy contain no more
but Whether Christ suffered the wrath of God or no? are your hell pains so
soon vanished into smoke? is the death of Christ's soul no question with you?
whether the death of Christ's body, and the shedding of his blood be the full
price of our Redemption, and cause of our reconciliation to God, is it not
worth the asking, nor worth the answering? but you ran from the rest not able
to justify that which I disproued; and then, as your manner is, you catch a
large and licentious word, and currie that till you confound both your self
and your Reader. For who but you would have proposed such a question, Whether
Christ suffered for us the wrath of God, knowing that in the Scriptures
themselves, according to which we must frame our speech in matters of faith,
there are many degrees and differences of Gods wrath, whereof some may be
attributed to Christ's sufferings without offense; others can not without plain
impiety? and therefore the question which you proposed in your Treatise was
but a very stale to make your Reader gaze at, whiles you shifted aside from the
matter which I moved.

[The one (you will say) is a proof of the other; for he which suffers Gods
wrath, must needs suffer the pains of hell.] That was and must be the whole
strength of your Treatise, unless you will confess that you meant to waste
your paper, and mock your Reader with a number of empty and idle fancies. But
how faint and feeble that foundation was to bear so great a building, the fo.
243.
conclusion of my Sermons does sufficiently show. In which I told you, that
either your argument must be vicious, if your antecedent were particular; or if
to make your argument good, you enlarged your antecedent to be general, your
first proposition would be both injurious and blasphemous. For though Christ
might and did suffer some parts of Gods wrath, as the Scripture uses that
word, which is all that your indefinite proposition will implie; yet it would
no way follow that he therefore suffered the pains of hell. And if, to amend
your consequent, you did affirm that Christ suffered the whole wrath of God,
and every part thereof, and so by consequent the pains of hell also; the form
of your argument was bettered, but your antecedent, on which the conclusion
must depend, was a most false and wicked assertion: for then must Christ have
suffered reprobation, desperation, eternal damnation, and what not. Whether
this exception were sound and good, I leave to the judgment of the Reader;
verily, I have either forgotten the first principles of Logic; or else it was
a full and plain subversion of your misshaped reason.

But you now amend the matter in your last defense, and where your chief
position Their four restraints of hell pains.
was before indefinite, Christ suffered for us the wratb of God; and so did
neither good nor harm to the maine question of Christ's suffering the pains of
hell; upon better advice, you make it general and say; Christ suffered all
Gods wrath, but with four restraints to save your opinion from apparent
falsitie and heresy. For first you add, Defense p. 7. l. 32.
all Gods PROPER wrath; next, if it be a punishment for sin, and no sin;
thirdly, as touching the essence and nature thereof; fourthly, so far as was
due generally for all mankind to suffer. But Sir Defender, this is not to
maintain your first argument, but to confess, and recant your former folly,
when you see your position impugned as frivolous and childish, if it be
particular; or as erroneous and impious, if it be general; to come in with
four fresh limitations in a new pamphlet before you can save your general
assertion from sensible impiety and infidelity. Howbeit take your fourth, to
return to truth is never too late: Let your general proposition stand
fettered and restrained with these four brakes: I must ask you now, not only
how you prove this general Collection, Christ suffered for us all Gods wrath
in the same nature and manner that we should have suffered it, saving your four
exceptions; but also, what parts of Gods wrath you leave enclosed in your
general affirmative, when all these are excluded. Which two demands I wish
thee (good Reader) to have in special remembrance against we come to debate
the Defenders question, that thou may see both what cause leads him so to
collect, and what truth is in the general, when these particulars are
excepted.

That Christ took our infimities and bare our sorrows is confirmed by the
Prophet Esaie, and alleged and expounded as well by Saint Matthew in his
Gospel, as by Saint Peter in his first Epistle; in either of which senses we
may safely grant the meaning of the Prophet to be general, though his words
have no special adscription of all, or some. Saint Matthew declaring how Christ
cured with his very word such as were possessed by devils, and healed all that
were sick, affirms that to be Math. 8. verse. 17.
fulfilled which was spoken by Esaias the Prophet, he took our infirmities and
bare our sicknesses, meaning he took from us our infirmities and recovered our
diseases. And in this sense the general is most true, that Christ took away
all our infirmities, and recovered all our sicknesses, were they corporal or
spiritual, temporal or eternal, that we should feel the full burden of none
of them. Neither did our Savior only take our sorrows from us, but he also
took them upon himself, which Peter observes when he says (Christ) 1. Pet 2.
himself bare our sins (that is, the burden and punishment of our sins) in
his body on the tree. And in this sense likewise, it is very true that Christ
bare the burden of all our sins without exception, but not all, and the self
same burdens of our sins which we should have borne. For he that so enlarges
Saint Peter's words, which this Discourser so much labors, extends them to
reprobation, pollution, desperation, damnation, and to all the punishments
prepared for the wicked in this life and the next, which is the depth and
height of all impiety. I wish the Defender therefore to get him some better
ground to erect his frame upon, he will else prove himself an evil Disputer,
and a worse believer. Saint Paul has a third sense gathered out of this
place, when he says, Heb. 4.
We have not an high Priest that can not be touched with the feeling of our
infirmities, but was in ALL THINGS (tried or) tempted in like sort, yet without
sin. That Christ was tried and pressed with all our infirmities may hence be
collected, but with these two additions like to his brethren, and still WITHOUT
SIN. for he must be like (not to the reprobate, much less to the damned,
but) to his Heb. 2.
brethren in all things, that is by partaking as well flesh and blood with
them, as sufferings and tentations like them, yet always without sin. Then
as the godly neither do nor can suffer the true pains of hell in this life,
which are the judgments and torments of the damned in another world; no more
did Christ suffer them in this life. And where conscience of sin, ignorance
of Gods counsel, and weakness of faith sometimes draw the godly to doubt of
Gods favor, and affright them with the horror of hell; from these, and all
like inward tentations and motions of sin, Christ must be most free, in whose
soul was no lack of grace, nor touch of sin; but the fullness of Gods
spirit, assured knowledge of Gods will, and perfection of all humane integrity
and innocence, besides the personal union and communion of his Godhead, which
kept him both from doubting of Gods love toward himself, and from fearing
damnation as due to him or possible to be laid on him.

[Your limitations you will say, serve to exclude those punishments which
Christ neither did nor might suffer. For Christ suffered only in this life,
and but for a time, and without sin; and yet suffered all, and the very same
punishments so limited, as you limite them, which the damned do, and those
were the pains of hell.] If you begin (Sir Defender) to limite the words of
the holy Ghost to your liking, I think it a safer and surer course to hear
and receive S. Peter's and S. Paul's limitations annexed to their own words, and
other defense against all your attempts I desire none. Christ himself (says
Peter) bare our sins in his body on the tree. Here see we not only the
person who, even the son of God; and the place where, and time when; on the
tree, not after; but also the part in which he bare the punishment of all our
sins, to wit, in his body. He must (says Paul) be like his brethren in all
things; that is, infirmities, tentations, and sufferings, but still without
sin. What is this to the pains of hell, which are the destruction of body
and soul excluded after this life from the joy and bliss of Gods kingdom,
and tormented among devils with everlasting fire?

[ That (you think) is my gross imagination of hell, the fire there is a
toyish fable; the greatest pain in hell is the sense of Gods fiery wrath,
which he inflicteth with his immediate hand upon the soul liable to sin
without any means or instruments; the substance whereof because Christ
suffered (as you say) for a time in this life, though not in hell nor for ever,
he suffered the very same pains of hell as touching the essence and nature
thereof, which the damned do; though in circumstances of time and place his
sufferings somewhat differed from theirs.] Your quintessencing and new framing
of another hell, which the Scriptures never speak of; your quenching hellfire
with a fancy; your appointing God to be the tormentor in hell with his
immediate hand; your nice dividing between the substance and circumstance of
Gods eternal judgments; your placing the substance thereof in the
apprehension of the soul, and that as well in this life as in the next, with a
number of like audacious and desperate devises to uphold the name or the shade
of hell-paines in the sufferings of Christ, we shall anon discuss, when we
come to your opening of the question; in the mean while the Reader must mark,
The question is not whether Christ bare the burden of all our sins on the
tree, or whether he were touched and tempted in all things like to his
brethren, yet still without sin, but whether it can be proved by the
Scriptures that Christ must bear all and the self same burdens of our sins
which we should have borne in this life, and the next, and which the damned
do and shall bear. Your distinction of the substance and circumstance of Gods
endless and merciless vengeance of sin in hell, we shall quickly let the
Reader see how vainly you presume it without all warrant of holy Scripture,
and how falsely you apply it to the person of Christ against the manifest
Scripture, if first we observe how handsomely you set down the doctrine which
I defend in the next words to your own hieroglyphicall question, of purpose
that if you cannot by truth ouerbeare it, you may at least by falsehood
disgrace it.

His Defense. p. 7.
contrary [ opinion (say you) we conceive thus, that Christ suffered for our
sins nothing else, but simply and merely a bodily death altogether like as
the godly do often suffer at the hands of persecutors, saving only that God
accepted the death of his son, as a ransom for sin, but the death of his
servants he does not.] Had you not seen and read my sermons printed before you
made this late defense, you might have excused your self (Sir defender) by
forgetting or mistaking my words; but after so often and open repeating them
in Print, what cause can be imagined why you should thus apparently pervert my
words, and purposely forsake the points which I proposed, save only that
finding the foil, and doubting a fall, you would gladly slip your neck out
of the collar; and seeing no better means, you think it more sk^ll to stand
wrangling about the Question, then to be taken tardie with saying just nothing
in a matter of the greatest weight, and chiefest regard in Christian religion.
My words are every where plain enough as well in delivering as debating the
question, that Christ suffered no death save only the death of the body, by
the verdit of holy Scripture; and therefore whatsoever the Scripture speaks
of Christ's death, it is intended and referred to the death of Christ's body on
the Cross, and by no means to the death of his soul. The words of my preface
are these: Pr^. p. 3. l. 8.
Where the Scriptures are plain and pregnant, that Christ died for our sins,
and by his death destroyed him that had power over death, even the Devil, and
reconciled us when we were strangers, and enemies in the body of his flesh:
besides, that the holy Ghost in these places by express words names the
bodily death of Christ, as the mean of our redemption and reconciliation to
God: no considerate Divine may affirm or imagine Christ suffered the death of
the soul. When I come in my Sermons to handle that point I thus begin it.
Sermon p. 73. l. 13.
That Christ did or could suffer the death of the soul, is a position far
from the words, but farther from the grounds of sacred Scriptures. When I show
the Fathers do join in the same resolution with the Scriptures, I say, Sermon.
p. 78. l. 32.
Rightly therefore do the Ancient Fat^ers teach, that Christ dying for our
sins suffered ONLY THE DEATH OF THE BODY, BUT NOT OF THE SOVL^. Concluding
their testimonies I capitulate in this wise; Sermon. p. 83. l. 28.
I hope to all men learned or well advised it will seem no Jesuitical
phrenzie, but rather Christian and Catholic doctrine, that the Son of God
dying for our sins suffered NOT THE DEATH OF THE SOVLE, BUT ONLY OF THE
BODY. If you understand not these words (Sir Defender) your Reader will judge
you fitter to learn your abc, then to dispute questions in Divinity; if you
do conceive them, and will pervert them, let him likewise pronounce whether it
be sincerity or impudency in you, thus to outface the matter against my
plain speech, and to make Proclamation that I defend Christ suffe^ed nothing
else for our sins but simply and merely a bodyly death altogether like as
the godly often do at the hands of persecutors. Had you said, I maintain
Christ suffered no death, but only a bodily death, I would have asked you by
what Scriptures you or all your adherents can disprove it; but charging me as
you do with this opinion, that Christ suffered nothing else but simply and
merely a bodily death altogether like the godly; I must tell you this is one
of your trueths, which many men will call a malicious leasing, since my words
are publicly extant to the contrary. My first resolution was; Christ Sermon. p.
4. l. 4.
saw before hand that going to his Cross he should taste all kinds of
calamities, and so it came to pass. For between his last Supper and his
death, he was betrayed of Judas, abiured of Peter, forsaken of all his
followers; he was wrongfully imprisoned, falsely accused, uniustly condemned, he
was buffe^ed, whipped, skorned, reviled; he endured cold, nakedness, thirst,
wounding, hanging, shame, reproach, and all sorts of deadly pains; besides
heaviness of heart and agony of mind, which oppressed him in the Garden. All
this I affirm Christ suffered before his death, and therefore all this besides
his mere bodily death; to which I added Sermon. p. 87. l. 23.
all those afflictions and passions of the Soul, which naturally and
necessarily follow pain and accompany death. You perchance would annex the
pains of hell, and the death of the Soul, but those are the very points in
question which I then did, and yet do utterly exclude from the sufferings of
Christ.

Where you say, I hold, Christ's death was altogether like as the godly do
suffer at the hands of Persecutors, I know not what you mean by your
altogether; in some things his death was like theirs, in many things unlike. A
wrongful and painful death of the body he suffered at the hands of the
Jews, as the godly do often at the hands of their persecutors; and a full
persuasion he always had of Gods exceeding and assured love and favor toward
him, in the midst of all his anguishes, as the godly have in theirs, though
in far less perfection then his was; but as touching the cause, the manner,
the force of his death, I make it altogether unlike theirs. They inherit both
sin, and death, from their Parents, and so of necessity must die, and
putrify in the grave; he did inherit neither, but being free from both,
yielded himself to die, that he might purge and abolish sin. Death wresteth
our souls from our bodies, be we never so patient, whiles sense does last; he
breathed out his soul powerfully, and willingly, which none could take from
him, except he would lay it down of his own accord. Our bodies do rot in the
grave, and lie in corruption, which is the dominion of death, till the time,
they shall be restored; his body could not be dissolved to ashes, because
neither part of his humane nature might perish, after it was once united to his
Divine; but lay in the grave without corruption resisting death, and rose with
speed in glory overthrowing death, first in him self, and after in all his
members at their appointed time. So that death is now a necessary consequent
to our sinful nature, his voluntary death was the satisfaction for our sins,
and pacification of Gods wrath, restoring us again to Gods favor, which
through sin we had lost. Thus have you both swarued very far Sir Desender from
your own question, which your self put in your first Treatise though wide
from our purpose, and wholly misreported the doctrine which I formerly avouched
by Scriptures, and Fathers; giving small hope you will deal more sincerely in
the rest, that enter so corruptly at the first, but you will now open the whole
state of the Question, which we are content to hear.

[ The opening of the whole state of the Question. For the better understanding
whereof ^ Defenc. p. 8.
we must note these principal things.] What you cal^ the opening of the
Question, I may better call the darkning and obscuring of the Question with
many trifling and tedious observations, with many new found, far fet, and ill
applied phrases, with many bold and false assertions powered out of your own
brains, without any show or so much as pretense of holy Scripture. And if you
may be suffered thus to reign and reuele in matters of Religion at your
pleasure; it is an easy way for you to conclude any thing without any great
pains or proofs. For you bring us a world of words warranted by no man's
authority, but by your own, and out of them you frame false positions fit
for your fancy, and utter them as undoubted principles of Christian Religion;
which indeed have in them neither truth, nor sense, when they come to be
examined. As is your matter, so is your method, tumbling and tossing too and
fro, like the vnsettlednesse of your head, and spending twenty pages in mere
confusion and contradiction, for which cause I must be driven to recall your
conceits to some special heads, least in pursuing your steps I loose both my
self and the Reader.

The things which you disorderly shuffle, and I shall be forced more largely to
handle, concern either the offender, which is man, or the offense, which is
sin, or the Judge, which is God; or the punishment which is death, or the
ransommer and redeemer, which is Christ. I mean to meddle with no more in any
of these, but what directly pertains to this question, and serves aptly to
exclude your conceits, and truly to establish the collections which I make.
First then, 1 touching MAN who comes, and what it brings. Sin is either
COMMITTED, as by Adam, or INHERITED, as by us all; or ASSVMED, as by Christ,
who took upon him the punishment of our sins though neither committed nor
inherited by him. And of it self sin breeds in the offender, where it is
not remitted, cleansed, and removed by the blood of Christ; POLLVTION of the
whole man, STING of conscience, and REVENGE of Gods wrath in this life and the
next. Thirdly, for the 3 IVDGE from what ground, within him the punishments of
his elect in this life do proceed, whether from his Justice, or from his
love, or from both mixed together, by whom he executes his justice in earth
and in hell, whether by his immediate hand, or by inferior ministers and
means, with what measure he proportioneth it, as well to the faithful in this
life, as to the faithless, till the number of their sins be full; and
lastly, to what purpose he directs it, either to revenge sin, as in the
wicked and damned; or to repress sin as in the godly, or to declare his
justice, as in Infants baptized; or to perfect his graces, as in the best of his
Saints here on earth; or to purge and abolish sin, and to prove obedience as
in the person of Christ Jesus. wages of sin, and includes all the
punishments provided here, and elsewhere for sinners, is either corporal
parting the soul from the body; or spiritual separating the soul from the
life, and grace of God; or eternal, excluding both body and soul, from the
joy, and bliss of Gods heavenly kingdom, and wrapping them both in the
darkness, fire, and horror of hell for ever. That all the pains and griefs
of this life, are the seeds of death, and ways to death, and so come under
the name of death, which drives the soul from the body, is now presumed, and
shall be proved in place convenient. Fifthly, concerning the 5 REDEEMER, which
is Christ; to whose sufferings all that is aforesaid must in some what part,
and how far he suffered, feared, or apprehended the wrath of God against our
sins: but without question we must know and believe that his person was
naturally and infinitely beloved of God, (all the elect being embraced and
accepted only for him, and in him) and that the dignity of his person and
depth of his favor with God, (when he submitted himself to show his
obedience, and maintain Gods justice, by the shame and sharpness of the
Cross, received in his human nature) was the right ground, and true cause of
our Redemption and Reconciliation to God; whose patience unto death was a
greater and acceptabler sacrifice to God for sin, then all the world; yea
then all earthly and heavenly creatures were worth. And to increase or
strengthen this voluntary sacrifice for sin, the pains of hell were no way
needful since Christ was to show his obedience in this life only, and after
death to rise and reign with glory, and by that which he suffered on the
Cross, he was to learn the obedience of a Son, and not the vengeance due to
devils. In all these issues, if I would take the Discoursers trade, to affirm
what I list, without any further proof, I could end the whole cause in as few
words as I have expressed it; but since that will neither content the Reader,
nor conclude the gaine-sayer, I must have leave in larger manner as occasion
serves, both to repel the Defenders bold presumptions, and to confirm those
things which I take to be safer Resolutions in Christian Religion.

The principal things which you would have noted (Sir Discourser) are either
defective in their divisions, or coincident in their parts, or repugnant to
your purpose. Defense p. 8. l. 6.
All suffering of pains in man (you say) is from God, either properly from his
Justice, or from his holy love; either from himself alone, or also from his
instruments and inferior means: and that for sin either inherent, or
imputed; either as Correction or as punishment; either immediately or mediatly
as anon we shall further see. Not one of these four partitions, which you make
the fortress of your cause, is sound and sufficient; and the fifth is the
selfsame with the second, it only varieth in words. In these two divisions (
all suffering of pains in man is from Gods Justice, or from his holy love;
either as correction or as punishment) you roue obscurely, but absurdly, at the
ground, the measure, the purpose of all pains and punishments, as they come
from God on all men, be they wicked or godly, Christ himself not excepted;
either in this world, or the next. For the GROUND of them, you say they proceed
from Gods justice properly, or from his holy love. The MEASVRE and PVRPOSE of
them you confound in saying either as correction, or as punishment, which you
should distinguish.

From Gods justice properly on men infected with sin comes nothing but
punishment, that is their due, which the just Judge awardeth them. From Gods
love, of it self comes nothing but grace and bliss; for which cause he is
the fountain of Grace, and father of Mercy to such as he loves. In the
reprobate God hates their sins, and so their persons, being the committers
or inheriters of sin still abiding. In the elect, Gods holiness disliketh
their sins as much as the others; but their persons he loves and favors
for Christ his son, in whom they are chosen. And though the full and due
punishment of their sin, which is spiritual and eternal death, be
translated from them, and abolished in Christ; yet when men redeemed and freed
from the heavy burden of their sins do not earnestly repent them, or
eftsoons frequent them, God for the conservation of his holinesle, and
demonstration of his righteous judgment to all the world, does sooner and
sharper visit and punish with the corporal and temporal scourges of this life
his own children, neglecting or resuming their sins, than his enemies; whom
with longer patience he suffers to heap up wrath against the day of wrath. A
James 2. ver. 13.
judgment merciless therefore, as S. James calls it, is and shall be to the
wicked, whereas in the godly mercy rejoices against judgment, but not without
justice. For 1. Pet. 4.
judgment (which in God can never be without justice, since he is the
righteous Judge of the world) must begin at the house of God, 1. Cor. 11.
and when we are judged, we are chastened, (with a merciful judgment) that we
should not be condemned with the world. And though in the afflictions of the
godly, there be many things added of favor; as the measure, which is
tolerable, not ouerwhelming their patience; the purpose which is holy, to
recall them from the delight and custom of sin, and to perfect the graces of
God in them; the comfort which is great, that God loves their persons, when he
pursues their sins; the promise which is sure, that if they suffer with
Christ, they shall reign with Christ, and such like; yet the smart of Gods
rod, and sharpness of his whip, wherewith he awaketh the negligent, and tameth
the unruly, proceed from his just judgment, and commend his holiness which
hates all sin in whomsoever; and declare his justice to the whole world,
that he wincketh not either at the waiwardnesse, or at the carelessness of his
own children. The places in Scripture witnessing thus much are infinite, and
easy for every child to observe; and therefore one shall suffice for all. To
his Church God says by the mouth of Jeremy, Ierem. 30.
Though I utterly destroy all the Nations, where I have scattred thee, yet will
I not utterly destroy thee; but I will correct thee by judgment, and not
utterly cut thee off. I have stricken thee with the wound of an enemy, and
with a cruel chastisement for the multitude of thine iniquities, thy sins
were increased. Thy sorrow is incurable for the number of thine offenses,
because thy sins were increased, I have done these things unto thee: But I
will restore health to thee, and heal thee of thy wounds.

Defen. p. 10. l. 29.
[ The godly in this world do suffer pains for their sins; but these
whatsoever they be, ( yea though death it self) are improperly called
punishments, they are chasticements of sin.] This new Grammar does best
become your new doctrine. All pains for sins whatsoever, suffered by any of
the elect in this life, are chasticements, but in no wise you may endure to
have them called punishments, except very improperly. What is a chasticement
properly, but a punishment moderated with love and mercy? And since you be so
precise that no pain suffered by any of Gods children may properly be called a
punishment; whence I pray you is the word punishment derived? not from the
Latin word punire to punish? and punio from Poena, which our English tongue
resembling the Latin, calls pain? so that pain and punishment are words
of one deriuation, and so properly of one signification, and by force of the
words properly, all pain for sin is punishment for sin. And therefore in
all men's judgments saving yours, chasticement is a punishment tempered with
favor, and not a pain excluding all punishment as you make it in your
dissolute division. Read either the text, or notes of the Geneuian Translation
of the Bible, which you would seem so much to follow; or whose translation you
will, and see whether they do not contradict your childish conceit, that the
Chasticement of Gods children is no punishment. Psalm. 106.
Moses was punished for their sakes; and again, God Lament. 3.
does not punish with the heart; and the Wiseman speaking unto God, Sapient. 12.
with how great circumspection (says he) will thou punish thine own children.
And upon those words of Jeremy, Ierem. 10.
O Lord correct me, but with judgment, not in thine anger; they of Geneua
note, Ibid. lit. q.
He only prays that God would PVNISH THEM with mercy, which Esaias calls in
measure ca. 27. for here by judgment is meant, not only the PUNISHMENT, but
also the MERCIFVLL MODERATION of the same. So that Chastisement notes the
measure of the punishment, which God favorably inflicteth on his children, not
according to their sins, nor exceeding their strength. Psalm. 103.
He has not dealt with us (says David) after our sins, nor rewarded us
according to our iniquities. 1. Cor. 10.
There has no tentation taken you (says Paul) but such as belongs to men;
and God is faithful which will not suffer you to be tempted, above that you be
able, but will give the issue with the tentation, that you may be able to bear
it. Yea, to his enemies God mitigateth the heaviness of his hand at first, and
gives them time and place to amend before he destroys them. Reuelat. 2.
I gave her space to repent (says Christ) but she repented not; and therefore
when the measure of their sins waxes full, God repaieth them the fulness of
vengeance, which is puuishment proportioned to their sins; and this is the
due and proper punishments of those that are wilful, and do not repent their
wickedness.

Defenc. p. 10. l. 29.
[ The pains of the godly are partly remembrances to cause repentance, partly
Chasticements to humble us and mortify sin in us; but these whatsoever they
be (yea though death it self) are improperly called punishments. Here you
touch after your loose manner the purpose of God in afflicting his servants,
which you say is to reform them, but in no wise to punish them. If God had
none other meaning in afflicting the faithful, but to reform their sins, nor
none other means to do that, but by pains, your speech had some truth; but
because God has diverse purposes in so doing, and diverse ways without pains
to amend his children, this that here you bring, as the rest elsewhere, is a
blind groping besides the truth, and a bold presuming that you are in the
truth. God many times lodeth the best and chiefest of his Saints with oftener
and greater troubles, then he does the meaner sort; not because their sins
are more then others, or they need more amendment then the rest; but to TRY
their faith, as in Heb. 11.
Abraham, and Job. 1.
Job; or to show the 2. Cor. 12.
perfection of his grace, as in Paul; or to prepare them to glory, as in Luke
16.
Lazarus; or to Romans 8.
conform them to Christ, whose steps they must follow; and often to declare
his justice, as he did in striking David's child, when the sin was both
repented and pardoned in the Father. In the 2. Sam 12.
sickness and death of which child, as of all other infants regenerate by
Baptism, there neither was, nor can be any use of Repentance, humiliation, or
mortification for themselves; and consequently by your own division, since to
them it can be NO CORRECTION, it must in them be a punishment of sin, not
actually committed by them, but naturally derived to them by the guilt and
corruption of their Parents. Yea, the general pain laid on Adam and all
mankind, as dissolution by death, privation of original light and grace,
corruption of sin, infection of soul, which declare us all to be the
children of wrath by nature; were they corrections or punishments of Adams
sin, since after death there is no repentance nor amendment of life, and the
rest are neither bars to sin, nor retraits from sin, but either parts,
effects, or causes of sin? which stick so fast, and bear such rule in many
even of the elect, that no gentle or fatherly admonitions, reprehensions, or
comminations, will prevail with them, but they must be ouerruled and wearied
with sharp and pearcing scourges, before they will see or forsake the
loathsomeness of their sin. Wherein though it be a great favor of God,
rather to pursue them with all temporal plagues unto their conversion, then to
let them run headlong to everlasting perdition; yet the means which he uses
are mixed with justice and mercy, and are rightly believed to be punishments
fully deserved by their sins, though not fully proportioned to their sins,
the just and full wages whereof in sinful men can be none other but death
corporal, spiritual, and eternal. So that your division, all pain from God
is either correction, or punishment; and your position no pain in the godly is
punishment, are not only frivolous and false, but repugnant each to the other:
for so much as pain comes from God for probation of faith, perfection of
grace, assurance of salvation, encouraging of others by example, as well as for
correction; and death and correction in Infants, where correction has no
place, must by your own partition be a punishment of sin inflicted on the
first Man and all his posterity. The which because we all inherit from our
Parents, and had it in us at our birth, when there was no use of correction for
us, it was then in us all, and so still remains a punishment of our first
Parents sin; though by the grace, and price of Christ's death, we are and
shall be freed from it.

But come to your purpose, and apply this to Christ, for thither you bend and
Christ's bodily death, part of the punishment of our sins.
thereat you shoot; is your division true in the sufferings of Christ? then
since by your own assertion Defenc. pa. 11. l. 12.
chastisements and remembrances, (which are the branches that you make of
Correction) belonged nothing at all to Christ, and indeed there could be no
cause to correct any sinful corruption or affection in him, where no sin
was; it is a plain confession that the bodily death and pains which Christ
suffered on the Cross, were the punishment of our sins in his body; and
consequently a part of that curse which was imposed on the first man's sin;
which you so stiffly denied in your Treatise, where you said; Treatise. pa. 45.
l. 1.
Therefore Christ's dying simply as the godly die (that is a bodily death) may
in no sort be called a curse or cursed. And if to shift of this contradiction,
and confession of the truth of my answer to the place of S. Paul, Christ was
made a curse for us, you refer these words ( as the godly do) not to the
same kind of death which is bodily in both, but to the same cause of death,
which was different, in Christ and his members; Remember good Sir, the words
are not mine, but your own; I put many differences betwixt the death of
Christ, and his Saints; as namely the cause, the manner, and force of his
death, which I have touched Supra pa. 7.
before; but the kind of death which was bodily, and not Ghostly, is all one in
Christ and the godly. For Christ died not the death of the Soul, no more do
the godly, when they depart this life, albeit they may oftentimes whiles here
they live, draw near to the death of the Soul by sinning, which Christ could
not. And if you begin now to be better advised, I am not displeased with it; it
shall suffice that mine answer did, and does stand true, that Christ in
suffering bodyly pains and death for us, suffered a part of the same
punishment and curse which was laid on all mankind for the sin of Adam.

Defen. pa. 9. l. 34.
[ We must note especially that to suffer (as the godly do) Chasticements and
corrections, is not to suffer or feel Gods wrath, nor the punishment of sin:
except it be in a very improper speech. To suffer the true punishment,
satisfaction, proper payment and wages of sin, only that is to suffer
properly and truly the wrath of God: now then seeing the pains which Christ
for us did feel, were indeed properly the punishment, and payment and
vengeance for sin, such as the godly do in no wise suffer, Christ only
having wholly suffered that for us all: Therefore indeed his sufferings
proceeded from Gods proper wrath, and were the true effects of Gods mere
Justice, bent to take recompense on him for our offenses.] Thou have in these
words (Christian Reader) the bulwark of this man's cause, concluding that
Christ suffered the MERE JUSTICE, PROPER WRATH, and very CVRSE of God for
sin. The frame of his reason, if I understand it, (as who understands his
mysteries but himself?) is this. All pain in man is from God, either as
correction of sin or as punishment for sin. In Christ there was no ( cause
and so no need of) correction: his sufferings therefore were the punishments
of sin. They were punishments for sin; Ergo, they were the true punishment,
proper payment, wages and vengeance of sin, which proceeded from Gods proper
wrath, and were the true effects of Gods m^ere justice, bent to take recompense
on him for our offenses. His terms of TRVE, PROPER, and MERE, joined to the
PUNISHMENT, WRATH and JUSTICE of God, are not warranted by any Scripture, much
less referred to the sufferings of Christ, nor so much as proved by any
testimony, defined with any certainty, directed by any part, or expounded by
any means; but only proiected as Ridles, and laberinthes to weary the wise,
to angle the simple, and to refuge himself, when he shall be pressed with the
falsitie and impiety of his assertions. Least therefore we wrangle about words
in vain, which is his desire and devise, that he may seem to say somewhat,
and carry the Reader into a forest of strange and unknown phrases, where he
shall hardly discern what either side says; I th^nke it needful first to
declare what the Scriptures mean by the wages of sin and wrath of God, and
so to try in what sense, and with what truth his terms may be added to them,
and applied to the sufferings of Christ.

Romans 6.
[ The wages of sin is death, says S. Paul. God himself foretold Adam it
should be so. Whenever thou catest (of the forbidden tree) thou shall Genes 2.
die the death. Then how many kinds of death, are by God threatened and
inflicted on sinners; so many parts must the wages of sin contain. Now those
are three, the death of the Soul in this life, which I call spiritual; the
death of the body leaving this life, which I call corporal; and the death of
both in the next world, which I call eternal. For as man had two parts by
which he did live, Soul and body; and two places wherein he might live if he
obeyed God, earth for a time, and heaven for ever; so disobedience deprived
either part of man in either place, of the life which he should have enjoyed,
and subjected him to the fears, griefs, and pains of death, both here, and
in hell for ever.

The life of the body is the union of the Soul with the body; the effects
whereof are sense, and motion, to discern, obtain, and perform that which is
needful or healthful for the body. And as the presence of the Soul brings
life to the body, so the departing of the Soul takes life from the body, and
leaves it dead, that is, void of all action, motion and sense, as to every
man's eyes is apparent in dead bodies. The Soul therefore in the Scriptures is
usually taken for the life of the body, which proceeds from the Soul, and is
maintained by the Soul; And these phrases to Math. 2. Romans 11.
seek a man's Soul, tolay Ioh. 13. 1. Ioh. 3.
down his own Soul, or to give it for another, to power out his Soul unto
death, with such like, do properly express the death of the body, quickened by
the Soul, because men loose or leave this life, when they loose or leave their
Souls. And where God threatened death to Adam, even the very same day in which
he should transgress, we must not think that God either delayed the
punishment longer, or extended it farther, then his words at first imported.
When therefore the very same day that they sinned, God said to the woman,
Genes. 3.
increasing I will increase thy sorrow, and to the man, In sorrow shall thou
eat all the days of thy life, we must acknowledge, that from that time
forward, death began to take hold, and work on both their bodies, though not
by present separation of the Soul from the body, (for Adam lived after that
930. years) yet by mortality, mutabilitie, misery, and namely by sorrow and
pain as the instruments and agents of death. 2. Cor. 7.
Worldly sorrow causes death, as Paul witnesses; and a Prou^rb. 17.
broken heart (says Solomon) dries the bones; yea, Eccles. 30.
sorrow has slain maxy. And were it not so written, yet experience and nature
teaches us, that grief of mind, and pain of body, where they continue or
increase, consume the flesh and hasten death; so that when God. the same day
that they sinned, subjected them to sorrow and pain, which before they felt
not. He made way for death, that it might continually work in them, and ^ken
them till they returned to dust. De ci^itate Dei. li. 13. cap. 10.
The ti^e of this life (says Aust^n) is nothing els^ but a race to death, and
truly after a m^n begi^th to be in this b^dy, he is in death.

The life of the soul is not her understanding and will, which she can never
lose, no not in hell; but only the truth and gra^e of God, by whose spirit
she receives the light of faith to direct her, and the strength of love, to
stir and i^cite her in t^is life to behold, desire, and embrace the
holiness and goodness of Gods blessed will and promise, for her everlasting
happiness; which with patience and comfort of the Holy ghost, she expects
till Gods appointed time do come. The lack or loss of this inward sense, and
motion of Gods spirit, which only can quicken the soul, is the death of the
soul, deprived of her life, which is God, and left to herself in blindness
and hardness of heart, and given over unto a reproba^e mind, and vile
affections, to work wickedness even with greediness; till contempt of Gods
will, and desperation of his mercy do fearfully end her miserable time in
this life, and violently draw her from hence to see, and suffer the terrible
judgments of God provided for sin in another world.

Life everlasting, is the perfect and perpetual vision and fruition of Gods
glorious presence in the heavens, where unspeakable light, and honor, joy, and
bli^e, shall compass, and replenish body and soul in the fellowship of
Christ, and his elect angels for ever. The exclusion and reiection of the
wicked from this heavenly f^licity, together with the shame and confusion of
sin wounding and stinging the conscience without ease or rest; and the
dreadful horror of hell, the place of darkness and devils, having in it
continual flames of intolerable and unquenchable fire eternally tormenting
the souls and bodies of the damned; the Scriptures call the second death,
because it is never inflicted but after the first death; and likewise wrath to
come, for that the state of this present life is not capable of th^se extreme
torments, which are reserved for another world. And least I should seem to
make degrees and parts of eternal death out of mine own head; let us briefly
view, whether the word of God do not witness the same. Luc. 13.
There shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth (says Christ) when you shall see
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and a^ the Prophets in the kingdom of God, and your
selves thrust out at doors. Daniel 12.
Many of those that sleep in the dust of the earth shall awake (says Daniel)
to perpetual shame and reproach; Esa. 66.
Their worm shall never die, says Esaias. The Lord that willed his good and
faithful servants to enter into their masters joy, when he came to the
slothful and unprofitable servant, commanded to be Matthew. 25.
taken from him even that he had, and to cast him into utter darkness. The
Judge himself forwarneth he will give this sentence on the wicked in the last
day, Ibidem.
Depart from ^e, ye cursed, into everlasting ^ire, prepared for the devil and
his angels. They shall be Revel. 14.
tormented in fire and brimstone (says John) and the smoke of their torments
shall asc^nd evermore, and they shall have no rest night nor day.

This is that 2 Thessalonians. 1.
everlasting perdition and Jude ver. 7.
vengeance of eternal fire, which the wicked shall suffer in hell, and this is
the full and complete punishment and wages of sin, repaying the reprobate
according to their deserts, when their sins come once to that ripeness and
fullness, that they may no longer be endured by Gods justice; the two former
kinds of deaths in this world being such as are either despised, or desired, by
the wicked. For nothing is more acceptable to them, than without all fear, or
care of God, to follow their wills, and pursue their lusts; which i^ the death
of the soul; and the death of the body which they can not decline, they
labor to neglect; and though they murmu^ at God for it, as if man had been
framed at first mortal, yet find they no great hurt in it, because they know
not the sequel of it; and perceive it to be common to good and badde, and to
leave no sense of pain behind it. And indeed the outward punishments of this
life are by Gods bounty, and patience so tempered, not only with comfort to
the godly, but with moderation to the wicked, that they warn all men to fear
and fly the wrath to come, and give time and place for amendment. Sapien. 12.
The old inhabitants of the holy land, thou (Lord) did h^te (says the
Wiseman) for they committed abominable works, as sorceries, and wicked
sacrifices; nevertheless thou sparedst them also, as men, and did send the
forerunners of thine host, even hornets to root them out; not that thou
could not destroy them with one rough word, but in punishing them by little
and little, thou gave them space to repent. The Apostle says the same, Romans
2.
Despisest thou the riches of Gods bounty, and patience, and long suffering,
not knowing that the bounty of God leads thee to repentance? but thou after
thine hardness, and heart that can not repent, heapest unto thy self wrath
against the day of wrath, and of the declaration of the just judgment of God,
who will reward every man according to his works.

The wrath of God is also diversely taken in the Scriptures; sometimes for the
inward dislike, and hatred that God in his holiness has of all iniquity;
sometimes for his judgments threatened, or executed against sin, whether they
be tempered with love or patience, to work or expect repentance, as in his
own, and in this life; or proportioned to the deserts of wicked and impenitent
sinners, for substraction of grace, as to the reprobate in this world, or
infliction of vengeance, as to the danmed in hell. Such is the holiness of
God, that he can love no wickedness, but by nature and of necessity does and
must hate all unrighteousness in whomsoever. Psalm. 5.
Thou art not a God, that loves wickedness (says David) neither shall evil
dwell with thee. 2. Cor. 6.
What fellowship has righteousness with unrighteousness? or what communion
has light and darkness; What favor then and allowance should iniquity find
with God, that is the very fountain and flaming fire of all holiness? To
declare Gods perfect hatred against all sin as well of the faithful as
faithless, the Scripture witnesses not only that his soul abhors the
outrages of the wicked, which are an abomination unto him, but also that he is
displeased and grieved with the sins even of his elect. Proverb. 6.
These things the Lord hates (says Solomon) yea his soul abhors them.
Zachary 8.
All these are the things that I hate says the Lord, by the Prophet Zachary.
Psalm. 5.
The foolish shall not stand in thy sight, thou hate all them that work
i^iquitie, says David to God. The Lord will abhor the cruel and deceitful
man. Yea God is displeased and grieved with his own, when they sin against
him. Deuter. 32.
The Lord saw it (says Moses) and was stirred to anger, with the provocation
of his sons and his daughters. When David had slain Vriah, and taken home
his wife; the 2. Sam. 11.
thing displeased the eyes of the Lord, says the Scripture. Likewise when he
numbered the people, 1. Paral. 21.
God was displeased with that deed. Esaias remembering the mercies of the Lord
toward the house of Israel, says; Esa. 63.
he was their Savior in all their troubles, he was troubled, and the angel
of his presence saned them: but they rebelled and grieved the spirit of his
holiness. The Apostle confirms the same: Ephesians. 4.
Grieve not the Holy spirit, by whom ye are sealed unto the day of Redemption.
Then as the love of all righteousness is a natural and necessary consequent
to Gods holiness; so the dislike and hatred of all sin is rightly and
properly appertinent to his divine purity; neither must the godly take it for
an improper kind of speech, but fully believe and plainly confess, that God
is truly and greatly displeased with their sins, lest in their hearts they
bring him within compass of liking or allowing their uncleanness: and when
they repent, they must not only tremble at the provoking of so righteous and
fearful a Judge, but chiefly sorrow for the displeasing and offending the
holiness of so gracious and loving a father. This dislike and detestation of
disobedience even in his own children, which God of his holiness has, the
Scripture often expresses by the name of Anger, though no punishment follow.
Exodus 4. ver. 14.
The Lord was very angry with Moses (says the Scripture) when he so long
refused to go at Gods appointment to deliver the children of Israel out of
Egypt. God was likewise Numb. 12. verse. 9.
very angry with Aaron and Miriam his sister, for speaking against Moses,
though Aaron was not punished for it, and Miriam quickly healed of her
leprosy. So God himself professed to Eliphaz the Temanite, saying; Job. 42.
verse. 7.
My wrath is kindled against thee, and against thy two friends, though he
willed them to sacrifice for their offense, and promised to accept Jobs prayer
for them. The same may often be observed in other places of the Scriptures.

The wrath of God is likewise taken for the threats, whereby God denounces
what he will inflict on the wickedness of men; or for the sharp reproof,
which he uses against sin committed. Psalm. 95.
I swear in my wrath, they shall not enter into my rest, says God of the
disobedient Israelites in the wilderness. Ezech. 38.
In mi^e indignation, ^d in the fire of my wrath have I spoken it (says God by
Ezechiel) surely at that time there shall be a great shaking in the land of
Israel. So David, Psalm. 2.
Then shall God speak to them in his wrath, and terrify them in his sore
displeasure. Wherefore David prays for himself, Psalm. 6.
O Lord reprove me not in thine anger; knowing that Gods rebukes and threats
ought to be as much regarded and feared of the faithful, as his plagues.

Lastly, all the Judgments of God, awaking the negligent, scourging the
disobedient, obdurating the impenitent in this life, or renenging the
Reprobate, here and in hell, are in the Scriptures called the wrath of God; of
which speech there can be no question, because the word of God gives plain
and plentiful evidence in every of those parts: only the Discourser
avouches, that the two first, are no degrees nor effects of Gods proper wrath;
though the Scripture call them wrath, but are so termed by a very improper
speech. These are his words: Defen. pa. 9. l. 35.
To suffer chastisements and corrections as the godly do, is not to suffer, or
feel Gods wrath, except it be in a very improper speech. And this is one of
the maine points, on which he puts theissue of the question. Defen. p. 13.
l. 2.
I affirm (says he) Christ suffered Gods proper wrath and vengeance: You
think, all afflictions whatsoever, small or great, and toward whomsoever, are
the effects of Gods wrath: but that is not so, except in a most improper
speech. To the godly their afflictions both small and great, are Gods fatherly
and gracious chastisements, and no effects of his properwrath.

Thou must not forget (Christian Reader) from what beginning we come to this
issue. This Rouer taking upon him to prove, that Christ suffered the true
pains of hell, and of the damned, made this his foundation, Treatis. pa. 33.
That Christ suffered the wrath of God for us; which he affirmed to be equal
to hell it self, and all the torments thereof. Mine answer shortly was, I did
not see what this proposition, Christ suffered for us the wrath of God, if it
were granted, could help his cause, or hinder mine. Conclus. pa. 243. l. 27.
For the wrath of God extended to all pains and punishments, as well corporal
as spiritual, in this life and the next, were they temporal or eternal. So
that no pain or punishment, small or great, could befall the body or soul of
Christ, but it must needs proceed from the wrath of God. To this he now
replieth, To Defen. p. 9. l. 35.
suffer (as the godly do) chastisements and corrections, is not to suffer or
feel Gods wrath, nor indeed the punishment of sin; except it be in a very
improper speech. Where first observe that these words ( as the godly do) are
not contained in mine answer, but intended by him in his reply. The ground on
which I stood, was that all the miseries of man's life what soever they be, came
first from the wrath of God revenging the sin of our first Father; and so are
degrees and parts of that wrath wherewith God punished the transgression of
Adam. I named no miseries peculiar to the godly, but common to them with the
wicked; neither did I touch any special manner of suffering as the godly do
suffer; but proved that the Scriptures, which must teach us all how to speak
in Gods causes, called them wrath even in the godly. And consequently, since
Christ suffered sorrow, pain, and death, which came for sin, and are common
to all, he might and did suffer the wrath of God for us, and yet not the pains
of the damned.

[You cast about afresh (Sir Discourser) in your defense, and tell us the
Scriptures Phrases of Gods wrath in Scripture against the wicked are improper.
speak very improperlie, when they call the miseries of this life the wrath
of God; and therefore you bring us a new phrase of your own framing, and say
the godly in no wise do suffer Gods proper wrath, that is, properly taken, or
properly so called, which Christ did suffer as you affirm.] Is your learning
so good (Sir Defender) that you will apply to God wrath, indignation, and
fury properly so called, which are the highest degrees of Gods anger against
the wicked? Have you forgotten, who took upon you such knowledge in the Hebrew
tongue, that the usual words whereby the Scripture expresses the wrath of God
against the wicked, do import the aph.
nose, the chemal^.
heat, the k^tseph.
boiling, the char^n.
kindling, the (...).
excess and rage of God against the wicked? which words if you refer to God
by way of proper speech, you make of every one of them a barbarous and
blasphemous heresy. So that your late coined distinction of Gods wrath by
improper speech toward his children, and his wrath properly so called against
his enemies, is vain and foolish: the words in Scripture that note Gods wrath
against his enemies are most improper, and are translated from the behauiou^ of
angry men to God, of purpose to strike a terror into the wicked, of that
great and grievous judgment which they shall receive. But whatsoever the words
design in their natural signification, which the Christian faith forbids
us to attribute properly unto God, because they express humane affections and
corporal passions, which are not in God: by the anger which is in God against
sin, the Scripture means nothing else, but his most holy dislike of sin in
whomsoever, and his most just and constant will and decree, in some to reward
sin according to desert, which is vengeance in this life, and the next; in
others so to temper the punishment of sin with love and mercy, that
whatsoever he inflict on body or soul, shall tend to the praise of his
justice and mercy, and end with the consolation and salvation of their souls.
And by the anger which proceeds from God, are in the Scriptures intended
either his threats against sin, or his punishments of sin, be they
corporal or spiritual, temporal or eternal, mixed with mercy, or
proportioned only to justice.

If you relinquish your holdfast of improper speech, and raze that unadvised
shift out of your book; (for God has in him no wrath properly so called, but
his holiness displeased, and justice provoked by sin, are improperly named
his wrath in the Scriptures;) Let us come to the proprieties of the things
themselves, and see whether chasticements for sin do properly proceed from
Gods love only, or from his justice tempered with love and mercy. Of the
wicked I shall not need to speak much, we make no great question of them;
howbeit even their external punishments in this life are not void of Gods
bounty and patience diversely blessing them with earthly things, often warning
and sparing them, by giving them time and place to mislike and leave their
sins; and length-fully expecting their submission and amendment, which the
Apostle calls Romans 2.
the riches of Gods bounty, patience, and long sufferance, leading (even the
obstinate and hard hearted) to repentance: The doubt is of the godly; whether
their afflictions which are corrections and chasticements for sin, rise only
from Gods love, or rather from his justice mixed with love. I affirm the
Scriptures do directly and distinctly propose in the chasticements of the
elect as well judgment and wrath, as mercy and love; and that not by abusing
the words, but by reserving to either their natural proprieties, and several
consequents; the one for the commendation of Gods justice, the other for the
demonstration of his mercy, and consolation of the afflicted.

Esaias 57. 17.
For his wicked covetousness I was angry, (says God) and did smite him, but I
will heal him, and restore comfort unto him. He must be more then absurd; that
will imagine, God would or could say, for his wicked covetousness I loved him;
that were to make God the abettour and embracer of wickedness, which is wholly
repugnant to his Divine sanctity and glory; the words therefore must stand as
they do without any evasion of improper speech, and Gods anger in this place
must plainly differ from his love, which cannot be added to these words
without evident impiety. Since then the cause was sin which God does
perfectly hate in whomsoever, even in his own, and the smiting came for sin
and from anger, it is not possible this chasticement should spring only from
love, but jointly both must work together, I mean Gods anger against sin,
and his love toward the person, to make the punishment tolerable, and
comfortable to the bearer. The like rule God gives for all that belong to the
true seed, and son of David, which is Christ. If Psalm. 89. 31. 32.
his children forsake my law, and walk not in my judgments; I will visue
their transgressions with the Rod, and their iniquity with s^ripes; but my
mercy will I not take from him. God threatens no love to sin, he threatens
anger; the stripes here mentioned are not the love of a father, but mitigated
by love; the mercy here promised, is not adjoined as the only cause of this
correction, which is ascribed to the transgressions and iniquities of the
children; but it serves for a salve, to heal the wound, which Gods justice
provoked by their sins should formerly make. For he is the God that Deuteronomy. 32.
wounds and heals; kills, and quickneth; 1. Sam. 2.
casts down to hell, and rayseth up again; not working contraries by one
and the self same love, but when he has justly done the one for our offenses,
he graciously does the other for his mercies sake; in Habacuk. 3.
wrath remembering mercy, least we should be consumed. He then despouseth the
Church unto himself in Ose. 2.
judgment and mercy, not in judgment forgetting mercy, nor by mercy excluding
judgment, for 1. Petri. 4.
judgment begins at the house of God; but retaining both that the whole
Church may Psalm. 101.
sing mercy and judgment unto him as David did; yet with this difference that
he does not Lament. 3.
punish with the heart, as the Prophet testifies, but his Miche. 7.
delight is in mercy. Which plainly proves the Rod is not all one with love,
as the Apostle notes, when he opposes the one against the other; saying, 1.
Cor. 4.
Shall I come to you with a rod or in love? but is guided by love, lest in
displeasure God should Psalm. 77.
shut up his mercies. These two therefore in God, just anger against the
sins, and tender love toward the persons of his children, together with
their effects, which are judgment and mercy, may not be confounded the one
with the other, but as they have different causes and proprieties in God, so
have they different effects and consequents in us; the Scriptures bearing
witness, that Gods anger rises for our sins, his love for his own names
sake; his anger he threatens, his love he promises; he has no pleasure in
punishing, he delights in mercy; he repents him often of the evil which
he denounces, his gifts and calling are without repentance; when we call upon
him he delivers us out of all our troubles, his mercy will he never take from
his, nor frustrate his truth. Yea, the godly have a different feeling of his
anger toward them from his love; they fear, they faint, they grieve, and
groan under the burden of affliction, they wax weary of it, they pray against
it; they give him thanks when they are freed from it; none of which affections
may with any sense of godliness agree to his love.

[But these are Defen. p. 13.
no effects of Gods proper wrath, (you think) Et pa. 10.
Christ only having wholly suffered that for us all.] What you mean by Gods
proper wrath, is known only to your self, you never express nor expound the
word, but with more obscure and doubtful terms then the former. At first, you
affirm Gods wrath toward his children was a most improper speech. I have now
showed, that if you look to the words used in the sacred Scriptures, Gods
wrath toward his enemies is as improper a speech as the other. Your second
wrench was, that all chastisements for sin are inflicted on Gods children
properly by his love. I have proved, that they proceed properly from Gods
justice tempered with mercy, and not from his only love. Your third shift is
now, they are no effects of Gods proper wrath, which Christ did wholly suffer
for us all. If you understand by Gods proper wrath that which is only wrath,
and has no admixture of his love, favor or mercy, then is your position
ridiculous in your first maine point, and blasphemous in the second. For who
ever avouched that God punished his children, and his enemies with the same
degrees and effects of wrath? or who ever dreamed that God chastising the
sins of his elect, in wrath remembered not his mercy? you do indeed affirm
of Christ, that he suffered all Gods proper wrath, which if you now interpret
to be without all respect of love or favor toward him, you light on a greater
blasphemy, then you are ware of. Wherefore look well to your new found
phrases of Gods mere justice, and proper wrath, with which you think to
color your conceits; they will else prove you a weak Scholar, and a worse
Christian.

The word ( proper) applied to Gods wrath may signify either that which is not
figurative; or that which is not common to others; or that which has no
mixture of love, or mercy to mitigate wrath, but is wholly and only wrath. In
God nothing is figurative; he is naturally, and wholly truth itself. The words
applied to him are often improper and figurative, because we can hardly speak,
or understand many things that are in him, but by such words as are known and
familiar to us. In this sense all that the Scripture intends by wrath in God,
is most proper, and natural to God; namely his holiness abhorring sin; his
justice proportioning punishment to it, and his power performing whatsoever his
will and council decrees for the repressing, or revenging of sin. For which
respect Zanchius, a very moderate and considerate writer of our time, and one
whom amongst others, the Discourser Defen. p. 26.
judges no way inferior to the best of the Ancients, sets down this for
one of his Resolutions, which he calls a Thesis: De tribus Elohim lib. 4. ca
6. quaest. 1.
Ira, eo sensu, quo scripturae dant illam deo, vere, and proprie, ei
attribuitur: Anger, in that sense in which the Scriptures give it to God, is
truly and properly ascribed unto him. And his resolutions ensuing upon the
former are not only, that God is Ibid. quaest. 2.
angry, (he means truly and properly as his first Thesis affirms,) with
all sinners as well elect, as reprobate; but that, Ibid. quaest. 4.
mayor and grauior est ira dei aduersus homines etiam electos, propter peccata,
quam existimari possit ab ipsis hominibus. The anger of God against his elect
for sin, is greater and greeuouser, then they can conceive.

A second signification of proper may be, that this wrath which the Scriptures
attribute to God, is proper to him, and common to no creature else. Men, and
devils have wrath, but that is tumultuous, or vicious; and has no communion
with Gods wrath, which is righteous and holy. The Saints and Angels in heaven
no doubt detest all iniquity, but they are no fit discerners, esteemers, nor
rewarders of sin. The secrets of the heart they know not, whose uncleanness
is open only to the eyes of God. The weight of sin they cannot truly
balance; he only that is offended, and cannot be deceived, rightly knows how
far every sin should displease, and what every sin deserves. As they
cannot fully ponder offenses, no more can they justly proportion punishment to
the demerits of every sinner, and least of all ordain, and arm means
temporally to afflict, or eternally to revenge the bodies and souls of
transgressors: he only that is all-wise, all-holy, all-iust and almighty,
can thoroughly discern, perfectly dislike, euenly reward, and powerfully
repress sin by repentance or vengeance, as seems best to him; and
therefote he only is the righteous Judge of the world, and capable of that
wrath, which is proper to God.

A third meaning of Gods proper wrath may be this, that as every thing most
rightly deserves his name, when it has in (...) permixtion of the contrary to
alter his nature; so Gods proper wrath may be that which is wholly and only
wrath without any temper of mercy or love, to diminish the heat and hight of
wrath. That is most properly light, that has no darkness; truth, that has
no falsehood; good, that has no evil in it. And since Gods justice against the
wicked admits neither love to their persons, nor mercy to their miseries;
that is also Gods proper wrath, which is fully and wholly wrath without any
favor or pity toward them that are the vessels of wrath appointed to
destruction. Of their damnation S. John writes: The ^euel. 14.
smoke of their torment shall ascend for ever, and they shall have no rest day
nor night. Whereby it is evident, their ^ames. 2.
judgment shall be merciless, their Mark. 9.
worm never dying, and the fire never quenching. And how can it be otherwise,
since they are both haters and hated of God. (...) 1.
Jacob have I loved (says God) and Esau have I hated. Thou Psalm. 5.
hate (says David to God) all those that work wickedness. Yea Romans 1.
the wrath of God (says Paul) is revealed from heaven against all ungodliness
and unrighteousness of men. For as they regarded not to know God, so God
delivered them up into a reprobate mind to do unseemly things. Neither is
there any greater wrath in this life, then for men to be left to the lusts of
their own hearts, that they may be full of all unrighteousness, wickedness,
maliciousness, haters of God, inuenters of evil, void of all love,
fidelity, and mercy, and here receive in themselves a meet reward of their
error, to prepare them for eternal vengeance, with devils in the world to
come. This wrath of God against the wicked, has in it neither love, nor
mercy, but is wholly wrath proportioned to their desires which are sinful,
and their deserts which are hateful before God, and so they feel the just,
and full recompense of their affected ignorance, and wilful disobedience. Of
this wrath the elect do not taste, they are freed from it in Christ their
Redeemer and Savior, by whose spirit their minds are lightened and renewed, and
their hearts persuaded to the obedience of faith, and by whose death they are
wholly delivered from the wrath to come. Of the two former they often taste,
specially when they neglect continual and serious repentance, to which free
remission of sins is offered in the blood of Christ Jesus; or when through
the rebellion of the flesh against the spirit, they are carried back to the
desires of their former corruption. In which cases the Lord with sundry and
sore afflictions lets them sharply feel what it is to provoke the
holiness, or abuse the goodness of so gracious a Father, and never leaves
scourging them, till they see and acknowledge their unruliness, and lament and
leave their uncleanness, taking hope and hold through faith of his mercies
promised them in Christ Jesus.

If it can not be truly said of the elect, that in this third sense, which you
urge, they taste of Gods proper wrath, because of the love which God bears,
and shows them in Christ his son; how much less may it be avouched of
Christ himself, that he suffered all Gods proper wrath; on whom nothing was
laid for our sins, but with so great love, favor, and honor (considering
the cause which he undertook) that God in each and all Christ's sufferings
declared him to be the best pleasing sacrifice, and most sufficient recompense
for sin, that heaven could yield, or God would have. For whether we look to
the choice of the person, to the measure of his chastisement, or to the reward
of his labor, we shall see the exceeding and admirable love, and favor of
God toward him, albeit the justice of God kindled against our sins, did not
quit him from all pain: yea that very chastisement, by which he yielded, and
learned obedience, did not only witness, but also increase Gods love toward
him. And where you (Sir Discourser) cast your eyes only upon Gods severe and
implacable justice against sin, when you speak of Christ's sufferings, to
serve your own turn, and to tole in hell-paines with some pretense of piety;
all the godly may perceive, and must confess, that God in satisfaction for
sin had greater regard of his holiness despised by man's disobedience, and of
his glory defaced by Satan's triumph for our fall, than of the rigor of his
justice provoked by contempt of his commandment. For had God chiefly respected
the execution of his justice against sin, his own son was most unfit to be
subjected to that vengeance which was prepared for devils: but God in the
recompense which he required for sin, chose rather to have his holiness
contented, and his glory advanced, than to have his justice inflicted to the
uttermost. And therefore he selected the person of his own son, that might
fully satisfy his holiness, and maruellously exalt his glory, but on whom of
all others his justice could take least hold; not that his justice should be
neglected, but that a moderate punishment in his person, for the worthiness
thereof would weigh more even in the balance of Gods exact justice, than the
depth of Gods wrath executed on all the transgressors.

The chastisement of our peace laid upon him will prove the same. For where the
What death Christ died.
wages of sin is death, and death due to sin is threefold, spiritual,
corporal, and eternal, as I have formerly showed; such was the person of our
Savior, that two parts of death due to sin, could by no rule of Gods justice
fasten on Christ's humane nature. The gifts of Gods spirit and grace could not
be quenched nor diminished in him; he was John 1.
full of grace and truth; he had not the spirit John 3.
by measure, as we have; but John 1.
of his fullness we all have received. John 8.
It is my father (says he) that honors me, whom ye say to be your God; yet
have ye not known him, but I know him; and if I should say I know him not, I
should be a liar like unto you: but I know him, and keep his word, and do
always the things that please him. The cleerenesse of truth knowing Gods
will, and fullness of grace keeping his word, being continually present with
the humane soul of Christ; most apparently the death of the soul, which
excludes all inward sense and motion of Gods spirit, could have no place in
him, by reason the death of the soul is the want of all grace, and height of
all sin, from which he was free: much less could any part of Christ's manhood
by Gods justice be condemned to everlasting death, or to hell fire; since there
could nothing befall the humanity of Christ, which was unfit for his
Divinity, they both being inseparably joined together; or repugnant to that
love which God so often professed, and proclaimed from heaven; or injurious to
the innocence and obedience, which God so highly accepted, and rewarded; or
prejudicial to man's salvation, which God so long before purposed and promised.
No weight of sin, no heat of wrath, no rigor of justice could prevail
against the least of these, to cast Christ out of heaven, and combine him with
devils in the second death, which is the Revel. 21.
lake burning with fire and brimstone. There is only left the third kind of
death, which is corporal, to which Christ yielded himself willingly for the
conservation of Gods justice, who inflicted that pain on all men as the
general punishment of sin; for the demonstration of his power, who by death
overcame death, together with the cause and consequents thereof, and for the
consolation of the godly, that they should not faint under the cross, nor
fear what sin and Satan could do against them.

It was love then in God toward us, to give his son for us; John 3.
So God loved the world, that he gave his only begotten son, that whosoever
believes in him should not perish, but have life everlasting: but far
greater love to his son, than to us, though the burden of our sins, which
we could not bear, were laid upon him. For since God has. Ephesians. 1.
adopted us through Christ Jesus unto himself, and made us accepted in his
beloved; of force he must be much better beloved, for whose sake we all are
beloved. And if to Hebr. 1.
make the world by his son, were an excellent demonstration of Gods
everlasting and exceeding love toward his son; to John 3.
send him into the world, that the world through him might be saved, does as
far in honor and love exceed the former, as our Redemption, by which heaven
is inherited, does pass our creation, whereby the earth was first inhabited.
Neither was it possible that God should remit the rigor of justice against
sin, for the love of any, but only of his own son; whom because he loved
as dearly as himself, and had made Hebr. 1.
heir of all things; worthily and rightly did the wrath of God against man
assuage, and yield to the love of God toward his own son; against whom no
punishment could proceed, but such as was fatherly, and served rather to
witness obedience, than to execute vengeance. For though you (Sir Discourser)
in the height of your unlearned skill resolve, that Christ could suffer no
chastisement, but Defenc. pa. 11. l. 11.
all his sufferings were the true and proper punishment, or just vengeance of
God for sin; yet the Prophet Esaias tells us, the chastisment of our peace
was upon him; and the word Musar, which the Prophet there uses, derived from
Iasar, is the proper word that in the Scripture signifies the correction of a
father toward his son; and of God likewise toward his Church. Proverb. 19.
Chastise thy son (says Solomon) while there is hope. Deutr. 8.
As a father chasteneth his son, so the Lord chasteneth thee, says Moses to
Israel. Proverb. 3.
My Son refuse not the chastening of the Lord. Psalm. 94.
Blessed is the man whom thou Lord do chasten. The like may be seen by
those that will look, Deutr. 21. verse. 18. Ierem. 2. verse. 30. Ierem. 31.
verse. 18. Psalm. 118. verse. 18. The Apostle concurreth with the Prophet Esaias
touching Christ's sufferings, and says, Hebr. 5.
Though he were the son, yet learned he obedience by the things which he
suffered. He learned obedience, which is the subjection of a son to his
fathers chastisement, he tasted not vengeance, which is the indignation of an
enemy requiting.

Yea the very death which Christ suffered in the body of his flesh, was so
far from being an effect of Gods proper wrath, that it was an increase of
Gods love toward him, and as well the price of our Redemption, as the cause of
all his honor following. John 10.
Therefore the Father loves me (says our Savior) because I lay down my
soul (or life) to take it again. And so much the Prophet foretold, Esa. 53.
Therefore will I give him (says God) a part in many things, and he shall
divide the spoil of (or with) the mighty, because he poured out his soul (or
life) unto death. Which the Apostle shows to be thus verified in Christ.
Philip. 2.
He humbled himself, being obedient, unto the death, even the death of the
Cross. Wherefore God also highly exalted him, and gave him a name above every
name, that in the name of Jesus every knee should bow; of things celestial,
terrestrial, and infernal, and every tongue confess, that Jesus Christ is the
Lord, to the glory of God the father. All power, honor and judgment, in
heaven, earth, and hell, are therefore delivered over to Christ by God, and all
things subjected under his feet, because he h^bled himself, and was obedient
to his father unto death, even the death of the Cross. Was it then wrath in
God without love, that brought Christ to his death; or rather unspeakable love
in God toward his son, which ouerruled his justice provoked by our sins,
and so highly accepted, and plentifully rewarded the death of Christ, that he
made him LORD over all things and persons in heaven, earth, and hell? to give
grace and peace, mercy and glory to Gods elect by his means and merits; and
to inflict excecation, destruction, and damnation on the wicked both men and
devils by his judgment and sentence? If it were admirable love and favor in
God toward Christ's humane nature to join man's flesh and spirit into the
unity and society of his Sons Divine majesty, what inestimable honor and
glory was it to put the whole government of Gods kingdom in heaven and earth
into Christ's hands, which is the reward that God has allotted to Christ's
obedience and patience showed on the Altar of the Cross? So that the learned
may soon perceive, I work no Defenc. pa. 19.
deceit nor mistaking to the Reader through the ambiguitie of this word, THE
WRATH OF GOD, as you pretend; but you wandering in the desert of your own
devises, have fashioned to your self a fardle of phrases, as Gods proper, and
improper wrath, (...) mere justice, and such like, and under the generality
and uncertainty of these words you hide your head; and when you are required
to make some proof, and show some parts of Gods wrath out of the Scripture,
which Christ suffered, besides the death of the Cross, and pains thereof, you
answer; to Defenc. pa. 17. l. 15.
particularize or to specify the parts of Gods wrath, which Christ felt, as I
will you to do, what madness were it in men to attempt, and what folly is it
in any to require. Indeed it would be madness in you to attempt it, for
thereby you should plainly disclose that absurdity and impiety which now is
cloaked under general and doubtful terms; but those that be godly will never
suffer their faith to be framed by your phrases, except you show warrant of
Gods word, both whence you collect them, and what you mean by them; neither of
which you do, nor can do with any truth in these points now in question.

For first by what Scripture prove you that Christ did or must suffer the
proper The Scriptures never mention that Christ suffered Gods wrath.
wrath of God or the punishment and vengeance of sin? I following the sense
and words of the Scriptures, and of Divines both old and new, which make
shame, sorrow, pain and death in this life the effects of Gods wrath punishing
sin in Adam, and his offspring at his fall, did by consequent ( a specie ad
genus affirmative) gather, and in that respect confess, that Christ suffering
those things on the Cross, suffered the wrath of God, and due punishment of
sin in this life: but you tell us now, the Scriptures in that point speak
most improperly, you have found out that Gods wrath signifies properly the
pains of the damned, and those Christ suffered for our sins. True it is, and
long since by me Sermon. pa. 131. conclus. pa. 243.
avouched, that Gods wrath against sin extends to all the pains and
punishments of Soul and body, as well in hell as on earth; and in comparison
of the terrible torments of hell fire, the pains and punishments of the
faithful in this life may be called, and accounted rather the Sermon. p. 133.
chastisements of a Father, then the rigor of a Judge; but since you refuse
that sense of Gods wrath, which I collected from the Scriptures as very
improper, take no advantage of my confession, and let Gods wrath stand in your
sense either for Gods displeasure against the person offending, or for the
vengeance of sin executed on the wicked and damned; I ask you now by what
authority of holy Scripture can you prove, that Christ suffered Gods proper
wrath, or his wrath at all? I recall not my former Resolution, which I take to
be sober and sound; but you rejecting it as improper and deceitful, let us see
how you prove by the Scriptures that Christ suffered Gods wrath, which you so
much presume, and make the chief pillour of all your procedings. In your late
defense with shame enough, you yield at last, that this Defenc. pa. 16. l. 12.
word HELL is not literally and expressly applied to Christ's sufferings in the
Scriptures; you must likewise yield, by your leave, that this speech, the wrath
of God, is not literally nor expressly affirmed of Christ's sufferings in all the
Scriptures.

That Esaias. 53.
he was wounded for our transgressions, and torn (or trodden under feet) for
our iniquities, and we healed by his stripes; as also that he was afflicted and
oppressed, and bare our iniquities, and poured out his soul unto death, the
Prophet Esaias witnesses; that he Math. 20. Ioh 18.
drank of the Cup, which his Father gave him, the Evangelists mention; and the
Apostle says, he was Romans 4.
delivered, and 1. Cor. 15.
died for our sins according to the Scriptures; but none of these express or
infer that he suffered the proper wrath of God, or full punishment and
vengeance of sin; which are the phrases placed for the groundworke of all
your discourse, though no way proved by any show of Scripture. The words used
generally by the holy Ghost to express Christ's sufferings (besides the former)
import that he gave himself for us to be the Ephesians. 5.
sacrifice, the 1. Cor. 6.
price, and the 1. Timoth 6.
ransom of our deliverance. All which words note no wrath conceived against
him, nor vengeance executed on him; but rather the exceeding love and favor of
God toward him, as the only Sacrifice that God would accept; the only price
that God did esteem, the only ransom that God would receive for the sin of
the world. This Sacrifice was his body, this price was his blood, this ransom
was his death. Hebr. 10.
We are sanctified by the offering of the body of Jesus once made. 1. Cor. 6.
Ye are bought with a price ^th Paul, that is, 1. Petri. 1.
ye were redcemed with the precious blood of Christ, says Peter. For Ephesians. 1.
we have redemption in him by his blood; And Hebr. 9.
he is the mediator of the new testament, through death, for the ransom of
the transgressions in the former testament, So that by the sacrifice of his
body, price of his blood, and ransom of his death, he has made a most full
recompense, satisfaction, and redemption for the sins of the world: and
consequently the punishment which he sustained, 1. Petri 2.
when he bare our sins in his body on the tree, was the full and perfect
Hebr. 1.
purgation, and 1. Ioh. 2.
propitiation of our sins; full not in the degrees and parts of condemnation
and vengeance due to sin, which the damned do suffer, as you falsely and
absurdly insinuate, but full in price and force of Redemption and deliverance
from sin; for so much, as Gods holiness is highly pleased with the obedience,
Gods glory greatly advanced by the humility, and Gods justice fully satisfied
with the submission and patience of his Son on the Cross.

More then this if you will urge on the person of Christ, as needful for our
Redemption, first prove it, and then profess it at your pleasure; otherwise if
you boldly and vainly presume it, your addle and idle words can not prejudice
the settled and undoubted principles of the Christian faith warranted by the
word of God, and fully received by the Church of Christ even from the
beginning. To your maimed and ruinous foundation that Christ must suffer all
and the very same punishment, wages, and vengeance of sin, which the damned
do suffer, and we should have suffered, had we not been excused by his
suffering it for us; I have plainly and sadly answered I know not how often, it
is a false and lewd imagination; and so impious, that your self dare not in
your late Defense offer it to view, without many bridles to hold it from
horrible blasphemy. But (Sir discourser) why coin you conclusions in
christian Religion, that must have three or four exceptions to save them from
open impiety? and why see you not that your special reseruations overthrow
the truth of your own assertion? for where the true and proper punishment,
wages and vengeance of sin in all the wicked is spiritual, corporal, and
eternal death; in your limitations at last, which you forgate at first, you
except Christ from spiritual death, which is sin, and from eternal death
which is damnation of body and soul to hell fire; and yet you still affirm,
that Christ suffered the full and proper punishment, wages, and vengeance of
sin, as though these two, spiritual and eternal death, were no parts of the
punishment and vengeance due to sin; or these being excepted as unfit for
Christ to suffer; you could truly say Christ suffered the full and proper
punishment, and vengeance of sin, which consists of these three kinds of
death.

And who but you would send us such headless and senseless resolutions in
Divinity as these are; I Defenc. pa. 13. l. 22.
affirm that Christ suffered all gods proper wrath, and vengeance for sin, I
say all that the very damned do suffer, namely so described and limited as is
above said. And again, Defenc. pa. 12. l. 1.
He suffered from Gods hand even as the damned do; namely in these points
which are both possible and reasonable. Were you some new Evangelist, or
vpstart Apostle, it were even enough for you to refer Christ's sufferings to
your description and your limitation without any farther authority; but when
you take upon you with your bare word to broch so many novelties in Christian
religion, without one line or letter of holy writ to uphold your dreams and
devices, who can choose but deride your folly? You pin men's faiths for the
ground of their salvation to your descriptions and your limitations, to
possibility and reason measured by your rule without any text or title of
Scripture to warrant your words; and then you think the maine question is
profoundly and fully handled; but your sober and wise Reader will presently
find the lamenesse or lewdness of your grand conclusion. For if Christ's
person not only by your possibility and reason, but by the soundness of
truth, and sincerenesse of faith must be exempted from sin which is the
death of the soul, and from damnation which is everlasting death; why write
you so boldly that Christ must suffer all Gods proper wrath, even all that the
damned do suffer; whereas apparently those two being excepted, Christ could
suffer no kind of death but only a corporal? And if by your so describing and
so limiting the matter, you draw Christ within the stain or guilt of sin, or
within the compass or danger of damnation; hope you to find any Christian
ears so patient that will endure that monstrous and sacrilegious indignity?

[But you will invent a new hell for Christ, which shall have the Defenc. pa.
13. l. 14.
substance, but not the circumstance of damnation, and shall be inflicted Ibid.
pa. 12. l. 32.
by Gods immediate hand properly, ye a only in the very soul of Christ, l.
27. God can do more than he will.
which Gods own infinite wrathful power and justice can inflict for
satisfaction, where and how it pleases him.] The question (good Sir) is not of
Gods power what he can do, but of his will revealed in his Word, and of his
promise performed in the person of his son for our salvation, and testified
by the mouths and pens of the Prophets and Apostles, that were guided by his
holy spirit to speak and write the truth. I make no doubt, but God can create
another heaven, another earth, and another hell, as quickly and as easily as he
did these that now are; yet if any man affirm that God will so do, or has so
done, I must hold him for an Infidel, because he gainsayth Gods truth, and
belieth Gods will by pretending Gods power. Talk not therefore what God can
do; show rather by the word and witness of truth what God has done; to that
must we trust, to that are you bound, and from that are you slipped. You have not
so much as any color of Scripture, for these desperate novelties and vanities,
I will give them no worse words, lest you complain of my bitterness; and if
any man be but so wise, as to let your prove these things before he believe
them, he is safe enough for ever admitting them, I may spare my pains in
refuting them; yet because destitute of all other help, you appeal to
possibility and reason, to fourbish your new invention of another hell, let us
see how handsomely you hale it onward.

Defenc. pa. 8. l. 12.
[ By the law of our creation as we are men, having a soul besides our body,
so our soul has in it a threefolde faculty of suffering pains. First that
which is proper and immediate justly so called: proper, because it is proper
only to reasonable and immortal spirits. Immediate two ways; First, because
it can and does receive an impression of sorrow and pains made from God only
by and in it self, without any outward bodily means thereunto. Secondly, it
is also an immediate punishment or else correction of sin: it comes not for
any other cause at all. So that thus we mean, when we speak of the souls
proper and immediate suffering. The souls second faculty of suffering pains,
is not proper, but common to us with beasts: namely, that which is by sympathy
and communion with and from the body. A third kind of painful suffering the
soul has: namely, her vehement and strong affections are painful, whether
they be good or evil, as zeal, love, compassion, pity, care, etc. neither
are these immediately for sin, whether punishments or corrections: neither are
they punishments, or corrections at all properly in themselves: accidentally
they may be, when they grow so strong that they pain and grieve the soul.]

If the walls and roof of your new hell rise no fairer, nor stand no faster
then your foundation does; a weak puff of wind will blow all away. If a man
should shortly answer you, That the soul of man has but one faculty of
suffering, though the means be diverse from which and by which she suffers
pains, and that the means be far more than you number (as namely she may
suffer pain from her own understanding and will, yea from devils and from the
fire of hell, besides the means which you reckon, to wit, her sympathy with
the body, her vehement affections, and the immediate hand of God when and
where pleases him) your building is at an end; you can go no farther; you have
neither Divinity, nor Philosophy, possibility, nor reason to support that
which you would so feign infer. But let us view your specialties.

[ The soul (you say) by the law of our creation has in it a threefold
faculty of suffering pain.] The soul indeed by her creation has a triple
reference to good and evil; to wit, her apprehension and distinction of
either; her inclination and motion to either; and her impression and passion
from both; and for the performance of these she has sundry and several parts
and faculties. For as man was made to know God, and love God, and after a time
of obedience perfectly to enjoy God, who is only and wholly good; so had he
three special powers and faculties in his soul answerable to these three
purposes of the Creator; and yet capable of the contrary, which was the want
of all good, if he fell from God. And therefore by the power of his
understanding man might discern good and evil; by the liberty of his will ^e
might elect and embrace either, and by the passibilitie of his soul he might
feel and suffer the impression and sequel of both by joy or pain, which God
in his justice allotted to be the end and wages of liking and doing good or
evil. And because for the service and safety of his body, and for the
duties and actions of this life, man was to use earthly things, and also to
need outward means for hearing the word, and viewing the works of God, there
were given him senses to perceive, and sensitive motions to desire things
needful and delightful for him, as also to dislike the evil of penury,
pain, and sorrow that should be occurrent to his senses. In which the wisdom
of God ordained, that what seemed good to man's imagination should provoke his
desire with love and delight, and what seemed evil, should offend him with
some touch of griese; the superior and spiritual powers of the soul being
given as Judges to censure, restrain and oue^rule the sensitive delights and
motions, where they swarued from the true rule of good and evil, which was
only Gods will revealed, or written in the heart of man. The respects and
diversities of good and evil offered in general to the sense and
understanding of man, were sanctity, sufficiency, and felicity with their
contraries, and likewise the general passions and impressions of good and
evil received in the soul, were hope and joy for good approaching or
posfessed; and fear and pain for the imminence or presence of evil, as also
for the departure or loss of good, in whose place evil, which is the
privation of good, necessarily succeeded. The passions then of evil (for true
joy and hope thereof, are rather perfections than passions of the soul) are
fear and grief; and the means by which they are wrought in the soul, and
brought to the soul, are naturally the senses and affections, understanding
and will; and supernaturally the hand of God, or such external means as God
has provided to punish the soul.

So that first your making a threefolde faculty in the soul of suffering
pains, is an ignorant conceit in you, as if the faculty of suffering pains
were multiplied, because the means inflicting pains are many. If I should
say, The soul has in it a thre^fold faculty of understanding, for that it
perceives many things by the senses of her body; many things by her own
light and remembrance; and many things by the immediate revelation of Gods
spirit; might not wise men instly deride me, knowing the power and faculty of
understanding to be but one and the selfsame in man, though the means be
diverse by which that faculty is informed? Likewise the will of man is carried
sometimes by the eye, sometimes by the ear at the persuasion of others,
sometimes by her own affections, sometimes by fear, sometimes by reason,
sometimes by grace; shall we therefore say the soul has in it a sixfold
faculty of liking and electing that which is offered her? or rather it is one
and the same power of will, which is moved and often times ruled by these six
means; partly from the body, partly from her self, partly from others, and
partly from God. Even so the passibility of the soul, or the faculty of
suffering pain, is but simple and single in the soul, how many soever the
means be, by which she receives the impression of pain: otherwise you might
as well say, The soul has contrary faculties of suffering, because she
feels contrary impressions of joy and pain sometimes striving together,
sometimes succeeding each the other; but the soul as she is furnished with her
faculties to discern, and elect good and evil, so is she framed to receive
the impressions of either which are contrary; and in that respect capable of
joy and pain in this life, howsoever in the next life, the soul shall be
perpetually fastened to the one or to the other without alteration or change.

As you confound the faculty of suffering pain with the causes offering, and
the The agents and means by which the soul suffers pain.
means bringing the impression of pain to the soul; so do you neither fully
number the agents from which, nor the means by which pain is inflicted on the
soul, on which you ground your three kinds of the souls suffering of pains.
If the soul were not passible, that is, capable of joy and pain, she could
neither be rewarded for well doing, nor punished for evil. But God has
created her receiuable of both, that as she should do good or evil in his
sight, so she might suffer and feel that which should be good or evil, to
wit, joyous or grievous even in her own sense and judgment. Of both, (I mean
joy and pain as they are rewards of well and evil doing) God alone is in this
life, and the next, the supreme ordainer, appointer, effecter, worker, and
distributer, all other agents and means whatsoever serving only his will,
expressing his power, and obeying his commandment; yet that does not hinder,
but in the punishing of his own here, or of his enemies in this world and the
next, God may and does use instruments and means, whom and what pleases him
to perform his will. For example in this life, besides Gods agents to punish,
which are Angels, men, devils, and all other creatures; the means which he
has ordained to impresse pain in the soul, are as many as there be
intellectiue or sensitive powers and abilities in the soul to foresee,
discern, or remember whatsoever evil past, present, or to come, on us, or on
others whom we love; or to perceive, or desire any good which is lost, lacking,
or likely to be taken from us, or from others whom we regard. So that not only
sympathy with and from the body, and vehement and strong affections, of
zeal, love, compassion, pity, and care, which you reckon, do pain the soul;
but the eyes, and ears, upon a thousand occasions, when the body is not
touched, bring fear and grief to the heart; yea the understanding,
remembrance, conscience, and will (which you utterly forget) do oftener offend
and afflict the soul even of the gody, than either the body, or the
affections do. And in the world to come (which you purposely skip to make way
for your new hell) besides the loss of glory, sting of conscience, and shame
of sin, the Scriptures assure us that utter darkness, ruthfullwailing,
horror of devils, torment of fire, despair of case shall afflict the bodies
and souls of the damned with intolerable and eternal anguish, as when we come
to speak thereof, we shall more largely prove.

A third error in you is, that you make your second kind of the souls
suffering pain, which is by sympathy and communion with and from the body,
not to be proper to man, but Defenc. p. 8. l. 23.
common to us with beasts; wherein you bewray either your understanding not to
be great, or your intent to be vilde. For though beasts have bodies and senses,
as men have, and the pain of their bodies pierces and affects the sensitive
parts and powers of life in them; yet have they no souls I trust, which can be
affected the pain of their bodies, as men have. I hope you be not so deep in
your distillation of hell, that you will bestow souls on beasts to make them
liable to your newfound pains of hell; but in men their immortal spirits are
and shall be afflicted by their bodies and senses both here, and in hell, when
the full punishment of their sins comes to be laid upon them. Job. 19.
How long will you vex my soul, says Job. Psalm. 105.
The ^on entered into his soul, says the Psalmist of Joseph's fetters. Eccles.
1.
All is vanity, and affliction of the spirit, says the Preacher. Luc. 2.
A sword shall pierce thy soul, says Simeon to Marie. Then for the soul or
spirit of man to be vexed, afflicted, pierced, and pained by and from the
body, is proper to man, and no way common to us with beasts, which have no
souls: and that kind of suffering pain which is without the body, is not
proper to the soul, by reason it is common to men with devils, who have no
bodies, and yet suffer pain as well by their understanding and will, as by
external means appointed of God to punish the damned both souls and devils.
Wherefore your terms of the souls proper and immediate suffering, which
before I called unsalted and unsettled, and you say are Defenc. p. 9. l. 6.
easy to be understood and necessarily to be used in this question, as you now
have declared and delivered them, are false and absurd. For no kind of
suffering pain is proper to the soul of man, but only that which is with the
body, or by the body; the other kind of suffering pain by understanding and
will, and by hellfire, being common to men with devils; which have no bodies,
and are no souls, no more than souls in heaven are Angels. S. Austen truly
says, August. 'retracta. l. 1. cap. 11.
Angelos habere animas, nusquam me legisse in diuinis eloquijs canonicisque
recolo. That Angels have souls I do not remember I have any where read in the
divine and canonical Scriptures. Since then devils have neither bodies nor
souls, though they be spirits; and beasts though they have bodies, yet have
they no souls to be pained by their bodies; it is evident that the piercing
and afflicting of the spirit and soul of man by the body, and from the body,
is the only kind of suffering which is proper to the soul of man; the
spiritual affliction of the soul by her understanding and will, and by the
torment of perpetual and eternal fire, being common to men with the reprobate
Angels.

To the immediate suffering of the soul in hell, which is another of your
newfound Good affections of love and zeal are not painful.
fancies, I will immediately come, if first I touch an error or two in your
former words; to let the Reader see, that you are unlike to lay sure grounds in
faith, when you know not the plain rules of Nature. A third kind of painful
suffering (you say) the soul has: namely her vehe^ent and strong affections
are painful, whether they be good or evil, as zeal, love, etc. I pray you
Sir, how come zeal, and specially love, when they be good, to be painful
affections in your Calender? S. John says, 1. John 4.
There is no fear in love; and gives this reason; for fear has
painfulnesse, presupposing it for a prinple, that love has no pain: which is
most true; because we delight in that which we love; and so love having no
pain in it, but delight, it has consequently no fear, by reason fear has
pain, which love has not. But if it be strong (you will say) it paineth the
soul. If love bring delight, the stronger the love that is good, the greater
the delight; and so the strength of love does not increase, but exclude all
pain. Which is also S. John's rule, 1. John 4.
Perfect love casts out fear, which is the least impression of pain that
may be. And where love that is good, is strongest and most fervent, as namely
in heaven, there is no place for pain; and in earth when we are commanded to
Luc. 10.
love the Lord our God, with all our heart, with all our soul, with all our
strength, and our neighbor as our selves, must we be wholly delighted, or
partly grieved with God, and our neighbor. The like is to be said for zeal,
which is nothing but the heat or feruencie of love. Accidentally they may turn
us to pain, when our godly zeal and love are hindered, or crossed by the
wicked. But the thing that grieueth us in those cases is not our love, but the
lewdness of the wicked, despising or wronging that which we zealously love.
And so may all virtues pain us. What just man is not displeased with
injustice? What liberal mind is not moved at avarice? What valiant heart is
not grieved with cowardice? The like we shall find in all other virtues; even
an inward offense at their contraries, and yet no wise man will say that
virtues are pains and punishments of the soul.

[Of Defenc. p. 8. l 33.
compassion, and pity, among the rest you say accidentally they may be
punishments when they grow so strong that they grieve the soul.] As though
there could be any compassion or pity which does not grieve the soul. What is
pity but sorrow at the sight of another man's misery? and what is compassion but
a vehement passion or grief of the heart for his misery whom we dearly love?
so that there can be neither compassion nor pity, without sorrow and grief of
heart; neither are they at any time punishments if they be good, but rather
Christian duties and virtues. The miseries of those whom we love, may be
punishments unto us; and our compassion on them, if they be wicked, may turn
to be vicious, and so be a punishment because it is immoderate, where it should
be temperate; as we read of David's excessive compassion on Absalon his lewd
and rebellious son. These be errors enough in so few words, but these are
nothing to those that follow in favor of the souls immediate suffering from
the hand of God himself without any instruments or inferior means. I might
resume your former words of the souls immediate suffering from God alone; but
because you heap up a great deal of rubbish to the same purpose much like the
other, or rather much worse than the other; I think it best to rid all
together.

Defenc p. 9. l. 9.
Thirdly, we must also note, that God himself is always and evermore the
principal and proper punisher when the soul suffers pains after the first
manner, that is in her proper and What suffering is immediate from God.
immediate faculty of suffering. And that is always immediately for sin
also, not for any other cause at all. Fourthly, God himself therefore was
thus the principal, and only proper punisher of Christ, as he sustained the
punishment of our sins. The devils and wicked men his persecuters did their
parts also indeed for other ends, but yet they were all as instruments only,
and used by God unto his own end, namely that Christ might pay hereby a just
price and full satisfaction for our sins. It was then the Almighty and most
just God himself in his severe wrath against our sin, that principally and
properly inflicted on Christ the pains and punishments, which he as our
surety suffered for the paying of our ransom. As it is written, Esa. 53.
The Lord LAID UPON HIM THE PUNISHMENT OF US ALL.

Your phrases be so fresh and new, that your self can scant tell what to make
of them, or how to expound them. In these words, and those which go but the
next side before, you set us down three interpretations of the souls
immediate suffering not agreeing the one with the other. Defenc. p. 8. l. 8.
All suffering of pain, is (you say) from God, either from him alone, or also
from his instruments and inferior means. This presently you call immediately
or mediatly; and this comes nearest to the sense of the word, if it came as
near to the truth of the matter. For what is immediate, but without all
means? The souls first manner of suffering pain then (as you say) is
immediate, that is Defenc. p. 8. l. 8.
from God only; you must implie without all instruments or inferior means
whatsoever. For that kind of suffering which has any means or instruments,
is mediate, not immediate from God alone. Why then in your second
interpretation of immediate, do you not exclude all instruments and means, but
only outward bodily means? For thus you say in the second place, It is justly
called Defenc. p. 8. l. 18.
immediate, because it can and does receive an impression of sorrow and pain
made from God, only by and in it self without any outward bodily means
thereunto. Here you exclude not all means, but outward bodily means. And
when Satan led Saul for fear, and Achitophel for anger, and Judas for sorrow
to despair, and in fine to dispatch themselves; this desperation wrought in
them by Satan, was by your doctrine immediate from God, because the devil was
the doer thereof, without any outward bodily means. And likewise, when by
hatred, rage, fear, and fury Satan afflicts the children of disobedience,
in whom he works; this you will call the immedia^e hand of God, because he
uses a spirit, and not a body for his instrument. And yet doubting how this
can be maintained, for that God uses men as well as devils to prove and punish
both his own and his enemies, you fall to a third sense of immediate, where
you make God alone the principal; the rest to be only instruments; and so that
is immediately from God, which is principally from God, what means or
instruments soever he use, bodily, or ghostly, men or devils. And in this sense
all pains and punishments whatsoever, wheresoever, by whomsoever, are
immediately, that is, principally from God, and by consequent all three kinds of
suffering pain in the soul which you put, and what means soever else can be
named of inflicting and impressing pain in the soul are immediate from God,
that is, they come chiefly from him, whose power, will, and judgment the rest
demonstrate or execute. And thus for want of truth and lack of understanding,
whiles you labor to expound the souls immediate suffering of pain from God,
you utterly subvert and overthrow all that you would say.

[Againe, God himself (you say) is always and evermore the principal and
proper punisher, when the soul suffers pains after the first manner, that is
in her proper and immediate faculty of suffering.] Keep your manifold
faculties to procure you more wit; the soul has but one faculty to suffer
and feel pain, how many soever the means be from which or by which she may
receive pain; it shall suffice to call it the first manner of the souls
suffering pain. When you say God is the principal and proper punisher, what
mean you by punisher? Amongst men the Judge determines and pronounces what
shall be done, the hangman executes the sentence upon the condemned, and both
in their kinds are punishers. The like appears in Gods judgments. God alone
is the decreer, appointer and commander; though he v^e angels, men, devils, and
all other creatures to execute his will for the punishing of sin; or
delivering of his servants from the hands of the wicked. This is the difference
betwixt an earthly and the heavenly Judge; that men give to men right, and not
strength to execute their judgments, but God as he gave to all his creatures
all the strength which by nature they have, when he first made them; so he
uses their natural strength which he gave, and gives them farther power and
force, where need is, fully to accomplish his will and commandment: yea
farther, he uses the wills and forces of men and devils for ends and effects
to them unknown, and in them unrighteous, but to him most just and holy. So
that God is the only punisher as a Judge to decree, appoint, and command what
shall befall every man for sin; he is also the onli^ giver and supporter of
all power and force, when any punishment is executed either by the natural
strength of any creature, or by strength and might above nature; but that God
is always and evermore the executioner, when the soul suffers otherwise
than by her body, or by her affections, or that he was the principal and
only proper executioner of Christ as he suffered for our sins; or that in
hell (which is your vpshot) God is the immediate executioner and tormentor of
souls and devils, those are rather sick men's dreams or mad men's fits, than
sober and Christian verities.

And in plain reason how agrees this word principal, either with proper or
with immediate, both which are joined by you with it? Where God is principal,
there uses he other means and instruments besides himself, and his own
hand. Principal has always accessaries and instruments, and where they
intermeddle, they use not Gods immediate hand, but such means as they are able
and apt to guide. So that when God is principal punisher, he is neither proper
nor immediate punisher, but uses the service and force of his creatures to
perform his appointment; and when he is either the proper, or immediate
executour of his own will, he neither needs, nor uses his creatures. And
here the third time you play with the word proper, but very improperly, as you
did twice before; first with Gods proper wrath, then with the souls proper
faculty of suffering, now with the proper punisher, which can no way be
matched with principal and applied to God without a palpable absurdity. For
refer principal whether you will, to the determination or to the execution
of Gods will and judgment; to say that God is the principal determiner of his
own will, is a wicked speech. For who is Gods counselor to advise him, or
associate to assist him; that God should be principal and others concurrent
with him to promote his will with their consents; or restrain it with their
dislikes? God is not only a Judge of the world, but the sole Judge thereof; to
make him principal and not sole therein, is to impart his right, and glory
unto others, which he will not endure. We shall see, honor, and admire, and
with heart and voice magnify the righteousness of Gods Judgment that shall
be given by his Son; ^n which sense it is said, 1. Cor. 6.
The Saints shall judge the world; yea, we shall judge the Angels, but that is
by submitting our wills to his, and by glorifying his judgment, as in heaven
his Saints always do, not by clayming voices with him. There is then no Judge
of the soul but only God, and to say he is principal Judge thereof, is
apparently to dishonor him. Will you refer principal to the execution of
Gods judgments? then he must have some others to conioyne with him in common;
and they must use such means as lie in their power; and so God is neither the
proper nor immediate punisher of the soul, where he is the principal. And
when it pleases him to take upon him the chief execution of his own
judgment, what cause is there he should call assistants unto him? Does he
lack wisdom, or power, that his creatures must aid and help him? I wish
you to weigh your words better, before you wade in things above your height.

Your words are absurd, your matter is more absurd, and the proofs you bring
for it are most absurd of all. To bring Christ's soul within the compass of
hell pains, you flash out the fire of hell as a fable, and turn out of
service the rest of the torments there, namely reiection from the kingdom of
heaven, the sting of Conscience, confusion of Sin, horror of darkness and
devils, despair of ease and such like, as no pains, or at least as no
substantial pains of hell: you suppose a pain which you imagine comes from
the immediate power of God, upon the souls of the wicked as well in earth, as
in hell, and so not only you make God the tormentor of souls and devils in
hell with his own immediate hand, but you so aggrauate the pain thereof,
with fiery words, that the reprobate may fully feel it in this world, and yet
it neither does end their lives, nor waste their bodies, which a pange of the
stone, or a fit of an Ague will do. The best proof you bring for all this, is
a bold face, and big words, wherewith you bid all the world NOTE it is so.
But Sir, if charity did not stay me, I should NOTE you rather for an idle
talker, then for a booke-maker, which think it lawful for you to allegorize
all that the Scripture mentions or threatens of hell; and in the end broach
out of the heat of your own head a Chymysticall hell, as well in this world
as in the next; and so little regard either the truth of Gods speech, or the
faith of the whole Church, or the consciences of all good men; that without any
further trouble or trial WE MVST NOTE, you say so. Such archers, such arrows;
such cheapmen, such chafe; a man of your pitch will hardly be brought to any
other pass.

The bottom of your building (for it deserves not the name of a foundation,
it is so weak and rotten) is this, which I wish the Reader to NOTE, it is so
notable stuff; That where there are but three sorts of the souls suffering
pain, as you conceive; the first by the immediate hand of God, the second by
sympathy with the body, and the third by her vehement and strong affections;
The affections (you say) are neither Defen. p. 8. l. 29.
immediately for sin, nor punishments at all properly in themselves: the
souls second faculty of suffering by sympathy with the body, you affirm,
is Defen. pa 8. l. 23.
not proper, but common to us with beasts: the first therefore in your conceit
is the Ibid. l. 37.
proper and principal humane suffering for sin; which Christ must needs
feel being a Ibid. l. 38.
man made of God to suffer for all our sins. Of this wandering and halting
division I have spoken before. It is evident the soul may suffer pain from
and with the body; and from and by her own powers and faculties of
understanding, will, sense, and affections, and from the hand of God immediate
or mediate, that is using other means than are beforenamed to punish the soul.

That the pain of the body paineth the soul of man there can be no question,
natural sorrow for our selves and others, when the body is not touched nor
pained, every woman and child can give testimony. Threats, rebukes, evil
reports taken in at the ears; dangers, distresses, and losses foreseen or
seen in our selves and others, which must needs trouble and grieve the soul,
are no news in any condition or person. The affections which are both ungodly
and unruly, are so many blasts and

Of these six means, besides the immediate hand of God to inflict pain on
the soul for the punishment of sin; it pleases you (Sir Discourser) to skip
four; and the other two in effect to deny. Affections (you say) are neither
punishments nor corrections at all properly in themselves; and suffering by
sympathy from and with the body, is common (as you avouch) to us with beasts,
and is no proper humane suffering; because in your judgment your first kind
of suffering from the immediate hand of God alone is the proper humane
suffering, which for that cause your self call the souls Defenc. p. 8. l. 22.
proper and immediate suffering. But what if in all this you speak not one
true word? what if the affections that be evil be properly punishments of
sin? what if the souls suffering, from and with the body, be the true and
proper humane suffering? what if God use not his immediate hand in tormenting
souls; but having ordained and appointed means by his wisdom and power,
commits sinful souls to be punished by those instruments and means which
he with his hand has prepared, and in his word expressed? Do you not show your
self a deep Divine, that prove points of faith by open falsities; and heap
up errors by the dozens, binding them with your bare word, and obtruding them
to the world as oracles lately slipped from heaven? but go to the parts, and
first to the affections, which you affirm are no punishments, whether they be
good or evil.

The affections of the soul that be good, as the love of God, the zeal of his
glory, and hope of his mercy and truth, are the special gifts and graces of
Gods spirit, and so far from paining the soul, that they breed exceeding
comfort and joy in the Holieghost. The affections that are e^ill are not only
the rage and reward of sin, but inflict as great anguish as may be felt in
this life. Concupiscence which is the root and nurse of all evil affections in
us, be they sensitive or intellectiue; what is it, but the inordinate and
intemperate desire and love of our own wills and pleasures, despising and
hating whatsoever resists or hinders our devices or delights, yea though it
be the will and hand of God himself? this corruption of the soul by sin,
which is now natural in us all, whence came it, but from and for the
punishment of the first man's sin? what is it but the very poison of sin?
and whether tends it, but to withstand and refuse all grace, that men
rejecting God, and rejected of God, may run headlong to the final and
eternal vengeance of their sin? It is no small punishment of sin for men
to be left to the Romans 1.
desires of their own hearts, and to be given over to vile affections; which
the Apostle calls the reward of their error, and even the fullness of all
unrighteousness: which make men the servants of sin, whiles they Tit 3.
wait on lusts, and diverse pleasures, which 1. Pet. 2.
fight against the soul, by Romans 7.
leading it captive unto the law of sin, which is in the members. And if you
doubt whether they pain the soul or no, look but on their names or their
effects, and you shall soon be out of doubt. Anger, disdain, despair,
dislike, detestation, fear, sorrow, rag^, fury for earthly things, can these
be so much as conceived or named without evident impression or mention of
pain? yea the fairest of our affections, and those which at first flarter us
most, as love, desire, and pleasure. (I speak still of evil and unlawful) do
they not quickly fail, sourly leave, and sharply vex with their
remembrance and repentance the greatest seekers and owners of them? In all
these worldly desires and delights S. Austens rule is generally true. August.
deciuitat. Dei. l. 21. cap. 26.
Quod sine illiciente amore non habuit, sine vrente dolor non perdet. He that
kept them not without alluring love, loses them with afflicting grief. As for
the intellectiue passions of the soul, which are the trembling at Gods wrath,
the fear of his power, and despair of his favor, besides the shame of sin,
grief of heart, and horror of hell; what torments they breed in the condemned
consciences of the wicked, the godly may partly judge, by that which they
sometimes taste, notwithstanding their present recourse to the mercies and
promises of God in Christ. So that evil affections, as well intellectiue as
sensitive, be punishments of sin, and painful to the soul; howsoever your
cogitations (Sir Discourser) be otherwise humored.

Concerning the souls suffering from and with the body, which you say is
common The souls suffering from and with the body is not common to beasts.
to us with beasts: if the soul do not consider for what cause, at whose hand,
and to what end she suffers; as also how she may be freed, and what thanks is
due to her deliverer, she may be well likened to the Horse and Mule in whom is
no understanding: but the brutish dullness of some earthly minded men, does not
make this kind of suffering not to be properly humane, which God from the
beginning did, and does use to all his servants and saints (his own son not
excepted); and whereby God works in all his children correction, probation,
perfection, preparation to glory, which are things most proper to men, and no
way communicable unto beasts. Heb. 12.
God scourges every son whom he receives, and yet he uses him not like a
beast. 2. Tim. 3.
All that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution, not common
to them with beasts. Iam. 1.
Count it an exceeding joy (says James) when you fall into diverse tentations,
knowing that the trial of your faith brings forth patience. Now to impart
any of these things to beasts, were very strange Divinity. Math. 5.
Blessed are they (says our Savior) that suffer persecution for
righteousness sake, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. Shall men be
blessed, and enjoy Gods kingdom for suffering as the beasts do? 1. Pet. 4.
If any suffer as a Christian, let him not be ashamed. He that puts no
difference betwixt the sufferings of beasts and Christians, is unworthy to be
a Christian. 1. Pet. 5.
The same afflictions (says Peter) are accomplished in your brethren, which
are in the world. If you list (Sir Discourser) to take beasts for your
brethren, you may make your sufferings like to theirs, or common to them;
otherwise they that are men, and specially Christian men, must acknowledge
that this kind of paining the soul by the body, is proper to men, and common
neither to beasts, nor to devils. 1. Cor. 10.
There has no tentation taken you (says Paul) but such as is humane. What is
humane, but common to all men, and only to men; and so common neither to
beasts, nor to any other creature, but proper to men? Take back therefore your
vain imagination, and more foolish collection, that the suffering of the soul
by her body is not properly humane, because it is common to men with beasts,
and learn hereafter that beasts having no soul, much less any graces or
promises of God in this life or the next, can not communicate with men in that
kind of suffering, which the soul feels from her body, and whereby she is
chastised, proved, perfected in this life, and prepared for the glory of the
life to come.

[At least yet you think the souls immediate suffering from the hand of God
alone, is the Defenc. p 8. l. 37.
proper and principal humane suffering.] If there be any such suffering of
pain, as you imagine, from the immediate hand of God alone, it is the proper
and principal suffering of devils, and not of men. For humane properly it can
not be, unless it touch the whole man, that is as well body as soul, whereof
man consists. And therefore the r^ll punishment of man's sin in earth and in
hell, contains the torments of both parts; without either of which, there is
no proper, nor principal humane suffering; though the soul after death be
aff^icted for a season till the body be raised and punished with he^; which is
the true humane suffering for sin after this life, because it is
everlastingly allotted to the wicked for sin, by the most righteous judgment
of God. But how proo^e you (Sir Discourser) that the soul of man suffers
sensible and absolute pain. I mean not depending on her own cogitations or
actions, from the immediate hand of God? what Scripture, what example have you
for it? It is the maine mortar of your new erected hell; but tempered only
with the water of your own wit; nor Scriptures, nor Fathers do acknowledge
any No proof that God punish^th immediately.
such kind of suffering in hell from the immediate hand of God as you affirm;
yea they expressly avouch the contrary.

From the hand of God without question is all power, and so all punishment,
whether it be here, or in hell; he alone gives force to each creature to
pierce and punish; and he alone made the soul capable of pain from her body,
from her self, and from whatsoever creature should please him to use for the
punishment of the soul. Of this I make no doubt; the hand of God, which is the
power of God, orders* strengthens, sharpeneth, continues, and works, all
pain and punishment both here and elsewhere, for the time and for ever; but
whether he does this by means likewise ordained and appointed by the same
power, either within or without the soul, or by his immediate hand without all
means, this is the question; and reading the Scriptures for this with as good
attention as I could, I find no such thing affirmed in them, or proved by you
in all your Discourse. Touching hell, I sinde the contrary confi^med and
avouched by the manifest and express words of the holy Ghost; and in the
greatest plagues and punishments of this life, the means that God uses are
likewise mentioned in the Scriptures: the immediate hand of God inflicting
pain on the soul no where, that I read, or that you prove, which in so
weighty a cause every wise man will expect at your hands, before he admit your
metaphorical flames of a new found fire, devised by you for the Soul of
Christ, to make it subject to the pains of hell.

That God is the only giver of all grace, by the working of his holy Spirit in
our hearts, without the assistance of any creature to further that action, may
not be doubted of any Christian. John 3.
A man can receive nothing except it be given him from heaven; even from the
Father of lights. (whence) Iam. 1.
comes every good and perfect gift. For which cause the Scriptures call him,
the 1. Pet. 5.
God of all grace, working all in all; and his Spirit, the Spirit of grace, 1.
Cor. 12.
distributing to every man, as pleases him; and yet this division and
operation of grace, which proceeds most powerfully from God alone, is not
always immediate, but depends on the hearing of the word, partaking of the
Sacraments, and imposing of hands, which God uses as means not to help his
power, but to direct and guide our weakness. Otherwise neither man nor Angel
has, or can have any power to touch and turn the heart, or to inspire it with
grace, but only God, who made it and can alter and change it at his pleasure.

As the giving, so the taking away of all good gifts pertaining either to the
use of this life, as prudence, courage, magnanimity, and such like; or to the
furtherance of the li^e to come, as faith, hope, love, and other fruits of Gods
Spirit; depend wholely on Gods will and work: and yet that is no let, but when
God has most justly deprived men of his grace, which should preserve them from
evil, he may and does leave the neglecters and abusers of his grace to be
possessed and ruled by the spirit of 1. John. 4.
error, Zacl. ar. 13.
uncleanness, and Esai. 19.
giddiness, that Ephesians. 2.
works in the children of disobedience, and carries them headlong into all
kind of mischief. Not that God performs any of these things with his
immediate hand, which are wicked and impious; but that by his just judgment he
gives them over, which despise and forsake him, to be a pray to the roaring
Lion, that deuoureth them. Neither is Satan to seek how to lead men
destitute of grace, to all villainy both against themselves and others; since
he can 2. Cor. 4.
blind the minds of unbelievers, distract their Mark 5.
wits, and inflame their hearts with all sorts of raging lusts, and untamed
affections, as he did in Cain, Saul, Achitophel, Judas; and daily does in all
the wicked.

In the outward punishments of this life, where God turns the fury and
violence of his creatures to revenge sin; and the service of men, Angels, and
devils, to pursue the wicked to their destruction, and to chastise his own to
their conversion; the hand of God does every where appear by the Scriptures,
but that is nothing to your immediate suffering of the soul. For first in them
God uses his creatures, as his agents and instruments; and where his immediate
hand may happily be conceived to work without means, there he punishes the
soul by the body, which by your own position is not the proper and immediate
suffering of the soul.

In the fear, shame, and grief, which the soul here conceaueth upon the
denouncing, conuicting, or beholding of her own uncleanness, and the terrible
judgments of God against sin; the power, truth and justice of God are
evident, but not that immediate hand of God, which you imagine. For in this
case God punishes the soul by her self, that is, by her intellectiue or
sensitive faculties, letting her plainly perceive, what joy is lost, and what
vengeance is provided for all the workers of wickedness. The loss of which
bliss, and terror of which vengeance apprehended by outward sense, or inward
intelligence, cannot but mightily grieve and afflict the soul. And the greater
the loss, that is irreuocable; as also the soarer the mischief that is
inevitable, the deeper is the wound, that either of them make in the heart of
man. But this fear and grief, whiles here men live, proceed from the
cogitation and persuasion of the mind and conscience, and not from the
immediate hand of God. And in the world to come the horror of hell and rage of
fire, which God has ordained to punish the soul, shall inflict an
intolerable torment not rising from the minds and wills of the wicked, as in
this world it does, but impressed by an external and violent agent, which is
the means that God has prepared to execute vengeance on men and devils.

How beit in none of all these appears that immediate suffering of the soul
from the hand of God alone, which you so much talk of, and to which you would
so feign subject the soul of Christ to make him suffer the substance of that,
which the damned (according to your dream) do feel in hell. For in your
conceit of the souls immediate suffering from the hand of God, the soul must
only be a patient, and no agent; and God must inflict the pain on the soul
with his own hand, and not by any means without or within the soul; only
the soul must feel and discern the present and inherent pain by her passive
power and faculty, by which she is capable of all pain, whence soever or
howsoever it comes. This kind of suffering you every where affirm, you no
where prove; and that which is most absurd, you presume against the clear
words of the holy Ghost continually naming the fire of hell, and threatening the
wicked with it, to allegorize the Scriptures at your pleasure, and in stead of
fire which God has ordained and armed as a most dreadful means to take
vengeance of sin, you suppose a certain pain, which God with his immediate
hand will inflict on the souls of the damned, and that you make the substance
of hell pains, and fasten it to the soul of Christ for the time, before he
could work our redemption, or suffer the punishment of our sins. But sir
Discourser this is rather dreaming then debating of matters of faith, to
allegorize whatsoever stands in your way, and in stead thereof to imagine
what you please without either proof or pretense out of the word of God; as if
your mouth were the rule of Religion, or the truth of God would vanish by your
fantastical figures and shadows. Wherefore leave your devising and auouching
what best likes your unquiet humor in so weighty matters of man's Redemption,
and tie your tongue if not your heart, to the words of the holy Ghost, that at
least you may bear the show, if not the sense, of a Christian man. For I
utterly deny that God is either the immediate tormentour of souls in hell,
which is your idle and absurd imagination; or that with his immediate hand God
did torment the soul of his Son at any time here on earth, as the souls of
the damned are tormented in hell, which is your witless and wicked assertion.

For proof you produce the words of ^say affirming of Christ, that the Lord
laid upon him the punishment of us all; but in this, as your manner is, you hit
neither the words, nor the meaning of the Prophet. The word is HAAVAH to be
crooked or to go a^rie, and so by translation signifies the crookedness o^
wickedness of man's life; which the Prophet testifies was laid upon Christ in
saying, Esa. 53.
the Lord laid upon him the iniquity of us all. But grant it may sometimes by
the joining of other words import any punishment allotted to wickedness; does
the Prophet say that God laid all the punishment due to sin upon Christ, or
that God laid it upon the soul of Christ; both which you infer out of the
Prophets words, though neither be there expressed, or thence to be concluded?
S. Peter will tell you on what part of Christ God laid our sins, even on his
body. 1. Pet. 2.
Himself bare our sins (says Peter) in his body on the tree. Now where
Christ did bear them, there God did lay them. Christ bare them in his body,
as Peter affirms; God therefore laid our sins on his body, that by
suffering death on the Cross, which was the wages of sin, Christ might make
the purgation of our sins in his own person. Again, the sense which you
would sow to the Prophets words, that God laid upon him all our punishment,
that is as you would have it, all the punishment which we should have suffered,
is false and wicked. For so Christ must have suffered, reiection, desperation,
and eternal damnation which the damned do suffer, and we should have
suffered, had we not been redeemed. If you mean no more than the Scripture
intends, that what Christ suffered for us in the body of his flesh on the
Cross, was the full redemption and satisfaction for all our sins; then are
you wide from concluding out of these words, that Christ suffered the pains of
hell or the full vengeance due to our sin by the immediate hand of God, which
is the chief point that you aim at. This is all the proof you offer out of
the Scriptures for the immediate suffering of the soul of Christ from the hand
of God; and what sturdie stuff this is, the rudest reader that lights on
your pamphlet of Defense will soon conceive. If you keep this course in the
rest of your positions, the world will soon be weary of your newfound
fancies, if you be not of your manifest follies.

[But Christ suffered (you say) the substance of hell-paines, though not the
circumstances of place and time, which the damned do suffer; for they are not
of the nature and essence of hell.] To make God the tormentor of Christ's soul
here on earth with his immediate hand, and so of all the damned souls in
hell, you brought us the words of the Prophet Esaias, the Lord ^ayd upon him the
iniquity of us all: for this seraphicall sequestration of the substance from
the circumstances of hell, which mystery of iniquity you begin now to broach,
what Prophet or Apostle can you produce? Dare you, Sir Discourser, out of the
hazard of your own head, pull in pieces Gods settled, revealed, and eternal
judgment against sin; and with the worm of your own wit wrest in sunder
the substance of hell from the circumstance thereof? What will you not
adventure in earth, that attempt this in hell? or what shall be free from your
forge, that offer to make us a new essence and nature of hell, and heaven? If
you can de^se or intend to mingle your toys with Gods truth, and with silly
sleights of Sophistry, which you think Philosophy, sub^ert maine points of
Divinity, your leisure is great, but your labor is leaud. In the secrets of
the next world, none of the godly ever presumed to debate or determine any
thing, specially touching hell or heaven, without the manifest precedence or
sequence of holy Scripture. You had need therefore (Sir Deviser) to be well
advised; it is no small presumption and intrusion against Gods wisdom, power,
and counsel, to eleuate and frustrate the pains which he has appointed for
the wicked in hell, and to come fresh and new in stead thereof, which God has
not ordained. I profess to all the world, I dare not depart from so often and
earnest words of Christ himself, nor allegorize the sentence of the Judge,
which shall be pronounced on the reprobate both men and angels, and executed in
the sight of all the elect, not by any figures and metaphors, but by the terror
of the things themsel^es matching the truth of the words, which Christ shall
utter. And he (...) I assure thee Christian Reader I ^warue not either from the
continual tenor of the Scriptures, nor from the full consent of Christ's
church; howsoever this Deviser flat himself in his new invention. But let us
trace him in his own path, and control him with the le^ell of Gods truth.

What can be more substantial to any judgment or punishment than the sentence
of the Judge, and specially of such a Judge, as with his will, word, and power
decrees, pronounces, and setl^th all things in heaven, earth, and hell? If
then this Judge in his sentence of condemnation appoint the PLACE and TIME to
be parts of the punishmen^s inflicted on the damned; tell us I pray you, why
some parts of the sentence be mo^e essential to the punishment than others? or
why all being parts alike, they should not all be equally of the substance of
the judgment? Matthew. 25.
Depart from me ye cursed unto everlasting fire, prepared FOR THE DEVIL AND
HIS ANGELS, is the sentence to be pronounced on all the wicked, that shall be
damned. Of the continuance there can be no question, but here it is expressly
mentioned, that it shall be EVERLASTING. For the place, it is as plain by the
witness of the Scripture, which makes no fire everlasting but only
hellfire. Our Savior Mark 9. verse. 43. 45.
twice in one chapter joins the one as an exposition to the other; and thrice
almost with one breath affirms everlasting fire to be the fire of hell. verse.
44. 46. 48.
It is better to enter into life m^imed than having two hands (or two feet) to
be cast INTO HELI, INTO THE FIRE THAT NEVER SHALL BE QVENCHED; WHERE their
worm never dies, AND THE FIRE NEVER GOES OVT. No fire is everlasting, but
only hellfire. Christ therefore in his sentence including the one, implies
the other as part of his judgment against the reprobate, and makes both time
and place essential parts in the punishment of the damned. And when he says,
DEPART from me ye cursed, for so much as there shall be then no places left, but
heaven for the blessed, and hell for the cursed, he does not exclude them from
the one, but by appointing them to the other. Besides, that fire which is
prepared for the devil and his angels, is no where but in hell; and therefore
adiudging them to that fire, he does evidently adiudge them to hell fire.
Since then no man is or shall be damned but only to hell, and that for ever;
the place and continuance are express, and so essential parts of the
judgment; and consequently of the punishment that is and shall be inflicted on
all the damned. For the judgment which then shall be openly pronounced, is
immutablie decreed, and already revealed by the Judge himself; and therefore
unchangeable to all that a^e or shall be damned, and executed on that part of the
wicked which is extant, I mean their souls as soon as they depart this life,
though their bodies be yet in the dust, as afterward shall be showed. Most vainly
then and falsely do you slide between the substance and circumstance of
hell-paines; since the name of hell-paines does necessarily and naturally
import the place of torment where those pains are, which is hell; and out of
which place they are not: else might they be called as well aeriall or
terrest^iall pains, as hell pains, if they were found as well in the air or
on the earth, as in hell. But the Scripture has resolved us there is a ^ place
of Luc. 16.
torment after this life, which is called hell, and the torments there so far
exceed all the pains of this life, not only for perpetuity, but also for
intolerable acerbitie and gravity, that they are justly called hell-paines, as
proper to the place where devils and damned persons shall be punished with
everlasting fire.

And where you would seem out of the dregs of Philosophy to borrow the
difference of the substance and circumstance of hell-paines, you understand not
what you say. For even by the rules of Philosophy there are no circumstances
in things perpetual and immutable. Circumstances must often vary, else are
they no circumstances, if they be eternal and necessary consequents. Since
then time and place do not alter in any of the damned; for all that are damned
are cast into hell for ever, though all suffer not like pains; if there be any
circumstances in hell, they are rather in the degrees and differences of pain,
which you make the substance of hell, than in the place or perpetuity of the
torment, which never vary in any of the damned. And since you will needs be
meddling with Philosophy, I pray you Sir Discourser, if Christ suffered the
substance of damnation as you avouch, does not your doctrine plainly conclude
the Savior of the world to be damned? for, which shall truly attribute the
name of any thing to any person, the substance or the circumstance of the
thing? By all the rules of Art and reason, to whom the definition does agree,
the thing defined must likewise agree. Now each definition imports the
substance, not the circumstance of the thing defined. And so if Christ suffered
the substance or damnation, it is evident by your doctrine he was damned; which
is a corollar^e in Christian religion fit for such a considerate Colonel as
you are; I will say no worse. Yea such is your deep insight in these matters,
that with turning and winding as a worm does in wood, to make Ch^st suffer the
substance of those pains which the damned do suffer; you exclude him, against
your own intention and assertion, from all both substance and ci^cumstance of
that, which the Judge pronounces and inflicteth on the damned. For where the
sentence of the Judge, Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire,
contains in it reiection from Gods kingdom, malediction and torment of
eternal fire, with their necessary consequents; Reiection and malediction
Christ Defen. p. 10. l. 29.
never tasted by your own confession. Continuance of time and place are as you
say Ibid. p. 12. l. 22.
mere circumstances only, and not agreeable to Christ; there remains then
the fire of hell; which you allegorize, by no means acknowledging any TRVE
sire in hell, for that you utterly deny. Now allegories are by no means the
substance or essence of an^e creature; and so you teach, Christ suffered the
substance of all that the damned do suffer, save that he suffered as your
self confess, no part of that which Christ by his judicial sentence
inflicteth on the damned; which is the substance of all that the damned do or
shall suffer. Thus what Christ pronounces on the damned you make
circumstantiall and allegorical; and what is no way comp^ised in his sentence
of condemnation, you make that only to be substantial and essential in
hell-paines; let the Reader now judge whether this hell be not of your own
framing, and not of Gods ordaining.

This is folly sufficient by a vain distinction of substance and circumstance
to exclude all that Christ pronunceth on the damned, from the substance of hell
pains; but because it makes an open gap to Atheism, to allegorize the
greatest torments that God has ordained for the wicked in hell, and to admit
nothing for the substance thereof, save that which was common to Christ with
the damned; which can be neither reiection, malediction, nor eternal torment
of fire, since Christ suffered none of these, and yet (as you affirm) he
suffered the substance of all that the damned do suffer; let us more largely
consider what pains are essential to damnation, and to hell, not that hell
which your running head has lately hatched, but that which the word and will
of God has for ever established; as also whether there be true fire in hell or
no; that we may the more plainly perceive what vanity and impiety you have
adventured to make hell and so heaven to be every where as touching their
substance; and the chiefest torments of hell to be imaginary pains devised
and conceived by your self and a few of your sect, without all warrant of
holy Scripture, or witness of ancient and Christian believers. Wherein when I
speak of substance and essence, thou must not think (gentle Reader) that I
mean precisely matter and form, as Philosophers do, which bodies only have; I
speak as a Divine, of rewards and punishments; in which that is most
essential and substantial, which God has ordained shall be general and
perpetual in either kind. Then that is essential to damnation or to the
pains of hell reserved for the damned, which God by his word and will
revealed, has provided and established for all that shall be damned, excepting
or sparing none, but including them all in one and the same judgment. And if
thou find by the word of God, that the place of hell and perpetual torment
there, be necessarily and generally decreed and appointed for all the reprobate
that shall be damned, make sure account that is essential to the punishment
and pains of hell, which the will and word of God has ordained and expressed
shall ineuitably and eternally pursue and punish the wicked. For Gods will and
ordinance is most essential and substantial in all these things; and what he
has determined, and settled generally and eternally, without ceasing or
changing to take hold on the wicked, that is the substance and essence of
their punishment, and of hell-paines, which is their portion.

In my Sermons I delivered many parts of hell-paines, which by no means could
with any sense of religion be applied to Christ. The Discourser neither does
nor can deny them, but shifteth them off as either allegorical or not
essential to the pains of hell. I shall therefore need but to examine whether
they be figurative or proper speeches, as also whether they be essential or
accidental to the condition and punishment of the damned; which I am content
in order to do. Out of the sentence of the Judge to be pronounced against all
the reprobate, I observed four parts of hellpaines inflicted on all the
damned; to wit, Sermons. (...). 50.
Reiection, malediction, vengeance of fire, and continuance therein for ever.
Touching reiection and malediction, the Discourser plainly confesses, that
Defenc. p. 11 l 27.
in Christ there could utterly be none of these, as also neither Ibid.
desperation, dereliction, nor sting of conscience. This confession I take to
be ver^e true, though it be neither agreeable to himself in other places, nor
conformable to his general positions otherwise. But of that afterward. In the
mean while, if reiection from all grace and glory, and extreme malediction
of body and soul, be essential pains in hell, and punishments for sins;
and Christ never tasted these; then Christ never suffered all that the damned
do suffer, as touching the essence and substance thereof.

And first of reiection from the kingdom of God, what say you, Sir Deviser,
(for I Reiection from the kingdom of God: essential to hell pains.
may rightly so call you, that take upon you to devise us a new hell not heard
of in the Scriptures) is it either no pain to the damned, or is it no
essential part of their punishment, to be thrust out of the kingdom of
heaven? The loss of good things, when they be perceived and desired, does by
nature no less grieve and asflict the soul of man, than the presence of evil
does offend him. All earthly creatures, as well as man, affect that which is
good for them; and from the desire of good which is natural to all, it is not
possible that man should be exempted: but as by sense and understanding he
discerns higher and better things than the rest, so this affection and
inclination after he truly perceives or fully beholds them, is exceedingly
inflamed with them; and when he finds himself disappointed and deprived of
them, his grief increases according to the goodness of the things, and
greatness of his desire. The joy and honor then of the saints in the kingdom
of God when the wicked shall presently behold, and see themselves rejected
thence, they shall inwardly grieve with unspeakable sorrow, and outwardly
mourn with gnashing their teeth for very anguish of heart, as perceiving
themselves excluded from that inestimable bliss for ever. This collection our
Savior confirms in express words:

Luc. 13.
There shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth, when ye shall see Abraham, Isaac,
and Jacob, and all the Prophets in the kingdom of God, and your selves thrust
out at doors. Yea where there are two sorts of pains in hell; Loss of
heaven, and sense of evil; the learned and ancient Fathers have professed the
former, to be a greater and grieuouser pain than the latter. Ad Theodoru
lapsum epist. 5.
There are some (says Chrysostom) of an absurd judgment, who only desire to
escape hell: contra ego, multo durius esse tormentum quoddam assero, quam
gehenna est: hoc est, non assecutum esse tantam gloriam, and illinc elapsum
esse. But I on the contrary a^firme there is a far worse torment than hell
it self is, to wit, the loss of so great glory, and the falling therefrom.
Neither do I think that we ought so much to grieve at the evils in hell, as
at the loss whereby we fall from heaven, qui nimirum est cruciatus omnium
durissimus, which doubtless is the bitterest anguish of all the rest. S.
Austen in like sort: (...) (...). ad (...). cap. 112.
To perish from the kingdom of God, to be banished from the city of God, to
want so plentiful abundance of the sweetness of God, as he has laid up in
store for those that fear him, tam grandis est p^a, vt ei nulla possint
tormenta quae nouimus comparari, is so grievous a punishment, or pain, that no
torments which we know may be compared unto it. NAZIANZENE. De plaga gran^inis.
Those (that rise to judgment) this amongst other, or rather ABOVE other
punishments shall torment them, that they are rejected of God. And Basil. De
regulis fu^ disputat. interroga^ 2.
The estranging and rejecting from God, is an evil more intolerable, than all
that is (feared or) expected in hell. If the grief shall be so great to be
excluded from the kindome of God, and the same be comprised in the sentence of
the Judge, where he says, Depart from me ye cursed; then is there no doubt but
it is an essential part of the pains of hell: since it is not only general
and perpetual to all the damned; but a necessary precedent to the rest of
their torments, which can neither take full hold of them, nor afllict them in
the highest degree, till they be wholly deprived of all consolation and
expectation of any favor from God, and utterly confounded with the grief and
shame of that re^ection which they shall suffer at the hands of Christ before
men and Angels.

Malediction, the second part of the Judicial sentence against the wicked,
notes Malediction (...) to (...) pain^s.
as well the cause of their condemnation to be sin, for which only, both men
and Angels are accursed; as the sequels of sin in the condemned, whom this
curse excludes from all sense and hope of Gods blessings, eternal and
temporal for ever; and wrappeth in the fearful remembering and feeling the
number and horror of their offenses, that before flattered, delighted, and
encouraged themselves in their wickedness. For where shame, sorrow, and fe^re
are by Gods wisdom and truth appointed as waiting mates on sin, and
offered to the consciences of all men, to stay them from sin, or lead them
to repentance when they have sinned, if they do not harden their hearts; the
wicked to take their full forth in their uncleanness, cast these behind them,
and not only conceal and excuse their sins, but quench all reverence and
remembrance of God, least any thing should hold or hinder them from their
pleasures. And therefore the Justice of God arising to take final vengeance of
their rebellion against him, causes extreme and inward shame, remorse and
fear, which they so much shunned, when they might have repented, and desisted
from their evil ways, most dreadfully to invade them, and as mighty streams
to ouerwhelme them, till they sink to the bottom of all confusion,
compunction and desperation. Which is a most just reward of their dalliance
with God, and yet a most painful torment to the damned, who in their life
time wilfully renounced God, to enjoy their delights; but there and for ever
after shall without remedy or mercy behold the lothsomenesse of their sins,
and grieve at the folly and fury of their disobedience; God punishing the
soul of every such transgressour with the remembrance and remorse of his
madness, with the evidence and conscience of his uncleanness, and with the
sight and assurance of his perpetual wretchedness.

^.
Quae p^na grauior quam interioris vulnus conscientiae? What pain more
grievous, (says Ambrose) then the wound of the conscience within? ^.
Amongst all the afflictions of man's soul, there is none greater, (says
Austen) then the conscience of sin. ^.
How think thou (says Chrysostom) shall our consciences be bitten? and is
not this worse then any torment what soever? Basil. in Psalmum. 33.
The most grievous torment of all (says Basil) shall be that reproach and
eternal shame. Cyprian de Ascens. Domini.
Omni tormento atrocius desperatio condemnatos affliget. Worse then all other
torments shall desperation afflict the condemned. Lamentat. 3.
Give them grief of heart, even thy curse upon them, says Jeremy to God. No
doubt then the sting of conscience and shame of sin, which so extremely
shall grieve the heart, is a part of that eternal curse, which shall light on
the wicked; and so painful and grievous shall it be unto them, that they
shall curse the day of their birth, time of their life, and all the works of
their hands, that occasioned or leasured them to come within the compass of
this fearful and everlasting curse. Hier^. lib. 6. in Esa. cap. 13.
Torments and sorrows shall take hold on them (in the day of judgment or of
death) and they shall be pained as a woman in labor with child. By which it
appears (says Jerome) they are tormented with their own conscience.
Pamphil^ apolog. pro Origene.
Tunc and ipsa conscientia proprijs stimulis agitatur atque compungitur. Then
the very conscience (of the wicked) is pricked and pierced with her own goades
and stinges. August. in Psalm. 53.
Magna paena est impiorum conscientia. The conscience of the wicked, is a great
pain or punishment unto them.

You did well utterly to exempt the Savior of the world from both these, I
mean from reiection and malediction; you must otherwise have deprived him of
all grace and glory; and plunged him into the shame of sin, and remorse of
conscience; neither of which without open impiety, can be ascribed to the
soul of Christ: and yet both these are essential paincs to the damned, and
not circumstances, as you pretend of time and place. How painful they are, I
leave the Reader to consider by that which is already said; essential they
cannot choose but be to damnation and hell, not only because they are comprised
in the sentence of the Judge, which is the substance of condemnation, but also
for that the rest of hell pains are not inflicted till both these take hold on
the souls of men. For so long as men have any part or hope of heaven, they are
not condemned to hell, neither shall the final judgment of God proceed
against any, till their own consciences do first convict them and condemn
them. And therefore as in Christ's sentence, reiection, and malediction stand
before the rest, so in perfourmance they must take place before eternal
torment of fire shall follow. Gods judgment being certainly just, shall be
without all contradiction even in the consciences of the condemned, who then
shall be their own accusers: and as hell has no communion with heaven, no more
can a man be adjudged to hell, but he must first be excluded from the
possession and expectation of all heavenly joy and bliss. I speak of the
order and coherence of the punishments, not of any long distance of time
between them; for so much as that judgment shall be as quickly executed, as
pronounced.

The torment of fire is the third part of this iudgemen^, which I make no
question, but you will acknowledge to be an essential pain of hell,
whatsoever you intend by the name of fire. For if this also be accidental to
damnation, I marvel much what is substantial. But you are content to admit
this for the substance of hell pains, so you may allegorize it, and make
thereof what best fitteth your fancy. Then if Christ suffered not the torment
of hell fire so much threatened to the wicked in the Scriptures, and inflicted
on the damned by Christ's sentence; it is very plain he suffered no part of the
substance of hell pains; unless your learning serve you to say, that when
Christ comes to give Judgment against all the damned, he shall utterly
forget and mistake himself, and in stead of the substance of hell pains,
pronounce only the circumstances thereof against the reprobate both men and
Angels. Here therefore is the place to examine whether the fire of hell be
allegorical, or no; for that it is essential to the pains of hell, can be
(no doubt) with any but with Atheists, and Infidels, which know not God, since
it is named by Christ as a chief punishment, prepared for the devil and his
Angels. Wherein I wish thee (gentle Reader) advisedly to mark what is said on
either side, it is a matter of no small moment both to Christian religion and
true godliness, whether it shall be lawful for every unstable wit, at his
pleasure to allegorize whatsoever likes not his humor in the sacred
Scriptures. For if the small and eternal Judgment of God against the wicked
be allegorical; then surely the reward of the faithful from the same Judge at
the same time must likewise be allegorical. And if we once bring all that is
threatened and promised in the world to come to be figures and allegories, we
endanger the power, and justice of God, which must openly appear to all the
world in the punishment of sin, (if he be a God: and displeased and offended
with sin) as also his mercy, bounty and glory, in crowning his elect, to be
nothing but types and figures. The end of all things, which is the time of
judgment must openly and fully perform whatsoever God in this life threatens
or promises: and if that day do not plainly distinguish between
righteousness and unrighteousness, the elect and the reprobate, and show a
most sensible difference betwixt the kingdom of heaven and the torments of
hell; to the view of men and Angels without figures or allegories, no time
after is, or ever shall be appointed for that purpose.

The first reason which leads me to believe the fire of hell to to be a true,
substantial, and external fire, and no allegory, is that, which is and must
be the ground of all Religion, to wit, the proper signification of the word
threatened in the Scriptures to the wicked, and by Christ inflicted on the
damned. Otherwise if we hold not fast this rule, not to run to figures in
expounding the Scriptures, except the proper signification of the words in any
place be August. de d^ct. Christia. lib. 3. cap. 10.
against the truth of faith, or honesty of manners, we shall leave nothing
sound or assured in the word of God. For August. ibid.
when the mind is possessed with any error, whatsoever the Scriptures avouch
to the contrary, men think it to be figurative; as S. Austen rightly
observes. Your self approve this rule, when it makes any thing for you: your
words are: Defenc. pa. 109. l. 8.
I like well that no figure is to be admitted in Scripture, where there is no
ill or hurtful sense following literally. Now that external and substantial
fire is denounced to the wicked in the Scriptures, and shall accordingly
torment the damned in hell, what injury is it to the Christian faith, or what
repugnance has it with the rest of the Scriptures? We do and must believe
that Christ shall come to judge the quick and dead; and with his own mouth
shall openly adiudge the reprobate to Matthew. 25.
everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his angels. What necessity then
is there to allegorize this fire? It is impossible, you think, for souls and
devils, which are spirits, to be punished with external and corporal fire;
and therefore the fire in your conceit must be figurative. Shall it be
impossible to God, when he speaks the word, to perform the deed; or is it
too hard for you to conceive the manner how it shall be done? I trust you take
not upon you to restrain the maruailes of Gods works to the reach of your
wits, or to measure the greatness of his arm by the weakness of your hand.
How many thousand things are there in the creation, conservation, and
alteration of the world; in the air, in the earth, and every part thereof,
which are daily before our eyes, and yet far pass our understanding? To tie
Gods truth and glory to your capacity, were mad deuinitie; to make any
thing impossible for him, which his mouth has spoken, were mere infidelity.
He that created spirits of nothing can as easily make them capable of pain and
punishment from fire, or whatsoever mean pleases him to use. But fire he
has threatened unto men and devils. By fire therefore shall they be tormented,
which his hand that is Almighty, and his mouth that is all true, shall
perform in the sight of all the world.

A second reason is, that Christ shall pronounce these words in Judgment,
where the guilty must perceive, what is their doom; the ministers must know,
what they shall execute; and the elect must discern what they are to approve.
Now allegories are exactly known only to the speaker; the hearers, except
they can search the heart, can not certainly know the meaning of figures and
parables till they be expounded. Christ's judgment therefore shall be plain
and proper, and contain nothing in it that any way may hinder the present and
evident conception, execution, or approbation of it. The end and use of
parables, which are allegorical similitudes, ou^ Savior confessed when his
disciples asked him, Matthew. 13.
Why speak thou to them in parables. Who answered: because it is given to
you to know the secrets of the kingdom of heaven, but to them it is not given.
Mark. 4.
To them that are without, all things are done in parables, that seeing they
may see and not discern, and hearing they may hear and not understand. Then
serve parables and allegories, which are both one, to hide the meaning of the
speaker; and to darken the understanding of the hearer. But the Judgment of
Christ has clean contrary purposes; and must have plain and proper speech,
that the whole world may hear it with their ears, understand it with their
hearts, and see it executed with their eyes. For how should allegories or
metaphores be executed by Gods Angels, who shall be the ministers in that
judgment? or how shall all the elect concur with Christ in judgment, if he
use metaphores and allegories known only to himself? It is evident therefore
the general and final sentence by which the wicked shall be adjudged to
everlasting fire, must have in it no figures nor allegories, but only plain
and proper speech, which must be heard and understood of all good and bad, and
be presently put in execution by the ministers that attend that Judgment.

A third is, that where parables by reason of their darkness must be expounded
before they can be conceived; when Christ does declare the meaning of them, his
exposition of necessity must be in plain and proper words, lest a dark and
doubtful exposition breed a further confusion in the minds of the hearers,
than the parable it self. The parable of the good seed sowed by the owner of
the ground; and of tares sowed by the enemy; as also of the harvest and
reapers; when the Disciples of Christ prayed him to declare unto them; he
expounded it in these words: Matthew. 13. verse. 37.
The sower of the good seed is the son of man, the field is the world; the
good seed are the children of the kingdom; the tares are the children of the
wicked; the enemy that sows them, is the devil; the harvest is the end of
the world; and the Reapers be the Angels. As then the tares are gathered and
burned in the fire, so shall it be in the end of the world. The Son of man
shall send forth his Angels, and they shall gather out of his kingdom all
offenses and the workers of iniquity, and shall cast them into a furnace of
fire, there shall be wailing and gnashing of teeth. And upon occasion of the
parable of the draw-net cast into the sea, and gathering all kinds of men, and
after seuering the good from the bad; our Savior repeating the same exposition
in the same words (So shall it be in the end of the world; the angels shall go
forth, and sever the bad from among the just, and shall cast them into a
furnace of fire) said to his Disciples, Ibid. ver. 51.
Understand ye all these things? and they said to him, Yea Lord. The parable
they understood not, but this they understood. The fire therefore into which
the wicked shall be cast, is no parabolicall, but a plain and proper speech.
Again, Christ expounds the parable by it: it is therefore no allegory, but
a true and proper speech by which Christ opened the obscurity of the parable;
and his Disciples presently conceived his meaning by the propriety and
perspicuitie of his words. Then, that Matthew. 13.
the Angels of God in the end of the world shall sever the wicked; and cast
them into a furnace of fire, is an evident, plain, and proper speech, easy to
be understood of every Christian by the very hearing of the words uttered,
without recourse to you Sir Deviser to help allegorize them; or to bring in
stead of them the immediate souls suffering, which you still avouch, but never
take the pains to prove, or use the means to unfold.

Fourthly, your new conceit has no coherence with the sense or words of the
Holy ghost; but either he must correct his speech, wheresoever he mentions
the fire of hell, or you must recall your fancy, who suppose an inward pain
in the soul from the immediate hand of God to be hell fire. For if that which
you call hell fire be only within the souls of the wicked, how can they
DEPART, GO, or BE CAST INTO HELL FIRE, which by your imagination is cast into
them, and not they into it? And therefore when our Savior so often affirms,
that the wicked shall be cast into hell fire, and iudicially wills them to
depart from him into everlasting fire; you must set him to school, and teach
him to speak righter, and according to your opinion, to say, that hell fire
shall be cast into them. But if these be fooleries most unfit for any Christian
man, to control the son of God in his speech, and to condemn him of open
and childish ignorance, as not knowing the difference betwixt an external and
internal fire; then learn to reverence the verity and gravity of the word
of God, and to confess that he which sees and setleth all things in heaven,
earth, and hell, cannot so forget himself as to mistake the one for the other.
For if the fire be a violent, external, and local agent into which the wicked
shall be cast; then are the words of our Savior and of the Prophets and Apostles
most proper and pertinent to the matter: but if that fire which shall torment
the damned, be nothing but an internal pain rising within the soul by the
immediate hand of God; then are all the speeches of the Holy ghost, expressing
their punishment, wide from the sense, and dissonant from the truth of that
which you suppose they would deliver. David describing the vengeance that God
at the last will execute on the wicked, says, Psalm. 11.
Upon the wicked God will rain snares, fire, and brimstone. This raining upon
them, shows that the means and matter of their torment shall be without
them; and not an anguish only rising within them, as you imagine of hell fire.
Revel. 20.
The devil that deceived them, was cast (says S. John) into a lake of fire
and brimstone; and whosoever was not found written in the book of life, was
cast into the lake of fire. The Holy ghost by your direction must have said,
the lake of fire was cast into the devil, and into every one that was not
found written in the book of life. Mark 9.
It is better (says our Savior) to enter into life maimed, than having two
hands to go into hell, into the fire that never shall be quenched. Our Savior
by your doctrine is not well advised so to speak, when he should have said, It
is better to enter into life maimed, than hell fire to go into you. And when
Christ foretells that the Angels shall sever the badde, and cast them into a
furnace of fire; he commits two great ouersights by your new Divinity: the
first in saying, the Angels shall cast the badde into a furnace of fire; where
indeed by your device the furnace of fire shall be cast into the badde: the next
in that he says, the Angels shall cast them into the fire; which has no
truth in it, if the souls of the wicked inwardly suffer from the immediate
hand of God alone, as you teach. For how do the Angels cast the wicked into the
fire, when the immediate hand of God inflicteth that, which you call hell fire,
on the soul without any instruments or inferior means? These mockeries you
must make of the Scriptures, before they will serve your new conceit, that hell
fire is an allegory, and imports nothing but a pain raised within the soul
by the immediate hand of God alone; which what agreement it has with the
doctrine and descriptions of the Holy ghost, I leave the Christian Reader to
consider.

Fifthly, the word Gehenna, which Christ authorized in the new testament to
signify hell, has no just representation of hell, if there be no substantial
and external fire in hell. For where anciently the children of Judah Ierem. 7.
built the place of Topheth in the valley of the son of Hinnom to burn their
sons and daughters in the fire 2. Reg. 23.
unto Molech; which valley the eighteenth of Iosue places Iosue. 18. verse. 16.
near to Iebusi (that was afterward Jerusalem) and calls Gehinnom: and the
chief council of Jerusalem, whiles their power lasted, used to punish certain
offenses with fire in the same valley lying near to their city: Our Lord and
Master either taking the word that was usual among the people in his time to
import hell, and establishing it with his authority; or resembling hell to the
place of tormenting and burning malefactors with fire so well known to the
Jews, names it Gihanna in Syriack; which the Hebrews call Gehinnam, the
Evangelists (...), and the Latins Gehenna. In this application of the word,
that the one might fitly resemble the other, three things were chiefly
respected, as Peter Martyr rightly observes upon the second chapter of the
second book of Kings. First that being a Pet. Martyr. in 2. cap. 2. lib. Regum.
valley, to wit, a low bottom, it resembled hell, which is believed to be
beneath the earth. Secondly, for the fire, wherewith the wicked are tormented
(in hell) even as the children were in that valley burnt with fire. Lastly, the
place was unclean and detestable, whither all vile and loathsome things were
cast out of the city of Jerusalem, even as defiled and wicked souls are cast
out of the kingdom of heaven into hell. And howsoever you may quarrel with
the first and last respects, because you think them not Canonical, though I
find them grounded on the Scriptures, if that were to this present purpose:
the second is without contradiction the maine reason why our Savior took the
word Gehenna to represent hell, and is expressed by himself when so often in
the Gospel he adds fire to the word Gehenna, and expounds the one by the
other, that is, Gehenna by unquenchable fire. Matthew. 5.
Whosoever shall say fool (to his brother) shall be worthy of the Gehenne of
fire, that is, of the vale of fire, or of hell. And again, Matthew. 18.
It is better for thee to enter into life with one eye, than having two eyes to
be cast into the Gehenne of fire, which is the vale or lake of fire, and hell
fire. In the Gospel written by S. Mark Christ joins the one as an
explication to the other. It Mark. 9.
is better to go halting into life than having two feet to be cast into
GEHENNA, into the fire that never shall be quenched. So that the resemblance of
true fire in either place, painful to the sufferer and dreadful to the
beholder, was the chief respect, why our Savior allowed GEHENNA in the new
Testament to signify hell, and consequently does assure us there is true fire
in hell. For if hell have no fi e in it besides an inward and inherent pain of
body or soul, as we see in all violent and burning diseases, Christ might
more fitly have resembled hell to any sharp and sore sicknes^e, than to an
external and sensible fire, which can have no reference to hell, if the
torments there be only spiritual and internal.

These reasons lead me to r^solue and believe, that the fire of hell so much
threatened to ^he wicked in the Scriptures and inflicted on the damned, shall be
a true, visible, and external fire; wherein lest thou should think,
Christian Reader, I rest too much on mine own opinion, as this D^scourser does
in all things on his; I am content to let thee see, that the Ancient and
Catholic Fathers of Christ's Church have constantly professed as much before
me, and condemned the Discoursers conceit as an open error repugnant to the
Scriptures, and hurtful to the Christian faith. I have already produced the
testimonies of so many Fathers in the Page 342.
conclusion of my Sermons touching this point (the writers being of the
greatest learning and account in the Church of Christ) as may satisfy the
^ober, and stumble the froward; their judgment concurring with the manifest
words of holy Scripture: yet because this Discou^ser lightly regards their
concents, and vainly shifteth off their proofs, let us hear and examine his
answer to their assertions.

The Fathers by me cited, were Austen, Ambrose, Chrysostom, Eusebius,
Tertullian, Lact^ntius, Cyprian, Minutius, Pacianus, and Gregory, besides the
words of Sibylla, which many of those Fathe^s accept and allege as proceeding
from God to witness the truth and terror of his general judgment to all
the world, and agreeing with the tenor of holy Scripture. His answer
begins and ends in this wise; Defenc. page 146. l. 25.
You set your self to prove that in hell there is material fire. But it
seems you are now almost afraid so to call it: yet you call it true fire,
which also we utterly deny. All your proofs, (such as they ar^) run to
prove corporal and material fire yet eternal, except your Scriptures, which
utterly prove nothing at all. Defenc. page 147. l. 8.
And me thinks you should not care for corpor^ll fire now in hell, seeing you
seem to believe no torments for damned souls, save on ly at the resurr^ction.
For thus you reason, as the body has been the instrument of the souls
pleasure in sin, so it shall be of her pain. But all prouocations and
pleasures of sin, the soul takes from her body, all acts of sin she
commits by her body. Therefore the justice of God both temporally and
eternally punishes the soul (ONLY) by the body: Or therefore all the souls
pain for sin, both temporally and eternally is by the body. This is your
own reason: which being true, why should you care for corporal fire in hell,
before the last iudgem^nt?

You begin and end with two notorious untruths and falsifications of my words;
that at least you may make others believe, there is some likelihood in yours,
when I dare not stand by mine, but am either afraid of them, or conclude
directly against them. Do I set my self to prove, that in hell there is
material fire; and yet am I now almost afraid so to call it? It is your wont
(Sir Discourser) not mine, to take up terms that may be turned every way, and
to plant your chief strength upon the doubtfulnesse of their Signification.
Do I any where apply the word material to hell fire? or do any of the places
which I cite, so call it? If they do, name them; if not, how set I my self to
prove material fire in hell, without any words or proofs sounding that way?
Know you my meaning without my words? or do you boldly presume of my meaning
against my words? If by material fire, you mean that which is maintained by
wood or by such like matter as nourishes fire, and without the which fire will
quench; (for that is one of your chiefest objections which you say is
unanswered:) then do the places which I bring plainly prove that hell fire
is not material. For Lactantius says of it; Conclus. pa. 346.
It burns of it self without any nourishment. And Gregory; Ibid. page 345.
It is neither kindled with man's industry, nor nourished with wood; but
contrary to the nature of our fire, it consumes not what it burns, but
rather repaireth what it eats, as Tertullian says of it. So that neither my
positions nor probations gave you any cause to conjecture I meant your
material fire. The places produced by me express the contrary: and mine own
words are; Ibid. page 343.
S. Austen long since has plainly resolved, the fire of hell is not only a
true fire, which were my words, but a corporal fire, that shall punish both
men and devils. And closing I make it Ibid. page 348.
a point of Christian doctrine delivered by the Prophets and Apostles, and
received by the Fathers of all ages in Christ's church, that the fire of hell
shall be visible and sensible to the bodies of the wicked, and shall eternally
and corporally punish the damned according to their deserts. It was therefore
your foolish objection, that hell fire must be material, if it be not
allegorical according as you dream; it was no resolution of mine, nor so much
as mentioned by me. I saw the ambiguity of the word well enough, and for that
cause did refrain it from the beginning For though material may be that which
consists of matter and form, and so all things that are corporal, as the
wind, the air, the heavens are likewise material; yet in our vulgar speech
and understanding, to which I framed my self, that is material fire which is
nourished with some MATTER apt to burn and consume; and in that sense hell
fire is no material fire.

The end of your answer in this place is far worse than your entrance: for
there The Defender grossly peruerteth my words.
you wittingly and wilfully pervert my words by adding ONLY and ALL unto them,
directly against my meaning; yea when I openly admonish the Reader to the
contrary. I inferred by occasion of former proofs; therefore the justice of God
both temporally and eternally punishes the soul by the body: which words are
most evidently true, since in this life without all question the soul is
punished by the body; and after judgment the body being cast into hell fire,
shall eternally afflict the soul. My words then bearing in them a manifest
truth, you take the pains, by interlacing them, to wrest them to an open
falsehood: for you make me say: Therefore the justice of God both temporally
and eternally punishes the soul ONLY by the body. Now this is as false, as
the former was true: for God in this life does often punish the soul by her
self; and until the last day it is as certain the souls of the wicked
departed hence are punished without their bodies; which so long lie dead in the
dust of the earth. What conscience this is (for nothing in you must be
impudence, though it be never so shameless) of an evident truth to make a
palpable error, by adding (ONLY) to my words, which I carefully and purposely
did avoid, let the Reader judge.

But the proposition inducing this conclusion you will say is general; to wit,
all prouocations and pleasures of sin the soul takes from her body, all
acts of sin she commits by her body; the conclusion thereof you think
should be likewise general: therefore ALL the souls pains for sin both
temporally and eternally is by the body. Your thoughts (Sir Discourser) bewray
your own folly, they must not marshall my reasons; I can express mine intent
without your help. Out of a general assumption what Art hinders me to avouch
an indefinite and particular conclusion; especially when I meddle with Gods
matters, whose power and will in judgment no rules of reason can bind or
limit? And if I would needs express the form of a syllogism (as you vainly
imagine I meant to do in these words) I never learned out of a negative for
the mayor, to draw an affirmative for the conclusion: but had not your eyes
stood in your light, it was easy for you to have seen both what the
conclusion must be by force of the premises; and how in respect of him that is
all-iust and yet allmighty, I thought not good to restrain him to my
conclusions, but to infer in sted thereof, that which sufficiently depended
on the conclusion, and could have no question either in holy writ, or daily
use. Both the premises are orderly and plainly set down in my writing, and
not loosely and ignorantly misplaced, as yours are, by putting the cart before
the horse, and taking that for the mayor which with me is a part or appendix of
the conclusion. My words stand thus: Conclus. pa. 254. l. 29.
Nothing is more proportionable to Gods justice, than to join them in pain
that were joined in sin; and to retain the same order in punishing, which
they kept in offending. But all prouocations and pleasures of sin the soul
takes from the body, all acts of sin she commits by the body. What boy
now knowing the first principles of Logic does not presently perceive the
conclusion must be; therefore nothing is more proportionable to Gods justice
than both temporally and eternally to join body and soul in pain which were
joined in sin; and to make the body the instrument of her pain, as it has
been of her pleasure. This conclusion is an universal negative; and yet does
not exclude all pain of the soul without the body to be vnagreeable to Gods
justice, as you pretend I mean; but avouches no pain to be more agreeable,
than where body and soul are both joined in suffering, as they were in
offending. And because no punishment is more agreeable to Gods justice, than
where both soul and body are coupled in pain, as they were in sin; though
it be no way against Gods justice to punish the soul for a season without the
body: Ibidem.
Therefore (which is the inference that I use) the justice of God both
temporally and eternally punishes the soul by the body, that as it has
been the instrument of her pleasure, so it shall be of her pain. You affirm,
not only my meaning, but my reason to be this; that God temporally and
eternally punishes the soul (ONLY) by the body. I utterly deny that I have
any such reason, words, or sense; but that you purposely have inserted the word
(ONLY) of your own, to make my reason seem false and foolish; which otherwise
is sound and sure.

You mistook (you will say) my meaning; you did it not of malice. Your
mistakings (Sir Discourser) are indeed very gross, as shall well appear, when
we come to your fairest forts; but in this (by your leave) you could not
mistake me, except you were bereaved of your wits and senses. I not only
provided that my words should import no such thing, as you dream of; but to
clear all cauils, when I had made some proof out of Cyprian, Ierom, and
Tertullian, for the second proposition of my reason, I moved the question my
self, and answered it, with as plain and precise a denial as I could devise
to utter. These are my words: Conclus. pa. 257. l. 12.
Do I then deny that the soul has any sufferings in this life and the next,
which come not by the body? BY NO MEANS. For though those conjoined sufferings
be most answerable to sins committed; yet the soul has some proper
punishments in this life, as sorrow, and fear, when the body has no hurt:
from which Christ was not free, as appears by his agony: and so in the next,
the souls of the wicked have grief and remorse, besides the pain of fire.
These punishments in this world and the next, the soul suffers, not by her
body, nor from her body: how then should I mean that God temporally and
eternally punishes the soul (ONLY) by the body, or that (ALL) the souls
pain for sin is from the body, as you make me to speak, both without and
against mine own words? Whether this dealing savor of unshamefastness, or
no, judge thou Christian Reader, as thou see cause. The manner of the
Discoursers carriage in the entering and ending of his answer, I might not omit.
Now to his matter.

The midst of his answer is a medley meet for a man of his learning and
judgment; the sum of it is this: Defene. page 146. l. 25.
All my proofs (out of the Fathers) run to prove corporal and material
fire, except the Scriptures (by me alleged) which utterly prove nothing at
all. For his part he sees no reason to believe, that now there is corporal
fire in hell (which is only our question or else nothing) whatsoever shall be
hereafter, when the bodies shall be tormented with their souls. Lastly, Austen
here does not prove there shall be such sire (after the resurrection) be only
shows the manner how it may be so hereafter, if God will. Now if the power of
God only be all our reason, we may as well prove the sky is fallen. All the
rest of the Fathers say nothing further, nor indeed, so far as Austen.
Whether ten ancient writers, all Christian and Catholic fathers, relying
themselves on the manifest words of holy Scripture, and joining in one
confession of the truth, be not more to be trusted and better believed than H.
I. of Paul's Chain, let the poorest prentise in London judge. As for the
Scriptures; if you Sir Deviser and such other busy heads may allegorize them,
when they contradict your humors, from Genesis to the Apocalypsis, they shall
utterly prove nothing at all against you: for what is there in them which you
may not pervert with your fancies and figures, if nothing shall be plain and
proper that any way seems unsavory to your reason? The Fathers have for
that which they affirm, the exact and evident words of holy Scripture, and not
so few as Twenty Places of the New Testament witnessing, without any parables
or allegories, fire to be threatened and performed to the wicked in the world
to come. Whereupon with one consent they have all resolved and professed it as
a settled ground of Christian religion; that hell fire, to which Christ shall
adiudge the wicked at the last day, shall be a true, external, and sensible
fire; I mean seen and felt of all the reprobate in their souls and bodies.
To this our new Patriarck of Paternoster Rue answers: Defenc. pa. 146. l. 37.
Austen does not prove there shall be such a fire; he only shows the manner how
it may be so hereafter, if God will. Now if Gods power only be all our
reason, we may prove as well the sky is fallen. Gentle Sir, if so many
vouchers from Christ's own mouth and from his Apostles following their masters
steps, be no proof with you, nor sufficient witness of Gods will, you have
some advantage against S. Austen and all the rest of the Fathers for presuming
upon Gods power without the knowledge of his will: but if those proofs be more
then pregnant, then look to your allegories, lest they prove you to be a
proud presumer against the Scriptures, and an arrogant despiser of the Fathers,
where they accord with the word and will of God. It is not enough for you (Sir
Deviser) to rowze your self, and say YOU SEE NO REASON; you must take the
pains to yield good reason why you depart from the literal and proper
signification of the words uttered by the son of God. And since you can
pretend none but want of power in God to perform the words which he has
spoken in their proper sense; all the godly will see great reason to refuse
your fancies and figures, as idle shifts to decline the cleerenesse of the
sacred Scriptures.

The Scriptures you say Defenc pa. 146.
show no more any corporal, or material, or true fire to be now in hell, than
a corporal worm, material brimstone, much wood, and true chains: which I
What is meant by the worm that never dies.
called a sleeuelesse objection; but neither I, nor Austen whom I cite against
it, does any where answer it.] Of the worm mentioned in Christ's words (their
worm never dies) I showed you S. Austens judgment, which might content a
far greater Clerk than you. Neither is he alone in that opinion. Gregory
Nyssene says, Nyssenus de resurrectione Christ's.
I hear the Scripture affirm, that the damned shall be punished with a fire,
darkness, and worm; quae omnia compositorum ac materialium corporum, poenae
cruciatusque sunt; all which are the punishments and torments of material and
compounded bodies. Basil delivering what terrors shall be presented to the
eyes of the damned in the day of judgment; amongst other things names a Basil
in Psalm. 33.
darkish fire, that has lost his brightness, but kept his burning; (...), and
a venomous kind of worm feeding on flesh, and raising intolerable torments
with his biting. Josephus a Jew living in the Apostles times, and no stranger
to the Christian faith, in his oration to the Greeks, (which Damascene does
mention, and Zonaras does cite) speaking of the final judgment of God to be
executed by the person of the Messiah, says, Zonaras na^um ^om. 1. fol. 191.
There remains for the lovers of wickedness an unquenchable and never ending
fire, (...), and a fiery worm not dying, nor destroying the body, but breaking
forth of the body with vnceasing anguish. Howbeit, because August. de ciuit.
Dei. l. 21. ca. 9.
S. Austen leaves it indifferent for every man to refer the WORM properly to
the body, or figuratively to the mind, as he likes best; so that by no
means he think the bodies in hell shall not be touched with the pain of
fire; I left it likewise free for every man to make his choice, and saw no need
of farther answer. *
Touching brimstone, you may jest at S. John if you list, who says of the
wicked, they shall be Revel. 14.
tormented in fire and brimstone before the holy Angels, and before the Lamb;
and likewise of the devil, that he Revel. 20.
was cast into a lake of fire and brimstone: or if you please, you may oppose
God himself, and ask whether material brimstone were mixed with the fire
which he rained from heaven on Sodom and Gomorre, and why he powered them both
on the heads of those wicked ones, as if fire alone were not sufficient to
destroy them, who Jude epist.
are set forth for an ensample, (by) suffering the vengeance of eternal fire.
But howsoever you presume to alter or new frame the judgments of God after
your fancies, when I read that God has Genes. 19.
rained brimstone and fire out of heaven on Sodom and the cities adjoining, and
will Psalm. 11.
rain fire and brimstone upon the wicked, as David testifies; I dare not
allegorize either of them, because I reverence the word of God, which is his
will; and by no means distrust his power. For if God will have brimstone mixed
with hell fire to make it burn not only the darker and sharper, but also the
lothsommer, and so to grieve the sight, smell and taste of the wicked, which
have here surfeited with so many vain pleasures; what have you or any man
living to say against it? yea rather, why teach you not men to tremble at the
terror of Gods judgments, who can and will so fully punish all the powers and
parts of body and soul, with one and the same fire in hell?

Your objection of true chains and much wood, I called sleeuelesse; in deed I
should Chains there are in ^ll though not of iron.
have called it witless; for but you, no man that would seem wise, ever did
account it worth the obiecting or answering. Who knows not that the names of
artificial things applied to Gods judgment or government, must not import
with him as they do with us, things made or provided with men's hands; but the
wonderful works and powerful acts of God, tending to the same end, for which
these artificial things do serve with us? As when we read in the Scriptures,
of Gods sword, cup, bow, book, sootestoole, furnace, and such like: Is any man
so foolish as to ask after the Cutler, Goldsmith, Fl^tcher, Stationer,
Carpenter, Mason that made those things for God; and not rather to look to the
use of these things amongst men, and thence to collect the marvelous and
manifest effects of Gods power, justice, counsel, and providence determining
and perfourming in this world and the next, what pleases him against men and
Angels? The chains wherewith the devils are bound, Peter calls the 2. Pet. 2.
chains of darkness, not of metal which man can frame; and they note the
inevitable subjection, and immutable condition of devils plunged in outward
and inward darkness, malediction, and horror, whereby they are now Pet. Ibid.
kept unto damnation, without any power to resist or decline the judgment,
which shall be pronounced on them. That God has a Smith to make Iron chains
to bind the devil, or a fueller to cut and fetch wood for hell fire, lest it
should fail; these were such meriments to be concluded out of Scripture, that
if you find no vanity nor absurdity in them against the truth and glory of
God, you may take the Legend or the Alcoran into your Creed, without any
scruple of conscience: but if these things be more then sottish, then deserve
your objections a worse name then I gave them.

The Scriptures, you say, show no more any true fire in hell, then true chains
and much wood. To suppose those things to be needful for hell, which are
prepared by the hands of men; is a very wicked and wilful impiety. For so
should hell fire quickly cease, which Christ has said shall be everlasting.
And that the Scriptures prove no more the truth of fire there then they do
of wood, is an open, and arrogant untruth. For first all the Fathers of Christ's
Church, and the soberest Divines of our time, are condemned by this insolent
assertion, as ignorant and absurd teachers, who confess the truth of hell
fire to be established by the Scriptures, which of wood they do not. Secondly,
the words of Christ and his Apostles, are challenged to be false. For they in
plain speech affirm fire to be in hell, which of wood they do not. Thirdly,
the reason, whereupon the Defenders objection is grounded, overthrows all
religion in this life, and all reward in the life to come. For this is and must
be the pillar whereto his objection leans. The Scripture names fire, and so
it names wood; and therefore it shows the truth of the one no more then it
does of the other; but if the wood be figurative, so must the fire be. Apply
this reason to the Church of Christ on earth, or to the kingdom of heaven, or
to Christ himself, and see whether it will not utterly subvert them all, and
make all Gods promises and graces here and in heaven to be allegorical, and
not literally true. Of Christ God says; Esa. 28.
Behold I will lay in Sion a stone, a tried stone, a precious corner stone. And
of himself Christ says, John 15.
I am the true Vine. Were it not brave blasphemy to say, the Scriptures show
Christ to be no more a true God, then a true Stone, or a true Vine, because
they affirm of him all three? To his Church God says, Esai. 54.
I will lay thy foundation with Saphires, and will make thy windows of
Emeraudes, and thy gates shining stones. All thy children shall be taught of
God, and much peace shall be to thy children: in righteousness shall thou be
established. Shall we say that wisdom, peace, and righteousness here
promised to the Church are figurative, because Emeraudes and Saphires mentioned
in the very same place must be figuratively taken? Christ says to his
disciples; Luc. 22.
I appoint you a kingdom as my Father has appointed to me, that you may eat
and drink at my table in my kingdom. Are all the rewards of the faithful in
the kingdom of heaven allegorical, because this most apparently is so? Proud
and false therefore is that surly resolution of yours, Sir Discourser, who
avouch the Scriptures show no more true fire in hell, then much wood, because
the Prophet in one place names them both; and if your objections be no better,
let the Christian reader judge whether there be any cause you should so
earnestly call for an answer.

But let us view the place whence you fetch your wood to nourish hell fire; and
see whether it make no more for the one then for the other. Against Senacherib
that proud and blasphemous king of Assyria, the capital and cruel enemy of
Gods people and Church, the Prophet denounces vengeance in this wise. Esa. 30.
The Lord shall cause the glory of his voice to be heard, and shall show the
stroke of his arm with the anger of his countenance, and flame of devouring
fire, with scattering and tempest. For Tophet is provided of old, it is even
ready for the King: (God) has made it deep and wide, the burning thereof is
fire and much wood: the breath of the Lord does kindle it as a current (or
river) of brimstone. Tophet was a place built by hand in the valley of Hinnom
nere to Jerusalem, made deep and wide to contain whole Pyles of wood which
the Priests of Molech with their devices and provisions could readily kindle,
and raize to huge and mighty flames, to enclose and consume the children that
were presented to their Idol. To this place and use the Prophet alludeth, when
he threatens the King of Asshur; and to comfort the Iowes that God had care
over them, he assures them, that Gods Tophet was provided of old, and ready
for the King (of Asshur,) that it was deep and wide (to receive him and all
his retinue;) and the burning thereof (as) the fire (of) much wood, the breath
of the Lord kindling it as a flood of brimstone. That Tophet was a place in the
valley of Hinnom, and a part of Gehinnom Ierem. ^. ve^. 31.
BVILT HIE of purpose to burn children in the fire, appears by Jeremy. The
store of wood heaped there, and the rage of fire kindled there is evident by
Esays comparison, when he says. The burning thereof is fire and much wood, the
breath of the Lord as a River of brimstone kindling it: fire and much wood is
the fire of much wood, to which he compares the burning of hell, for wood
without kindling makes no fire. And so the Chaldaie paraphrast expresses it.
Chalda^a paraphras. in Esa. 30.
A flame of sire is there (in hell) kindled LIKE AS in much wood. And to every
man meanly seen in the Hebrew tongue, it is a known Rule, that Caph the note
of similitude is often understood in the Scriptures; and then specially when it
is added to one part of the Periode, for example; Psalm. 11. v. 1.
Fly to your mountain a bird, that is LIKE a bird. Miche. 3 v 9.
Zion shall be plowed a field that is LIKE a field. Genesis 49. v 9.
A Lions whelpe Judah from the pray shall thou ascend; that is LIKE a Lions
whelpe. Esa. 4^. v. 6.
All flesh is grass, and the glory thereof is as the flower of the field that
is, all flesh is LIKE grass. And in this place of Esaie it is so the rather,
because the aduerbe of similitude is expressed in the next member, where it is
said, the breath of the Lord, LIKE a stream of brimstone, does kindle it:
which argues that the former part must likewise be understood the burning
thereof is A s a fire of much wood which in effect is a mighty flame. This
then being a comparison, what reason have you, Sir Discourser, to pronounce,
that the Scriptures show no more true fire in hell then much wood; since fire
was the maine respect why hell was likened to Tophet; wood was not, and without
fire, hell is no more like to Tophet then it is to a bodkin; which if it be
thrust into a man's body will raize pain enough. And therefore these
amplifications must either utterly be void, and import nothing known to the
Jews, or else there must be fire in hell as there was in Tophet, and that like
the fire of much wood, which is violent and raging; and as a torrent of
brimstone, which flameth all with fire, if it be once kindled. And since Christ
called hell Gehinnam for the resemblance it had to the flames of Gehinnom as is
before proved; what marvel if the Prophet speaking by the same spirit,
compared hell to Tophet, which was the place in Gehinnom where the mightiest
fires to burn men were made in his time?

Or if we follow not the Chaldaie paraphrase to make wood a comparison, but
lean to the later writers who make it a metaphore, and refer it either to
the continuance of hell fire, or to the sins, souls, and bodies of the
wicked feeding and nourishing the fire of hell, as wood does our common fire;
what gain you by that? If one word in the sentence be figurative, will you
conclude all the rest to be figurative? so may you as well anouch all the
Articles of our faith to be allegorical, because sitting at the right hand of
God is a plain allegory. And are there no more places in the Scriptures
mentioning hell fire besides this of Esaie? Or if there be, as there be
exceeding many, which have no similitudes nor metaphores in them, will you
allegorize them all, because this place of Esaie has one similitude or
metaphore in it? whether this have any learning, reason, or sense in it let the
Reader judge.

And because I have mentioned the opinion of the latter writers, making wood a
Later Divines profess true fire to be in hell.
metaphore in this place of Esaie, and yet confessing the fire of hell to be a
true, substantial, and external fire; I think it not amiss to let the
Reader see, what diverse of them, in true religion and learning not inferior to
any of our time, have professed touching either of these points. Peter Martyrs
judgment of GEHENNA we heard before, who makes Pet. Martyr in 2. cap. 2. lib.
Reg.
Tophet all one with GEHENNA and says of Tophet: Esaie in his 30. Chapter
calls that place (of Gehenna) Tophet, and fire unquenchable, as having much
wood and brimstone to nourish it. The Prophet also sets down the breath
wherewith the fire is blown, that it may flame the more siercely. Munster in
his Annotations upon the 30. of Esaie says Ma^ster. Annotat. in 30. Esa.
Gehenna is here called Tophet. Dicit habitaculum illud esse ig^eum; That
(place or) habitacle the Prophet says is all fiery, to let thee understand,
that the torment there is everlasting. For the unclean lusts of the mind,
which here are not purged by faith, shall be the nourishment of that eternal
flame IN STEED of wood and coals. And also the conscience (within) shall
afflict the wicked as a kind of fire. Hell is perpetual because the Spirit
and will of the Lord give everlasting force of fire to it. Bullinger in his 90.
homily upon the same Chapter. Bullinger homil. 90. in Esa. 30.
Our Prophet calls hell Tophet, as our Savior called it Gehenna. And indeed
Tophet or Gehenna did burn and flame with perpetual fires devouring their
children, which seduced with a devilish error, thought they offered them unto
God, when they offered them unto the devil. As then in Tophet wretched men
were skorched with fire, so in hell all the wicked are tormented with
everlasting fire. Therefore hell is rightly called Tophet and Gehenna whose
inside or burning is fire; that is, if thou ask what is in hell, there is fire
and burning, or, whatsoever is within hell is nothing but fire. God perfourmeth
that hell shall flame with perpetual fire, even as in many places and hills
of the earth an unwasted store of brimstone is found that even thence we may
gather there may be Rivers and lakes of brimstone in hell. All these things the
Almighty knows how to prepare, that these torments may ^itte both Souls and
bodies, so that we have no need to dispute whether this fire and brimstone be
corporal, and if it be corporal, how it works upon spiritual substances.
The Lord as I now said, can fit all these to either part (of man,) that in
truth they may be inflicted as well on the bodies, as on the spirits of the
damned, which here the Prophet foretells. If thou had rather dispute
against them, and wilt not now believe these things, doubtless thou shall one
day try them by experience. Gualter upon the same place. Esaie Gualther.
homil. 163. in Esa. 30.
teaches what heil is. The inside thereof is fire; that is how deep and wide
soever hell is, it is all fire and burns everlastingly. For so he describes
the sharpnes of the punishment, which the wicked shall there suffer. And lest
any should ask, what matter can suffice to maintain such a fire, the Prophet
says, there is great store of wood. He that made hell has plentifully
provided, that the fire there shall never go out. For filthy lusts and lewd
acts not purged by ^aith, and guilty minds yield perpetual matter and
maintenance to those flames. Yea and the bodies also of the wicked shall be
incorruptible that they may suffer continual fire and flame, and dure therein.
He mentions also a stream of brimstone, whereof the Apocalypse speaks,
that we should remember and consider those things which are in nature; For so
many ages has the fire of Aetna continued and still does, casting up flames of
brimstone. He then that kindles these things (in nature) without the help or
assistance of men, he also can kindle and maintain the fire of hell, that it
shall never fail. Musculus commenting upon the 25. of Matthew says. Muscul. in
Mat. cap. 25.
Those who measure all things by the rule of reason, and think nothing firm
that cannot be comprehended by man's wit, dispute how it is possible, that the
body should always burn (in hell) and not consume, which is repugnant to the
nature of the body. They likewise dispute how fire can burn not only bodies,
but also wicked spirits which have no bodies. These curious men think that to
be against nature, which is done by Gods will, neither do they consider, the
nature of all creatures to have and be that, which they have and are by Gods
commandment. Others quarrel with the quality of the fire, and think it no
corporal but a metaphorical fire, which they take ^or an exceeding pain and
sorrow of mind. This they gather out of the 9. of Mark, where Christ says,
their worm dies not, and the sire quenches not. Here as by the name of worm
no corporal worm is to be understood, but a great and continual remorse of
mind; so they think by the word fire no corporal fire, but a metaphorical
must be conceived. I take it to be rashness and not the part of a christian man
(thus) to dispute of the quality of this fire, but rather leaving the certain
knowledge thereof to the Judge, to provide that we try it not one day, what
manner of sire it is. Zanchius very soberly and learnedly examining this
question resolves in this sort. Zanchius de operibus dei part. 1. lib. 4. cap.
19.
It is certain the devils together with all the wicked shall be in everlasting
fire, and therein tormented. Christ plainly professes he will say to the
wicked depart into everlasting fire prepared for the devil and his Angels.
What manner of fire it shall be I dispute not because the Scripture does not
express it; but this is without question, that not only the souls of the
wicked, but also their bodies shall suffer torment FROM THIS FIRE, and
therefore the fire such as may work upon their bodies, and inflict on them a
far greater pain, then our material fire does impresse on us. What quality
soever it shall be of, it seems it shall be altogether a corporal creature,
which may work upon bodies and torment them. Which being so; IT IS MANIFEST
the devil shall suffer pain and torment from a corporal thing, I mean from
this sire, and that everlastingly; therefore it is called eternal and
unquenchable fire. And asking your question Idem in 1 cap. 2 epist. ad These.
part. 3. Thesi. 4.
How is it possible, that spiritual substances should suffer from corporal,
he answers. We have an example in our selves in whom the soul suffers many
things from the body by her conjunction with it. Again, what can resist the
power and will of God? Let this doubt therefore depart from the minds of the
faithful. I produce these later writers of great learning and good religion,
as I might many more, to let thee understand gentle Reader, that I neither
press the Scriptures, nor cite the Fathers to any other purpose, but to that,
which by all their judgments is Christian and catholic; and howsoever some
men otherwise learned, but carried with this new conceit of Christ's suffering
the essential pains of the damned, to color their devise, call these things
in question, yet the most advised and sufficient Divines of our age have
clearly confessed that which I teach, to accord with the holy Scriptures, and
to be held of the godly without contradiction.

The ancient Fathers of Christ's Church uphold the same doctrine, and teach the
fire of hell to be an external, visible, and true fire, and not a spiritual
and internal pain only, as this Discourser intends. Chrysostom. ad Theodor.
laps. epist. 5.
With no speech (says Chrysostom) can any man express it here, but else where
we shall see it most plainly. Set now before thine eyes that horrible way,
which shall carry (thee) headlong to the fire, and the (devils) ready with
torments, and the persons delivered to such cruel tormentors. These things
shall be in that day. August. li. 50. homiliarum. hom. 16.
Let us always think on these things (says Austen) lest it repent us too
late, when we come to the sight of eternal fire. For the burning pit of hell
shall be laid open, there shall be a descent, but no ascent. Basil. in psalm. 33.
Call to mind (says Basil) that terrible tribunal of Christ, which no
creature may endure; there must every one of us be presented to render an
account of his life. About those that have lived wickedly shall stand fearful
and grisly angels beholding the sire and kindling it. Then shall they see a
deep gulf, and darkness that no eyes can pierce through, and an obscure fire
that with blackenesse has lost his shining, but kept his burning. Cyril. de
exi^ an. and de secund. aduentu.
Alas (says Cyril) what a place is that where is weeping and gnashing of
teeth, which is called hell, which the devil himself abhors? Alas what a
Gehenne of unquenched sire is that, which burns and shines not? how venomous
is that worm, which never rests? how terrible is that deep and euerduring
darkness? how cruel in their torments are those merciless Angels? woe to the
guilty; when the innocent shall be rewarded with honor, and they with shame.
The innocent shall go to Paradise, the nocent into fire unquenchable. The sight
of God shall cherish the innocent, the sight of fire shall torment the wicked. If
the fire of hell be visible, it must needs be an external and true fire: for
internal and spiritual pains are invisible. And therefore the Church of
Christ has always confessed the fire of hell to be an external and violent
force of true fire tormenting the wicked; and condemned as an error in Origin,
the conceit of an inward and spiritual fire in stead of hell fire, which this
Defender is so much in love withal.

Ierom directing Auitus what he should beware in the reading of Origens bookcs,
says, Hiero. ad Auitum quid sit cauendum in libris (...).
Scias detestanda tibi in cis esse quam plurima, and iuxta sermonem Domini,
inter scorpiones and colubros incedendum. This know, that there are very many
things in them to be detested by thee; and as God speaks, Thou must walk
amongst Scorpions and Serpents. Where repeating diverse errors of Origin, he
lays this down for one of those that must be detested. Hiero. ibid.
Ignes quoque Gehennae and tormenta quae scriptura sancta peccatoribus
comminatur, non ponit in supplicijs, sed in conscientia peccatorum, quando Dei
virtute and potentia omnis memoria delictorum ante oculos nostros ponitur, ac
praeteritas voluptates men's intuens conscientiae punitur ardore, and
poenitudinis stimulis confoditur. The fire of hell also and the torments, which
the sacred Scripture threatens unto sinners, (Origin) PLACES NOT AMONGST
(external) PVNISHMENTS, BUT WITHIN THE CONSCIENCE of sinners; when as by the
virtue and power of God the remembrance of all our sins is set before our
eyes, and the mind beholding her pleasures past, is punished with the fire of
conscience, and pierced with the stings of (grief and) repentance. This error
Ierom more plainly expresses, and sharply taxes in his larger Commentaries
upon the Epistle to the Ephesians; whose words to prevent all cauils I think
best to set down in Latin as they lie, though they be large; for that they
give light to the former testimony. Hier. in 5. cap. epist. ad Ephesians.
Quia sunt plerique, qui dicunt non futura pro peccatis esse supplicia nec
extrinsecus adhibenda tormenta, sed ipsum peccatum and conscientiam delicti
esse pro poena, dum vermis in cord non moritur, and in animo ignis accenditur
in similitudinem febris, quae non torquet extrinsecus aegrotantem, sed corpus
ipsa corripiens punit sine cruciatuum forinsecus adhibitione: has it aque
persuasiones and decipulas fraudulentas verba inania appellauit and vacua, quae
videntur blandiri peccantibus, sed magis eos ferunt ad aeterna supplicia.
Because there are many which say that there shall be no (external) punishments
for sin, nor TORMENTS OVTVVARDLY INFLICTED, but that sin it self, and the
conscience thereof is punishment, whiles the worm does not die in the heart,
and a fire is kindled in the soul after the fashion of a fever, which does not
outwardly torment the sick, but possessing the body ve^th ^t without any
forr^gne inflicting of pain: these persuasions and deceitful devices, the
Apostle calls void and empty words, which seem to flatter sinners, but
indeed hasten them to eternal punishment. Hell fire by this resolution is a
punishment OVTVVARDLY inflicted on the damned, and not an inward fire or pain
kindled in the mind, and possessing the soul or body as an ague does, which
is an inward grieuance, but no external violence; and the contrary conceit of
your spiritual fire in the mind to be hell fire, is here condemned in Origin
as a deceitful and detestable error, hastening men to eternal torments.

The same confession still continued, in the Church of Christ, Gregory: Gregor.
moral^. lib. 9. cap. 38.
Quos flamma Gehennae deuor at, a visione very luminis coecat, vt for is eos
dolor combustionis cruciet, and intus poena caecitatis obscuret, quatenus qui
authori suo cord and corpore deliquerunt, simul cord and corpore p^iantur.
Whom the flame of hell deuoureth, it blinds from sceing the true light; that
pain of burning may outwardly torment them, and punishment of blindness
inwardly obscure them, that as they sinned against their maker with heart and
body, so they may be punished both in soul and body. Isidore: Isidor. de sum
(...). lib. 1. cap. 31.
Duplex damnatorum poena est in Gehenna, quorum and mentem vrit tristitia, and
corpus flamma. There is a double punishment of the damned in hell, whose minds
burn with sorrow, and their bodies with flame; by a just rcward, that as they
debated with their minds what they might perform with their bodies, so they
should be punished both in soul and body. Bid: By the Beda lib. 3. cap. in
cap. 9. Marci.
worm (Christ) notes the rottenness, as by fire the burning of hell; or cls
the worm signifies the ouer-late repentance of sin, which shall never cease
to bite the conscience of the damned in their torments; vt ignis sit poena
extrinsecus s^iens, vermis dolor interi^s accusans; that the fire (of hell)
should be a torment OVTVVARDLY raging, and the worm a grief inwardly
accusing. Bernard: Bernard de interiori dom^ cap. 38.
Timor co^turbabit te, cum terra aperietur cor am te, and iurues and caedes in
stagnum sulfuris ardent is and foetentis. Ignis exterius carnem tuam comburet,
vermis interius conscientiam corrodet. Fear shall amaze thee, when the earth
shall open before thee, and thou fall and light in the lake of brimstone
burning and st^king. Fire shall OVTVVARDLY BVRNE thy flesh, and a worm shall
inwardly gnaw thy conscience. So Tertullian before them: Tertul. in Apologetico.
Gehenna est ignis arcani subterraneus ad poenam the saurus. Hell is a treasure
of secret fire kept under the earth to punish withal. And Iustine the Martyr:
The devils Justinius Apologia prima pro Christianis
shall suffer punishment and vengeance, (...), enclosed in everlasting fire.
Arnobius likewise: (The Gentiles) are Arnobius aduersus gent^s. lib. 8.
admonished by the books of (their) best learned men, and verses of (their)
Poets, of that fiery flood and infernal lake of flames often compassing (the
place) which being prepared for eternal torments, they delivered as known,
both by the demonstration of devils, and by the oracles of the Prophets. As the
flashes of lightning touch men's bodies, but consume them not, and as the fires
of Aetna and Vesuuius and of other places of the earth do burn, and not
spend; so that flame appointed to punish (the wicked) is not fed with the
decays of those that burn, but nourished with parching their bodies that
waste not. And Prosper: To Prospr de vita contemplatina. lib. 3. cap. 12.
hear and read these things, and to believe they shall come to pass; to
think how great an evil it is to be excluded from the joy of beholding God;
to be banished from heaven, and cast into everlasting fire with the devil and
his angels; to see no light in that fire, but to feel that it burns; to
suffer the terrible cracks of that flaming fire; to have their eyes blinded
with the bitter smoke of that fuming gulf; to be drowned in the deep lake of
Gehenna, and to be torn eternally with most greedy worms; to think on these
things and many such like, is a sure way to renounce all vice, and refrain all
allurements of the flesh. Apparently then the fire of hell by the confession of
all these ancient and Christian writers is local, as kept under the earth;
external, as enclosing the damned both men and devils; and sensible to the
eyes with obscure flames tormenting all the parts of the body with an horrible
pain of burning, but not consuming them.

And that the fire of hell shall be an external and true fire, what proof can
be fairer or fuller than that Scriptures and Fathers with one voice profess
that Christ shall come to judge the world in flaming fire, which shall 2. Pet 3.
melt the elements with heat, and dissolve the heavens; and threfore without
question must needs be a true, substantial, and external fire; and that the
same fire, with which he shall come to judge, shall devour his adversaries.
Esa. 66.
Behold (says Esaias) the Lord will come with fire, that he may render his
indignation with the flame of fire: for the Lord will judge with fire. Psalm. 96.
There shall go a fire before him, (when he comes to judge, says David) and
burn up his enemies ro^nd about. The Lord Jesus (says Paul) 2 Thessalonians. 1.
shall show himself from heaven in flaming fire, rendering vengeance to them
that know not God, and obey not the Gospel. For (to such) Hebr. 10.
remains no sacrifice for sin, but a fearful expectation of judgment, and
a violence of fire which shall devour the adversaries. Fire (says Arnobius)
shall go before Christ coming to judgment, Arnobius in Psalm 96.
even fire which shall perform two offices: with one and the same aspect it
shall lighten the friends, and inflame the enemies of God: for the fire which
shall burn the sinful, shall be made brightness to the just. The end of this
present world (says Iustine Martyr) is the Just. in resp. ad quaest. 74.
judgment of the wicked by fire as the scriptures of the Prophets and
Apostlesdeclare, and likewise the writings of Sibylle: so blessed Clemens (that
lived with the Apostles) in his Epistle to the Corinths affirms. Christ shall
come (says Ambrose) Ambros. in 2 Thessalonians. cap. 1.
with his heavenly army, and with fire as his minister to give vengeance. ^or
the sire of judgment shall serve him to revenge the reprobate, says Gregory.
Paul Theodoret. in 2 Thessalonians. cap. 1.
shows (says Theodoret) that u Gregor. in Ezech. hom. 2.
judgment shall be full of terror, noting first the Judge coming from heaven;
then their power which minister unto him, who are the angels; lastly, the kind
of punishment: for (the wicked) shall be delivered to the flame of fire. There
are Idem in Psalm. 96.
two properties in fire; to burn, and to shine: the shining property the
assembly of Saints shall enjoy; by the other shall wicked men be punished. So
Basil: Basil. in Psalm. 28.
There are two forces in fire; one to burn, the other to shine: the sharpness
of ^ire which punishes, is laid up for those that deserve burning; the light
and shining thereof is allotted to the joy of the blessed. And Athanasius:
Athan. interp. parabol. quaest. 79.
Fire has two forces; the one of shining, which shall be given to the just.
the other of burning, which shall be divided to sinners. Ierom likewise: Fire
shall be Hieron. in Ezech. li. 1. cap. 1.
light to the faithful, and punish the unbelievers. And Theophylact: (Christ's)
coming shall be in flaming fire, as David professes (of him): A fire shall
go before him, and shall burn his enemies round about. For Theophylact. in 2 Thessalonians. cap. 1.
this fire shall offer burning to sinners, and no shining; but to the just it
shall give light and shining and no heat or burning. The fire, I trust, which
has these two properties, to lighten the just, and torment the wicked, is an
external and sensible fire; and with that fire Christ shall come to dissolve
the heavens, melt the elements, and punish the wicked; neither shall the
spiritual and internal pain of the soul, which the Discourser makes his
hell fire, come near the Saints, or be joyous and comfortable to any, as the
fire of judgment shall be to the saints of God.

Then all sorts of writers, Prophets, Evangelists. Apostles, and Divines of all
ages: Yea Philosophers, Poets, and Sibyls have taught, the wicked shall ^e
punished with true fire, and not with metaphores; and the Son of God in
person has confirmed the same; and all sects, Jews, Pagans, and Christians
have believed it; God taking special care as well by deeds as words that the
truth and terror of his vengeance upon sin should not be unknown to all the
world. For which cause he has not only made the earth in many places as Aetna,
Vesuuis, and else where to burn with perpetual fire; but has often destroyed
sinful persons and places with fire from heaven; to let all men see and know
that the vengeance decreed. threatened, and executed on the wicked is sensible
and true fire from God; which he has made of all senseles creatures the most
violent, potent and fearful means to punish. Therefore did he Genes. 19.
rain fire and brimstone upon Sodom and Gomorre when their sins were at
full; and punished the people, that murmured at him, with fire; calling the
name of the place Number 11
THABHERAH, because the fire of the Lord burnt amongst them; as likewise he
sent Number. 21.
Fiery serpents to bite them, when they spoke against him. So Number. 16.
Fire came out from the Lord, and consumed the two hundred and fifty men of
Corahs company, that presumed to offer incence unto the Lord; as before it had
destroyed Leuit 10.
Nadab and Abihu for offering strange fire before the Lord. And at Eliahs word
2. Kings. 1.
Fire came down from heaven twice and devoured two Captains with their two
bands of an hundred men. Insomuch that when Satan would have Job believe, he
was punished by Gods own hand, he gate fire to fall from heaven upon Jobs
sheep and servants; the messenger making this report; Job. 1.
The fire of God is fallen from heaven, and has burnt up (thy) sheep and
servants and devoured them. Which kind of vengeance Luke 9.
James and John the Disciples of Christ desired, when their master was repelled
by the Samaritans and denied lodging, as willing to have that inhumanitie
punished to the example of all others, but that they were repressed by him who
came to save, and not to destroy. Thus has God often by true and sensible fire
from heaven, declared and verified the certainty of his general and final
judgment, when his Son shall appear in flaming fire to render vengeance to
all that know not God and obey not the Gospel; and that fire of Judgment,
which shall burn heaven and earth, shall shine to the Saints with joy and
comfort, and punish the wicked by tormenting them for ever.

This you think is not against you: for you deny that Defenc. pa. 146. l. 35.
Now there is corporal fire in hell, whatsoever there shall be hereafter, when
bodies also shall be there united and tormented with the souls, and this only
is your question, or nothing. Many shifts you have sent us in Whether there be
true fire in hell before judgment is not the question.
your late defense, which savor neither of learning nor religion; but a
slenderer then this you have sent us none. For first this is not the chief
doubt, whether there be now in hell any true fire or no; which you say is your
ONLY QVESTION or nothing: but what is the substance of damnation due to sin,
and what vengeance for sin all the wicked must suffer in hell, not for a time
but for ever; and we should have suffered, had we not been redeemed; this is
the right and maine point in question. For this is the full weight and burden
of our sins, which you See the conclusion of my sermons fol. 339
say must be laid upon Christ before we could be freed from it; and this is the
proper payment and wages of sin, which we should have paid, had we not been
ransommed by the death of Christ; and therefore by your own conclusions Christ
must and did pay the same, which else we should have paid. That which the
damned do presently suffer in hell, is not the full burden, nor just vages of
their sins; else the terror of Judgment, as well as the taking of their
bodies were wholly superfluous; if the true payment and full vengeance of their
sins were executed on them before Judgment. But the reprobat as well men as
Angels are Epist Iud. verse. 6.
Reserved under darkness unto the judgment of the great day; and 2. Pet. 2.
Unto DAMNATION (which) sleeps not; though it be not already to the full
performed on either. Again, a great number of the wicked shall never try the
torments of the soul severed from the body, because the day of Christ shall
find them living, as the Apostle 1. Cor. 15.
testifies, and not part their souls from their bodies, but cast both jointly
into hell fire, so that the vengeance of sin before Judgment which you would
so feign fasten on, and make YOUR ONLY QVESTION, comes too short of all your
own conclusions, and is excluded by the express words of your limitations in
your late defense. For you subject Christ to all Gods proper wrath and
vengeance, so far as was due generally for all mankind to suffer. But the
fire of hell before Judgment, except it be the self same that also remains
after judgment, belongs not by Gods justice to all men in general, by
reason many shall not suffer it but after judgment. It is evident therefore
that the fire of hell before judgment is not your maine question, because it
neither is the full wages nor vengeance of sin, nor generally due to all
mankind; but the right and true question is touching hell fire after
judgment, wherein body and soul shall burn, feeling the torment and violence
of everlasting fire, according to the measure of each man's sins.

Howbeit, if we mark well the words of holy Scripture, this which you would so
gladly make your question, is no question at all. For by the sentence of the
Judge it manifestly appears, that there is but one and the same fire provided
for all the damned both men and devils; and that fire not only is everlasting
without end or change, but prepared and made ready before the day of judgment,
as the words of our Savior do plainly import; who will say to all the wicked
without exception: Matthew. 25.
Depart from me ye cursed, (...), into (that) everlasting fire, which is
(already) prepared for the devil and his angels. The article so often
repeated suffers the fire whereinto the wicked shall be cast, to be none
other fire but the selfsame that is everlasting, and prepared for the devils.
The Participle of the Preterperfect tence argues the time when that fire was
prepared for the devil and his angels, to be perfectly past before judgment.
Of the first there can be no question; August. de ciuitate Dei lib. 21. cap. 10.
Idem quippe ignis crit supplicio scilicet hominum attributus and Daemonum,
dicente Christo, Discedite a me maledicti in ignem aeternum, qui paratus est
Diabolo and Angelis eius. Vnus quippe ignis vtrisque erit, sicut veritas dixit.
The same fire (says Austen) shall serve for the punishing of men and Devils,
Christ saying, Depart from me ye cursed into the fire everlasting, which is
prepared for the Devil and his Angels. One fire shall be to both, as the truth
has spoken. The second, that hell fire is prepared before the day of
judgment, and abides everlasting from the time of the preparation without any
new creating or altering at the day of judgment, is as evident by the sacred
Scriptures. Esaias who lived and prophesied more than eight hundred years before
our Savior revealed this doctrine, says of it, as we heard before: Esa. 30.
Tophet is prepared of old (or long since) the burning thereofis (as the) fire
(of) much wood; the breath of the Lord, like a river of brimstone, does kindle
it. Our Lord and Master almost one thousand six hundred years since, made the
soul of the rich man in the sixteenth of Luke to say of hell fire, Luke 16.
I am tormented in this flame. And S. Jude proposing the destruction of Sodom
and Gomorrhe, says; They Epist. Jude. verse. 7.
are set forth for an example, (...), (in or by) suffering the punishment of
everlasting fire. Where we see the fire which God rained from heaven on Sodom
and Gomorrhe, is called everlasting; and the inhabitants of those cities are
affirmed by the Apostle (even then when he wrate) to suffer everlasting sire,
for an example of the just judgment of God. It is therefore one and the same
fire of hell that punishes the wicked before and after judgment, which was
prepared long since, as Esaias says, and is everlasting, that is, not ending or
changing into another fire, but increasing and kindling with greater
fierceness at the day of judgment, that all the wicked both men and angels
may receive a damnation answerable to their deserts, which in part they now
feel, but then expect a sharper and sorer torment than yet is executed on
them; which is the terror of judgment and fullness of damnation reserved for
them.

Then notwithstanding your sleights and shifts, Sir Discourser, that Christ
suffered the substance and essence of hell pains, and that happily there shall
be corporal fire after Judgment, yet now there is no true fire in hell: we
find it resolved by the Scriptures, and avouched by all the ancient Fathers,
and the best learned Divines of our time; that the fire of hell so much
threatened in the Scriptures to the reprobate, is a true, substantial, and
external fire, and the same that was prepared for the devils even from their
fall, and does and shall dure as well before, as after Judgment for ever; into
which the souls are, and at the general resurrection the bodies of all the
wicked shall be cast, there to burn with unspeakable and vnceaseable
torments. And though I think it not fit for any man to take upon him to
deliver the quality or force of that fire further then the Scriptures have
revealed it; yet that is no just cause to doubt the truth thereof, or to
prejudice the power of God, who has spoken the word, as if he could not, or
would not perform it; but rather for certain to know, and confess that God
can punish the mightiest of his Angels by the weakest of his creatures; and as
in sinning they have exalted themselves by pride far above their degree; so
in punishing them for their sin, God can and will depresse them as far
beneath their original condition; to teach them that all their strength
depended on his will and pleasure. So that we have no need to run to the
immediate hand of God alone, to make him the sole tormentor of spirits, (as
this Discourser does) for extracting a new Quintessence of hell fire: the will
and word of God, as it gave to men and Angels all their power and force, so may
it take the same from them swelling against him when he will; and subject them
to the force of any his creatures, which he can endue with might to perform
his commandment against all the transgressors and despisers of his
righteousness and holiness.

In sum we see that Christ suffered no part of that, which the Scriptures
make substantial and essential to the pains of hell and damnation of the
wicked, I mean of that which is included in the sentence of the Judge
pronounced against them: but this Discourser, as he has devised a new kind of
redemption never mentioned in the Scriptures, nor derived from the blood of
Christ; so has he framed us another hell, then the word of God reuealeth; and
changed the whole course of the sacred Scriptures with his dreams and devises,
that though the text of holy writ do no way favor his sansies, yet by flying
to allegories, and heaping up a number of metaphores, he might entertain some
talk, when his proofs did fail. To uphold that Christ suffered the true
pains of hell, before we could be redeemed by his death and bloodshed; he
minced hell pains into substance and accidence, and least this gear should
seem gross, he shadowed the substance of hell fire with figures and
allegories; and sent us at last to the immediate hand of God, for all
punishment of sin in the life to come; not upon any just ground or proof out
of Scripture, but because his Mastership knew not otherwise how to carry his
conceits cleanly, he unloaded them all by tropes and metaphores upon Gods
immediate hand; from which only (as he says, though very untruly) the Soul
has her proper and principal suffering. But examining the parts, we find no
such metaphysicall substance of hell, as he pretends; no such metaphorical
fire, as he affirms; no such immediate hand of God, vexing Souls and devils
in hell, as he imagines; we rather find the clean contrary; to wit, his
circumstances to be of the substance of the Judgment pronounced upon the
wicked; the fire in hell to be a true and substantial fire; and by that, as by
a peculiar means decreed by the will, strengthened by the power and revealed
by the word of God, the damned both souls and devils to be perpetually
punished and tormented, each of them according to their demerits; though the
inward powers and faculties of the mind, shall not cease most grievously also
to afflict the damned and despayring spirits. And touching Christ's sufferings,
to which all this must be referred, and for which all this is discussed, we
find him most free from darkenes^, destruction, confusion, remorse of sin
from malediction, dereaction, and desperation with their consequents; and from
the torment of hell ^ire, either in soul or body which is the second death;
that is in deed from all the parts of damnation noted in the Scriptures to be
provided for the reprobate, which are the true pains o^ hell; and so this
deuisers dreams to be as far from truth, as they are from all testimonies
of holy Scripture, which mention no such things suffered by Christ, nor make
any of them needful for Christ to suffer before he might pay the price of our
redemption.

Defenc. page 2^ l. 26.
We do not contend to express what just measure of Gods wrath. nor precisely
in what manner it was revealed, and executed on Christ. Only we know that
whatsoever it were, ^.
Gods very wrath and proper vengeance for sins, though outwardly executed on
the body, yet it could not but sink in deeper, even into the depth of the
soul and be discerned by Christ, and conceived to be such, and so sustained as
proceeding from God, and so wound the Soul properly. yea chiefly, though the
anguish thereof bruised his body jointly also. You have labored (Sir
Discourser) in twenty pages of your Defense by many lame distinctions and
false positions to show us the MANNER and MEASVRE of Christ's suffering the
pains of hell for the sin of man. The manner you made to be, Christ's suffering
them properly, yea only in his very soul, from the immediate hand of God, even
as the damned do. The measure you took to be all Gods proper wrath and
vengeance for sin, yea the self same pains for their nature which are in
hell. and which are extremest and sharpest in hell. Your twelfth page told us
in plain words, Defenc. pa. 12. l. 28.
These pains then in this very manner inflicted Christ felt; indeed not being
in the local hell; yet those being the self same pains for their nature
which are in hell, yea which are SHARPEST in hell. And he discerned and
received them properly, yea ONLY in his very soul. You begin now to tell us
another tale, that you doc not contend to express what just measure of Gods
wrath, nor precisely in what manner it was revealed and executed on Christ.
Only you know that what soever it was, Gods very wrath and proper vengeance
for sins, though outwardly executed on the body, could not but sink in
deeper, and so wound the soul properly yea chiefly. By a long process you
made us believe the souls proper and immediate suffering must be from the hand
of God alone, without inferior means and instruments, and not from the body,
because that kind of suffering is common to us with beasts, and Treatis. pa.
18. li. vltima.
makes not properly to our redemption. And so by your refined divinity, the
stripes, wounds, blood and death of Christ, could not properly pertain to the
price of our redemption, by reason those sufferings which come by the body were
common to Christ with beasts. Thus reverently and religiously, to prove your
self a pure Christian, you resolved touching the bloodshed and death of
Christ, sustained on the Cross. Now as almost tired with that blasphemous toy,
and perceiving how hard it would be to please the learned with this leaven, or
to seduce the simple with these unsavory shifts, which have neither foundation
nor mention in the sacred Scriptures; you begin to turn an other leaf, and
to tell us you do not contend for the just measure, nor precise manner of
Christ's suffering the wrath of God. Only you know that whatsoever it were
(though you can neither prove nor express what it was) Gods very wrath and
proper vengeance for sin, though outwardly executed on the body, could not
but sink deeper into the Soul, and wound the soul properly yea chiefly,
though the anguish thereof bruised the body jointly also.

It is well yet at last that you find your self ignorant of some things, and
that you will not take upon you to express in what precise manner, or just
measure the wrath of God was revealed and executed on Christ. For whiles you
broched those secrets more boldly then wisely or truly, you ran your self
out of breath, and brought neither substance nor shadow of holy Scripture to
warrant your vanities, but daunced up and down with certain licentious and
ambiguous phrases of GODS PROPER WRATH, MERE JUSTICE, VERY VENGEANCE and such
like flowers, neither confirmed by the Scriptures, nor so much as expounded by
your self, but because you check your own presumption, I will spare it, and
come to that which you profess your self so resolutely to know; that Gods
very wrath and proper vengeance for sin, though outwardly executed on the
body (of Christ) could not but sink deeper into the soul, and wound the soul
properly, yea chiefly, though the anguish thereof bruized his body also.
Wherein notwithstanding you keep your accustomed phrases of Gods very wrath
and proper vengeance, which you neither do, nor dare describe by the parts
thereof, that we may discern the truth of your speech; yet for their sakes
that are simple, I am content shortly to examine what wrath from God, Christ
suffered, as far as the Scriptures direct us, at whose hands he suffered it,
and what he did, and must conceive of those his sufferings.

There is no question but power to feel, conceive, and discern by sense,
reason, What wrath of God Christ suffered.
or faith in man belongs properly yea only to the soul of man. Life, sense,
and motion appear in the body, and have their actions performed by the
instruments of the body: but even in them the power and force that quickneth
and moves the body, and discerns by the senses of the body, comes from
the soul, and so depends on the soul, that the soul departing from the
body leaves it void of all motion, sense and life. Then in all Christ's
sufferings, when any violence lighted on his body, the pain pierced into his
soul, and his soul not only fully felt the anguish thereof, but rightly
discerned the fountain whence, the cause why, and the means by which it came.
Christ likewise knew himself to be endewed with such might and strength, that
of him self he could not only resist the whole world, if he would; but even
command and repress men and devils. His ouerruling of seas, winds, and
wicked spirits, and giving his Disciples power over them is so evident and
often in the Scriptures, that no Christian may be ignorant of it. After his
agony in the Garden, with the word of his mouth he threw to the John. 18.
ground the whole band of men, that came with Judas to take him; and when by
this means he had showed him self not destitute of his wonted force and
virtue, he voluntarily submitted him self, not only to be bound and brought
whether they would, but even to be whipped, mocked, wounded, hanged, and every
way used at their pleasure. Which he did not to satisfy their wicked rage, but
to obey the will of his heavenly Father; who when he would punish the sins of
men in the person of his own Son, Matthew. 26.
Delivered him into the hands of sinners, from them to suffer Acts. 4.
whatsoever the hand and counsel (of God) had determined before to be done.
For Acts. 3.
those things which God before had showed by the mouths of all his Prophets
that Christ should suffer, he thus fulfilled, by the malice of some, and
ignorance of others, whom Satan incited, with the greatest contumely and
cruelty they could devise, to take Christ's life from him. In all which Christ
suffered nothing but what the Acts. 2.
determinate counsel and foreknowledge of God purposed and appointed should be
done. For this was John. 18.
the Cup which (his) father gave (him) to drink; and this was the Luke 22.
hour, and power of darkness, when the Prince of the world came against him,
howbeit neither man nor devil John 19.
could have any power at all against him, but what was given (them) from above.
So that in all those wrongs, reproaches and pains which were offered and
inflicted on him by the rage of Satan and the wicked, he saw the secret
counsel and hand of God punishing our sins in his body, and by that means
satisfiyng the divine justice that was provoked by our transgressions.

But no where do the Scriptures deliver that God with his immediate hand
tormented The pains of hell were not the cause of agony.
the soul or body of his Son, much less that he impressed the very pains
of hell and of the damned on the soul of Christ; which is your new found
Redemption and satisfaction for the sins of men. By his agony in the garden
you boldly and rashly presume it; but by what logic you conclude it, neither
do I conceive, nor can you declare. Christ was SORROVVFVLL and AFRAID in the
garden, and began to be AMAZED; ergo, you think, he felt, or foresaw he should
suffer the pains of the damned from the immediate hand of God. Well these may
be your hasty thoughts, but this has no ground in Art, reason, nature, or
Scripture. For many other things Christ might fear; and this of all other
things he could not fear. How many things are there in God, when we approach
his presence; how many things proceed there from God, when we advisedly mark
his counsels and judgments, which may justly ouerwhelme the weakness of man's
flesh with admiration and fear even to astonishment? The brightness of Gods
glory, the greatness of his power, the deepenes of his counsels, the sound of
his voice, the presence of his Angels, the sight of his vengeance prepared, or
executed on others how many good and perfect men have these things strooken
into fears and mazes? When Saint John in the spirit saw the shape of the
son of man and heard his voice, he Revel. 1.
fell down as dead for fear. When Daniel had seen the vision of the goat and
the Ram, he was Daniel. 8.
afraid and fell upon his face, yea he was stricken and sick certain days
being astonished at the vision. When the parents of Sampson saw the Angel
ascend toward heaven in the flame of the Altar, they Iudic. 13.
fell on their faces to the ground; and one of them said, we shall surely die,
because we have seen the Lord. When a light from heaven suddenly shined round
about Paul, as he was trauayling to Damascus, he Acts 9.
fell to the earth trembling and amazed. When Isaac perceived that he had
ignorantly blessed Jacob in steed of Esau, he was Genes. 27.
stricken with an exceeding great (fear and) trembling. When the people saw
the Creeple walking, that was daily laid at the gate of the Temple to ask
alms, and knew him to be the same man that before was lame from his mothers
womb, they were Acts 3.
amazed and sore astonished at it. Jeremy lamenting the misery of the Jews,
says; I am sore Ierem. 8.
vexed for the hurt of the daughter of my people, I am heavy, and astonishment
has taken me. Even as the Apostle also witnesses of himself; Romans 9.
I speak the truth in Christ, and lie not; I have great heaviness and
continual sorrow in mine heart, for my brethren that are my kinsmen according
to the flesh. If visions and Angels from God, if the works and judgments of
God executed on others have driven the best men to frights and agonies, what
marvel then if the humane nature of Christ presenting himself in the garden
unto the Majesty of his Father to be the Ransommer of mankind, and with his
own smart to satisfy the justice of God for the sin of the world, and no
way ignorant how weighty that burden, and how mighty the hand of God was, to
whose will he must and did wholly submit himself; what marvel I say if the
weakness of our flesh in Christ began to be afraid and astonished at the
judicial presence and power of God, at the peril of man if he were deserted,
and price to be paid for him before he could be redeemed? not that damnation or
destruction were prepared or purposed for him that should save us; but for that
the hand of God was infinitely able without hell and the pains thereof to
press and ouerpresse the manhood of Christ by whatsoever means he would.

This, you will say, is the pains of hell, and the very same, yea all that
which the damned do suffer.] In deed Sir Discourser? does your skill serve you
to make a religious submission to the Majesty of God, and an holy confession of
his most mighty power even with fear and trembling, to be all that the damned
now suffer, or the self same pain which is sharpest in hell? Do not the
godly at all times when they enter into the just consideration of themselves,
presently see their own infirmity and indignity, and thereby fall with fear
and trembling to confess all sanctity, glory, might, and majesty to be Gods,
and themselves to be not only earth and ashes, but even sinful and hateful
unto God, if he be not gracious and merciful unto them? And will you call
these faithful meditations of Gods children giving unto God his due, the
pains of hell and state of the damned, because the sense of their weakness
and unworthiness breeds in them fear and trembling? Then make heaven as
touching the essence thereof all one with hell, and salvation in substance to
be the same that damnation is, because the best learned Fathers confess, that
the Angels in heaven do and shall tremble at the voice and judgments of God.
Hilarious de trinitat. li. 2.
Ad^uius vocem Archangeli and Angeli tremunt: At whose voice the Angels and
Archangels do tremble; says Hilarie speaking of the Godhead in Christ. Which
words Leo the Great does allow and allege in his Leo epist. 97. ad Leonem
August.
Epistle to Leo the Emperor; and they grew to be of that credit, that the
effect of them was inserted in the Church service by Gelasius, as Alcuinus does
witness. Albinus Flaccus de diuinis offi^ijs.
Maiestatem tuam tremunt potestates: The powers of heaven do tremble at thy
Majesty. Christ Basil. in hexamer. homil. 11.
coming from the heavens (to judgment) every creature shall tremble, says
Basil: the Angels themselves shall not be without fear. for they also shall be
present, though they shall give no account to God. At that day (says
Chrysostom) Chrysostom. ep. 5. ad Theodorum lapsum.
all things shall be full of astonishment, horror and fear. A great fear
shall then possess even the Angels, and not the Angels only, but the
Archangels, and Thrones, and powers of heaven, because their fellow servants
must undergo judgment for their lives led in this world. Will you hence
conclude that the Angels and Archangels are or shall be then in the pains of
hell, because they do and shall tremble at the sound of Gods voice, and sight
of Gods wrath to be executed on the world? No more may you infer that Christ
did or should suffer the pains of hell and of the damned, for that his manhood
began to fear and tremble either at the majesty of God sitting in judgment;
or at the power of his justice able to punish by what means, and in what
measure pleased him; or at the weight of our sins, for which he did
undertake; or at the sharpness of vengeance laid up in store as well for the
Jews as all other unbelievers, that should neglect the salvation then to be
purchased by his death and passion; since the person of Christ being God and
man was far more assured and secured from hell and damnation, than either the
Saints or Angels of God are, or can be.

At least then, you think, Christ feared and felt the wrath of God due to our
sins, though outwardly executed on his body.] From Christ's Agony, which
might have diverse causes, and whereof the true cause is not revealed unto us by
the Scriptures, as I have always said, so I now repeat it again; you can
conclude nothing for your pains of hell to be suffered in the soul of Christ
through the immediate hand of God. They are your blind and bold devises, (I
must not say lewd and wicked, because you are so tender, you may not be
touched) to bring the true pains of hell, yea the sharpest and extremest of
them into this life; and to make the substance of hell nothing but a certain
pain inflicted only on the soul by the immediate hand of God: which you
think Christ suffered in the garden, where you say, he Defenc. pa. 17. l. 1.
felt as extreme sharpnes of pain, as may by any possibility be endured yea
though in hell it self; and yet this Ibidem. pa. 21. l. 7.
incomprehensible, unspeakable, infinite and intolerable fiery wrath and
pains of hell did neither part his soul from his mortal body, nor so much as
break his patience. So terrible you make the torments of hell in words, and so
easy in deeds, that the wicked here suffer and endure them without ending
their lives, breaking their sleeps, or refusing their food. But the true
pains of hell are of an other manner of force, th^n you dream of. They leave
no place for meat, nor sleep; the body must be immortal and not able to die,
that shall endure them; they pass all patience of m^n and Angels. So that
howsoever you aggrauate your fancy with fiery words, you eleuate in truth the
dreadful judgments of God against sin, when you make the sha^pest and
extremest of them to be tolerated of our Savior in this life with patience
and si^ence, as appeared in his sufferings; and the reprobate in the midst of
your hell pains to live, eat, and sleep; which in the tr^e pains of hell
were not possible. Austen says rightly: August. de ciuita. dei. li. 21. cap. 3.
So is the soul conjoined with this body, that to the pains which are
exceeding great, it yields and departs: because the very frame of the
members and vital parts is so weak, that they are not able to sustain the
force which brings great or most sharp pain. Which Chrysostom also
confi^meth: Chrysostom. ad populum A^iochen. hom. 49.
Name fi^e if thou will, the sword, or wild beasts, and if any thing be more
grievous than these: yet are these scant a shadow to the torments of hell. And
these when they grow vehement, are easiest, and soonest dispatch men, the body
not sufficing to suffer a sharp pain any long while. Your hell pains then
are not very sharp, which the wicked may suffer so many years in this life,
and not forsake either food or sleep.

Yet Christ did feel, you say, Gods very wrath and proper vengeance for sin,
and that only you know, though you c^n not express the manner or measure of his
feeling it. And it was discerned and concei^ed by Christ to be such, and so did
wound the soul properly, yea chiefly; though it were outwardly executed on his
bodic.] The wrath and vengeance of God due What is Gods wrath due to si^ne.
to sin, and generally to all mankind for sin, is spiritual corporal,
and eternal death with all the seeds and fruits of death; that is, the loss
of all earthly and heavenly blessings in this life and the next, and the depth
of perpetual mi^ery in body and soul here and in hell. This is the true wages
and full payment of sin; and though God of his bounty and patience do often
remit to the wicked in this life, a great part of this (...) in things tempo
all, yet when he inflicteth on them the miseries and cala^ities of this life,
he gives them their due. And as for spiritual and eternal death now and
hereafter, it is so proper and certain to the reprobate, that not one of them
shall e^cape e^ther. Spiritual death is Ephesians 4.
blindness and hardness of heart working all vncle^nnesse even with
greediness; which shows men to be ^.
strangers from the life of God, and (...) (...), as past all sense and feeling
of God. Eternal death the Scripture calls WRATH TO COME, because no man
suffers the full force and wa^ght thereof in this life, but as it is the
Reue^. 2^. and 21.
second death, so it follows in men after the first death, which ^euereth the
soul from the bod^e. Ye vipers bro^d (said John Baptist to the Pharisees and
Saddu^s) ^.
who has taught you (thus) to fl^e from the wrath to come? Jesus (says Paul)
1. I h^ss. 1.
delivers us from the wrath to come. In this life the wicked may have a Heb.
0.
fearful expectation, but no present execution, of this judgment; there is a
Ro^. 2.
day of ^rath, even the revelation of the ^st judgment of God, when every man
shall be rewarded according to his works, and a violent fire shall d^uoure the
adversaries. This wrath by the Scriptures is reserved for the vessels of wrath
for ever, and shall be executed on them with indignation, fury and fire; not
only because the wrath of God against the wicked burns l^ke fire, but for
that it shall be powered on them with flaming and everlasting fire. The effects
whereof are reiection, malediction, confusion, desperation and such l^ke, which
never accompany salvation.

To say that Christ suffered this kind of wrath, which is the true and proper
wages of sin, is horrible and hellish blasphemy, which I hope no Christian
man will adventure. From the spiritual death of the soul, which is the Romans 1.
wrath of God revealed from heaven against all ungodliness and
unrighteousness of men, and brings with it the loss of all grace and
goodness in this life, and consequently leaves the pollution and dominion of
sin in the soul of man, our Lord and master must be as free as from
damnation; the one being always a necessary consequent to the other.
Displeasure and wrath against Christ's person God never had, nor could have
any; Christ being his own and only son, and so dearly beloved, that for his
sake Gods most just and most heavy wrath against the sins of all his elect
did calm and assuage: for Gods inward love does not admit contrarieties or
changes as man's does; all Gods counsels, ways, and woe kes being absolutely
perfect and constant, chiefly toward his own son, whom he naturally,
infinitely, and everlastingly loves in the same degree that he does himself;
and therefore no more possible there should be in god any displeasure or
dislike conceived of his son for bearing the sins of the world, or for what
cause soever, than of himself. And since the humane nature of Christ was by
Gods own wisdom, will, and work, joined into the unity of the person of his
son, and made one and the same Christ with his Godhead; no cause, nor course
whatsoever could alter or diminish the exceeding love and favor of God toward
the very manhood of Christ; but as God did inseparably knit it to the person of
his son, so did he make it fully partaker of that infinite love wherewith he
embraced his son. To confirm this to all the world: God did often from
heaven pronounce with his own voice, Matthew. 3.
Matthew. 17.
This is my beloved son in whom I am well pleased; as he forespake by his
Prophet, Esa. 42.
Behold m^e elect (in whom) my soul delights. This unspeakable love of God
toward the person of his Son now being God and man, is the chief ground of
our election and redemption. For we were Ephesians. 1.
adopted through Jesus Christ, and made accepted in (his) beloved; by whom we
have redemption through his blood, even the forgiveness of sins, according
to the riches of his grace. So that we were neither elected nor redeemed, but
by the infinite love of God toward his son; for whose ^ake we were adopted
to be the sons of God, and to whose love the fierce wrath of God provoked by
our sins did yield and give place; neither may he bear the name of a
Christian man, that otherwise teaches or believes of our election and
redemption. Now judge thou Christian Reader, whether it were wrath or love in
God toward his son, that pardoned all our sins for his ^ake, and accepted
the voluntary sacrifice of his body and blood for the redemption of the
world, through who^e death we are reconciled to God, and cleansed by his blood
from all our sins.

Then as in God there neither was, nor could be any displeasure against the
person Christ did not conceive that God was inwardly displeased with him.
of his Son; nor against any part thereof for what cause soever; nor any
change or decrease of the love which God with his own mouth professed from
heaven toward Christ incarnate; so could not Christ without plain infidelity
conceive or believe that God was inwardly displeased or angry with ^im, no not
when he presented him self to God his Father under the burden of all our
^innes; knowing that neither sin, from which he was ^ee, being the innocent and
^mmaculate ^amb of God; no^ Gods most holy dislike, or just pursuit of sin
could diminish Gods fatherly affection and most constant love to him. For
though he were not ignorant, that God in his holiness did hate and abhor the
uncleanness of our sin; and in his justice would pursue it, to witness his
v^ter dislike and detestation thereof; ye^ for so much as Christ himself was
holy and undefiled even in his humane nature; and did not thrust himself into
this action, but was called and anointed by God to this honor, which God would
yield to none but to his only Son; and this readiness of the Son to l^ke
and obey his fathers counsel and decree, and to pity our misery by laying
our burden on his own shoulders; was in it self so glorious to God, and
gracious toward man, that it could not b^ but most meritorious and acceptable
to God, the Author, and accomplisher of man's Redemption by this means; what
cause could Christ have to doubt of his fathers love toward him, or of his
fathers approving and accepting his office and service tending wholly to the
perfourming of Gods will, and aduauncing of Gods glory?

But God was angry with our sins, though not with his son; and that Anger
Christ must bear, before we could be freed from it.] The more Angry God was
with our sins, the more contented he was with the person of his Son and
every part thereof, that submitted himself to the purpose and pleasure of God
to appease his wrath kindled against our offenses. And that Anger Christ did
undertake to quench, by satisfiyng the justice of God in such sort as seemed
best to God himself, and not by frustrating or declining it, nor by suffering
the substance of the same destruction and damnation which was due to us. Yea
this very point of Christ's obedience and patience, enduring and so upholding
Gods justice according to Gods own will, (respecting who he was that in this
wise submitted and emptied him self) was far more contenting and pleasing to
God, then if the whole world had been condemned for sin to hell fire. For
God delights not in the destruction of the wicked, but in the obedience of
his Son he took infinite delight; not revenging him with rage as an enemy,
but imposing a fatherly correction on him for our sins; which in his person
could extend no farther, that is, to none other kind of death; and in ours
would have been the eternal destruction of body and soul. Wherefore the
wisdom and goodness of God chose out the person of his own Son purposely;
that neither our sins might be remitted as trifles skant provoking his Anger,
nor his Justice meet with such as no way deserved to be respected or spared;
but that the burden of our sins might be translated from us, who were
unworthy of all favor, and lie upon the shoulders of his own Son, whom in
all justice he must and did most highly love and tender; and therefore could
award no farther or other punishment against him for our sins, then might
stand with the moderation and affection of a father, and try the obedience and
submission of a son. Sharp was the chasticement of our peace on that part of
our Savior which was capable of pain and smart, least God should seem to
dally with our sins; but not such as either exceeded his strength, or any way
changed or called in question Gods favor toward him. And so our Savior
conceived and resolved of all his sufferings, that by Gods justice they must
have in them grief and anguish very painful and offensive to his humane
nature, because our sins were very loathsome and displeasing to Gods divine
nature: yet so that nothing should be laid on him, which might ouerwhelme or
endanger his obedience or patience; and that Gods purpose in so doing was to
abolish sin, and abate his wrath, his justice being thus satisfied in the
person of Christ Jesus: and not to execute on his own Son the fulness of that
vengeance which was prepared for sin in men and Angels.

And where the Discourser prateth so much of Gods VERY wrath, and PROPER
vengeance for sin, to be executed on the body and soul of Christ; if he
mean the very same wrath and vengeance which is prepared for devils, and shall
be executed on all the damned; he openly blasphemeth. For then must the Son
of God be everlastingly adjudged to hell fire as they are. If he fly to the
substance and essence thereof; he foolishly cau^lleth, or vainly seeks to
shift his hands of open impiety. For if by substance and essence of hell fire
provided for sin, he mean only a sharp and extreme pain; then by this
childish sophistry, an headache, or toothach, a fit of an ague, or pang of the
stone, if the pain be sharp, are in substance and essence all one and the
very same, which the damned now suffer in hell; since he is no way able to
prove that God is the immediate tormentor of souls in hell. But thus to mock
and delude the dreadful Judgments of God against sin, and to play with the
person of Christ in so weighty matters of our salvation, is fitter for Pagans
then Christians; and well this Discourser may multiply the miste of his words,
but he shall never be able thence to der^e any light of truth. If he mean the
very same pain in soul or body which the damned suffer; he runs headlong
into that impiety, which he would seem to shun. For the bodies of the damned
suffer hell fire, which Christ's did not; and their Souls apprehend that God is
their enemy, and not only hates them, but has rejected, accursed, and
condemned them for ever; which to imagine of Christ's soul, is to charge him
with plain Infidelity and Apostasy. Christ therefore rightly conceived of
his sufferings; and knew God to be a gracious and loving father, even to his
manhood; though such was the constant course of Gods justice, to which Christ
submitted himself, that the price of our sins might not ^e easy in the
person of our Savior; to make us the more wary, how to provoke Gods justice
hereafter, and to acknowledge our selves the more bound to him, who with his no
small smart redeemed us; and withal to ratify the fearful vengeance of God
powered on the wicked to be most just, when as the exchange of our sins was so
grievous to the undefiled and well-beloved manhood of the Son of God. Since
then God could no way be displeased with the nature, office, or action of
Christ in offering himself a ransom for man, which God himself first decreed
before all worlds, promised by his Prophers, published by his Angels, testified
by signs and wonders, and confirmed with his own voice from heaven; and the
sufferings of Christ were tempered with Gods love, proportioned to Christ's
strength, supported with ^oy, accepted with favor, and reward^d with all honor
in him and in us for his sake; what wound could this chastisement make in the
depth of Christ's soul, when it was executed on his body? or what could the
soul of Christ conceive more, then that God was in de^de angry with our
sins, and therefore would not accept our persons being in ourselves
vnr^ghteous and odious unto him. And yet in mercy towa^ds ^s, and honor ^wards
his Son, God would make him the Redeemer and Savior of the world, not
neglecting his Justice, nor forgetting his love, but so mixing them both
together, that his dislike of our sins might appear in the punishment of
them, and his relenting from the rigor of his Justice in favor of his only
Son might magnifi^ his mercy, satisfy his wrath, and enlarge his glory; and
declare in most ample manner the submission, compassion, and pe^fection of his
Son, as only worthy to perform that work, which procured, and receive that
honor, which followed man's Redemption?

Christ then suffered from the hand of God, but mediate, that is, GOD DELIVERED
^
him into the hands of sinners, who were Satan's instruments, with all eproach
and wr^nge to put him to a contumelious and grievous death: God by his ^ecret
wisdom and justice dec^eeing, appointing, and ordering what he should suffer
at their hands. Our sins ^e bare in his body on the tree, not that his soul
was free from fear sorrow, (...), derision, and temptation, but that the
wicked and malicious ^ewes practiced all kind of shameful violence and cruel
tortu^es on him by Whipping, Racking, pric^ing, and wounding the tenderest
parts of his body, whereby his soul ^elt extreme and intole^able pains. In
all which he saw the determinate counsel of God, and received in the garden
from his father this Judgment for our sins, that he should be (...)
d^liuered into the hands of sinners. For had he not humbly submitted himself ^
to obey his fathe^s will, no power in earth could have prevailed against him;
but as he ^
had often fortold his Disciples what the ^.
Priests, Scribes, and Gentiles should do unto him so when the ^
hour was come, which was foreappointed of God, to obey ^
his fathers will, he yielded himself into their hands; they persuing him to
death, of envy and malice, but God thus ^.
perfourming even by their wicked hands what he had ^oreshewed by his ^.
Prophets, that Christ should suffer. For they not knowing him, ^or the word^
of the Prophets, fulfilled them in condemning him; yea they fulfilled all
things which were written of him. So that no man shall need to run to the
immediate hand of God, nor to the pains of hell for the punishment of our
sins in the person of Christ: the Jews FVLFILLED ALL THINGS that were
written of him touching his sufferings, and therewith Gods anger against our
sins was appeased, and God himself reconciled unto us. Esaias speaking of the
violence done by the Jews to Christ, says, he was ^
wounded for our transgressions and broken for our iniquities, and with his
stripes we are healed. (Thus) the Lord laid upon him the iniquity of all us,
and he 1. Pet. 2.
bare our sins in his body on the tree; by those sufferings before and on the
Cross which the Scriptures expressly declare and describe. And as for the
immediate hand of God tormenting the soul of Christ with the self same pains
which the damned now suffer in hell, which is this deuisers maine drift; when
he makes or offers any proof thereof out of the word of God, I shall be
ready to receive it, if I can not refute it: till then I see no cause why every
wandering wit should imagine what monsters please him in man's redemption, and
obtrude them to the faithful without any sentence or syllable of holy
Scripture. I have no doubt but all the godly will be so wise, as to suffer no
man to reign so much over their faith with fancies and figures, unwarranted by
the Scriptures, unknown to all the learned and ancient councels and Fathers,
unheard of in the Church of Christ till our age, wherein some men applaude more
their own inventions then all humane or divine instructions.

The fear of bodily sufferings you think could not be the cause that there
Defenc. page 12. l. 35.
strained out from Christ much sweat of clotted blood.] You strain the text of
the Evangelist to draw it to your bent. Saint Luke has no such words, that
there strained out from Christ much sweat of clotted blood: he says, Christ's
Luc. 22.
sweat was like drops of blood trickling down to the ground. Theophylact a
Greek borne, and no way ignorant of his mother tongue, expresses Christ's
sweat in the garden by these words, (...), Christ's body or face DISTILLED with
plentiful drops of sweat. And albeit (...) sometimes signify the congealed
parts of that which is otherwise liquid, and compacted pieces of that which else
is poudered; yet often it notes that which is thick^ in comparison with
thinner, or eminent in respect of plainer. Now Christ's sweat might be thick
by reason it issued from the inmost parts of his body, and was permixed with
blood, or else it might break out with great and eminent drops, as coming from
him violently and abundantly, and being colored with blood and congealed with
cold, might trickle down like DROPS or strings of blood upon the ground.
Howsoever, the Scripture says not his sweat was clotted blood, but like to
congealed or cooled blood, neither that such clots were strained out from him,
but that his sweat being thicked and cooled on his face, fell from him like
strings of blood. But grant there could be no reason given of Christ's bloody
sweat in the garden, no more then there can be of the issuing first of blood,
and then of water out of his side when he was dead; which S. John does exactly
note as strange but yet true; will you conclude what please you, because many
things in Christ both living and dying we^e miraculous? I bind no man's
conscience to any probabilities for the cause of this sweat, but only to the
express words and necessary consequents of holy Scripture, and yet I wish
all men either to be sober and leave that to God which he has concealed from
us, or if they will needs be gessing at the reason thereof (for certain
knowledge they can have none) by no means to relinquish the plain words or
known grounds of holy Scripture, to embrace a fancy of their own begetting.

The learned and ancient Fathers have delivered diverse opinions of this sweat,
which thou may see (Christian Reader) in my Sermons, and which we shall have
occasion anon to reexamine: every one of them being (as I think) more probable
and more agreeable to Christian piety, then this Discoursers dream of hell
pains, or Gods immediate hand at that present tormenting of the soul of
Christ. And if we look to the order and sequence of the Gospel, we shall
find that fervent zeal extremely heating the whole body, melting the
spirits, thinning the blood, opening the pores, and so coloring and thicking
the sweat of Christ, might in most likelihood be the cause of that bloody
sweat. Which S. Luke seems to insinuate when he says, that after Christ was
Luc. 22.
comforted by an Angel from heaven, (and so recovered from his former fear,
and freed from suffering hell pains, wherein there is no comfort) he prayed
more earnestly, (or ardently) and his sweat was (in color and consistence)
like drops (or strings) of blood trickling down to the ground. So that
feruencie in prayer is set down next before that sweat in the Gospel, as a
precedent or cause thereof. Howbeit I only bar the boldness of this
deviser, who presumes what pleases him of Christ's bloody sweat in the
garden, because the Scriptures do not exactly mention the cause; and think it
no reason to let him build on a blind conjecture, a false conceit of his own
without any warrant of holy Scripture.

But I am repugnant to my self, and some where Defenc. page 13. l. 27.
I hold that Christ suffered no more but mere bodily pains, that is in his
soul from and by his body. Page 14. l. 18.
Nevertheless contr^riwise I seem somewhere to yield wholely so much as you
affirm.] I leave that grace to you Sir Discourser, to roll to and fro, and
when you have said a thing after a sense and in a sort, then in another kind to
unsay it again; and laying the whole foundation of your cause upon Christ's
suffering the wrath of God, neither to bring any proofs, or to show any parts
thereof by the word of God; but to play with the terms of very, proper, and
mere; and to call that the opening of the whole question. Indeed I every where
defend that Christ suffered no death expressed or mentioned in the Scriptures,
save only the death of the body; from other passions or sufferings of the
soul, as fear, sorrow, shame, and such like, I do not exempt the soul of
Christ, when he sustered for our sins; though I leave no place in him for the
fear of damnation, sting of conscience, despair or doubt of Gods favor, and
such other shipwrackes of all faith, hope, patience, and piety. The Cross,
death and blood of Christ when I name, I use those words as the Scripture does,
to declare the whole manner and order of his passion from the garden to the
grave, as it is described in the Evangelists; not excluding either the fear or
agony, which befell him before he was apprehended, but comprising within his
death his obedience and patience in all those as^ictions, which he suffered
till he died. And this is no wavering in me, to retain the words of the holy
Ghost in their right sense and use; but it is rather a childish dalliance in
you, Sir Discourser, to suppose that the death of Christ does import no more
but the very act of giving up the ghost; or else if I by that word design the
rest of Christ's sufferings endured at the time of his death by the witness of
holy Scripture, you will also hemme in your hell pains within the list of the
same words, though the Evangelists name or note no such thing in all the
history of Christ's pass^on.

So likewise in speaking of Gods wrath against the wicked I wrap in no Ridles,
nor enuiron the Reader with a windlace of words; but plainly and fairly
distinguish it either by the natural virtues and properties that are in God
mis^iking and repre^sing sin, or by the effects and punishments proceeding
from God to revenge the works and reward the workers of iniquity. In the
wicked, Gods holiness hates the evil deed, and the doer; that is, both the
sin, and the sinner; and by his justice without all love or favor toward
them awardeth a punishment against them according to their deserts; which the
power of God does execute on them, not respecting their strength, but rather
inabling them to continue in perpetual torments of body and soul in hell
fire for ever: Gods purpose being only to revenge sin in them, and to
destroy them for their sins; which is most holy and righteous in him, though
it be never so grievous and intolerable to them. Gods just and full judgment
against sin, where and when it pleases him to inflict it, is the depriving
body and soul of all outward and inward peace and grace in this life for the
time, and the rejecting of both from all blis^e and rest in the world to come
for ever; which is the los^e of God and of all his blessings provided in this
life, and the next for his elect. These causes and parts Gods anger has
against the wicked for their sins, and to every of these the Scripture
bears witness.

In Christ Gods holiness infinitely embraced the humility, obedience, and
charity of his Son offering himself to be the ransommer of man, and
perfectly loved the integrity, innocence, and purity of his manhood created,
called, and anointed of God to this intent and end, that his death and
bloodshedding should be the redemption of the world, though God utterly hated
the sins of men, which his son then assumed into the body of his flesh to
bear the burden of them, when we could not. Wherefore Gods justice finding
the love of the Father toward his Son, far to exceed the hatred of the
Creator against the uncleanness of his sinful, but sedused creature, did
relent from the rigor of that judgment, which was provided for sin in
Angels, and with a fatherly regard and respect to the meanest part of the
person of his son, decreed a punishment for our sins in the manhood of
Christ, which was a corporal death, accompanied with the sharpest pains, that
Christ might endure with obedience and patience: whose voluntary submission
and sacrifice for sin the justice of God did accept as a most sufficient
price and payment for all our sins, which in themselves deserved everlasting
destruction of body and soul in hell fire with devils. This correction though
very sharp yet not ouerpressing the patience of Christ's manhood, Gods justice
would not release to his own Son, least he should seem to make light
account of our sin, (if it were remitted only for prayer and entreaty) and
without just cause so terribly to punish the sins of the reprobate with all
kinds of death, I mean corporal, spiritual, and eternal. And greater or
other death, then the death of the body, God by no justice could impose on the
person of his Son, since Christ could not be subjected to sin, which he
must cleanse and abolish in us; much less be rejected from everlasting ^lisse
and joy, to which he must bring us; least of all linked and chained with
devils in perpetual flames of hell fire, for so much as he was the true and
only Son of God, for whose sake we all were adopted and made heirs of
eternal salvation. And for this cause the power of God, which is otherwise
most dreadful to men and Angels, and so was then to the manhood of Christ,
restrained it self, and tempered the smart of Christ's pains to the st^ength
of Christ's humane nature, not meaning to ouerwhelme his patience, but to try
his obedience to the uttermost. In all which suf^erings Gods counsel and
purpose was most favorable and honorable even to the manhood of Christ, the
perfection of whose confidence and patience he would demonstrate to Angels and
men and propose him a pattern to all the Sons of God, how to humble
thems^lues under the mighty hand of God; and accept his obedience unto death
as a most prec^ous and pleasing satisfaction and sacrifice for the sins of
his elect; and reward his humility with unspeakable honor in making him Lord
and Judge of all, both men and Angels, not only to confound the pride, and
supp^esse the power of Satan, but to adiudge him to everlasting torments with
all the wicked and accursed.

Against the tenor and effect of this Christian confession, which I refer to
the judgments of all that be learned and rightly instructed in the sacred
Scriptures, I never speak any one word to my knowledge; I cannot in every
sentence repeat every circumstance, nor of every page make a pair of
Indentures, much less may I forsake the form of wholesome words delivered in
the Scriptures. But the maine sum and scope of this doctrine being so fully
declared and so often repeated by me, I had no reason to fear the capacity, or
doubt the memory of any heedfull Reader. And howsoever some shallow trifler
may pick out a word here and there to carpe at, yet are there so many clear
places to direct all doubts, that no man needs to stumble, but he that will
not or can not stand upright. For let the Christian Reader look but to the
mark at which I aim in every place, and remember these two rules; that of
three sorts of death, which only are mentioned in the Scriptures, as the wages
of sin, to wit, corporal, spiritual and eternal death; I always remove
the two last from the person of Christ by describing or naming the first, which
was his corporal death? and in that I contain the whole course and manner of
his death, that is, the fears, forrow^s shames, temptations, derisions,
smarts, and pains, which the Scriptures record in the history of his death:
and all my words will prove plain and easy, which this man thinks so false
in themselves and so contrary to themselves. Examine my words which he has
brought for examples of contradiction and falsity, and see whether his labor
be any more than mere nugation and vanity.

A^ouching and proving that Christ could not suffer eternal damnation, which
is the full wages of sin, nor the death of the soul, which by the Scriptures
must exclude Christ from the favor and grace, truth and spirit of God: and
giving the reasons why sin could not prevail upon his person as it did upon
others, I conclude; What marvel then if sin, which should have wrought in us
an eternal destruction both of body and soul, could not farther prevail in
him (that is, to none other kind of death) but to the wounding of his flesh
and shedding of his blood, for the just and full satisfaction of all our
sins, even in the righteous and sincere judgment of God? In this I free
Christ from eternal destruction or death of body and soul, which was the
wages of sin in our persons, but could not take hold on his, as the
difference there betwixt him and us declares. I exempted him by proofs in the
page precedent from the death of the soul, which was the maine scope of that
section, and so le^t him subject only to the third kind Sermons pa. 15. l. 4.
ad marg.
of death, which was corporal, and might be suffered not only without all
taint of sin, loss of grace, and change of Gods favor, but even with great
manifestation of Gods power and wisdom in his death; and commendation of
Christ's obedience and patience unto death. That third kind of death I do not
name, but describe by the wounding of Christ's flesh and shedding of his blood;
Sermons pa. 4. l. 34.
the rest (of his pains and griefs) that went before, not being excluded as
superfluous, but continued and increased by that sharp and ^xtreame
martyrdom, which he endured on the cross^, as my caveat touching Christ's
Cross did plainly admonish. And since the whole manner of Christ's death and
shedding his blood expressed in the Scriptures, is the thing that I always
intend, and the word does import; when I name or touch the death of Christ* all
that he voluntarily or violently suffered when he yielded himself to be put to
death, ^s comprised in the mention of his death. Besides that Christ by his
bloody sweat in the garden began of his own accord in some sort to effuse
his blood for our sakes and safeties, and the efore it could have no just
reason to imagine that my words exclude his agony and other passions of the
soul mentioned in the Scriptures, specially my very next words affirming, that
Sermons pa. 17. l.
the same part might and did suffer in Christ which sinned in man (to wit) the
soul, (though) by no means it could receive the same wages which we should
have received.

But I profess by the general title of my Sermons the Defenc. page 14
full redemption of mankind by the death and blood of Christ; and commend the
j^ce and fruit of his bodily death as most sufficient] That indeed is very
dangerous to your fancy, who hold the joint sufferings Redemption by Christ's
blood most sufficient.
of Christ's soul from and by his body not properly to pertain to man's
redemption, for that they are common to men with beasts, and therefore labor
to frustrate all the words of the Holy Ghost delivered in the Scriptures as
improper, and impertinent to our salvation; but to me there can be no danger in
the truth, nor doubt of the fruit or force of those things which the spirit of
God so often and evidently commends unto us in the ^acred Scriptures as the
price of our redemption and means of our reconciliation to God. In Christ
(says Paul) we have Ephesians. 1.
redemption by his blood even the remission of our sins. Redemption by
Christ's blood you will and must g^ant; the Holy ghost does directly avouch it:
but whether that redemption be full and most sufficient, which is purchased by
the blood of Christ, you do make some doubt, or else you need not stick at my
words, which import so much. Of that if you doubt, you must bear the name of
some other sect, and not of a Christian, for no Christian may doubt whether the
redemption which we have by the blood of Christ be f^ll and suff^cient or no.
To make Christ in part a Savior, is to make him in part no Savior, contrary
to S Peter, who says, Acts 4.
There is no salvation in any other. If you will de^iue our whole redemption
from him, but not from his blood shed for us, then give you S. John the lie,
who says, The 1. John 1.
blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all sin. Clensing from all sin is
full and perfect redemption from sin; and sin being fully remitted and
purged, there is no cause of breach between God and us, that should hinder our
salvation. Christ by his own Hebr. 9.
blood (says Paul) entered once into the holy place having purchased eternal
red^mption. Fuller or more sufficient than eternal redemption we neither
expect, nor ever shall have any; since that which is eternal, admits no
change nor increase. Then that redemption which Christ has purchased by his
blood, is most full and sufficient by the Apostles testimony; and sooner shall
you prove your self to be no sound Teacher, than that to be no sound doctrine,
which has so manifest witness in holy Scripture.

I teach that the Defenc. pa. 14
joint sufferings of Christ (the soul feeling what the body suffered) are most
auailable for our salvation; and that (besides the sacrifice of Christ's body)
there is no The joint sufferings of Christ most available for our salvation.
other sacrifice of his soul, which can be neither bodily nor bloody.] If I
alone did teach thus, and not the whole Church of Christ with me; or if the
sacred Scriptures which must guide us all what to affirm and believe in the
work of our salvation, did not teach the same; I were worthy to be challenged:
but if I say no more than the Scriptures do warrant me to speak, look you Sir
Discourser to your late created Creed that can not admit nor endure the words
of the Holy Ghost. That the true sacrifice for sin was but ONE and ONCE made,
and that it required the BODY, BLOOD, and DEATH of the Offerer, is not my
addition, but the Apostles assertion. Christ Heb. 9. verse. 26.
appeared (says Paul) in the end of the world once to put away sin by the
sacrifice of himself; and by reason he was an high Hebr. 7. verse 17.
Priest after the order of Melchisedech, and a Heb. 8. verse. 2.
Minister of the true Tabernacle and Sanctuary, it was of necessity he should
have somewhat also to offer, Heb. 10. 5.
Wherefore when he comes into the world, he says (to God) Sacrifice and
offering thou would not, but a body have thou ordained me. verse. 7.
It is written of me that I should do thy will O God; verse. 10.
by the which will we are sanctified (says the Apostle) even by the offering
of the body of Jesus Christ once. Who after he had offered (this) verse. 2
one sacrifice for sin sits for ever at the right hand of God. For with
(this) verse. 14.
one offering has he (consecrated or) made perfect for ever them that are
sanctified. That likewise without Heb. 9. 22.
effusion of blood there is no remission, and therefore Christ with his verse.
12.
own blood entered in once unto the holy place, and obtained eternal
redemption; as also that the verse. 16.
death of the testator must be, where a testament is; in either of these the
Apostle is evident and vehement. Now if you (Sir Discourser) can convey these
things to the souls proper and immediate suffering the pains of hell from the
hand of God, and show how these resolutions of the Apostle perteine properly
yea only to the soul of Christ; we shall greatly wonder at your wisdom. For
thereby shall you prove, that the soul has not only a body, but blood also
that may be shed, which are miracles, I will not say monsters, both in
Scripture and nature. Luke 24.
A spirit (says Christ) has no flesh and bones, as ye see me have. If you can
teach Christ that he never knew before, by my consent you shall be allowed for
more than a Creed-maker. Howbeit, you will mar your own market in so doing.
For if the soul consist of body and of blood, what shall become of her proper
and immediate faculty, of suffering without and besides the body, which you
so highly advanced in the beginning, as to make it the proper and principal
humane suffering? If you shrink from these follies or rather frensies, as I
hope you will, then must you grant the joint sufferings of Christ, I mean the
wounding of his body and shedding of his blood even unto death, as the
Scriptures describe it, to be the true sacrifice for sin, and consequently
most available for our salvation. If you think I exclude the soul of Christ
from her part in this bodily and bloody sacrifice of Christ; I have so often
said and showed the contrary in my former reply that I am weary of iterating
one and the same thing, though you be never weary of mistaking it. My former
words I repeat again, that the Reader may see, I have no cause to recant or
control them. Conclus. pa. 352. l. 19.
The true sacrifice for sin which Christ offered, must have the body, the
blood, and the death of the offerer; none of which agree to the soul of
Christ, though the body without a soul could be no reasonable sacrifice; and
therefore I exclude not the soul, whose obedience, innocence, and patience
concurred to sanctify this sacrifice, but I note the parts of the sacrifice
for sin by the Apostles doctrine were those, which I named, the blood and
death of the Sacrificer, both which must needs be found in his body, and not
in his soul. These words you quote in the margent, but you take not the pains
to refute them, much less to establish your unbloody and vnbodily sacrifice of
Christ's soul suffering hell pains from the immediate hand of God. Which kind
of offering for sin is as strange to the Scriptures, and to all the learned
and ancient fathers as the rest of your unknown doctrine. And therefore you
do well to strain still on the same string by censuring what you mislike, and
never proouing what you affirm, least you should mar your music, if you
should proceed to the parts or proofs of your new found Redemption by the
pains of hell.

Yet Defenc. pa. 14
somewhere I seem to yield wholly as much as you affirm; as where I say, the
same part indeed might suffer in Christ which sinned in man, I mean the
soul.] Somewhat it is you find so many writers new and old on your side; you
here no sooner the suffering Christ might suffer in s^le and yet not hell
pains.
of the soul, or the anger of God against sin in any man, but you presently
count him under your colors. Even as I make for you, when I write against
you, so do the Ancient fathers, and later Divines, whose names you abuse.
[But if Defenc. pa. 14. l. 21.
I mean as I ought, then at least I follow your meaning.] It is a piece of
your skill, when I speak directly against your fancies, to make men believe I
mean as you do, or at least I ought so to mean. Indeed if you may be vmpeere
what I ought to mean, I shall be sure to iump with your meaning; but look to
my words good Sir and measure my meaning by that which I speak, and not by
that which you would have me speak. I said Christ's soul might suffer for
sin: what collect you thence? I did not add without or with the body, so
that all the sufferings of Christ inflicted on his body might be and were
impressed in his soul, and you nothing the nearer to your purpose of hell
pains suffered in the Soul of Christ. But grant the soul of Christ did
suffer for sin without concurrence of the body; must it needs follow, he
therefore suffered the pains of hell? how many griefs and pains of the soul
are there, not proceeding from the body, which are nothing like nor near the
pains of hell? For example in hearty and true repentance how great is the
grief and pain of every part and faculty of the soul detesting and
abhorring sin, and fearing and feeling the power of Gods wrath? and yet I
trust each penitent person does not suffer the pains of hell. Fear, grief,
and sorrow then, the soul of Christ might deeply taste when he suffered for
sin, and yet be far from the pains of hell. But your collection from my
words is more absurd; for where I say, the soul of Christ might suffer for
sin, yet by no means could it receive the same wages (of sin) which we
should have received; you infer not only without any words of mine, but
directlv against my words; ergo I mean, or I ought to mean, that the soul
and mind of Christ suffered the pains of hell from the immediate hand of God:
and so where I avouch Christ by no means could suffer the same wages (of sin)
which we should have suffered; you paraphrase, Imeane, or I ought to mean,
Christ suffered the self same which we should have suffered, and of my
negatiues you make affirmatiues, and then tell the Reader I contradict my self.

But in plain terms I Defenc. pa. 14. l. 27.
allow in Christ all those afflictions and passions of the Soul which
naturally and necessarily follow pain; and this ALL reaches unto more then
mere bodily pains; it includes the souls proper and immediate pains also.]
Where you learned to reason I do not know, but you have the best grace to
disgrace your self that ever I saw; and if this be all the learning you have,
you may clout shoes with this Al. Do the torments of hell naturally and
necessarily follow pain? then whosoever in any part, or for any cause is
payned, suffers the pains of hell, or at least the souls proper and
immediate pains, which you make extremest and sharpest in hell. Babes and
boys may thus babble; it is a shame for men to talk so much out of square. Let
my words stand simplely as you bring them, and allow in Christ all those
afflictions and passions of the soul, which naturally and necessarily follow
pain, what conclude you out of them? your sight is very sharp, if you see any
absurdity in them. Howbeit you draw my words from their right course and
sense, by leaving out what pleases you: My words are Sermons pa. 87.
When the ancient fathers affirm that Christ dyed for us the death of the
body only, we must not like children imagine, they exclude the union,
operation, or passion of the soul: but in the death of his body and shedding
of his blood, they include all those afflictions and passions of the soul
which naturally and necessarily follow pain, and accompany death. Christ
suffering for us a painful death how could it be otherwise, but such
afflictions and passions of the soul as naturally and necessarily follow pain
and accomp^ny death, should be found in the soul of Christ, unless we give
him an insensible flesh or impassiole soul, both which are errors in the
nature of Christ? His flesh wa^ sensible, and his soul passible as ours is,
because they both were humane. Pai^ then and death in my words are plainly
referred to the body of Christ, whose ^lesh could not be wounded and blood shed
as his was, but naturally and nec^ssarily his ^le must feel the pain thereof.
And yet if my words w^e not limited to the pain of Ch^sts body, as indeed they
are; I see no inconuenienc^ growing from them, nor help for your fancy
contained in them. Def^ 14. l. 29
Yet plai^er (as fauo^g your error) I say, (...), pain, and grief of body or
mind be it never so great, will commend Christ's obedience and patience; And the
punishment of sin, which proceeds from the ius^ice of God, and (...) (...)
that Christ might and did bear. Yea he suffered death, with all painf^ ^ut no
sinful (...) or ^onsequents. How good a sempste^ you are, does well appea^ by
your short cu^ing and ^ide (...) thing my words together. The first sentence
you take our of a Section of my (...) wherein I purposely show, that not only
the pains of hell, but even the fear o^ (...) must ^e far from the soul of
Christ. The suffering of hell pains in the soul of Christ, I there refuse as ^
not cons^t to the Christian (...), but (...) (...) to the (...) ^ertaintie,
sanct^ie of Christ's person, (...): (...) and (...) with God. Immediately after
the words which you bring I say, (...) Christ there could be^ ^
no apprehension of h^ll pains as due to him or determi^ for him, but ^e m^st
(...) (...) ^are that God would be inconstant or v^st, which are more then
(...) (...) Yea to these very words which you (...) I ^oyne this exception in
the same (...) but the ^.
sense of damnation or separat^n from God, or the fear or doubt thereof in
Chr^t as they quench faith and abolish grace, so they dissolve the union and
commu^on of ^ath (...) natures, or else breed a false persuasion and sinful
temptation in the soul of Christ. Who can be so sottish as not to see, that my
former words import Smart, (...) and g^fe of body and mind which have in them
neither sen^e nor sear of hell pains that is of damnation or separation from
God; since no man is damned but unto the p^ines and place of hell, and is first
separated from God?

With as great discretion you fasten on an other sentence of mine; where though
(...) ^position be not general but indefinite, and has two restraints even
from your (...) (...); to wit, in this li^e, where Christ suffe^ed; in ^ like
to us, who a^ his (...) (...); you throw off all, forgetting what your self
objected, and whereto I (...) (...) ^nswere, and suppose that here I fully
concur with your con^ites. But (...) (...) your own objection, and that will
rightly guide my solution. Your reason, which you proudly boasted could not be
refu^ed by the wi^ of man, ^as (as you call (...) (...) from the les^e to the
more. ^
Thus do the members of Chri^ (...) the terrors (...) God and sorrows of
h^ll.) therefore of necessity Christ suffered the lik^. P^ooue you by this
A^gument that Christ after this life suffered the terrors of God and sorrows
of hell? I do you wrong to ^pect it, for it is open impiety so to think or
say. Then do you more wrong to imagine that I extended my words farther then to
refell your reason. As you spoke of this life, though you expressed it not; so
I replied that the pu^shment (...) s^nne, which proceeds from the justice of
God (in this life) and is no sin, Christ might and did bear; but in no wi^e
those terrors and fears of consci^nce, which proc^ from sin, and a^gment
sin. Now I pray you what allowance find you here for your new erected hell,
or how force you my words to fit your devises? Terror of conscience, and fear
of hell could have no place in Christ, by reason they proceed in (...) from
r^morle of sin, weakness of faith, and doubt for the time of Gods favor,
which we cannot ascribe to Christ without drawing him into the dregs of our
sin. And therefore when we compare his suffering with ours, we must always
except the roots and branches of our corruption, for that they be taintes of
sin, and wants of grace neither of which may be admitted in the soul of
Christ. Now if I exclude the (...) (...), and terror of conscience from the
person of Christ in the same sentence, which you quote* how should my words
sound in your ears, as if I admitted the true pains of hell to be suffered in
the soul of Christ, which I have often said the wicked do not suffer in this
life; muchlesse Christ's members, whence you fet your pat^e for Christ's
sufferings; least of all Christ himself, on whom that vengeance by no justice
could be inflicted? The mortal bodies of men and their frail life, are by no
means capable of those terrible judgments of God against sin reserved for
another world: and howsoever your error leads you to adventure the making of
a new hell, my resolution is every where occurrent in my Sermons, that no
justice of God could award against his own Son the same pains, which the
damned in hell do suffer; if we measure their pains by the Scriptures and not
by your fancies: besides that the members of Christ are not subjected in this
life to those torments of hell, which the reprobate in an other place do and
shall endure. Romans 8.
There is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus. How then should the
Lord Jesus himself not only fear, which I there deny, but also suffer the
same condemnation to hell pains, which the wicked and accursed do and shall
suffer?

Defenc. pa. 15. li. 6.
We say not Christ suffered simply all the pains of the damned; he felt not
such as are by their very nature sins, as well as pains; as indeed
desperation is. ^ When God offers Desperation in hell is no sin.
grace and mercy, as in this world he does to many; to renounce or refuse is a
damnable sin; but in hell where there is no promise nor possibility of
either; there to despair is no sin: yea rather there to hope, that Gods
irreuocable judgment shall be altered, and his settled counsel changed, were to
hope that God will be false of his word, and wavering in his will, which
indeed is a mighty sin. And therefore neither reiection, confusion,
destruction, desperation, nor damnation, are sins in hell, but the just and
fearful punishments of sin, ordained by Gods justice, and inflicted by Gods
power; who there requires no obedience, but only executes vengeance; the
suffering whereof is not sinful, though it be never so painful to the
damned, abiding for ever in the pollution and confusion of their sins here
committed. So that if my Lordship as you call it, do stand to my words, and
not clippe them nor renounce them, your Patriark ship gains little by them
for your purpose. For I by no means acknowledge that the true pains of hell
are inflicted on any in this life; and by no justice could the Son of God be
damned to suffer hell pains, either in substance or in circumstance, as the
Scriptures describe them. And therefore your vaunting before the victory.
depending only on the foolish mistaking, or peevish perverting of my words is
as ^idieulous, as it is vainglorious All you can get is this, that if you can
be suffered to wrest my words from their coherence and sense, without
respecting what goes in the same Section before them, or what is joined in the
same sentence with them; and then interlace them with other words of your
own, serving your turn when mine do not; you can pick out two or three
lines in the whole book, that thus abused and corrupted shall sound somewhat
toward the secrets of your fantastical hell. By which art of yours you make
me say in one section, that the justice of God both temporally and eternally
punishes the soul (ONLY) by the body; and in the next section, you say I
grant, that Christ did bear punishment of sin, (AS GREAT AS ANY IS)
proceeding from the justice of God, yet being no sin; and so with adding
(ONLY) to my words in the first place, and as (GREAT AS ANY IS) in the second,
you have made some show of contradiction in my positions, or at least in your
additions.

Thus much for the examination and refutation of those maine divisions and
positions which the Discourser has laid for the foundation of his cause in his
general opening of the Question; and likewise for the clearing of those
contradictions which he falsely supposed to be in my writings. Wherein if I
would have taken the trade which he does, I could with far more brevity and
facility have denied all that he affirms, and balanced my no to be every
way as good as his yea: but for their sakes that cannot discuss those things
themselves, I have not refused more largely and fully to express and prove the
truth in each of those points, which he catches hold of in defense of his
error, and thereby have given the Reader to understand that this Discoursers
new doctrine is as wide from the verity, as from the authority of holy
Scripture. There remain the particular challenges such as they are, which this
impugner makes to many parts and points of my Sermons, and of my conclusion
annexed to them; as also his defense of those special reasons published in his
first Treatise, which I refuted as far as needed in the conclusion before
mentioned. In which I mean to spend no more time then necessity forces me,
but to refer the Reader to the places where the things are purposely handled,
except some new matter not fully debated be offered unto me, by reason whereof
I may sometimes be drawn to make larger proof of some things, shortly but
truly before uttered by me; and ignorantly, if not peruersely mistaken by him.

To the Discoursers challenge that I forced my Text by mistaking the cross of
Christ for Christ's personal sufferings on the Cross, where Paul means the
afflictions of Christ's members in this world; I made in the conclusion of my
Sermons a tripartite answer, 1. That the Cross of Christ did always in the
Scriptures import the personal sufferings of Christ on the Cross; and never
the afflictions of the godly. 2. That the circumstances of the Text convinced
no less; which were Paul's earnest renouncing of all joy save in the Cross of
Christ, and his vehement opposing himself to those that joined circumcision to
the Cross of Christ, least they should suffer persecution for it at the hands
of the Jews. 3 That the best and most ancient Fathers, Ierom, Chrysostom,
Austen and others, expounded these words precisely of Christ's death on the
Cross.

To this what replieth our Controuller? The Defenc. page 22.
cross of Christ here signifies I grant Christ crucified, not in his own
person only, but also in his members.] Then first you be slipped from your
former resolutio delivered in your Treatise, which is no strange thing in your
writings. There your words were, Treatis. page 32.
I take it to be clear, the Apostle HERE SPEAKS NOT of the personal
sufferings of Christ, but of the godly: You there deny that Paul speaks of
Christ's personal sufferings, but of the godly. Here you affirm he speaks
of both, and least you should seem to divide them, you add; Paul does here
Defenc. page 22. l. 9.
jointly together understand by Christ's cross, the afflictions of the whole
mystical body, both head and members. A large and long Cross of Christ, that
contains not only his own death and passion, and whatsoever persecution he
suffered in his life time, but jointly together all the asflictions of the
godly from the beginning of the world to the end. I will not ask you where you
find, or how you prove Christ's cross to be so used in the Scriptures; you that
take upon you to frame new Redemptions, new hels, and new heavens to your
fancy; will not stick to frame a new Cross of Christ, without any Scripture:
howbeit know this, all wise will beware of such expositions as have neither
example nor ground in the word of God. For though our Savior sometimes said,
If any will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his Matthew. ^6.
Mark 8. Luke 9.
Cross and follow me; yet he never said, let him take up my Cross and follow
me; and Paul who often uses the word Cross without addition, and many times
the Cross of Christ, never takes it in all his Epistles for the afflictions
of the godly, but only for the spiteful and shameful death which Christ in
his own person suffered on the Cross. So that howsoever every Christian may
be said to take or bear his Cross; the Scriptures no where apply the Cross
of Christ, but only to the force and fruit of Christ's death suffered on the
Cross for us and our salvation: which is the sense that I affirm Saint Paul
here intended.

But the marks, afflictions, and DYING OF THE LORD JESUS, are used in this and
other places of the Scripture, to signify the afflictions of the godly.] Those
places have special words adjoined, which can not be referred to the person
of Christ, but must of force belong to the speaker or sufferer. As Galat. 6.
I bear IN MY BODY the marks of the Lord Jesus, says Paul: and again,
Coloss. 1.
I fulfill the rest of the afflictions of Christ IN MY FLESH. And so, 2. Corinthians. 4.
we bear about IN OUR BODY the dying of the Lord Jesus. Where these words, in
my body, and in my flesh are proper to the speaker, and no way deriueable to
the person of Christ. Wherefore the marks, afflictions, and dying of the Lord,
must either import a resemblance to the personal sufferings of Christ, or
demonstrate the cause for which the Apostle suffered, which was for Christ's
sake: and in this is no difficulty, to suffer affliction, in like manner as
Christ did, or to suffer it for Christ's cause. But the Cross of Christ,
whereof the Apostle speaks in my Text was that, at which the Jews were so
greatly offended, for which the true preachers were so sharply persecuted, to
which the false teachers joined circumcision for the better attayning of
salvation, in which the godly most rejoiced, and by which the faithful were
crucified to the world, and the world to them; and all these are proper to the
personal death and cross of Christ as he was the Savior of the world, and
not common to the afflictions of the Saints. It was a question of doctrine, not
of manners, for which the Apostle so much striued; and the highest point of
man's redemption, not of man's perfection, in which he so much gloried. For
touching other men's miseries, how should Paul rejoice in them; or how should he
by them be crucified to the world; and the world to him? He had good cause to
rejoice in the death of Christ though it were never so much maligned and
pursued by the Jews, because it was the wisdom and power of God to save all
that believed; and in his own troubles for Christ's quarrel he might rejoice
as having thereby Philip. 3.
fellowship with Christ's afflictions and made conformable to his death: but to
rejoice at other men's troubles, that has no warrant in the word of God. Romans
12.
Rejoice, says Paul, with them that rejoice, and weep with them that weep.
We may take comfort, and give God thanks that the faithful have grace to
endure persecution with patience and courage; but that affliction befalls
them, we may not be glad. For that is to rejoice at other men's harms, which is
repugnant to the rule of charity. Neither could Paul be crucified to the
world, by other men's troubles long before dead, or then unborn; examples might
encourage the weak, but Paul was strong and proposed himself as a pattern of
patience, suffering persecution. And therefore this haling into the Cross of
Christ the afflictions of all the godly that ever were or shall be, as if the
Apostle so highly rejoiced in them, and were crucified to the world by them, is
wholly against the hair, and has neither dependence nor coherence with the
Apostles words.

Besides you do not, or will not understand the maine point here in question
betwixt the Apostle and those false teachers of the Jews, whom he reprooueth
and refuteth in this Epistle. You say indeed, Defenc. pa. 22. l. 2.
It is manifest the Apostle here (Gala. 6. v. 12.) reprooueth the false
teachers for mingling the pure doctrine, because they were loath to taste
persecution; but you neither tell us what the Gospel was which they thus
mingled with circumcision, nor why they feared persecution, nor from whom;
which things if you would have specified as the Scriptures deliver them, you
should soon have perceived how properly the Apostle adds for the Cross of
Christ, and how rightly I referred these words to the force and fruit of
Christ's death, which is the sum and substance of the Gospel. What the Gospel
was which Paul preached, appears plainly by his own words. 1. Corin. 1.
verse. 23.
We preach (says he) Christ crucified, unto the Jews a scandal (or offense)
and unto the Grecians foolishness: 24.
but unto them which are called both of the Jews and Greeks, Christ the power
of God, and wisdom of God, to save all that believe. For Christ is 30.
made of God to us righteousness, redemption, and sanctification; to the end,
31.
That he which rejoices might rejoice in the Lord. In so much that 1. Cor. 2.
verse. 2.
I esteemed not to know any thing among you (says Paul) save Jesus Christ, and
him crucified. So that, Christ crucified, the Cross of Christ, the preaching
of the Cross, and the Gospel of Jesus Christ are phrases of like force used by
Paul for one and the self same word of truth, which is the doctrine of our
salvation by the death and blood of Christ. 1. Cor. 1. verse. 17.
Christ sent me (says he) to preach THE GOSPEL not with wisdom of words,
least THE CROSS OF CHRIST should be frustrate. For the 18.
PREACHING OF THE CROSS is to them that perish foolishness, but to us that
are saved, it is the power of God. Christ crucified then being the very ground
of our salvation, and the Gospel declaring him to be the power of God to save
all that believe; evidently the cross of Christ was the maine doctrine of the
Gospel which Paul preached to the Galathians; and which the false Apostles
mixed with circumcision and the righteousness of the law, as well for the
advancing themselves being Jews, as for fear of their countrymen, who
utterly disdained, and egerly pursued all that taught, a man hanged on a tree
as a malefactor, (for so the unbelieving Jews conceived of Christ) to be the
Savior of the world, and complement of all Gods promises made to the seed of
Abraham for their everlasting bliss.

The rage of the unbelieving Jews against Paul for preaching the death and
blood of Christ to be the Redemption of all the faithful is manifest in many
Acts 14. 17. 18. 21.
places of the Acts and of his own 2. Cor. 11. 1. These. 2.
Epistles; which fury whiles the false Apostles sought to decline, and
somewhat to please and pacify the Jews, they added circumcision and the
observation of the law unto the Cross of Christ as necessary for justification
and salvation, without which the death of Christ could do us no good. This
error then newly sown among the Galathians (to whom Paul before had preached
Christ crucified as the sole and sufficient mean of their Redemption, and
Justification, through faith in his blood) the Apostle throughout that large
Epistle of his written Gal. 6. 11.
unto them with his own hand, does purposely and mightily confute; and is so
far from coupling any thing with Christ as requisite for righteousness or
blessedness, and chiefly the law, that he opposes himself against men and
Angels for the truth of his doctrine; and resolves clean contrary to those
false teachers and flatterers of the Jewish nation, in most vehement manner;
Gal. 5.
Behold I Paul say unto you, that if ye be circumcised, Christ shall profit
you nothing. Ye are abandoned from Christ, whosoever are justified by the law:
ye are fallen from grace. His reasons are urgent and evident. Gal. 2.
If righteousness (could be) by the law, then Christ died in vain. Gal. 3.
And that no man is justified by the law in the sight of God, it is plain; for
the just shall live by faith; now the law is not of faith. For all have sinned,
and are justified freely by (Gods) grace through the Redemption that is in
Christ Jesus, Romans 3.
whom God has set forth, to be a Reconciliation THROVGH FAITH in his blood,
to declare his righteousness by the forgiveness of sins. Gal. 3.
As many (then) as are of the works of the law, are under the curse; but Christ
has redeemed us from the curse of the law being made a curse for us; (as it is
written, cursed is every one that hangs on a tree) that the blessing of
Abraham might come on the Gentiles through Jesus Christ. And that made the
Apostle enter this disputation with so sharp a rebuke to the Galathians, for
sliding from this Gospel or glad tidings of their salvation in the Cross of
Christ, to circumcision and the works of the law. Gal. 3.
O foolish Galathians, (says he) who has bewitched you not to obey the truth;
to whom Jesus Christ was before your eyes described crucified among you? And in
this confident course he goes on with plentiful and substantial proofs;
that the Redemption, righteousness, blessedness, adoption, freedom and
sanctification of Gods children, proceed from the grace of God and of Christ,
who Gal. 1.
gave himself for our sins that he might Heb. 2.
taste death for all, and are received by faith in the blood of Christ, which
confesses him to be the Son of God and the only Savior of the world.

What marvel then, if in the close of this example, when Paul had showed his
care to have the Galathians persist in this truth, in that he wrote so Gal. 6.
v. 11.
long a letter unto them with his own hand, which otherwise he did not use; he
did also traduce the pride and policy of the false Apostles, who partly to
advance themselves because they were Jews, partly to shun the envy of their
countrymen, frustrated the Cross of Christ, by adding circumcision and the
observation of the law unto it, Verse. 13.
not that they themselves kept the law but 12.
only because they would not suffer persecution for preaching the Cross of
Christ, which the unbelieving Jews so egerly resisted and impugned; and
withal professed of himself, that howsoever they Verse. 13.
rejoiced in the flesh, that is, in the circumcision of the Gentiles; yet Verse.
14.
God forbid that he should rejoice but in the cross of Christ, as the most
sufficient mean of man's Redemption, by which he was crucified to the world,
and the world to him, what persecution soever he suffered for it? And the
verses following, which you pe^uishly pull to patience in persecution, pertain
directly to establish the truth and force of Christ's Cross. For Verse. 15.
in Christ Jesus (says he, that is, to attain salvation by Christ crucified)
neither circum^sion an^leth any thing, nor uncircumcision, but a new creature;
that is, Regeneration in Christ, when the inward man of the heart is renewed by
faith through the operation of the spirit. And Verse. 16.
as many as walk according to this Rule of doctrine by preaching and believing
the cross of Christ, ( for many Philip. 3.
walk (after an other rule) of whom I have often told you, that they are the
enemies of the cross of Christ) peace be upon them and mercy, and upon the
Israel of God, that is upon as many as be Jews within and not without, and
have the circumcision of the heart in the spirit not in the flesh, whose Romans 2.
praise is not of men but of God. And therefore Gal. 6. v 17.
from hence forth let no man put me to business as if I liked or allowed
circumcision when and where pleased me. For if I yet Gal. 5. v. 11.
preach circumcision, why do I yet suffer persecution? the sl^inder of the
Cross is abolished, and the Jews have no cause of offense against me. But 2.
Cor. 11.
of the Jews five times received I forty lashes, sane one; I was thrice
beaten with rods, I was once stoned, I have been in stripes above measure, in
prison frequent, in death often. I Gal. 6. v. 17.
bear in my body the marks of the Lord Jesus, that is, the signs of these
persecutions suffered for his cause, which prove that in preaching the cross
of Christ I go not about to please men but God. For Gal. 1. v. 10.
if I would please ^en, I were not the servant of Christ.

There is no miscoherence with the Text, nor dissidence from the truth in this
exposition which not my self alone but the ancient Fathers and best Divines
both old and new have embraced: yea it fully agrees with the maine intent of
Paul in this Epistle, with the perpetual use of his words, and with the clear
light of other places where like persons and cause were undertaken by the
Apostle. You only are found, Sir Discourser, that to show neither learning nor
reading, but a presumptious ouerweening of your own wit will needs make the
Reader believe I understand not the Text. But let us hear your pure conceit,
how currantly it carries with it the words and circumstances of the Text. They
urge you to be circumcised, only least they should suffer persecution for the
cross of Christ, says Paul of those false teachers, which perverted the truth
of the Gospel among the Galathians by teaching circumcision and the
righteousness of the Law to be necessary to salvation. How expound you these
words of the Apostle? Def. page 23. li. 36.
he may (say you) be understood to say, that he would not suffer persecution
for commending the afflictions and shame of good Christians for Christ's sake.
You should say, THEY would not suffer persecution, unless you put Paul into
the number of false teachers, but that might be the escape of your Printer. Come
to your own ouersights. First then Christ's personal sufferings are here quite
excluded; for Christ I trust shall have an other title with you then the name
of a good Christian among the many; and so the cross of Christ in this place
by your exposition does both exclude and include the proper sufferings of
Christ. For before you said, here Paul does jointly together understand by
Christ's cross, the afflictions of the whole mystical body of Christ both head
and members. Secondly where ever read you in the Scriptures, that the Jews
raized persecutions against any, for commending the afflictions of the godly?
If it be a truth, name us the place and the persons; if it be a dream of
yours, keep it to your self: the Scriptures can expound themselves without
your ^ansies. That the Jews had a furious disdain and hatred against the
person of Christ, and specially against the shame and reproach of his cross,
and for his sake against all that preached or believed him to be the Messiah so
long before promised, and his death to be the Redemption of the world, the
Evangelists and Apostles every where in their writings give full testimony.
Paul himself first persecuting the Christians unto death, and afterward as
sharply pursued by the Jews for the very same cause, best knew what offense
the Jews took at the infamous death of Christ on the cross, and how egerly
they were bent against all that durst profess the name of Christ; and
therefore could speak in this case out of his own experience; that not the
commending of the afflictions of the godly, but the preaching of Christ's death
on the cross to be the salvation of the world, was the point that so much
irritated the Jews to lay violent hands on the Christians. Thirdly did
circumcision hinder the commending of the afflictions of the godly? the
Apostles and first spreaders of the Gospel, as also Paul himself were
circumcised, and yet the chiefest favorers and encouragers of the afflicted
Christians, so that circumcision was no impediment to like and allow the afl
ictions of the godly. But as Paul saw himself to be most odious to the Jews,
because they held opinion of him, that he Acts 21.
taught all men every where against the people, the Law and the Temple; (and
indeed he boldly professed that in Christ Jesus neither Gal. 5. and 6.
circumcision auayled any thing nor uncircumcision, and that they were no
longer under the Law, since Christ had redeemed both Jew and Gentile from the
curse and bondage of the Law) so he could not but discern the drift of those
false teachers, who to flatter the Jews and to claw favor with the enemies of
Christ's cross taught circumcision and the righteousness of the law, to be
necessary unto salvation, as if the death of Christ without them could profit
us nothing. You do therefore not expound, but pervert the words of Paul, which
I took for my text; when as he reproving those false teachers, (whom he before
confuted) for adding circumcision and the justification of the law to the death
of Christ, thereby to mitigate the malice of the Jews conceived against the
cross of Christ; you turn the Apostles words from doctrine to manners, from
preaching to not commending, from the death of Christ to the afflictions of
Christians; and so of the highest point of our Redemption, and Salvation by the
cross of Christ, you have found out a cold kind of scant allowing the troubles
of the Saints.

But the Fathers (which I brought) overthrow not your sense, they rather
justify it.] Whether Augustine, Chrysostom, Jerome, and Bid, whom I cited
for the sense of this place, do take the word Cross in this very sentence for
the personal suffe^ings of Christ on the cross, which was my assertion; I
refer it to the censure of the Reader upon the sight of their sayings, which
he may find in the Conclu. pa. 229.
conclusion of my Sermons. I must confess mine eyes be not matches, if they
speak not directly to that purpose. Howbeit, you have a special gift to make
a short return of all the Fathers with a nihil dicit, when they speak against
you. Indeed you are out of your element when you talk of Fathers, for you
neither like their credits, nor allow their judgments, as in process we shall
more fully show. For the present, to satisfy those that be soberly minded, and
to let all men see to your shame, that I took my text right, though you fondly
seek by your silly conceits to impeach it; mark I pray thee, Christian
Reader, whether both elder and later Divines do not concur with me in that
sense of Christ's cross, which I avouched to be in Paul's words. Christ was
crucified under Pontius Pilate. Aust. de symbolo a^ Catechum. li. 3.
This (says Augustine) we believe, and we so believe it, that we rejoice in
it. Be it far from me (says Paul) to rejoice but in the cross of Christ.
Athana. in p^ssionem and crucem dom^n.
Happily some man (says Athanasius) beholding the Lord and Savior to be
condemned of Pilate and crucified of the Jews, will cast down his head for
shame. But if we learn the cause why the Lord suffered, we shall cease to
blush, and rather rejoice as Paul did in the Lords cross. Ignatius in his
Epistle to those at Tarsus where Paul was borne, says, mindful of Paul;
Ignatius epist. 4. ad Tarsenses.
Hold it for most certain, that the Lord Jesus was truly crucified, (for
Paul says, Be it far from me to rejoice but in the cross of our Lord Jesus)
and truly suffered and died. Cyril: Cyrill. de recta fide ad Reginas.
Be it far from me to rejoice but in the cross of the Lord Jesus. Paul
says, he rejoices in the death of Christ: he knew Christ therefore to be God,
and to have suffered for us in the flesh. Theodoret thus expresses Paul's
meaning; Theodoret in galat. ca. 6.
Ego autem propter solam salutarem crucem me iacto and mihi placeo. I only
boast my self on that cross (of Christ) which brings salvation, and
therewith I content my self. Theophylact upon the same words of Paul;
Theophylact. in Galat. ca. 6.
Illi (inquit) circumcisionem hanc gloriae ducunt, a me vero procul sit
caeterarum rerum iactantia. Licet in vna Christi cruce and morte admodum
gloriars. They (says Paul) count circumcision a glory, far be it from me to
boast in other things. It is lawful for me thoroughly to rejoice only in the
cross and death of Christ Jesus. Some will ask, How or why do thou rejoice
in the Lords cross? For that he was crucified for my sake, which a^ no body,
and loved me so dearly, that he offered himself to death (for me.)
Oecumenius; O^menius in Gala. ca. 6.
What is this rejoicing (in Christ's cross which Paul speaks of?) That for us
who were unworthy (Christ) would be crucified; for that is the cause we have to
glory. Haymo upon the same place in the person of Paul says; Haym^ in Gala.
ca. 6.
I will not rejoice in the riches and dignities of this world, but in the
cross of Christ; that is, I will rejoice in his passion which was celebrated
on the cross, whence is my redemption and salvation. More I might easily bring,
but these for antiquity may suffice.

The grauest and exactest of the new writers agree with the Fathers. Bullinger:
Whereas Bullinger^ in Gala. ca. 6.
Paul might have used a simple kind of affirmation, ONLY THE DEATH OF CHRIST
is sufficient for me to salvation, he chose rather to express it by the way of
detestation, and to say; Far be it from me to rejoice, but in the cross of
our Lord Jesus Christ. Where again the second time, by the cross he means
the death, sacrifice, and expiation of the Lord Christ and the whole work of
our redemption. Gualter in his 59. homily upon that Epistle says: Now
Gualterus in Epist. ad Gala. homil. 59.
Paul opposes himself to those false teachers declaring how he himself is
affected, and upon that occasion repeateth the Sum of his doctrine, touching
the redemption and salvation of mankind?, in these words; Be it far from me
to rejoice, but in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ. He might have said
simply; I rejoice only in Christ crucified, in whose cross I know there is
reposed for me life and salvation. But he uses such a kind of speech as
teaches us their insolency was an abominable and capital offense. Calvin, a
man for his great pains in the Church of God worthy of great praise, where he
steppeth not too much aside from the ancient Fathers, expounding these words of
Paul, says: Caluinus in Gala. ca. 6.
To rejoice in Christ's cross, is as much as in Christ crucified, but that it
expresses more: for it signifies that death of Christ's which was full of
reproach and shame, and was accursed of God. That death then which men abhor,
and whereof they are ashamed, in that death Paul says he rejoices, because he
has perfect blessedness therein. Piscator in his Scholies upon Paul's Epistle
to the Galathians, noting what cross of Christ it was for which the false
teachers would not suffer persecution, says; Piscator in schol. super
Epistolam ad Gala. ca. 6.
Ob crucem Christ's, id est, ob doctrinam Euangelij de salute part a per solam
Christi crucem; they would not suffer persecution for the cross of Christ,
that is, for the doctrine of the Gospel teaching salvation to be purchased by
the cross of Christ only.

There is not a new writer of any judgment or diligence which joins not with
these; and howsoever some of them withal avouch, that Paul meant to show by
this opposing himself to these false teachers, that he shunned not
persecution for the cross of Christ as they did, but rejoiced in the doctrine
of the cross by which the elect are saved, what affliction soever befell him
therefore; yet they derive that part of Paul's meaning, not from the confused
signification of Christ's cross, as you do; but either from the EFFICACY
thereof by which Paul was crucified to the world, and the world to him, in
neglecting the flattery and enduring the fury of such as opposed themselves
against Christ: or from the CONFORMITY to it, that as he desired to reign, so
he was willing to suffer with Christ, and therefore rejoiced as well in the
fellowship as in the force and effects of Christ's sufferings on the cross: or
lastly, from the CONTRARIETY to the false teachers, that though they
adulterated the true doctrine of Christ's cross, because they would decline
persecution; it was Paul^ joy to teach sincerely the power of Christ crucified,
whosoever pursued him for so doing. This sincerity and duty of the Apostle I
am far from denying, but the cross of Christ I constantly refer to the
doctrine of man's redemption and salvation by the cross of Christ, that is, by
his personal sufferings on the cross, as all those old and new writers do,
and not to the troubles and afflictions of the godly, to which if this
Discourser dare ascribe the mean or merit of man's redemption or salvation, he
falls from purity to popery, and from the Christian faith to open heresy.
Thou see then, gentle Reader, how sure ground and just reason I had to
propose that sense of my text which I did; as also how untruly, unwisely, and
headily, this fellow ran first to the challenging of my text, and still
vpholdeth his humor with his private dream of Christ's cross containing
jointly together all the afflictions of Christ and his members from the
beginning of the world to the ending thereof; and makes the false teachers, as
fearing persecution for the commending of his conceit, to join circumcision to
the doctrine of the Gospel, and so by altering and interlacing Paul's words
after his own fancy, he has hatched at last an exposition without head or
heel, which no man understands besides himself, and the Divines of all ages
both new and old do contradict.

But I committed another great oversight in handling my text, which was to
Defenc pa. 24.
take occasion from the text to speak of any thing, for you count them the
faithfullest and wisest handlers of Scripture which conclude even from their
text firmly and first of all what soever they afterward teach thereupon.]
Indeed I think your manner be to conclude all that you afterward say, even from
your text without the help of any other places of Scripture. You be so fast in
your conceits, and so loose in your conclusions, that you can infer any thing
of every thing. Every word you speak, you tie to your text as firmly as flax
to fire: but if you would take the pains once to prove that you say, and not
only to say that which you should prove, you would find great difference
betwixt the firmness of a fancy in which you be so resolute, and of an
argument which for ought I yet see in your writings, you scant make not
understand. And where you quarrel with such handling of texts as is usual in
these days, but no good nor commendable use, your reading must be greater and
judgment better, before you take upon you to control the Preachers of England
for mishandling their texts. Many hundreds there are of whom you may learn
both how to divide and how to pursue your theme; your skill is not such, that
you should profess your self a Method-master to this Realm. When I took
occasion from my text to lay down first the contents, then the effects of
Christ's cross, as the Scriptures did deliver them; that is, what Christ
suffered on his cross for us, and what he performed by his cross to us; say
good Sir out of your new found art, what fault you find either with the matter
or with the method. [ Christ's cross, you say, signifies here no such thing,
but the afflictions of Christ and his members.] That is the vanity of your
error; that is not the truth of my text. Christ crucified in his own person
for man's redemption, is the full purport of Christ's cross in my text; as in my
Sermons I shortly declared; in my conclusion I more amply proved; and now I
trust I have therein fully satisfied the Reader. That standing good, I note
what Christ suffered; which I call the contents of his cross; and to what end
he suffered, which are the effects of his cross; both these are aptly and
fairly closed in my text, and by other places of Scripture justly proved to be
comprised in my text. This forsooth your mastership likes not, but I must make
syllogismes out of every word contained in my text, or else I make the
Scriptures such an instrument as they ought not to be. Silly Sir you understand
not what you say: first learn, and after teach, lest you teach that you never
learned. When it is said, Matthew. 22.
Give unto God the things which are Gods, can you out of these words without
the aid of other Scriptures, firmly conclude what things are Gods, and how
they must be given unto him; or must you prove that by other places of holy
Scripture? Even so when I had showed what was justly enclosed within the words
of my theme, I made direct and full proof thereof by other places of holy writ;
which I take to be a sound and sure way of well using the Scriptures, to that
very purpose they should be applied, notwithstanding your palterie prouisoes,
that no man must after speak any thing that can not firmly be concluded by
the sole and single words of his text; which is a rule fit for such a Rouer as
you are, that never soundly prove any thing; but not for him that will fully
divide and rightly deliver, as well the sense as the sound of any sentence of
holy Scripture which he takes in hand to unfold.

To show your self a firm and fine concluder upon texts, you exemplify your
skill, and infer that in three special points, I my self Defenc. page 25.
by my very text overthrow my self, in the first entrance as all men may see:
First, in that I expressly grant, the proper sufferings of Christ's mind may
rightly be in the contents of his cross, contrary to my maine opinion, that
Christ's bodily sufferings ALONE were the full price of our redemption.
Secondly, that Christ's soul in a large sense may be said to be crucified, if I
suppose my text to signify the whole contents of Christ's cross, which I
reproved in you with great contempt. Thirdly, in that I quite overthrow my
second question: for if it be a detestable thing to rejoice but in the cross
of Christ, then Christ's descent to hell after death must either be a part of
the contents of his cross, and so he must suffer among the devils and damned
spirits, or else he did us no good there, if we may not rejoice in his
descending thither. These iarres in my self, you say, I must reconcile, else
men will think, I have not handled my text indeed very rightly.] These iarres
good Sir, for so much as concerns me, are soon reconciled. Your first
objection is a plain falsitie, your second an open folly, your third a mere
mockery. The contents of Christ's cross I extended to those griefs, wrongs,
and pains, which Christ suffered in his passage to his cross, as namely his
submission in the garden, his apprehension, accusation, illusion, flagellation,
condemnation and such like, all which he felt before he was fastened to the
tree; and though indeed they were precedents to his cross, yet because the
grief and smart of them continued and increased with his hanging on the tree,
the Scripture does not exclude them from the cross of Christ, which often
means by that word, the whole course and manner of Christ's death and passion,
as well in coming to his cross, as in hanging on his cross. As for the
proper sufferings of the mind, those be none of my words; yet if you thereby
mean care and fear, shame and sorrow, not repugnant to the condition and
perfection of Christ's person; let them in Gods name come within the contents
of Christ's cross as antecedents or consequents to the pains which he
suffered. But if under the proper sufferings of the soul you convey the
suffering of hell pains, or the death of the soul from the immediate hand of
God, which is your dream; keep your errors for your own accounts, my words
have no such matter nor meaning.

How then Defen. pa. 25. li. 6.
can my maine opinion be true that Christ's bodily sufferings ALONE were the
full price of our Redemption, which I would also ground on all the Fathers
though very untruly?] How can your objections be weighty that speak never a
true word? By Christ's bodily sufferings I no where exclude either the sense,
consideration, or affection of the Soul, discerning the pains which, and the
cause why the body suffered, as you falsely imagine; I only except the death of
the Soul and pains of hell in Christ's sufferings; and to bar that, I show
by many sufficient testimonies of the ancient Fathers, (which you shall never
ouerbeare for all your bragges,) that Christ dyed for us the death of the body
only, and not the death of the soul. In this case I use the word ONLY, as
has been often told you; otherwise to exclude the union, operation, or
passion of the soul from Christ's sufferings, I never use it. And where I so
often and instantly urge that Christ's death, and bloodshedding are specified
in the Scriptures as the full price of our Redemption, and true means of our
reconciliation to God; You foolishly by their fullness would turn out all the
rest of Christ's sufferings as superfluous; but my words throughout my sermons
are express to the contrary. Sermons. pa. 63.
The cross, blood, and death of Christ are every where mentioned in the
Scriptures, as the very groundwork, and pillars of our Redemption. And the
things which are named in the Scriptures as they were the last, so are they the
chiefest parts of Christ's sufferings; the rest being understood as antecedent
to them, and not eminent above them. So that by the death and blood of Christ I
neither did nor do exclude the rest of his sufferings before he came to his
cross; only I make them Antecedent to that, not eminent above that which he
suffered on the cross. For as the end of every thing presupposes a beginning
and a middle, and the highest staire does orderly confirm there are lower
greeces; so the fullness of Christ's obedience and our Redemption performed by
his death and bloodshed on the cross, does not exclude the rest of his
antecedent sufferings from the communion of his merits, or cause of our
salvation, but only notes that his obedience, and patience on the cross even
unto death as it was the last, and the sharpest, so it was the chiefest and
acceptablest part of the sacrifice which he offered for the sins of the
world. Though then as you have used the matter by adding PROPER (to the)
sufferings of the mind, and ONLY to the sufferings of the body, you make some
show of repugnancie in my positions; yet when your miscoloured and misconstrued
patches are returned to their owner, my opinions stand sound in themselves and
consonant each to other, and have that reference to my Text which I first
expressed.

But Christ's soul in a Defenc. pa. 25.
large sense may be said to be crucified if we suppose this text to signify
the whole contents of Christ's cross; which I reprove in you with (such)
contempt.] It is an Idle skill and dangerous trade in you and your assistants,
when the necessary parts of Christ's satisfaction, and essential points of our
Redemption come to be questioned; for you to bring your inventions, besides the
Scriptures and without, if not against the faith, and then to vouch it may be
said in a large sense; that is by a metaphorical, hyperbolicall, or
metonymicall understanding. In exhortations we permit many things to Divines,
which in positions of faith are utterly unlawful. So long as the words of a
perswader may receive any true construction, be it proper or figurative, we
bear with his vehement and sudden affections; but in determinations of
doctrine, and conclusions of faith, all men require plain and proper speech,
that the truth may appear and not be shadowed and obscured with dark and
doubtful riddles. If your hell pains in Christ's soul and the death of
Christ's soul, be but phrases of speech first devised by you, you should not so
much strive for them being no where mentioned, nor applied to Christ in the
sacred Scriptures; but if they be matters of faith, and sufferings requisite by
Gods justice for man's salvation, as you bear the world in hand; why now when
you see the falsitie and absurdity of them justly reproved, come you in with
a large sense, a kind of speech, which in resolutions of faith is not
tolerable? I have no doubt but figuratively the soul of man and the Son of
God may be said to be crucisied every day. For not only the 1 Cor. 2.
Lord of glory was once crucified by the Jews; but there are that Hebr. 6.
crucify again to themselves the Son of God, even such as willingly fall
from the truth. And that the desires and delights of the soul may and must be
continually crucified, the word of God is evident. Gal. 5.
They which are Christ's, have crucified the flesh with the affections and
lusts; not by fastening their bodies to the tree, but by Coloss. 3.
mortifying their earthly members, as inordinate affection, evil
concupiscence, covetousness, and such like which have their seat principally in
the soul. Gal. 6.
The world is crucified to me, and I to the world, (says Paul) when he means
that his heart despises for Christ all the baits and threats of the world. In
a large and figurative sense therefore, Christ's soul may be said to be dead
and crucisied, and so may the devil be said to be God, for the Scripture
calls him the 2. Cor. 4.
God of this world; but I hope these may not go for positions of faith, nor
for Articles of Christian Religion, without believing of which we can not be
saved.

From the word Cross to crucified is an argument, you think a Coniugatis, as
from words of the same force and inflection; and therefore if Christ's soul
were partaker of the cross, it was also crucified.] From being fastened or
nailed to the Cross unto crucified is indeed a good consequent in the proper
signification of the word; for so much does Crucifigi import, whence Crucifixus
comes: but from the Patients, instruments, or the precedent or consequent
circumstances of the Cross, which yet are enclosed in the contents of the
Cross, to being crucified, is such an Argument as none but you would make. The
disciples flying, Peter forswearing, Pilats wife dreaming, the Mari^s
sorrowing, the women of Jerusalem weeping, Simon of Cyrene bearing the Cross,
are all within the contents or precedent circumstances of Christ's Cross, and
yet it were strange Logic to say they were all dead and crucified. The
swords and staves that were brought to take him, the cords that bound him,
the whippes that were made to scourge him, the thorns that crowned him, the
nails that fastened him, the wood that bare him, the lots cast on his garments,
the sponge that was filled with vinegar to give him drink, the spear that
pierced his side, are all within the contents of his Cross: Shall we thence
reason, and say they were also crucified? only his body was fastened to the
Cross, in which respect the whole person is said to have been crucified; and
the pains which he suffered before in his body and brought with him to the
cross, are properly contained in his crucifixion, by reason they continued in
his body when it was nailed to the Cross. The rest of the wrongs and pains
which he suffered, are figuratively comprised in the name of Christ's Cross,
because they were antecedents to his Cross, or else the name of Cross is
largely taken for all manner of affliction, which befell him after his last
Supper, when once he yielded himself to be prepared as a sacrifice for the
Cross. But what is this to the death of Christ's soul, or how does it any way
prove that in soul he must suffer the pains of hell before he could redeem
us?

At least yet; I quite overthrow my second question, that Christ after this
went down into Hell. For either Christ got us no purchase in hell, for which
we should rejoice; or else I must extend the cross of Christ, and his bitter
sufferings, even unto his being in hell, among the devils and damned spirits,
before we may rejoice therein] A conclusion fit for such a Clerk as you are,
that can neither distinguish things different from things pertinent to the
cross of Christ, nor see the coherence betwixt the cause and effects of
Christ's sufferings. In that I observed, the Apostle made it a thing detestable
to rejoice in any thing else but in the cross of Christ; I followed therein,
Chrysostom, O^cumenius, Theophylact, Bullinger, Gualter and others, whose
little fingers I take had more learning and judgment then your whole head;
neither do I see what you bring against it, but the opening of your own
folly. For first there be things coherent to the cross of Christ, and things
different from it. He that rejoices in the cross of Christ, does also
rejoice in every thing that is necessarily by Gods power and ordinance adjoined
unto it. For no man can rejoice in the cause, but he must likewise rejoice in
the effects; and where the Antecedent is expressed, the consequent is
therewithal intended. Now the cross of Christ in it self without the
effects, was and is most odious and scandalous to men, as appears by the
Jews and Gentiles ignorant thereof, and offended therewith. So that when the
godly profess they rejoice in the cross of Christ, they mean in the love of
Christ, who willingly endured the pain and shame of the cross, to purchase
them everlasting bliss, and therewith procured and established all the means
and parts of their Redemption, justification, and sanctification in this li^e,
and salvation in the life to come: and, but in respect of Christ's love
submitting himself to the cross, and of those effects merited and obtained by
the cross of Christ, they take no pleasure, much less joy in his griefs and
torments, as the wicked did that put him to death. Wherefore it was an easy
thing for every child to see, that when the Apostle rejoiced in the death of
Christ suffered for us and for our salvation, he also rejoiced in the
consequents of Christ's death, as his Resurrection, ascension, sitting at the
right hand of God, and promised return to Judgment, by which as by certain
degrees and steps, our justification, mortification, sanctification, and
salvation, are assured and performed. Now a consequent to Christ's death, if not
a part or preamble to his Resurrection from the dead, is the destruction of the
devil, and of hell, which is the chief place of Satan's power as I think, and
as the Church of Christ before me has thought, notwithstanding all that you
have said, or can say to the contrary. Thus stands my Text neither forced,
nor misapplied, as by your joint mystical imagination of a new cross you
supposed, but rightly both conceived and referred to the painful sufferings
and powerful effects of Christ on the cross; in which the Apostle so
rejoiced, that he detested all things different from it, or derogatorie to it:
and the iarres which so much offended your ears, were but your own jests and
Follies.
iefallies not truly reporting, but grossly mistaking the sense and sequels of
my positions.

Defenc. page 25. l. vlt.
Proceeding forward, I still show a badde mind toward you, seeking forthwith
even in the entrance to draw you without cause into hatred for disdaining the
Fathers. What then is your contempt and disdain of the Fathers, which I so
often report in sundry places, and as odiously as is possible? Surely you
believe I can not tell, happily it is because you follow not their authorities
in some opinions of religion, nor in diverse expositions of Scripture.] What
need you seek so busily for that which I so plainly have exemplified unto you?
you affourd the Fathers when pleases you, neither true knowledge of the first
principles of their faith, nor the right understanding of words familiar in
their native tongue, nor so much as reasonable or likely expositions of the
Scriptures, but fond and absurd as you term them; and yet you ask What is
your insolent dealing against the Fathers? With one consent they teach that for
our redemption Christ died the death of the body only, and by no means the
death of the soul: You teach that Christ must die the death of the soul
before he could redeem us, and that his bodily sufferings Treat. pa. 18. l.
vltim.
properly did not make to our redemption. And though Austen ask, Austen.
Epist. 99.
Who dare avouch that Christ died in soul, or in his humane spirit? you not
only dare and do it, but you make it the maine ground of our redemption:
wherein you condemn him and the rest of the ancient and learned Fathers as
ignorant of the very way and mean of our redemption. So likewise, that Christ
received upon him the punishment, but not the guilt of our sin; that the
second death in the Scriptures is the eternal punishment of body and soul;
and that the death of the body was inflicted on Adam and all his posterity as
a punishment of sin; in these and many such, which are delivered as sound
conclusions of Christian religion, you oppose your self against S. Austen and
the rest, and reject their judgments as false and erroneous. And for the sense
and signification of words used in the Scriptures, you lustily control them in
their native speech, and leave them not so much as the true understanding of
the Greek or Latin tongue. This Trea. pa. 95.
I affirm, say you, it is only the Fathers abusiue speaking and altering the
usual and ancient sense of Hades that bredde this error of Christ's descending
into hell: their unapt and perilous translating into Latin Inferi. Ibid. page
96.
And note here first, it is a thing too rife with the Fathers, yea with some
of the ancientest of them, to alter and change the authentike use of words;
whereby consequently it is easy for errors and gross mistakings to creep
in.] This challenge of yours against the credits and consciences of so many
learned and worthy Fathers as have used the word hades to signify the place of
hell, how insolent it is, I leave to the wise Reader to judge, when he shall
see that indeed they concur with the writers of the new Testament, and with
the ancient and vulgar understanding of their own tongue. How you entertain
their expositions of the Scripture, your own words do witness, when you
reply to interpretations alleged out of them; Trea. pa. 66.
this sense is most absurd; 67.
this is no less absurd than the former, there is no reason, nor likelihood
for it. 68.
This is more fond and absurd than the other. This is the reverence and loving
regard you bear toward their opinions and judgments for the manifold graces
of God that were otherwise in them; and this you think is no contempt, nor
disdain of the Fathers.

I call the Fathers judgments many times AVTHORITIES, that Defenc. page 26.
the world might conceive their words to be warrants unto us, and good
authorities to rest on in matters of Religion. If I had not this drift in my
mind, why give I them such a title, which to you seems somewhat insolent
indeed. What difference there is betwixt the authority of God and man in
matters of religion, I need not to learn, nor you to teach; there is no such
thing in question betwixt us: S. Austen has long since in Austen. contra
Fausi. Ma^ich. li. 11. ca. 5. and de Baptis. contra Donatist li. 2. ca. 3. and
E^ist. 19. and in prooem. 3. li. de Tri^tate.
sundry places of his works, humbly, truly, and fully confessed and professed
the eminence of the Canonical Scriptures above and against all the writings of
others, whosoever they be: with him I wholly join in judgment. This therefore
is an idle shift of yours, to guess what drifts I have in my mind, and that I
go about to impair the sovereignty and certainty of the Scriptures, by
giving such a title to the expositions and opinions of the Fathers, as to call
them Authorities. As though the best learned Divines both new and old, did not
use the same word in the same sense and case that I do. Peruse the labors of
that learned Father, Bishop Jewel, and see how often in his Reply to Harding,
and his Defense of the Apology, he calls the testimonies of the ancient
Fathers and Councels Authorities. We R^plie. page 95.
rest (says he) upon the Scriptures of God, upon the Authority of the ancient
Doctors and Councels. And again, to Ibid. page 149.
reckon up the authorities of ANTIQVITIE it would be infinite. The half
communion by the authority of Gelasuis may well be called open sacrilege. In
the conclusion of the same book, In the answer to Hardings conclusion.
I grant you have alleged authorities sundry and many such as I knew long
before. Verily I never denied but you were able to bring us the names and
shadows of many Fathers. You have defended the open abomination of your stews
by the name and AVTHORITIE of S. Augustine. You have sought up a company of
new petite Doctors Authors void of Authority, full of vanities. In the
conclusion of his defense of the Apology, The conclu^ to H^ding.
my Authorities of Doctors and Councels as you have used them, are few enough.
What meant you in favor of open Stews to show us the name and AVTHORITIE of
S. Augustine? Peter Martyr against Smithes books of the singleness of
Priests, says. Peter Martyr de votis and c^libat. fol. 474.
In judging of things obscure, we must have two ways or means to direct us;
one i^ward which is the Spirit, the other outward which is the word of God. Tum
si ad haec patrum etiam authoritas accesserit, valebit plurimum; to these if
the authority of Fathers be joined, it is of great force. So Chemnitius in his
examination of the Tridentine Council. Chemn. in 1. part exami. concilij
trident. cap. 6. genus traditionum.
Quod de patrum authoritate sentimus, etiam ab ipsis Patribus didicimus. That
which we hold touching the authority of the Fathers, we learned of the Fathers
themselves. Where also he teaches you this Rule worth the noting for your new
found Redemption and the rest of your novelties. Ibid^.
Sentimus etiam nullum dogma in ecclesia no^m, and cum t^ta antiquitate pugnans
recipiendum. We also confess that no point of Doctrine which is new to the
Church, and repugnant to all antiquity, is to be received.

If the Fathers themselves will better please you, I want not their example for
the use of that word which so much offends you. Jerome in his Epistle to
Damasus in very earnest manner makes this petition, Hiero ad Damas. Epist. 57.
Vt ^ihi epistolis tuis sieve tacendarum, sieve dicendaru^ hypostase^n detur
authoritas; That AVTHORITIF may be given me, says he, by your letters to use
or refuse the word hypostases. Vincentius in his book against heresies moves
this question. Vincentius aduers. Haereses.
Here some perchance will ask, where as the Canon of the Scripture is
perfect, and abundantly sufficient in it self for all things, quid opus est vt
ei ecclesiasticae intelligentiae iungatur authoritas; what need is there that
the authority of the ecclesiastical interpretation should be joined with it?
The effect of his answer (which is good for you to observe, that claim such
liberty for your self to expound the Scriptures at your pleasure) is this,
least every man should wrest the Scriptures to his fancy, and suck thence not
the truth, but the patronage of his error. Saint Augustine that is every where
careful to yield the Scriptures their due reverence, yet gives the word
Authority, to the decrees of Councels and writings of godly Fathers before his
time. Speaking of general Councels he says, August epist. 118.
Quorum est in ecclesia saluberrima authoritas, Whose authority is most
wholesome in the Church. And alleging the testimonies of Irenaeus, Cyprian,
Hilarious, Ambrose, Gregory, Chrysostom, Basil, and others against Julian the
Pelagian he concludes; Idem contra Iulianum P^lagianum li. 2. cap. 9.
Hoc probauimus Catholicorum authoritate sanctorum; this have we proved by the
authority of Godly Catholic men; vt vestra fragilis and quasi argutula
nouitas sola authoritate conteratur illorum; that your weak and sleigh
novelty might be overwhelmed with their only authority. For your contumacie
is first to be repressed by their authority. Ibid. cap. 10
With these testimonies and so great authority of holy men, thou must either
by Gods mercy be healed, or else thou must accuse the egregious and holy
Doctors of the Catholic truth; against which miserable madness I must so
answer, that their faith may be defended against thee, even as the Gospel it
self is defended against the wicked and professed enemies of Christ. If then
this word seem insolent to you which is so frequent with the best Divines of
former and latter times, let your Reader judge whether it be ignorance or
insolence in you to stumble at so plain a word, as if the religious and
ancient Fathers, and lights of Christ's Church were not worthy with you to be
counted learned Authors, nor their testimonies to be named Authorities fit to
guide and lead others to the knowledge of the truth.

Defenc. pa. 27.
I trust no advised Christian will challenge more authority to the Fathers
then was given, (by those of Beraea) to the Apostle, nor deny indeed to any
private man, much less to a Minister to judge and discern in themselves not
only the words of men, but even of the sense and meaning of the Scripture by
the Scripture it self, which thing the Beraeans did, and are commended by the
holy Ghost for it.] I trust you claim no power to judge of the Scriptures; you
may discern the truth there written, but with necessity to believe, not with
liberty to judge. And if by your freedom you fasten on falsehood, it is no
excuse for you, but a condemnation unto you. Saint Austen speaking of the
books of the Prophets and Apostles says, August contra Cr^um gra^aticum li.
2. cap. 31.
quos omnino indicare non audeamus, which we may not dare at all to judge. And
where you say the Ber^ans are commended by the holy Ghost for not believing
that Paul spoke touching Religion, till they had examined by the Scriptures and
seen whether the truth were so as he uttered; You speak not one^y unwisely
and untruly, but if you would have Christians to follow that course, you show
intolerable pride against the word of God: for the Beraeans were commended
(when as yet they neither believed in Christ, nor acknowledged Paul's
Apostleship) for their readiness to hear, and care to search whether Paul
spoke truth or no. This if you now assume to your self over Paul's words or
writings, you incur the crime of flat impiety. Paul's words to us that
believe, without further search or other credit, are of equal authority with
the rest of the Scriptures; and not to believe him, till we examine and see the
truth of his doctrine, is mere infidelity. Galat. 5.
Behold, I paul say unto you, must suffice all Christians, and if Galat. 1.
an Angel from heaven preach otherwise than he preached, we must hold him
accursed. For our comfort that believe, and to persuade them which as yet
believe not, we may search and see the consent betwixt the Prophets and
Apostles; yea the son of God sent men to the writings of Moses and the
Prophets, not as wanting sovereignty and sufficiency in himself above all
Prophets, but leading them that knew him not, to consider better of those
Scriptures which they knew. It is as true of Paul's writings, as of the rest of
the Apostles and Prophets, which S. Augustine affirms; Aug. epist. 19.
De quorum scriptis, quod omni errore careant, dubitare nefarium est. Of whose
writings to doubt whether they be free from all error, is plain wickedness.

Defenc. pa. 28.
Nevertheless I well perceive that all this great show of cleaving to the
Fathers judgments is but colored in you. For in other points again we see
when they speak not to your liking, the case is altered. Ibid. page 29. The
Fathers may be left in some private opinions.
I see in this book where you forsake the ancient and learned Fathers, that
is, as you speak in my case, you con^mne and despise them. The more unjust
then and injurious was your slander, that I went about by the use of one word,
which old and new Divines used in like sort before me, to make the Fathers of
equal authority with the Scriptures: since now you can both observe and
object, that even in this book which you impugn, I say and do the contrary.
And though I be far from repenting or misliking any thing that I said
touching the prerogative of the sacred Scriptures and their irrefragable
authority against all the words and wits of men; yet can I not choose but note
your negligence, that mark neither what, nor of whom I speak. Had I brought
Fathers in matters of faith against or without the Scriptures, you had some
color to choke me with mine own words; but taking care as I did, that in
cases of faith the Scriptures should be plain and perspicuous for my purpose
before I cited them; and the testimonies of the Fathers evident and concurrent
with the Scriptures; how do I cross any of those places which you quote out
of my writings touching the authority and sufficiency of the Scriptures in
points of faith? or what agreement has your dissenting from the Scriptures and
Fathers in the chiefest keys of Christian religion, with my leaving them in
some expositions and positions not pertinent to the faith nor generally
received of them all? It is vanity enough to dream of contradictions where
none are; and as great infirmity not to see that which lies before your eyes:
but to pronounce, that you know how Defenc. pa. 20. li. 12.
wavering and slipperie I am for the most part therein, when you neither
consider nor conceive what I say, that is more than childish temeritie. As I
said, so I say again; In Gods causes Gods book must teach us what to believe,
and what to profess; and therefore what I read in the word of God, that I
believe; what I read not, that I do not believe. Yea, I add thereto S.
Basils conclusion: ^asil. ^oral. Su^ ^0. ca. 21.
If all that is not of faith, be sin, as the Apostle says; and faith comes
by hearing, and hearing by the word of God; all that is without the Scripture
inspired from God, as not being of faith, is sin. This confession I
constantly hold, and as in the first book which you quote, I directly and
expressly defend, that no point of faith should be believed without Scripture,
so in my Sermons I no where vary from it, how slipperie soever your tongue be
to tell a tale in stead of a truth.

I do Defenc. pa. 29.
reject Austens opinion in three special points, and diverse Fathers in two
other cases, and some of those things I affirm against all the Fathers, and
almost against all the Church; and yet I bitterly reprove you for using the
like liberty. Do I any where reject S. Augustine or all the Fathers in any
point of doctrine necessary to our salvation, as you do in the chiefest
grounds of our redemption? And when I let the Reader understand, that the
reasons which some Fathers bring to fortify their private opinions, are not
sufficient for to force consent to be given unto them, do I call them fond
absurd without reason or likelihood, and paradoxes in nature, as you do? These
two things I justly reprove in you, which I my self do not fall into for all
your fitning. In the maine principles of Christian religion and our redemption,
you make the best learned Fathers ignorant of their Creed and Catechism; and
when their expositions of the Scripture cross your imaginations, you Revel
against their Judgments as void of sense and reason. This do^ I not; In the
rule of faith I renounce not their maine consent nor undoubted maxims, least I
conclude them or my self to err in faith: In other questions of les^e
importance wherein they differ sometimes from each other, sometimes even from
themselves, I let the Reader see their reasons, and leave him free to follow
what he likes, or to suspend his judgment, if he find cause therefore. This
liberty I never take from you, nor mislike it in you; but when you pronounce
all to be absurd, fond, and foolish, that yield not to your fancy: wherein you
do not only proudly advance your own dreams as necessary Doctrines, but
reprochfully prejudice the freedom of others. This difference is not my
devise: the Vincentius aduersus Haeres^s.
ancient consent of Godly Fathers (says Vincentius) is with great care to be
searched and followed of us, not in all the questions of the Divine Law, but
only or chiefly in the Rule of Faith. Whether therefore the bodies of such as
arose and came out of their graves after Christ's resurrection returned again
to corruption, or still kept the honor of immortality, which was bestowed on
them; as also when Christ said to the thief on the Cross, this day shall thou
be with me in Paradise, whether Christ meant the presence of his humane soul or
of his Divine glory should be that day in Paradise, and so whether the souls
of the faithful d^parting this life, go straight to heaven, or stay in a
place appointed them of God till the day of judgment: and likewise whether
Abraham's bosom were a receptacle for souls within the earth, and near to
hell; or far above the earth: and lastly whether the loosing of Adam from hell,
by Christ's descent thither, which the whole Church almost seemed to hold by
tradition, freed only the person of Adam from the place of hell; or both him
and his posterity from all fear and danger of hell: These be things that may
be liked, disliked, or suspended without any manifest breach of faith, and
wherein Saint Austen probablely disputes, but determines nothing for
certainty to be believed; always tempering his words in these cases with
August. ^pist. 99.
Ego quidem non video, explicent qui possunt, nondum intelligo, nulla causa
occurrit, nondum mu^. I see not how, let them declare it that can, as yet I
understand it not, I conceive presently no cause, as yet I find it not clear.
If I then labored with respective words, and other places of the same Fathers,
to show wherein they doubted, or dissented; who but a light head and slipper
tongue would call this contemning or despising of the Fathers? But you will
proceed to the special examples wherein I charge you with despising the
Fathers; and I will not be long after you.

First Defenc. pa. 30.
where you say out of certain Fathers, that Christ in his dying gave up his
spirit miraculously, no violence of death wresting it from him, as it does
ours, but when he saw his time, he even at an instant laid it down of
himself; Contrary to this I alleged the Scripture, HE WAS LIKE US IN ALL
THINGS, sin only excepted. To answer this you reply, was he like us in his
birth? Can we lie in the grave without corruption as he lay? Or raise our
selves from death as he did? Which poor answer I wonder to see coming from
you. As well you might show farther, he was not like us in that he walked on the
water, nor in that he fasted forty d^s, nor in that he knew the secrets of
men's hearts, nor in that he turned water into wine, and with a word healed all
diseases. These things done by his manhood, yet were they the proper effects of
his Godhead: they were no natural but spiritual things.] You may wonder at
what you will, and though your proofs and replies be not worth the paper you
wast, yet you so powder them with figures and fancies, that you think them
very precious. Where I observed out of Augustine, Jerome, and Bernard, that the
manner of Christ's death was not like ours, (though his death were the same that
ours is, I mean the separation of the soul from the body,) by reason he had
perfect sense and strong speech even to the very instant that of his own
accord (when he saw his time) he breathed out his soul; whereas both speech,
and sense do fail in us before we die, and our souls are taken from us, we
can not breath them out when we will; to impeach this observation you cast out
first reproachful words, and then vntidy proofs, such as your store could best
affourd. Treatis. pa. 53.
Here a fine fable is offered us, say you, a Paradoxe in nature, and contrary
to the Scripture which says, HE WAS LIKE US IN ALL THINGS sin only
excepted. This scornful speech and bare pretense of Scripture misapplied to
your peevish conceit, is all the answer you vouchsafe to those ancient and
reverend Fathers, I mean Saint Austen, and Saint Jerome. To repel this pride
of yours, and to make you perceive the misconstering of the Scriptures, I
shortly replied; Was Christ like us in his birth? in his grave or in his
resurrection? If he were unlike us in these, and yet those words must stand
true, then might he also be unlike us in his death, and no proof out of those
words could be made to the contrary. At this poor answer you wonder; but you
and your adherents lay your wits together, as you have done your heads, you
shall never refell this answer, as poor as it is, without confessing the
weakness of your own proof. For if you restrain the text (which you
brought) to natural humane properties, and infirmities, as now you do, then
most apparently his birth and his grave must in all things be like to ours, for
they are in us natural humane properties or infirmities. To be borne of a
Virgin, not to rotte in grave and to rise from the dead, Defenc. pa. 30.
Those Divine effects (you say) are justly believed to have been in Christ
because of the express Scripture that witnesses the same.] But then the text
which you urged, he was like us in all things, must have an other meaning then
you made show of. And so it well may, for even in his birth, in his grave, and
in his resurrection, he was like to us though not in every circumstance
thereof. His body was made of the seed and substance of his mother as ours is,
though she a Virgin, and we were begotten by our Fathers. It also lay
senseless and dead in the grave as ours does, though it could not return to
dust as ours shall. He rose from the dead to a celestial and immortal life;
and so shall we, but not when we will, nor of our own power, as he did: So
that he was like us in all things* that is in every part of our nature, and in
every kind of humane infirmities, but not like us in every action, circumstance
or consequent of all humane properties and infirmities. For so we should
deprive him of that fullness of wisdom, grace and power, wherewith his humane
soul was endued far unlike to ours not only if we respect natural
properties, and infirmities in us, which are utterly void of these gifts; but
if we compare our measure of knowledge, grace, and strength with the abundance
of his spirit. Then might he be like us even in death also which parted his
soul from his body, as it does ours; though he were unlike us in power to dye
when he would, which we can not, and retained full force of sense and speech to
the very moment of giving up his Ghost, which we do not.

Again the words following in the Text He was like us in all things, SIN
EXCEPTED, are a sufficient exemption of Christ from our manner of death, as
well as from our kind of birth, and rotting in the grave. For we are borne in
sin, which he might not be, and therefore was to be borne of a Virgin to
avoid all concupiscence, as well of a Father as in his Mother, without whom he
could not be made our flesh. So rotte we in the grave by reason of sin
dwelling in our bodies; which must be changed into dust, whence we were taken,
in reward of our first fathers sin, from whose loins we come with like
infection of sin. This Christ's body might by no possibility admit, though
you in the margin of your book make a false note to the contrary. First, for
that no part of his person might utterly be dissolved or corrupted after it was
once united to his Godhead, but must remain for ever inseparable from his
Divine nature, and so incorruptible: because God was united not to dust or
ashes, but to humane flesh which so must still continue. Secondly, for that all
Christ's sufferings for sin must have in them exact and perfect obedience, and
so precisely sense and will in every passion, to submit himself to the hand of
God: which in death he might do and did; but in rotting i^ the grave where
sense and will wanted he could not do. Lastly, the Apostle extends Christ's
obedience in suffering, no farther then to the death of the Cross; after which
could follow no fatder humiliation, and so no corruption to dust; but a sure
confirmation of his death by lying three days in the grave, and a plain
pledge of his resurrection, because he could not see corruption. The same words
exempt Christ from our manner of death. For where death entered not but by
sin, and the soul of each man to this day, by a natural instinct shows her
secret abhorring of death and open struggling with death before she depart her
body, from which she does not yield but by force of death taking from her first
speech and sense, and so by degrees the whole possession of her body;
violently thrusting her out of her seat; Neither this violence of death, nor
this resistance of the soul may be admitted, or were perceived in the person
of Christ. He might suffer nothing but willingly; because the misliking of the
heart is disobedience though the fact be endured. Wherefore if we mean with the
Apostle to confess Christ to have been obedient to his death, we must leave
in him both sense and will to obey even to the last gasp, and also power to
breath out his soul into his Fathers hand, when the time was come appointed by
God for him to depart this life. Again, what force created could wrest his
soul from him being God, and man, but at his liking? His own words are, none
takes my soul from me, but I lay it down of my self. Whereon Chrysostom
rightly groundeth this consequent. Chrysostom. de feria 5. passioni^ sermo 6.
Si nemo, vtique nec mors. If none then surely neither death.

But you would see Defenc. pa. 30.
express words in the Text that Christ died, as I say, not naturally, but
miraculously, and then you will believe it.] Would you have so plain words in
the text, that you can not, or that you should not quarrel with? If you
delude, as your manner is, the plain words of the Scripture with kinds of
speeches and large senses, I see no words that can hold you, but you may defend
after your fashion any kind of fancy or heresy, with Synecdoches, Allegories,
and Hyperboles. And though the judgment of so great and godly fathers joining
with the very words of the Scripture, carry with it sufficient weight to a
sober and religious Reader; yet for your pleasure, that you may see your
folly, I am content to cast about again. What is ponere animam in the
Scripture, Sir, I pray? is it willingly or unwillingly to lay down a man's
soul or life? You know Peter's words to his Master, John. 13.
Animam meam pro te ponam. I will lay down my life for thy sake. And S. John's,
1. John 3.
Nos debemus profratribus animas ponere. We ought to lay down our lives for
our brethren. And Christ's, John. 10.
Propter hoc Pater me diligit, quoniam ego pono animam meam, vt iterum sumam
eam. Therefore the Father loves me, because I lay down my soul to take it
again. In all these places ponere animam must needs be to lay down life or
soul willingly; except you be so wise as to think that Peter in love tells
his Master he was unwilling to die for him; and S. John forwarneth us, we must
not be willing to die for our brethren; yea, and that the Father loved the
Son because he was unwilling to die for his sheep, which were Divinity fit
for such a Doctor as you are. Then tollere animam is for another to take our (
life or) soul fromvs, whether we be willing or unwilling it should be done, as
appears by Eliahs prayer unto God, in saying 1. King. 19.
take away my soul, when he desired to die. Resort now to the words of our
Savior, where he said, John. 10.
None takes (my soul) from me, but I lay it down of my self, and see
whether they infer a peculiar manner of dying, not common to others. Had he
meant to say no more, but I die willingly, as you imagine he intended; pono
animam, I lay down my soul, had been words enough to express that meaning: but
he makes an addition, which must needs have some force; and not be an idle
repetition of the same thing; and likewise an opposition, the contrary whereof
must be found in his death. For where other men's souls are taken from them,
though they be never so willing to die, as appears by the witness of
Scripture, I lay it down OF MY SELF, says our Savior; that is, not only of
mine own accord, but by mine own power. To show that so he does, he says,
None takes (my soul) from me, (which they do from others) I lay it down of
my self. And lest any man should doubt as you do, whether ^e spoke of his
willingness to die, which is common to others; or of his power, which was
proper to himself; in full, express, and direct words, to stop such
cauilling mouths as yours is, he adds as a proof of his speech, John. 10.
I have power to lay it down (he means of himself, as the former words
convince) and have power to take it again: this commandment have I received
of my Father. That he was willing to lay down his soul I do not deny, the
word pono (I lay it down) proves so much; but he professes that he had
received power and commandment from his Father to lay it down of himself,
and to take it again of himself. This commandment was peculiar to his
person; no man living ever had or shall have the like; and this power to lay
down his soul of himself was as MIRACVLOVS, as his power to raise himself
from the dead, since they are both compared and joined together. These things
did those ancient and learned Fathers see, when they made their collections:
and so plain and perspicuous are they even in the Text it self, that none of
mean capacity or any modesty can mistake, or will outface them.

As for Defenc. pa. 31.
Chrysostom whom you cite hereupon, he has nothing for this point.] He that
has once hardened his heart and mouth against the truth, will never stay nor
stick at any thing. When you would needs out of those words, He was like us in
all things infer, therefore Christ must be like us in the manner of his
death; I let you see that Chrysostom avouches the contrary. The death of
Christ, and his rising from the dead, Chrysostom. in Johan. ^omil. 59.
both these (says Chrysostom) were strong, and besides the common (that is,
the natural) course of men. And expounding Christ's words I have power to lay
down my soul, that is. (says Chrysostom) Ibidem.
I alone have this power, which you have not. In this power which he had and we
have not, I trust he was unlike us; and so Chrysostom directly refelleth your
unskillful application of the Scripture that Christ was like us in all things,
even in the manner of his death. But Defenc. pa. 31.
If it were new and not ordinary that Christ should have power to lay down
his life, yet why may not his manhood dye naturally notwithstanding?] Forsooth
because he used that power at the time of his death, as he himself witnesses,
which no man ever did, or can do. As he had power which was above nature to
lay down his life when he himself would; so his own mouth testifies that
none took his soul from him, but he laid it down of himself, that is, of
his own accord and power, when he saw his time. And so Chrysostom tells you;
C^st in I^han. ^omil. 59.
Ita mori vires humanas excedit; So to dye (as Christ did) passes the power
(or nature) of man and, solus erat vitam ponendi dominus, Christ alone was the
(Ruler or) master of laying down his life. Howbeit in your mocking vain you
go on, and say, that I will conclude this better. You must remember what God
himself says; O fool this night they shall fetch away thy soul from thee.
Whereto you add. I remember it well, what then? ergo, Christ saying none
takes my life from me, meant he would dye miraculously, and not by the failing
of nature in him? If this be the reason, verily I grant it is marvelous
subtle and past my reach. If you ouer-reach no more then this reason does, you
will come short of all your new conceits. If your memory be not too much
moistened, you may call to mind that this place was brought to prove, Christ
was unlike us in the laying down of this soul; and if I be not as gross as
you are gamesome, it proves it very directly. God by those words expresses
the rich man should that night die, and thereby teaches us that when we dye,
our souls are taken from us. So that it is not in our power to keep our
souls in our bodies as long as we will, nor to leave them when we list: but
when God sends, will we, nill we, they are taken from us. This Christ denies
to be verified in him; none took his soul from him, but he laid is down of
himself, which we cannot do. Hence if it please you to frame but this reason
which is in open sight: All men's souls are taken from them when they dye:
Christ's soul was not taken from him when he dyed: ergo, Christ dyed not in the
same manner that we do; and so was unlike us in his death, by the manifest
words of the Scripture; you shall see a plain truth, not past your reach,
though repugnant to your purpose.

But I should prove Christ died Defene. pa. 31.
miraculously not naturally. That at last after long and sore anguish of mind,
and bodily torments his natural strength failed him, and therefore he bowed his
head and gave up the ghost; what miracle is there in this?] Men may well
marvel at your folly, who turn and wind every way rather then you will
acknowledge that which the Scriptures expressly witness was in Christ above
man's nature, which they that saw it marueiled at, and which the best Divines of
all ages have confessed to be miraculous in the death of Christ: To have
perfect sense, speech, and mo^on at the very instant of giving up the ghost is
a thing not possible to our nature. Our speech and sense and lunta^ motion do
first evidently fail before our souls depart from our bodies: But Christ had
all three by the full report of the Evangelists, even to the very act of
breathing out of his soul. Saint John writes that John. 19.
Jesus knowing all things were fulfilled said, I thirst: and when he had tasted
the vinegar he said, it is finished: and inclining his head gave up the ghost.
He notes in Christ exact memory of all things written in the Scripture
touching him, Plain speech, and voluntary motion in laying down his head at
the very moment that he yielded up the ghost. S. Luke witnesses that Luke 23.
crying with a loud voice (Christ said.) Father into thine hands I will
commend (or lay down) my Spirit. (...). And speaking these words he breathed
out his soul. The lowdnesse of his voice, and effect of his prayer professing
he would now die, and at the same instant performing it by giving up his
spirit, conclude that neither sense, memory, speech, nor prayer failed him to
the last breath, as they do us when we draw toward death; and therefore the
manner of his death to be far distant from ours.

Defene. pa. 31. li. 37.
Anon after (you say) he might die, and in the mean while both sense and
speech fail him before he died.] Your liberty to judge of the sense of the
Scripture does lead you, and hold you to this error. You imagine what please
you of the words of the Evangelists, and auerting them from their true
coherence by interposing your fancies, you maintain it as your right to judge
of the meaning of the holy Ghost. But consult your conscience, that you ^st not
with the truth; and compare the Evangelists words and purpose together, and you
shall soon see the course, and force of them. To what end do the Evangelists
so carefully note in Christ these circumstances, not usual with us, no^
possible for us at the departure of our souls, but only to show the truth of
his own words, that none took his soul from him, but he laid it down of
himself, which he had power to do and accordingly did? and therefore they
describe him remembering all things, calling even for drink because he was
exceeding dry through pain, warning the people standing about him, with a
loud prayer, that he would (now) lay down his soul into his Fathers hands.
And so bowing his head of his own accord he forthwith breathed out his soul.
Anon after, say you, but nature first decaying in him; Presently say I, when
there was in him no decay of nature, nor any want of memory, sense, or speech.
In vain else were all those things, both performed by our Savior, and
testified by the Evangelists, if this were not the scope thereof, that Christ
with actual and perfect obedience, devotion, and submission to the will of
God, and therefore also with full and perfect memory, sense, and speech, did
above the strength and use of men, willingly and powerfully with one breath
render his soul into the hands of his Father; who had decreed he should die,
but gave him leave and power to lay down his soul of his own accord when he
would, without constraint or stroke of death wresting or taking his soul from
him. And that the manner of Christ's death was miraculous even in his own
Person, and drove the standers by to confess he was more then a man, that so
could die; if you could but open your partial ears, you should hear the
Evangelists cofirme, though you very coursely entreat S. Ierom as bending
himself therein against the plain text, where indeed he rightly pursues the
words of the holy Ghost, and you would saucily control one text by an other,
and not seek to reconcile them together. Saint Marks words are these. And
Mark 15.
Jesus crying with a loud voice, gave up the ghost, and the Centurion that
stood ouerright him, seeing, (...), that crying in such sort he breathed out
his soul, said; Surely this man was the Son of God. This crying so loud
which Saint Mark speaks of, was that prayer whereby Christ commended his
soul into his Fathers hands, as S. Luke testifies; for those were the last
words he spoke at the time when he gave up the ghost. The breathing out of his
soul so presently upon so strong a voice, and ^o loud a prayer was so
strange, that it forthwith moved the Centurion, who stood ouerright him, and
well observed him, to pronounce that he was the Son of God. What now has
Ierom offended, I pray you, in noting that which S. Mark writes, that the
Hieronymus ad Hedibia^ quaesti^. 8.
Centurion hearing Christ say to his Father, Into thy hands I commend my
spirit, ET STATIM SPONTE, and forthwith of his own accord to have given up
the ghost, moved with the greatness of this wonder, said, truly this man was
the Son of God?

I Defenc. pa. 32.
urge Ierom, you say, against the plain text in an other place: which says;
When the Centurion s^w the Earthquake and the things which were done, he said,
truly this man was the Son of God.] If Ierom should have falsified one text,
as you have done, to outface an other, he were worthy to be blamed; but your
liberty to judge of the Scriptures at your pleasure must excuse you. What has
Ierom said in those words; which Saint Mark, and S. Luke in effect did not
before him? That the loud voice which Christ used presently before his
yielding up the ghost, was that prayer which Ierom mentions, S. Luke
witnesses. And speaking those words (says S. Luke) Christ gave up the ghost.
That was a very strange, and marvelous thing to the Centurion to hear him so
speak, and see him so die. Saint Mark observes; The Centurion seeing, that
crying in such sort, Christ gave up the ghost, said, Surely this man was the
Son of God. Could it move the Centurion (that had the charge to see Christ
executed) to this confession, and not seem strange unto him? Pilate that gave
sentence of death upon him, Marueiled he was so soon dead; and do you think
it much S. Ierom should say it was a wonder? But in S. Matthew it is Defenc.
pa. 32.
expressly noted that the Earthquake chi^ly did move the Centurion so to
think, and speak.] Saint Mark says, The Centurion that stood ouer-right
Christ, and beheld him; when he saw in what sort he cried, and died, said,
Truly this was the Son of God. After his death, the Earthquake and other
things that followed the death of Christ, caused the Centurion and his
Soldiers, as they were keeping Jesus now dead, greatly to fear, and with one
voice now to confess that surely he was the Son of God. Both which reports
stand true together; the one not overthrowing the other. For the Centurio alone
at the hearing of Christ's voice, and sight of his death did first affirm it:
Afterward when Christ was dead, as the Centurion and his soldiers kept his
body on the Cross, till Pilates pleasure were known, the wonders which
followed Christ's death, as the shaking of the earth, the cleaving of the
rocks, and opening of the graves, made the Centurion and those that were with
him watching Jesus greatly to fear, and (with one mind) to say, Truly this
was the Son of God. So that your words Page 32. li. 45.
HE SAID, meaning thereby the Centurion, are not in S. Matthew, but the
Centurion and those that were with him SEEING (the wonders that followed
Christ's death) greatly feared, saying, Truly this man was the Son of God.
And had the Centurion seen nothing wonderful in Christ's person before he
died; how should he and the rest have gathered certainly, that these things
declared Christ and none other, to be the Son of God? But Christ suffering
all things with silence and patience till the instant of his death, he then
showed himself to die with a strange and divine power above man's nature, which
the Centurion first marked, and therefore confes^ed him to be the Son of God;
and when the rest of the wonders that followed the death of Christ, were
perceived; they confirmed him and all his soldiers in the same opinion: yea
Luk 23.
all the people that came to that sight, beholding the things which were done,
smote their breasts and returned. Where S. Luke also puts a manifest
difference betwixt the Centurion and the rest of the people. Of the Centurion
he says, Verse. 47.
(...) seeing what was done, in that Christ praying gave up the ghost, he
glorified God and said, truly this man was just. Of the rest Saint Luke says,
(...), Beholding the sundry things that were done (after Christ's death) Verse.
48.
they stroke their breasts and returned.

This miraculous and divine power, which appeared in the person of our Savior
breathing out his soul at an instant, when he would and as he would, besides
and beyond the nature of man, at which the Centurion so much wondered; the best
Divines of all ages have likewise observed, and acknowledged. So that you have
small cause to conceive, you can take Bernard tardie in a tale in such sort as
you do; as if his age were too young, or his wits too weak to encounter your
worth. He says indeed: to die was a great infirmity, but so to die, (as
Christ did) was a great (or an infinite) power. Where showing your self to be
sharp sighted in toys, and heavy headed in truth, you ask, which is this
infinite power? Christ's tasting the vinegar, or his saying it is finished, or
his bowing the head, or his giving up the ghost? Had you not tasted so much the
vinegar of your own conceits, that you can scant lift up your head to look on
any thing but lees, you might easily have seen what Bernard says, and that he
says no more then the best learned Fathers in Christ's Church said before him.
Bernard seria 4. ^ebdo. paenos^.
Solus potestatem habuit ponendi animam suam, nemo ^am abstulit ab eo and
inc^to capite (factus obediens vsque admortem) tradidit spiritum. Quis tam
facile quando vult dormit? magna quidem infirmit as mori, sed plane sic mori
virtus immensa. Solus potestatem habuit ponendi, qui solus facultatem aeqne
habuit liberam resumendi; imperium habens vitae and mort is. Christ alone had
power to lay down his soul, none took it from him. Bowing his head, (being
obedient unto death) he gave up the ghost. Who can so easily sleep, when he
will? To dic was a great infirmity, but so to die was plainly an exceeding
power. H^e only had power to lay down his soul, who only had like free
power to take it again; having the rule of life and death.

Long before Bernard S. Austen said as much, whose words you say, being Defenc.
page 33. l. 1.
granted, necessarily conclude nothing for my purpose. They show nothing but
Christ's voluntary dying, and that at his death he sh^ed great power, which you
deny not.] Were it infirmity in you that you could not understand S. Austens
words, it were the less to be misliked; but being an insolent conc^ of your
self, that will quarrel with Scriptures and Fathers, least you should be
convinced of a manifest error, this has neither truth nor touch of any
Religion. That Christ died VOLVNTARIE, and showed GREAT POWER AT HIS DEATH, S.
Austen you grant avouches; and you because you can wind those words at your
will, do^ not deny them: but were you as careful to take Saint Austens words
in their right sense, as you be ready for a show to admit them, this matter
were ended. S. Austen speaks indeed of Christ's voluntary, and powerful
dying, but he does not mean, as you do, that Christ was only willing to die,
as religious and godly men are, which desire to depart this life; but that he
died S^rmo. pa. 3.
quia voluit, quando voluit, quomodo voluit; because he would, when he would,
as he would. And giving the reason of his speech out of the Scripture, (though
you proudly and falsely say he has no strength of reason by the Scripture) he
learnedly and truly pursues it in this sort. Austen. de Tri^tated. l. 4. cap.
13.
Where the spirit is far better then the body, and it is the death of the
spirit to be forsaken of God; as it is the death of the body to be forsaken of
the spirit: and this is the punishment in the death of the body, that the
spirit because it willingly forsook God, shall unwillingly leave the body;
neither can the spirit leave the body when it will, unless it offer some
violent death to the body; the (Soul or) Spirit of (Christ) the mediator did
plainly prove that he came to the death of his flesh by no punishment of
sin, in that he forsook not his flesh by any means against his will, but
BECAUSE HE VVOVLD, WHEN H^ VVOVLD, AND AS HE VVOVLD. Therefore he said, I have
power to lay down my soul, and have power to take it again. None takes it
from me, but I lay it down of my self. And this those that were present
GREATLY MARVAILED AT, as the Gospel observes, when after that (loud) voice he
presently gave up the ghost. For they that were fastened to the tree were
tormented with a long death. Wherefore the (two) thieves had their legs broken,
that they might die. But Christ was WONDERED AT, because he was found dead;
which thing we read Pilate marueiled at, when Christ's body was asked of him to
be buried. There is more sound Divinity in this one Chapter of S. Austens then
in both your Pamphlets; though you pretend S. Austens words conclude nothing,
nor against you, nor for me. Where you may learn, (for it is fitter for you to
be a scholar then a writer, till you have learned to leave your wilful
humors, and to give ^are unto the sage and wise Fathers that were pillars of
Christ's Church many hundred years before you;) first that for the punishment
of sin, the death of the body was inflicted on all mankind, in which the
soul should depart from her body against her will, and not when she would,
nor as she would. Secondly that the manner of Christ's death was clean contrary
to ours; he gave up his spirit of his own accord, and power, when he would and
as he would. Thirdly his giving up the ghost so presently upon his loud
prayer, was wondered at by the standers by, and by Pilate himself when he
heard of it. Whether this conclude my purpose I leave to the judgment of the
discreet Reader: your no, as it lightly comes without cause, so with me it
goes as lightly without regard.

But Austens words, which I first Se^mons pagina. 8.
quoted, prove not so much.] You take upon you to refute first and last; why
skip you then that which is cited in the midst? Grant Austens words to be true,
as indeed they are most true, which are alleged in the first place, and my
purpose is fully concluded. The^ prove that no man can August. in Johan.
tractat. 119.
SO SLEEP when he will, as Christ died when he would; that no man can so put
off his vesture when he will, as Christ put off his flesh, when he would; that
no man can so leave the place where he stands, at his will, as Christ left
his life when he would. And if so great power appeared in him dying, with what
power shall we think he will come to judge? Where voluntary dying in Christ
does not only import that he was content and willing to die; as Paul was when
he desired to be dissolved, but that he left this life by separating his soul
from his body when he would; having at that present when he parted his soul
from his body; perfect memori^, sense, and speech, and breathing out his soul
of his own accord, with more facility and celeritie then we can lay off our
garments, or change the place in which we stand. And from this admirable power,
by which he laid down his soul, and took it again at his pl^asure, Austen
draws a comparison to the exceeding greatne^ of that power with which he
shall come to judge the world.

With Austen join all the Fathers of Christ's Church that eaer spoke of this
matter, and the best Divines of latter ages confess the same. Athanasius.
Athana. cont. Ar^. orat. 4.
(...). To have power to lay down his soul when he would, and to take it
again; this is not the property of men, but it is the power of the Son of
God. For man dies not by his own power, but by necessiti^ of nature and that
against his will: but Christ being God ^ad it in his own power to separate
himself from his body, and to resume the same again, when he would. Origin.
Origenes in Johan. Euang. (...) 19.
An non Dominus singular quiddam prae omnibus, qui in corpus aduenerint, de
seipso dicit? does not the Lord affirm a thing that was (peculiar or) singular
to him above all that ever were in the flesh; when he says, None takes my
soul from me, but I lay it down of my self, and have power to lay it down
and power to take it again? Let us consider what he means, who left his
body, and departed from it without any way leading to death. This neither
Moses, nor any of the Patriarchs, Prophets, or Apostles did say besides Jesus.
For if Christ had died as the thieves did that were crucified with him; we
could not have said, that he laid down his soul of himself, but after the
manner of such as die. But now Jesus crying with a strong voice, gave up the
ghost, and as a King left his body. His power greatly appeared in this, that
at his own free power and will leaving his body he died. Gregory Nyssene.
Gregor. N^ssenus de resurrectione Christi Oration 1.
Memento Dominici dicti, quid de seipso pronunciet is, a quo pendet rerum
omnium vis and potentia; quomodo ex plena summaque potestate, ac non ex naturae
necessitate animam a corpore seiungit. Remember the Lords words, what he
pronounces of himself, of whom depends all power; how with full and
sovereign power, and not by necessity of nature he severed his soul from his
body; as he said, None takes my soul from me, but I lay it down of my
self. I have power to lay it down, and power to take it again. Gregory
Nazianzene makes the mother of Christ thus to speak unto him after his death.
Nazianzen. in Christo patiente.
Coming I heard thy voice unto thy father, (...), and thou suddenly departedst
(this life) as leaving it willingly. Jerome: Hierom. 15. cap. Marci.
With a faint voice, or rather speechless we die, that are of the earth; but
he which came from heaven breathed out his soul with a loud voice. Idem ad
Hedibiam qu^. 8.
We must say it was a show of his divine power to lay down his soul when he
would, and to take it again. Yea, the Centurio hearing him say to hi^ Father,
Into thine hands I commend my spirit, and statim sponte spiritum dimisisse, and
straightway of his own accord to send forth his spirit, moved with the
GREATNESS of this WONDER said, Truly this was the Son of God. Chrysostom
upon these words of Matthew, Jesus crying with a loud voice gave up the ghost,
says, Chrysostom in Matthew. cap. 27. hom. 89.
Idcirco magna voce clamauit, vt ostendat haec sua potestate fieri. Therefore
Christ cried with a loud voice, that he might show this to be done by his own
power. Mark says, Pilate maru^lled if he were already dead. And the
Centurion also THEREFORE CHIEFLY believed, because he saw Christ die of his
own accord and power. Victor of Antioch upon the like words of Mark, says,
Victor Antio^ in cap. 5. Marci.
By so doing the Lord Jesus does plainly declare, that he had his whole life
and death in his own free power. Wherefore Mark writes, that Pilate not
without admiration asked if Christ were yet dead; addidit item ea potissimum de
causa Centurionem credidisse; he added likewise that the Centurion chiefly for
that reason believed, because he saw Christ give up the ghost with a loud cry,
and signification of great power. Leo noting that Christ died not for lack of
help, but of determinat^ purpose says, Leo Sermon. 17. de Passione Domini.
Quae illic vitae intercessio sentienda est, vbi anima and potestate est emissa
and potestate reuocata? What entreaty for life shall we think there was,
where the soul was both sent out with power, and recalled with power.
Fulgentius: Fulgentius ad Trasimundum lib. 3.
Cum ergo homo Christus tantam accep^rit potestatem, vt cum vellet animam
poneret, and cum vellet denuo resumeret, quantam potuit habere Christi
diuinitas potestatem? Ideo autem ille homo potestatem animae habuit, quia cum
diuina potestas in vnitatem personae suscepit. Where then the man Christ
received so much power; that he might lay down his soul when he would, and
take it again when he would, how great power might the Godhead of Christ have?
and therefore the manhood of Christ had power to lay down his soul, because
the divine power admitted him into the vinitie of person. Sedul. operis
Paschalis lib. 5. cap. 17.
Sedulius: Animam protinus suam sancto de corpore volens ipse depos^it. Christ
himself forthwith (upon his prayer) willingly laid off his sacred soul from
his body. Nonnius in his Paraphrase upon S. John's Gospel, expresses the
saying of Christ, None takes my soul from me; in these words, Nonnius
Paraphras. in Joan. ca. 10. ver. 18.
No birthlaw takes my soul from me, no incroching time that tameth all
things; nor Necessity which is unchangeable counsel; (...); but ruler of my
self, I of mine own accord yield up my willing soul. Beda upon that place of
Matthew, And Jesus crying with a loud voice, sent out (or gave up) his spirit;
writes thus: Bed^ in Matt. cap. 27.
Quod autem dicit, emisit spiritum, ostendit diuinae potestatis esse emittere
spiritum, vt ipse quoque dixerat, nemo potest tollere animam; in that the
Evangelist says, Christ sent out his (soul or) spirit, he shows it is a
point of Divine power to send out the soul, as Christ himself said, None can
take my soul from me. Ibid. in Marci cap. 15.
Nullus enim habet potestatem emittendi spiritum nisi qui animarum conditor
est. For none has power to send out the soul, but he that is Creator of
souls. Which Bid builds upon the words of S. Matthew, who says that Christ
crying with a loud voice (...), dismissed or sent his soul from him.
Theophylact: Theophylact. in Matthew. cap. 27.
Jesus cries with a loud voice, that we should know it was true which he said,
I have power to lay down my soul: for not constrained but of his own accord
he dismissed his soul. And Idem Marci cap. 15.
the Centurion seeing that he breathed out his soul so like a Commander of
death, WONDERED, and confessed him: Idem Marci cap. 23.
(...) for he died not like other men, but as the Master of death. Lyra upon
these words of Matthew, Lyra in Mat^ cap. 27.
Jesus again crying with a loud voice, sent forth his soul. Whereby it
appears that voice was not natural, but MIRACVLOVS, because a man afflicted
with great and long torment, and through such affliction near to death could
not so cry by any strength of nature.

The latter writers concur with the older in this observation. Erasmus in his
Paraphrase upon Saint Luke. Erasmus pa^. in Lu. ca. 23.
Jesus when with a mighty cry he had said, Father into thy hands I commend my
spirit, breathed out his soul: to make it manifest to all, that he did not
faint as others do, the strengh of the body by little and little decaying, but
straightway upon a strong cry, and words distinctly pronounced, laid down his
life as of his own accord. And the Idem in Marci. cap. 15.
Centurion who stood ouerright as a Minister and witness of his death, and had
seen many dye with punishment, when he saw Jesus besides the manner of other
men, after a strong cry presently to breath out his soul said; truly this man
was the Son of God. Musculus, Musculus in Matthew. cap. 27.
That Christ sent forth hi^ soul with aloude voice is a proof of greater
power, then may be found in a man dying. Whereby he showed that he laid of his
soul of his own accord; answerable to that, I have power to lay down my
soul and to take it again. To which end John says, that bowing his head he
gave up the Ghost. Others first dye, and then their heads fall; but he first
lays down his head, and then of his own accord delivers his soul up to
his Father. Gualter Gualter in Ioh. hom. 169.
But let us see the manner of Christ's death, who as John writes with bowing
down his head yielded his Spirit. Luke says, he cried with a loud voice,
Father into thy hands I commend my Spirit. Concurrunt h^c non obscura
Diuinitatis argumenta; Here find we manifest arguments of his Divinity, which
the Centurion and others observed as some of the Evangelists witness. First
this cry and distinct pronouncing of his last words shows a power and virtue
MORE THEN HVMANE. For we know that men dying so faint, that the most of them
cannot speak be it never so softly. Again, he dies when he will himself,
yea and lays of his soul with authority, to show himself Lord of life and
death, which is an evident proof of his Divine power. It is profitable for us
diligently to mark the Divine power of Christ, which showed it self so
plainly in his death. Marlorat upon the words of Matthew, and Jesus crying
again with a loud voice sent forth his spirit, says; Marlor. in Matthew. ca.
27.
Declarat hic Christus maiestatem suam, Christ declares here his Majesty,
that he lays down his soul, not when men constrain him, but when he
himself will. Whereupon Pilat maruailed that Christ was so soon dead. And the
Lord himself said, None takes my soul from me but I lay it down of my
self. I have power to lay it down, and power to take it again. To which it
pertains that is written, he bowing down his head gave up his spirit; for
other men first dye, and then their heads hang; but Christ first laid down his
head, and then voluntarily rendered his soul to his Father. Many more might be
brought of all ages and places confessing the same; but if these suffice not,
what may be enough I do not know.

To decline the Scriptures and Fathers that make against him, the Discourser
has devised two shifts very like the rest of of his tenants, that is void of
all truth and judgment. Defenc. pa. 32.
I deny not, says he, but Christ might show some strange unusual thing
apparently to the beholders in uttering his last voice, which might very much
move the beholders and The Defender deuiseth shifts to decline Scriptures and
Fathers against ^im.
h^arers. Add hereunto that experience shows, (as Physicians say,) how some
diseases in the body bring death presently after most strong and violent
crying: Namely in some excessive torments, as of the stone.] Things reported
and expressed in the Scriptures touching the strange and wonderful manner of
Christ's death you deny; and dream of things there no way mentioned, to color
your matter and cousin your Reader. That Christ did render his soul into his
Fathers hands, when as yet neither speech, sense, memory, nor motion began to
fail, is diligently observed by the Evangelists, and was greatly marueyled at
by the Centurion, which saw the manner of his death: As also that he breathed
out his soul of his own accord when he had spoken those words without any
former or other degrees or pangs of death appearing in him, is likewise
witnessed by the Scriptures, and constantly avouched by all the Fathers. Saint
Luke says, and speaking these words he breat head out his soul: Saint Matthew,
and crying with a loud voice he dismissed his spirit: Saint Mark, and sending
a strong voice from him he blew out his Soul. This did he of his own accord
and power, None taking his soul from him, as in death they do ours; but
declaring himself by laying of his soul when he would, and as he would, to be
Lord and master of life and death. This is fit for all Christians to confess,
least they dishonor the death of Christ by depriving his person of that power
and glory, which he openly showed in the eyes and ears of all his persecutors.
This you shift of, and instced thereof imagine some strange and VNVSVALI
accident in the manner of Christ's death, which neither the Scriptures report,
nor you can express: wherein you show your self forward to invent what is not
written, and backward to believe what is written, which is the trade of such
men as mean to make a shipwreck of their faith.

That a man may dye crying, as Christ did, you have found at length if not from
Divines, at least from Physicians; for I perccaue you have sought all sorts of
helps both far and near to uphold your fancies.] P^rchaunce Physicians may
tell you, when a painful disease possesses the parts which are no fountains
of life or sense, a man may cry, till sense and strength begin to fail, and so
hasten his death by the violent spending of his spirits; but that a man may by
any course of nature retain perfect memory, sense, motion, and speech to the
very act of breathing out his soul, I assure my self no wise Physician will
affirm. And if any more humorous then learned will wade so far without his
Art, he must understand that his word may not ouersway the Rules of Divinity
and Principles of nature. For what are the powers and faculties whereby the
soul is conjoined with the body, but life, sense, and motion? so long then as
they last, the soul by nature neither does, nor can forsake the body. But when
sense and motion first outward and then inward are oppressed and overwhelmed,
then life also perishes and the soul may no longer abide in her body; the
union by which she was fastened unto it, being wholly dissolved Wherefore death
which is the privation of life, by Gods ordinance for the punishment of sin
by degrees surpriseth and in the end quenches all sense and motion, and so
forces the soul to forsake her seat; which by Gods appointment is violently
parted from her body whether she will or no: but never till the effects oflife,
which are sense and motion, be first decayed and abolished. A sown is the
suddainest ouerwhelming of the powers of life, which any natural experience
does teach us; and yet therewith though outward sense and motion do fail at
an instant, and the inward be very weak and almost insensible, the soul does
not presently depart, but stays a time till all sense and motion without and
within, (except the party be recovered) be utterly extinguished. Wherefore in
all men by necessity of nature the powers and parts of life decav in some
sooner in some later before they die; and therefore in Christ on the Cross it
was MIRACVLOVS and above nature, that having full and perfect outward and
inward sense speech and motion, he did in a moment, when he would, and as he
would, render his soul into the hands of his Father without any farther
decays, or other degrees of death precedent then the very act of breathing out
his soul, which left his body presently and perfectly dead.

Thou have gentle Reader the causes and prooses that moved me to observe the
man^r of Christ's death to be different from ours; which whether they be
consonant to the Scriptures, and rightly conceived by those learned and ancient
Fathers, which I have named unto thee, I leave to thy discrecte judgment;
assuring thee there is nothing to hinder the maine consent of so many old and
new writers in a matter of so great consequence, but only the headdinesse of
this discourser; who upon a bare pretense of one piece of Scripture not well
understood and worse applied, thinks he may work wonders; and conclude all
these grave and sound Expositours to be so ignorant of the sense of that place,
and so unable to reach to the depth of those words, Christ was LIKE US IN ALL
things; that with one accord they would affirm Trea. page 53.
a sine fable, a Paradoxe in Nature, and contrary to Scripture. Howbeit it is
no news with this man to defend that Christ was Ibidem.
distempered, overwhelmed, and all confounded both in all the powers of his
soul and senses of his body. He boldly avouches it was so with Christ before
his death in the Garden and on the Cross, and therefore he presumes it might
much more befall him at his death. But let him keep these secrets to himself.
I doubt not Christian Reader but thou will be well advised before thou put the
Savior of the world and the Son of God out of his wits or senses, to make
way for such witless and senseless fancies.

He Defenc. pa. 33.
proceeds to show my disdain to the Fathers for insolent rejecting all their
opinions touching the causes of Christ's Agony in the Garden, and of his
complaint on the Cross. For answer, first I desire to know whether you allow
of all these causes, or no; you seem to refuse the^ here: for herein you
showed not your own opinion, but the Judgment of the Fathers. Elsewhere your
self are resolute for some of those causes, and against other some. And yet
before; all these interpretations you say are sound, and stand well with the
rules of Christian piety; thus variable you are in that wherein you seem most
resolute.] When you know what it is to be constant, you shall do well to talk
of inconstancy; till that time your own doctrine will most disgrace your own
doings. You catch often at contrarieties in my writings; make good but one, and
then prate at your pleasure. Otherwise men will think it to be the weakness
of your wit, or stiffness of your stomach, that can not or will not rightly
conceive that which is truly spoken.

Touching the cause of Christ's Agony in the Garden; since the Scriptures do
not I did not resolve what was the cause of Christ's agony.
express it, I said it was curiosity to search it, presumption to determine
it, impossible certainly to conclude it: yet for that you made this your
chief advantage, that there could be coniectured none other cause of Christ's
exceeding sorrow in the Garden, besides the present suffering of H^ll pains in
his soul; I gave the Reader to understand how many there might be besides your
de^ce, which of all others was least tolerable or probable. Now you would know
whether I ALLOW of ALL these causes, or no. I have answered you that already,
if you had but ears to hear it. I did not acknowledge any of these to be
precisely or particula^ly mentioned in the Scriptures as the right cause of
that Agony, but if you would needs go to coniecturing, I said, there might
be conceived so many, and every one of them more LIKLIE, and godly, then your
supposing of Hell pains at that instant in Christ's soul. I persist still in
the same mind, what change find you in me? Else where I am Defenc. pa. 33.
li. 12.
resolute (you say) for some of these causes, and against other some. And yet
before I said, all th^se interpretations are sound and stand well with the
rules of Christian pictie.] It is more then a penance to be troubled with a
trifler, that has neither eyes to see, nor head to apprehend what is said.
When I came to consider of the general respects in Christ, whence that Agony
might arise; as the persons were two, God with whom, and Man for whom Christ
dealt in that work of our redemption; so I resolved the cause of Christ's
Agony could not proceed, but either from his submission to God, to whose will
and hand he must subject himself, if he would ransom man; or from comp^ssion
of man's misery, for whom he was willing to lay down his life. A thi^d ground
of Christ's fear I grant I see none. For that Devils should torment Christ's
soul, I leave that invention to your devotion. But do I determine any
particular cause contrary to my first profession, when I stand resolute, that
from one or both of these fountains the cause of Christ's fear and sorrow must
be derived? If I do not, then piper-like do you play with ^y variableness,
when you do not so much as attend that I am resolute in the general duties
of piety and charity, which I ascribe to our Savior; though I be not
resolute in any particular cause of his fear at that present, as I at first
professed I neither could, nor would be, by reason the Scriptures do not
expressly mention any. Again, what dullness is this to say I am resolute
against some of these causes, for that I make two principal heads, whereon the
rest depend? Can not your wisdom see, that Christ's SVBMISSION to the
Majesty of God sitting in judgment, and his DEPRICATION of Gods wrath
proceed from his religious and humble subjection to the will and hand of God?
As also that his sorrow for the REIECTION of the Jews, and DISPERSION of his
Church, and his LAMENTATION of man's sin grow from his compassion on man's
misery? And lastly that the VOLVNTARIF DEDICATION of his blood to be shed for
the sins of the world, and the SANCTIFICATION OF HIS PERSON to offer the true
and eternal sacrifice, partake with both the former respects? Is it a
contradiction with you to see many branches on one stem, many Springs in one
well, many members in one body? And so childish you are, that you take^-meale
for eggs, and interpretations for ^ses, and then you crake of my
contrarieties, how much I over shot my self: For where I bring diverse
Expositions of Christ's words on the Cross, My God, my God, why have thou
forsaken me; and say in the end, Sermon. page 37. li. 33.
All these interpretations are so^d an^ stand with the rules of Christian
piety: you in a dream or drow sinesse (choose which you will) imagine I say,
ALL THESE CAUSES of Christ's Agony are sound, an^ stand well with the rules of
Christian piety; and so contradict my former resolution, as if only two were
sound, and not the rest; where in truth I neither auo^ch the one, nor the
other: such conflicts you make with your own follies, and get the conquest not
on my Assertions, but on your own most foolish ouer-sights.

Yet these Defenc. pa. 34. li. 3. and 6.
agree not with any circumstance of the Passion, and on^ of them crosses and
overthrows an other.] Take first the pains to prove somewhat, and then
challenge your privilege to prate at your pleasure; otherwise your word i^ no
warrant for any wise man to depend on. The Scriptures testify first Christ's
sorrow in the Garden, and then his sweat like blood. His sorrow where he says,
Matthew. 26.
(...), my s^le is every way (grieved or) afflicted with sorrow even unto
death. His sweat, after he was comforted by an Angel from heaven, and fell to
fervent prayer. So says Saint Luke; An Angel appeared to him from heaven
comforting him. And being in an Agony he prayed Luke 22.
more earnestly, and his sweat fell on the earth like drops of blood. Now an
Agony does not properly or necessarily infer either fainting fear or deadly
pain, as you misconceiue; but notes a contention or intention of body or
mind whereby we labor to perform our desire, and strive against the danger
which may defeat us, as in place convenient shall more fully appear. Where
also you shall see that not fear but feruencie in all likelihood was the cause
of that bloody sweat. In the mean time it is plain that Christ professed he
had sundry causes of his sorrow in the Garden; for he says my soul is (...)
on every side oppressed with sorrow. And what urged him to that agony or
vehemency of prayer, which S. Luke speaks of, after he was comforted by an
Angel, wherein his sweat ran from him l^ke drops of blood, is not yet agreed
on, nor any way confirmed by you: But note any of these six causes, which I
conceived might induce our Savior to this sorrow or sweat; and see whether
they have not direct reference to his passion, and a full coherence each with
other. Howbeit, you reser^e that for a fitter place, and so do I.

Why then do I seem to Defenc. pa. 33. li. 10.
refuse them as none of mine, by saying, I showed not mine own opinion but the
judgments of the Fathers?] Nay why seem you so void of all understanding,
that you apprehend not so much as usual English? John 7.
MY doctrine is not MINE (says our Savior) but his that sent me: will you
hence conclude a manifest contradiction in Christ, because he says, mine is
not mine, but his that sent me. In possessions, that is mine, which is wholly
mine and no man's else; and in opinions, that is properly mine, whereof I am the
first inuenter and author; howbeit by a larger extension of the word, that is
mine also, wherein I communicate with others, though it be not properly or only
mine. Out of this distinction of proper and common, known to the very children
in Grammar schools, our Savior says most truly; My doctrine (that is, the
doctrine which I preach, and in that respect is mine) is not mine, is not only
mine, nor of my devising, but his that sent me. This were enough to warrant my
words; and yet my speech is somewhat plainer: for I added, not MINE OWN
opinion, but the judgments of the Fathers. Now mine own is that which is
properly mine, and wherein no man partaketh with me; and although you might
stumble at Mine, yet MINE OWN would put you out of doubt. So that here, as
elsewhere, you bewray the sharpness of your quarrelling humor; but if neither
you nor your friends could spy any greater faults, than these absurd and
ignorant cauils; the Reader will scant trust you hereafter, when you talk of
my contrarieties and inconstancies. But how does this excuse the foulness of
your mouth in rejecting the Fathers judgments with irreuerent and disdainful
terms; which was the thing I then reproved in you? If the opinions were only
theirs and not mine, would you the rather revile them as fond and absurd,
because they were wholly theirs, and no way mine?

Defenc. page 33. l. vlt.
The Fathers you say, I call not so. Such I meant and took for absurd
gatherers, as commonly ^le regard the sound doctrine of the Fathers, but only
admire their faults: whom here I noted by the name of our Contraries.] Are you
so set on shifting and shufling, that you can not forbear seven lines but you
must needs contradict your self, and that so grossly, that every Carter may
control you? In the seventeenth line of your three and thirtieth page, you
tell me, Pa. 33. li. 17.
I am in the best opinion, when I deny these to be mine opinions: and being
charged, that insolently you called those judgments of the Fathers fond and
absurd, you answer (that) these your words are Ibid. li. 24.
purposely meant of those in these days, that delight to vaunt of the Fathers,
and chiefly in their errors. Your uncivil and unseemly liueries of fond and
absurd opinions and senses, must needs belong either to the Fathers that
uttered them, or to me that cited them. To catch me in a kind of contradiction,
as you thought, your self acquit me from holding them: For I deny them, you
say, and r^fuse them as none of mine. On whom then light your fond and absurd
speeches, but on the Fathers that first conceived, and first delivered those
opinions and senses, which you so much duke and reproach? You meant it not of
the Fathers.] You flutter in vain, to free your self from that lime-twig:
against your plain speech no man will admit your secret meaning clean
contrary to your words. You say indeed, Trea. pa. 65. li 25.
I know our contraries do fancy other senses of this Text, My God, my God why
have thou forsaken me; but the senses of that text alleged out of the Fathers
word for word, and the places of the Authors named, when you come after your
proud and peremptory manner to examine and censure; you say, to that which was
produced out of Jerome and Chrysostom, Trea. pa. 66. li. 31.
which sense is most absurd; and this is too fond to be spoken. To the sense
noted out of Athanasius, Austen, and Leo, your answer is; Trea. pa. 67. li. 11.
this is no less absurd than the former; there is no cause nor likelihood in
the world for it. So when the testimonies of Ambrose, Austen, Ierom and Bid
were produced, that the reiection of the Jews might be some cause of Christ's
sorrow in the Garden; you grossly mistake their words, as if they had expounded
Christ's complaint on the cross, and pertly reioyne, Trea pa. 68. li. 3. and 8.
this is more fond and absurd than the other; there is no sense nor reason in
it. How think you Sir? speak you of the men, or of the matter, when you say,
this sense is most absurd, this is too fond to be spoken? Could you wrench your
words from the matter to the reporter, which you can not; what gain you by
that? If to allege these opinions of Fathers, be so fond and absurd, as you
say, though I refuse them, as you a^ch I did; what was it in the Fathers
themselves to profes^e and publish those most fond and absurd senses (as you
call them) to all ages and Churches, but mere and inexcusable madness? But
tie your tongue shorter, lest men think you mad, thus to rave at eueriething,
be it never so learned or advised, that rangeth not with your erroneous fancy.
They have spoken wisely and gravely, and your kicking and win^ing at their
religious and sober expositions with such scornful phrases, may discover your
coltish conceits, it can never decrea^e or craze their credits.

I Defenc. page 3^.
cast a needless rebuke upon you for confounding the causes of the agony and
the complaint together.] Though all your exceptions to the Fathers expositions
of that text, The Defender does grossly mistake the reiection of the Jews to be
the meaning of Christ's complaint on the cross.
My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me, be most frivolous and foolish; yet
none is more babish than when you mistake the reiection of the Jews (which I
showed out of Ambrose, Ierom, Austen and Bid might be some cause of Christ's
sorrow after his last supper) to be the meaning of his complaint on the Cross:
and would needs in a flaunt affirm that ME in those words of Christ (why have
thou forsaken me) does not signify my whole Nation; which of my certain
knowledge never came into my head, nor ever out of my mouth. For I took care
to wade no further in expounding them than the Scriptures and Fathers went
before me; and howsoever his sorrow for them might happily not cease before his
death; yet there was no cause why having formerly prayed his Father to forgive
them, that knew not what they did, he should now call the rest of the
perfidious and obstinate Jews by the name of himself. If you stand to uphold
this oversight, you show your self to have less judgment in mainteining it,
than you had in mistaking it; but you have stood too long on these irifles,
which I think to be true: for you trifle indeed, and neither in defense of
your self, nor disadvantage of me, bring any thing that is material. You come
therefore to peruse how you have ignorantly and purposely perverted my reasons.

That the Defenc. page 35.
true sacrifice for sin must be indeed BODILY, BLOODY and DEAD, we doubt not;
we unfeignedly and heartily embrace it. The Patriarks believed it, the Jews
sacrifices of beasts figured it, the New Testament confirms it. But what will
follow then? ergo Christ's bodily death only and merely was the whole ransom
and price of our sin? for we must note that this is the very question indeed;
this is the point of our controversy.] The Defender not able to support his
errors, does quarrel with the question.
When you can say nothing to support your errors, you begin to quarrel with
the question; as if you had or could prescribe me what I should preach of. What
I by warrant of holy Scripture received into the contents of Christ's cross,
and what I excluded from the same, is evident by my words; you may not come
after and alter the question to your liking. Into the Cross of Christ I
admitted whatsoever the Holy ghost witnesses the Son of God suffered either
on his cross, or going to his cross. My words are plain, Sermon. page 8. li.
35.
the rest which went before, not being excluded as superfluous, but continued
and increased by that sharp and extreme martyrdom which he endured on the
cross. And good reason had I so to do: for all the pains and griefs of
body or mind which befell him between his last supper and his fastening to
the cross, endured and augmented on the cross; and so by no means might be
excluded from his cross. What things I then excluded from the cross of
Christ, is as manifest by mine own words; which neither I can hide, nor you
may change. These they are: Sermon. page 8. li. 23.
Some men in our days stretch (the cross of Christ) a great deal farther, to
the death both of body and soul, and unto the whole pains of the damned in
hell: but upon how just grounds, when you hear, you may judge as you see
cause. Then showing what might be tolerated, if men could therewith be
contented, and that I neither refuted those which took hell pains
hyperbolically for Ibid. li. 29. li 36.
great and intolerable pains; nor those that by hell pains understood either
Page 9. li. 1. and 3.
a wrestling with the very powers of hell, or trembling at the terror of Gods
vengeance provoked by our sins, so they put no distrust nor doubt in Christ's
soul of his own salvation or our redemption, but leave him firm faith
always fixed on God: I repeated again, what it was I impugned; to wit, that
Sermon. page 9. li. 14.
some men in our days will no nay, but that Christ on the cross suffered the
self same pains in soul, which the damned do in hell, and endured even the
death of the soul. Here Sir is the question as I first proposed it, I no
where alter it, no^ vary from it: both these, I mean the death of the soul,
and the self same pains which the damned in hell do suffer, I excluded from
the cross of Christ, and consequently from the work of our redemption; which
I avouched to be perfect and full without either of those additions. To this
are all my proofs directed, and from this by your leave I may not suffer you to
wander: Defenc. pa. 35. li. 32.
Your mere bodily sufferings without any proper sufferings of the soul take
back to your self; I have no such words, nor make no such doubts; the death
of the soul and the self same pains which the damned do suffer, and we
should have suffered, had we not been redeemed, which is the second death or
the death of the damned, are the things brought by me in question. Wherefore
howsoever you will understand my meaning contrary to my words, because you
would shroud your self under the covert of these words MERE AND PROPER, I
must recall all my reasons to those two points to which I first intended them:
and whether I speak ambiguously or deceitfully, or change my question, or
charge you unjustly that you slip from the question to certain general and
doubtful terms, let the Reader in Gods name judge.

My proofs to my purpose stand sound and good. The true sacrifice for sin by
the Apostles Doctrine has these three properties in it; it must be BODILY,
BLOODY, and DEADLY; that is, it must have the bodily and bloody death of the
mediator, who must be the Son of God. This the Patriarchs belee^ed, the
Jewish sacrifices prefigured, the new Testament confirms. What follows you
ask. Erg^ Christ's bodily death only and merely was the whole ransom and
price of sin? Without your terms of proper and mere you are no body. My
reason is in sight. The death which the Mediator must dye for the sins of the
world must be bodily and bloody. The death of the soul, in this life, and the
death of the damned after this life (which are the pains of hell) could not be
bodily and bloody. Therefore neither of them was the death which the Mediator
must or did die for the sins of the world. If he dyed neither of those, then
he died the death of the body only, for so much as the Scriptures mention no
kinds of death but only these three, except it be by way of figurative speech.
Do you now see what follows? then what is your answer? Defenc. pa. 35. li.
32.
If I mean that the MERE bodily sufferings of Christ without any proper
sufferings of his soul are the entire and whole Ransom for sin, then you
affirm expreslie, there is no piece of reason in these words.] You are a
PROPER and MERE Gentleman to spott out matters of this importance. I conclude
by the Apostles assertion that Christ for the sins of the world died neither
the death of the soul, nor the death of the da^ed, which is the pains of hell
and second death; but ONLY a BODILY death. You reele too and fro, and stumble
first at bodily, and then at only, and in the end say you know not what. If I
mean that Christ's MERE BODILY sufferings without any proper su^ings of the
soul were the whole ransom for sin, then you see no reason in my words.] Thus
much reason you may hear in my words, that Christ died neither the death of
the Soul, nor the death of the damned, but ONLY a BODILY death, that is the
death of the body and none other kind of death. What say you to this? Page 8.
and 14.
This is not your Contro^ersie, you say; the very question indeed is as you
have set it.] Have you a Commission, when I have proposed questions which I
mind to impugn; to come after me and new set my questions? Acknowledge the
death of the soul, and the death of the dam^d, which are the true pains of
hell, to be no part of Christ's sufferings, and we shall soon conclude that
Christ died only a bodily death for the sins of the world. But you after
your slight and slippery manner, though even here you deny it very stiffly, when
you be pressed with reasons or authorities, convey your self presently to your
ambiguous and deceitful terms of mere bodily sufferings, and the proper
sufferings of the soul, and from thence you make your advantage. But what are
mere bodily sufferings? such as have no communion neither with the sense nor
grace of the soul? can a living body die a shameful and cruel death as
Christ did and the soul neither like or mislike it, nor so much as feel it?
This you infer upon the word only, when I conclude that Christ died a bodily
death only.

Defenc. pa. ^5. li 36.
If the sacrifice (say you) As it is only bodily and bloody do wholly purge
sin it follows that no action or passion of the soul, neither by Sympathy
nor any other, I say none at all As being in the soul, was regarded as
propitiatory and meritorious.] Grant first ^ Ft pa. 36. l. 2. What is
contained in Christ's bodily death.
your own terms to be true, (which are neither my words nor my meaning) that
Christ's MERE bodily sufferings without any proper sufferings of the soul were
the whole Ransom for sin; how exclude you the sense, affections, and actions
of Christ's soul not to be meritorious? Had Christ any sufferings in his body
which his soul felt not? and when his soul felt them, did he not patiently,
obediently, and willingly endure them for our sakes? Or was not the patience,
obedience, and love of Christ meritorious? How then will it follow, that if
Christ's sufferings were MERE BODILY without any proper sufferings of the
soul, no affection nor action of Christ's soul was meritorious? But you add
^f the Sacrifice, As it is only bodily bloody and deadly does wholly purge
sin, th^n no action nor passion of the soul was propitiatory and
meritorious.] If you mean that Christ's body as it was only dead (for that is
your word) did without soul or life wholly purge sin, then indeed your
consequent is good, that neither action nor passion of the soul could be
propitiatory, because the soul was not present when the body was dead. But
who makes that blockish Antecedent besides your self? Or who ever excluded
Christ's innocence, obedience, patience, charity, and digni^e from his bodily
and bloody sacrifice before you? will you sever the manner of offering from the
thing offered, and call it a perfect and propitiatory sacrifice?

As it was only bodily and bloody, it had no communion with any action or
passion of Christ's soul, As being in the soul.] Why entangle you the Reader
with an As and an As of your own adding, which no where are found in my words?
What sense can any wise man pike out of this? The sacrifice, As it is only
bodily, excludes all actions and passions of the soul, As being in the
soul.] Is it so strange a kind of speech to say that Christ died only a bodily
death, which so many learned and ancient Fathers have so frequently v^ed
before me, that you should bring in your As and your As thus to kick at it? In
death as in death, if thereby you mean the privation and want of soul and
life, there is neither pain, nor sense; and in the body As in the body, if you
take the body for a dead corpse there is no absolute necessity of a soul;
otherwise no body could be dead. What then? Had therefore Christ's body no
soul, nor his death no pain, when he suffered for our sins? Or are you of
late so souced in Sophistry, that when you hear of a body you will infer,
there is neither action nor pa^sion of the soul in that body, as in a body? or
when you are told of a man tormented to death, you will assure us that in his
death, as death, he had neither pain nor sense? All men besides you, conceive
in the sufferings of the body, the soul as the soul must have the sense and
feeling thereof, and is thereby urged by Gods ordinance to seek for the cause
and ease thereof. Hose. ^.
In their affliction (says God by his Prophet) they will seek me. And David,
Psalm. 82.
sill their faces with shame, that the may seek thy name. And likewise by the
suffering of death they understand the pain and sting of death approaching, and
lastly separating the soul from the body. And therefore Christ's sacrifice for
sin though it were only bodily; because no part of Christ died but only the
body, yet the soul endured the pain and discerned the cause thereof. And
though it were deadly, because it ended in death and was finished by death; yet
the actions and affections of Christ's soul, as well from her self as from his
body, at the time of his passion impressed, or stirred, either by the cause,
smart, author, or manner of his sufferings were meritorious, and made way for
the satisfaction of sin, which was not accomplished but by that death of
Christ's body, that God had determined. Let therefore the Reader judge how well
you impugn my conclusion, that Christ died for our sins the death of the
body only, and not the death of the soul nor of the damned; and how vainly you
vouch, Christ's death and sacrifice as they were bodily, had neither pains nor
patience, obedience nor charity, nor any other action or passion of his soul
in them.

Defenc. pa. 36.
Elsewhere I see in you manifest contrariety hereunto; for sundry times you
teach that Christ did suffer peculiarly and severally some proper punishments,
(which I hope were propitiatory and meritorious) in his soul, besides his
bodily suffering; yea that this was a part of his cross and an effect of God
wrath on his soul, as well as the suffering in his body. I pray thee Christian
Reader observe, that this Discourser plainly and fully here confes^eth that I
SUNDRY times teach, that Christ BESIDES his bodily sufferings did suffer
peculiarly and severally some PROPER punishments in his soul; and that this
was a part of his Cross, as well as the sufferings of his body. Now judge
whether it be not a mere shift for him to bear thee in hand, that the
question betwixt us is, whether Christ's mere bodily sufferings without any
proper sufferings of the soul be all that Christ suffered for our sins, and
the whole ransom for sin; or whether that be or can be my meaning as he
outfaced thee the next Page 35. li. 3^.
Page before; the contrary whereof I sundry times teach as he now confesses.
But I cross my self, he thinks, and write I know not what. Sir Trifler if I
contradict my self, show me my words, my writing is extant. If you will be
privy to my meaning against my words, you are a strange if not a sturdie
Prophet. But indeed I have neither meaning nor words sounding that way. I
avouch that Christ for our sins suffered the death of the body only, and not
of the soul; or no death but only the death of the body. Upon these words, the
death of the body only, if it may be inferred by any reason or learning,
ergo, Christ's dead body deprived of soul and sense was the whole Ransom for
our sins, for that he means by Christ's death: or, ergo no action, nor
passion of Christ's soul before or on his cross was meritorious: If I say
these conclusions do necessarily follow out of those words or out of the
meaning of them; then I must confes^e I am fowly ouershot in my speech. But if
these be most ignorant and absurd collections from my words, and from theirs
that used that spe^ch before me; then may thou see, Christian Reader, what
meaning this man has throughout this book, purposely to pervert and
misconster all that I say, to make thee believe I broch some strange and
wondrous Doctrine. But shifts l^ hid but a while, the shame in the end will be
his.

Defenc. pa. 36. li. 13.
How then can that which I sundry times teach of Christ's sufferings in his
soul be true if our whole ran^om and propitiation be bodily bloody and deadly,
only which is the point ^here stand on? What contradiction find you in my
words, that Christ might have and had sufferings in his soul, as fear,
sorrow, and affliction of mind and yet died no death, but only a bodily? Only
a bodily death does not exclude all pains which are not bodily, but all
deaths, save the death of the body. Wherefore my conclusion is wh^re it was,
That the death which the Mediator must suffer for sin, by the Apostles
doctrine must only be bodily and bloody; and therefore by no means the death
of the soul, or of the damned. [ Yet this ^as not our whole r^some you say,
nor the whole sacrifice for sin, the sufferings of his soul must be added
unto it. When I speak of Christ's death, I understand that manner and order of
his death which the Evangelists describe; for so the Scriptures mean when they
speak of Christ's death; and from that death I do not sever those sufferings
of his soul which the Scriptur^s mention, because the sharpness of that death
which his body was to suffer, drove him to the deep consideration of the
cause, why; of the Judge from whom; and the captive, for whom he suffered.
Christ otherwise had not suffered death as a Redeemer, if he had been ignorant
of any of these; or compelled by force to endure the fury of the Jews: he had
power enough to stay their rage, and decline their bloody hands; yea, to auert
or decrease the pains, as he thought good; but because he was to offer
himself as a willing sacrifice to suffer death to save us from the wrath of
his Father; he laid aside his own power, and submitted himself wholly to be
disposed at his Fathers will, which the Scriptures call his obedience unto
death. When therefore he foresaw and felt how sharp and painful that death
would be, and was, which he must and did suffer for our sins; was it possible
he should not fully cast the eyes of his ^inde upon the horror of our sins,
which did so sting him? upon the fierceness of Gods wrath, which did so pursue
him though he were his innocent and only son? and upon the terrible vengeance
that rested for us, if he should mislike or ref^se to bear the burden of our
offenses? If any man learned think it possible for Christ to suffer the one,
and not in spirit most clearly to see the other, I am content he shall se^er
the sufferings of Christ's soul from the grief and anguish of his bodily
death: but if it be more than absurd so to conceive; then find we that the
sight and sense of Christ's extreme torments in body caused and urged his
soul thoroughly to behold these things with fear and sorrow, which in
themselves were most fearful, and could not ch^ but affect Christ's soul
deeply and diversely. As for the whole ransom of our sin, we shall have
occasion in the next reason more largely to treat of.

Defenc. pa. 36.
But you have reasons, you say, to confirm your maine matter; among many,
these two: the first, the Jewish sacrifices shadowing and foreshewing; the
second, the sacraments of Christians testifying and confirming, that the true
sacrifice for sin was bodily and bloody. Still what trifling is this? does
any in the world deny, that the true sacrifice for sin was the body, blood,
and death of the Redeemer? Wherefore the proposition must be, as I did set it
in your behalf: the Jewish sacrifices were shadows or figures, and our
sacraments were signs of our whole and absolute redemption by Christ, I say of
the whole and entire propitiatory sacrifice, or else you shrink and leave the
question.] When I lack one to set propositions in my behalf, I will send to
you for help: till then spare your pains, except you might reap more thanks.
But you must learn to get you plainer terms, or at least more plainly to
expound them, if you will needs be a setter of propositions: for what is the
WHOLE sacri^ice propitiatory? and what is our WHOLE redemption? By the whole
sacrifice mean you the whole person of Christ, that gave himself for us? or
intend you the whole action, whereby he sanctified, submitted, and presented
himself as a sacrifice of a sweet smell unto God? or by the whole, understand
you all that in Christ was devoted and delivered unto death for the
satisfaction of Gods justice? And so our whole redemption, do you refer it
only to remission of sins, as the Apostle does when he says, We have
redemption through Christ's blood, even the forgiveness of sins? or also to
deliverance from the dominion and infection of sin, and to the abolishing of
all corruption in soul and body; which is our whole and absolute redemption?
When the powers of heaven shall be shaken, and the Son of man come in a cloud
with power and great glory, then Luc. 21.
lift up your heads (says Christ) for your redemption draws near. Ephesians. 4.
You are sealed (by the holy Spirit) unto the day of redemption, says Paul.
And David: God shall Psalm. 72.
redeem their souls from deceit and violence; that is, he shall deliver their
soul^s. The Saints, as the Apo^e speaks, Hebr. 11.
were racked, and would admit no redemption to obtain a better resurrection;
where, by redemption he means deliverance. As Zacharias said, God has Luc. 1.
visited and sent redemption to his people; that is, salvation (or deliverance)
from our enemies, and from the hands of all that hate us, to serve him in
holiness and righteousness all the days of our life. So that our whole and
absolute redemption compriseth all the degrees and steps of our salvation, as
justification, sanctification, and glorification; and these though they were
merited and obtained for us by Christ's obedience unto death, yet are they
performed and accomplished by diverse other means therewith concurring and
thereon depending, as by the grace of his spirit, the working of his power, and
glory of his coming. And therefore the words which you have set in my behalf,
are like their author; that is, they are ambiguous and quarrellous.

The whole propitiatory sacrifice are words as doubtful as the other: for
since Christ was the Priest, who Heb. 9.
by his eternal spirit offered himself unspotted to God, and Ephesians. 5.
gave himself for us to be an offering and sacrifice of a sweet smell unto God;
his innocence and obedience chiefly rested in his soul, and thence sanctified
his body, which suffered death for the ransom of our sins. Though then all
things in Christ were holy and acceptable unto God, and so sacrifices most
meritorious; yet nothing did fully satisfy the justice of God for sin, nor
make a perfect reconciliation for us with God, but his obedience unto death.
For that which must satisfy for sin, must be death; other ransom for sin
God neither in his wisdom and counsel would, nor in his truth and justice
could accept, after his will once determined and declared. It was the first
wages appointed and denounced by God to sin: Gene. 2.
In the day that thou eatest thereof thou shall die the death; (or certainly
thou shall die;) the doubling of the word noting the inflexibilit^e of Gods
counsel and justice. The Apostle witnesses the same, when he says, Romans 6.
The wages of sin is death. Then as sin was irreuocab^e rewarded with
death, so must it necessarily be redeemed by death. Which rule stood so sure,
that when the Son of God would give himself for us to redeem us, he could
not do it (by reason of Gods immutable counsel and decree) but by death.
Wherefore the Apostle calls him the Hebr. 9.
Mediator of the New testament through death for the redemption of
transgressions. And where a testament is, there MVST BE (says he) the death of
the testator. He contenteth not himself to say there was, but there must be
the death of the testator, before we could be redeemed. A necessity not
simply binding Gods power, but plainly declaring his counsel to be fixed, and
his will revealed.

Since then Christ was to Hebr. 2.
taste death for all men, that through death he might destroy him which had
power of death, even the devil; and deliver us who were Romans 5.
reconciled to God by the death of his son; the point (which indeed we both
must stand on) is; what death Christ suffered to redeem us from sin, and to
reconcile us unto God; whether it were the death of the damned, which is the
second death; or the death of the soul; or (as I avouch) the death of the
body only. Other parts of Christ's person, and beams of his virtues, and
kinds of his sufferings are not to this qu^stion, ^arther than they commended
and presented to God Christ's death which must ransom our sins; but the
scope to which all the rest was referred, and the ^lose which consummated all
the rest, was death; and therefore no sufferings of Christ were parts of the
propitiatory sacrifice which ransomed sin, but such as ended in death, or
tended to that sorrowful, shameful and painful death of Christ, which by
order of Gods justice was appointed to satisfy for sin. The fullness of
which satisfaction consisted in death, and therefore the death and blood of
Christ though they were not the whole sacrifice, yet were they the full and
perfect ransom and price for sin; because without them the rest could not
prevail, and to them all the rest was directed. If then you will deal plainly
as you pretend, or not forget your duty to God and his truth, you must leave
cauilling with the words of the Holy Ghost, and go soberly to consider, not
whether any other sufferings, but whether any other death of Christ's be
mentioned in the Scriptures to ransom our sins, besides the death of his
body. If you find any other there, profess ^t in Gods name; if you find
none but only that described or mentioned in the Scriptures, leave snarling at
the depth and breadth of those words which the Spirit of God has authorized,
and learn rather to understand them truly, than vainly to oppose against them.

In sense and substance there is no difference betwixt these words, the death,
blood, and cross of Christ; the cross noting the tree, whereon Christ died a
reproachful and cruel death for us; and his blood expressing the manner of his
death by sundry sorts of shedding the same, as by whipping, piercing his head
with thorns, boaring his hands and feet to fasten him to the cross, and
hanging him thereon three hours by the soreness of his wounds, till his soul
departed from his body. To make these jar one with the other, which the holy
Ghost had knit together, is the sign of a busy, but not of godly wit; and
howsoever you and your adherents can flourish with figures of Grammar, you were
best take heed that you turn not your ears from the truth of God. The
bodily death which Christ died to ransom our sins, the holy Ghost does note
sometimes by his Flesh, sometimes by his Body, sometimes by his Blood and
sometimes by his Cross, and these either joined or severed; and sometimes also
by his soul or life laid down or powered out unto death for us. We find them
joined, when Paul says, Coloss 1.
It pleased (God) by Christ to reconcile all things to himself and to pacify
by the BLOOD of his Cross through him, both things in earth and things in
heaven. And you which in times past were strangers and enemies, has he now
reconciled in the BODY OF HIS FLESH through death. Severed are they when Peter
says; 1. Pet. 1.
You were redeemed by the precious blood of Christ as a Lamb undefiled; Who
Hebr. 9.
by his own blood (says the Apostle) entered in once into the holyplace, and
obtained eternal Redemption. And so when John says, 1. John 1.
The blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all sin. As likewife Paul; Ephe.
1.
We have Redemption through his blood, even the Remission of sins. Of his
body himself says; Luke 22.
This is my body, which is given for you; and John 6.
my flesh will I give for the life of the world: so are Hebr. 10.
we sanctified by the offering of the body of Jesus Christ once. Likewise of
his soul by which the Scripture means his life for that life wholly depends
upon the presence of the soul in the body; John 10.
My Father loves me (says Christ) because I lay down my soul (or life.)
Matt. 20.
The son of man came to give his soul (or life) as a ransom for many. And
Esaias foreshewed that Christ should divide the spoil of (or with) the mighty,
Because he Esa. 53.
powered out his soul unto death, which seuereth the soul from the body; and
so made it an offering for sin by laying it down of himself, that death
might seize on his body. This then being the maine foundation of the Gospel,
which the Apostle received, that 1. Co^in. 15.
Christ died for our sins according to the Scriptures, the Question still
stands as I first set it, What death Christ died for our sins by the
witness of holy Scriptures, and not what sufferings went before, or what other
things joined with his death, which is the hole that you would feign hide your
self in. To that intent, which I set down, my reasons drawn from the Jewish
sacrifices and Christians sacraments did, and do still stand effectual. For
the old sacrifices must figure, and the new Sacraments must seal whatsoever
death in Christ was the full and perfect ransom of our sins. But they
foreshew and confirm the bodily death of Christ only; they neither show not
signify the death of the soul, nor the death of the damned. Therefore the
bodily death of Christ only is the full and perfect ransom of our sins: the
death of the soul, and the death of the damned, as they served nothing to our
Redemption, so were they not suffered in the soul of Christ.

Two cauils you offer against the first part of this reason touching the
sacrifices of the fathers before and under the law. One that they figured not
the whole sacrifice, as neither Christ's Deity, his soul, nor his
resurrection: the next that all the sacrifices of the Jews did not signify
his bodily death, because the Escape goat, which was a sin offering, was not
slain. Of trifling you talk much, this is more then trifling, it is plain
shifting. Christ's deity could be no part of that sacrifice which suffered for
sin; the divine Majesty can not suffer either pain or sorrow. To what end
then come you in with Christ's Godhead, when you talk of his suffering for
sin? His soul, you say, was not figured by those sacrifices.] The suffering
death in his soul was indeed no way figured by them; but that the mediator
should have an humane soul to be separated from his body by death, before he
could make purgation of our sins; that was more then figured by those
sacrifices. For since not the blood of beasts, but of man, and even of the
Son of God made man, was by Gods promise to be shed for our sins; It is
evident that from life to death he could not come, but by seuering his soul
from his body. And consequently he must have a soul being a man, which must be
powered out unto death, before he could die, even as the powers of life in
bloody sacrifices were parted from their flesh, before they could be offered as
sacrifices unto God.

But I Defenc. pa. 36. li. 31.
charge you untruly when I say, you expound your whole and absolute Redemption
to be of all the fruits and causes of our Redemption: you have no such word
nor meaning as fruits.] Your words are our whole and absolute Redemption, and
those I say contain the whole course of our salvation even unto the last step,
which is our glorification, as I have formerly proved by Christ's own speech.
Again if the Treati pa. 11. li 30.
resurrection of Christ, which is your own instance, be a part of that
propitiatory sacrifice, because it was a necessary consequent, then all the
benefits that Christ obtained for us, or bestowed on us, must be comprised in
that his oblation for sin. For they are all necessary consequents and
effects of our Redemption, and depend on these two branches; his death to free
us from sin, and his resurrection to raise us into a new and heavenly life
now and for ever. He was Romans 4.
delivered (to death) for our sins, and rose again for our justification.
From these two heads the Scriptures derive not only forgiveness of sins, but
newness of life on earth, and happiness of life in heaven. Yet you did not
call them fruits. Effects you called them, and what is a joyful effect, such
as was Christ's resurrection, but a fruit? and that as well in Christ as in us?
When the Prophet says of Christ Esaias. 53.
he shall see the travail of his soul, and be satisfied, what means he but
the fruits and effects of Christ's labor? when for his obedience to death, God
highly exalted him, and gave him a name above every name, that every knee
should bow unto him, what is this but a fruit and reward of his humiliation,
first, in his own person, then proportionably in all that be his?

Defenc. pa. 37. li. 5.
Many of the Jews sacrifices, yea most of them, did represent and signify
Christ's bodily sufferings only, yet not all. Therefore you may well deny mine
assumption, as you did before; and affirm that certain Jewish Sacrifices set
forth the sufferings even of the soul of Christ, and not of his body only.]
Did I any where say that all the Jewish sacrifices were bloody? or that all of
them did represent Christ's death and blood shedding? Could I be ignorant, that
the Jews had oblations made only by fire, as of flower, wine, and incense?
and also offerings of the first fruits, and other things dedicated or presented
to the Lord for the use of his tabernacle and Temple? Does not the Apostle say;
Heb. 5.
Every high Priest is ordained for men to offer GIFTS and SACRIFICES for
sin? Where gifts show, that things without life were offered as well as
living beasts and birds which were slain. As then there was no cause, nor
need I should, so I never used the word ALL in that case, unless I added
living or BLOODY Sacrifices. For they by their life lost and blood shed figured
the death of Christ Jesus. But this ALL is your adding to my words, that you
may take occasion to pike some quarrel at them.

But you may well deny my assumption, that no sacrifices of the Jews did
figure the sufferings of Christ's soul.] I assumed no such thing, neither did I
meddle with the sufferings of Christ's soul, unless they were the death of the
soul, or the pains of hell, which the Scripture calls the second death; and
I the death of the damned; because none besides the damned die that second
death: but you plainly give me the slip; and convey your self from speaking of
the death of the soul or of the death of the damned, which are the things in
Question, to the sufferings of the soul in general, of which I make no
Question. And though your meaning be, under the sufferings of the soul to
comprise the tormenting of Christ's soul by the immediate hand of God with the
self same pains which the damned do feel in hell; Yet such is your carriage,
that every where you suppress your maine intent, and make a fair show with
the sufferings of Christ's soul, as if you meant no more, but that Christ's soul
must needs have some sufferings proper to it self; which you confess I sundry
times teach; and yet you make your Reader believe, I ever impugn. You shall
do well to awake out of this slumber and call to mind, that there are no
sufferings of Christ's soul now in question, but the DEATH of the SOVLE, or of
the DAMNED; which you dare not openly avouch, and therefore you plaster them
over with smoother terms of the sufferings of the soul; to hide your secret
mysteries till you meet with itching ears, that will listen more to fancies
then to faith. Another piece of skill you show in this place, to ease your
self of all proof, and think it enough if you once deny it. For where you
affirm that certain Sacrifices of the Jews set forth (those) sufferings of
Christ's soul, which you mean; and I utterly denied that any sacrifices of the
Jews did show the suffering of hell pains in Christ's soul, or any other kind
of death besides the death of the body only: you take not the pains to make
any proof of that you a^rme, but stand in your state, and say you deny my
assumption. As if the negative being mine, and the affirmative yours, you were
not by all rules of R^ason to prove your a^atiue; and it sufficed me to stand
on the negative, till you made just proof of the contrary. [Here you will say
you do bring proof for your assertion.] Here indeed you spend three leaves in
talking of it as your manner is; howbeit your word is here, as throughout your
writings, the best warrant you offer us for this cause. But let us hear your
examples and proofs.

First, that Defenc. pa. ^7 li. 10.
sacrifice consisting of two goats, a slain and a scapegoat. You object here
against; first, that I abuse the Text. That were a great fault; but let us view
the Text.] Against your instance of the Scapegoat figuring as you would have
it, the suffe^ings My Exceptions to the Defenders instance of the Scapegoat.
of Christ's soul; I made three exceptions: First, that the Scripture did not
call the Scapegoat a Sacrifice for sin: Secondly, that no proof was or
could be made, that the Scapegoat signified the soul of Christ: Thirdly, that
if both those were granted, which were no way proved, the Scapegoat suffering
nothing, but being let loose into the wilderness, did rather infer that
Christ's soul was freed from all such sufferings as you would force upon it.
To the last, which is the chiefest, you take the pains to say little; and so
give the Reader to understand, that your bold assertion is the best foundation
of your proof: for if you can not show, as you neither do nor can, that the
Scapegoat by the Scriptures suffered any thing; how will you bring it about,
that the Scapegoat figured the sufferings of Christ's soul? shall no
suffering be a figure of suffering? such may your figures be; but the wisdom
of God makes figures for similitude and resemblance to the truth; and not for
contrariety to it, as you do. The chiefest point then you clean slide from,
and take hold on some words in Moses text, about which you think you may
wrangle with some more likelihood.

The very express w^rds of the text, you say, are these: Aaron shall take of
the people two goats for a sin offering. And very good reason must I bring
to frustrate so pl^ a speech.] I am far from bringing any thing to frustrate
the Scriptures; but if the Scripture express it self, I prefer that before
your misapplying the words to your will. (Aaron) shall take of the congregation
of the children of Israel two goats (for sin.) So stand the words, if you
will needs appeal precisely to the text. Here is a taking (of two goats) and
an intent for sin declared in general, but the particular manner of using and
ordering either of them according to Gods appointment follows in distinct and
direct w^ds. Aaron Leuitic. 16. verse 7.
shall take the two goats and make them stand before the Lord at the door of
the Tabernacle. And Aaron shall give lots upon both goats, one lot for the Lord
and another for the Scapegoat. And Aaron shall make the goat on which the l^
fell for the Lord to draw near, and shall make him reddie (or) sacrifice him
for sin. For here is AASA'HV added, which in the Scriptures usually
signifies to make ready a Sacrifice. And he shall kill the goat that is for
sin, for the people, and bring his blood within the vai^e. In as plain words
as the former be, or any can be, that goat on which the lot fell for the Lord,
must be made ready, that is, sacrificed for sin, of which he spoke at first;
and that which was the peoples sinne-offering must be slain, and his blood
brought within the veil. But neither of these agree to the Scapegoat:
therefore the Scapegoat was not the sin offering for the people, which the
Scripture in that place mentions. Defenc. pa. 37. li. 21.
These words (you say) prove not that the Scapegoat was no sinne-offering at
all.] These particular circumstances do plainly prove, which of the two goats
was made the peoples sinne-offering, and so convince that you inlargc the words
of Moses without any just ground to serve your own conceit. Two
sinne-offerings were not taken from the people, but two goats were taken for
sin, and one of them sacrificed for the people, as was after prescribed and
performed; and Aaron commanded for him and his house Leuitic 16. verse. 6.
to offer a bullock for his sinne-offering. So that where the Scripture
mentions no more sinne-offerings for the people but one, neither uses the
word AASA but to one of them; that one was prepared and slain by Gods
commandment as a sinne-offering for the people, where the Scapegoat was
preserved alive, and sent away into the wilderness, to show the force of the
former sacrifice by carrying with it the sins of the people.

Defenc page 37. li. 28.
I take a sacrifice and offering in the largest sense, as signifying any
consecrated thing given to God to appease him for sin. And such unbloody
sinne-offerings very many we shall find in Moses Law. Wherefore the
Scapegoat may be a sinne-offering, though it were not slain or bloody.] That
the word Sacrifice may be diversely taken, and applied to things unbloody and
ghostly, I have no doubt: but that one and the same word, in one and the same
place, should import both a bloody and unbloody sacrifice for sin, is a
shift of yours without all sense, it has no show in the sacred Scriptures.
Again, the sacrifices for sin, were they bloody or unbloody, which are
mentioned in Moses law, and namely in all those places which you quote in your
margin; they were all without exception OFFERED to God by FIRE; the things
living suffered first death by effusion of blood; the things without life, as
flower, oil, wine, and such like, were cast into the fire where the bloody
sacrifices were burned; and so without blood or fire no sacrifice for sin is
appointed in Moses law. Since then the Scapegoat was neither slain nor touched
with fire, but sent forth alive into the wilderness; what do those examples of
things unbloody, yet offered by fire, help you to prove, that the Scapegoat
living was such a sin offering as many are found in Moses law?

Defenc. pa. 38. li. 13.
Can there be any thing in the world more full and strong to prove that the
Scapegoat also was a true sinne-offering, or rather a true part of this whole
and entire sinne-offering consisting and being complete in both these goats,
the slain and the Scapegoat? For as the slain so the Scapegoat, we see, was
CONSECRATED to the Lord, and here OFFERED (to make reconciliation by him) and
separated from men, and bar^ upon him all the sins of the people.] You be
come now from a sinne-offering to a part of a sin offering; and that you
prove, because the Scapegoat was Page vt supra li. 5.
CONSECRATED and OFFERED to make reconciliation by him. All these words are
your own adding to the text; and if you keep that course, you may prove what
you list, if not by the Scriptures, at least by your commentaries upon the
Scriptures. The words of Moses in that verse, which you quote, are those: And
the goat (on which the lot fell to be the Escape goa^) shall be Leuitic. 16.
verse. 10.
brought alive before the Lord, LECAPPER, to pray over him (o^ to carry away
sin by him) and to send him for the Scapegoat into the desert. You ask
whose translation this is. The^s that had better skill in the Hebrew tongue
than you or I. The ancient translation of the Latin Church has, vt funda^
preces super ^um; to make prayers over him; which Isychius, Nicolaus de Lyra,
and Arias Montanus ^o follow. Pagnin^ says, ad emundandum per illum, to
cleanse, or carry away sin by him, which Vatablus in his notes varieth by
adrogandum, to pray over him. That the Scapegoat was consecrated or offered,
there are no such words in Moses text; except you mean, that the bringing of
the goat before God was the offering of it, and the praying over it was the
consecrating of it; but these be silly conjectures to prove the consecration
and oblation of a Sacrifice. The Scapegoat therefore was not the half
sinne-offering of the people as you pretend; it was a sensible figure of the
acceptance of the former Sacrifice, whose blood was carried within the veil,
and made a full propitiation for all their sins; as much as those Sacrifices
could effect. And in token thereof the Priest was willed before their faces by
imposing his hands and confessing their iniquities, to let them see, that the
Lord removed all their sins out of his sight, as that goat was carried away
from the sight of men into the wilderness. So that the Scapegoat was nothing
given to God for sin as you would have it, but showed rather a reiection and
detestation of sin by his departure into the desert, and was no sanctified
and accepted sacrifice for sin, as the other was who^e blood did make the
purgation of their sins, and reconcile them to God by his figuring and their
believing in the true and eternal sacrifice for sin.

Was not the Scapegoat then a figure of Christ as well as the slain goat?]
Though certain The Scapegoat might in some sort be a figure of Christ.
Fathers do sometimes resemble the Scapegoat to the wicked and reprobate,
which is not so wide a wandering from the truth, as your wresting it to
signify the sufferings of Christ's soul; yet neither did I, nor do I
gainsay, but the Scapegoat might in some sort be a figure of Christ,
notwithstanding all things in it can not be proportioned to Christ, for so no
figure can match him: yet that does not prove it to be sacrifice for sin,
much less to foreshew the sufferings of Christ's soul. There were many
figures of Christ, yea of Christ's death, as the Brazen Serpent, the Rock in
the desert; Sampson, Jonas, and many such, which were no sacirfices; and so
might the Scapegoat prefigure either the cause or shame of his death or both,
as the slain goat did the manner and power of his death, and yet be no
sinne-offering. Iustine Martyr says, The two goats Justinius in Dial^go cum
Try^one.
designed the two commings of Christ; the first when the Elders of the people
and Priests laying their hands on him and putting him to death, SENT HIM AWAY
AS THE SCAPEGOAT. The second, when they shall acknowledge him, whom they
dishonored, to be the sacrifice for all repentant sinners. Te^ullian is of the
same mind: One of the goats Tertul. contra Marcio. li. 3. and aduers. Iudaeos
de 2. Christi a^uentu.
arrayed in read scarlet, aecurfed and spet on, beaten and punched by the
people, was cast out of the city into a place of perdition, (thus) marked with
manifest signs of the Lords passion. The other offered for sin, and given
for food to the Priests of the Temple, secundae repraesentationis argumenta
sign bat, sealed the effects of his second appearing. Theodoret refers the
two goats to the two natures of Christ; the Theodoreti quaesti. in Le^it. and
si^il. Dialogo 3.
^laine goat to represent the passible nature of his flesh; the Scapegoat to
show the impassible nature of his Divinity. Isychius li. 5. in Leuit. 16.
Isychius does the like. Calvin a man of sharp judgment, and in some sense a
mainteiner of the sufferings of Christ's soul, yet does not apply the
Scapegoat as you do; but either to witness the resurrection of Christ, as
the slain goat did dcclare his death; or to show that Christ was a man devoted
to bear the shame and punishment of sin for others. There is here set down
(says he) a Caluinus Har^o. in 4. li. Mosis in 2 praec^pto ex cap. 16 Leuitici.
doubble way of cleansing sin. For of the two goats, one was offered for a
sacrifice after the manner of the Law, the other was sent forth (alive) to be
(...) vel (...), as a thing devoted to destruction for others, or an
of-scouring of the people. The truth of either of these figures was exhibited
in Christ, because he was the lamb of God, whose slaying abolished the sins
of the world; and that he might be (...), (one devoted or appointed to bear
the plague for others;) all beauty was quenched in him, and he rejected of
men. There may be brought a more curious speculation, that the sending away of
the (Scapegoat) was a figure of Christ's resurrection; but I embrace that
which is more simple and certain, that the goat sent away alive and free was
VICE PIACVLI (as a thing devoted to bear the brunt for others) that by his
departure and leading away, the people might be assured their sins did
vanish, and were carried far out of sight. So that though the Priest brought
one goat alive for a reconciliation, yet God was not pacified without blood,
quia vis expiationis a sacrificio alterius Hirci pendebat, because the force of
cleansing sin depended on the sacrifice of the other (slain) goat. Thus have
we many significations of the Scapegoat referred even to Christ by old and
new writers, and even by some whom you would seem most to follow; and yet none
of them applies it to the sufferings of Christ's soul. So that your assertion
in that behalf is but your mere imagination, farther from the words of Moses,
than their conjectures which you count widest off. But you will prove it by
maine might, that shall remove mountains before it.

It Defenc. pa. 39. li. 4.
must needs be then that the (Scape-goate) signified Christ, yea doubtless
Christ man. For the godhead could be no sinne-offering neither did it make
reconciliation for sin, neither did the Deity bear our sins upon him
properly; all which the Scape-goate did. If it were Christ man, it could not be
his body, for his body was slain bloudily, the Scape-goate was not slain. It
must then be of necessity (I think) the humane MORTAL Soul, which the
Scape-goate signified.] I know not whether you make the Soul of Christ mortal
as your words here stand, because he suffered the death of the soul as you
imagine, or whether this were the escape of your Printer; but by such
demonstrations as these are, supported with figures and fancies of your own
making, you may prove what you will. That the Brazen Serpent was a figure of
Christ's death, Christ himself witnesses. Whence you may infer after your
manner, that Christ had no true flesh nor felt death. For the Brazen Serpent
had neither flesh to feel, nor life to loose. So the Lord expresses, that
Matthew. 12.
Jonas was a figure of his lying in the grave; and yet was Jonas alive in the
Whales belly. May it therefore be concluded that Christ was never dead, nor
buried, because Jonas indeed was neither? Figures have a resemblance to some
things in Christ, not to all; as the brazen Serpent to his fastening on the
Cross, and saving all that beheld him in faith; Jonas to the time that he lay
in his grave, and to the impossibility conceived of his resurrection. So the
Scape-goate notwithstanding your must needs be, and could not be, might
signify the impassible godhead of Christ, as Theodoret, and Isychius affirm,
since power to take away sin and to cleanse it, without any suffering for it,
is proper to God. It might likewise resemble the detestation and hatred the
Jews had of Christ when they cried, John. 19.
away with him, away with him, if the usage of the people toward the
Scape-goate were such as Tertullian describes; which was to spit at him, punch
him, and curse him, as he was carried out of the City. And where he went away
alive for all their spites and wrongs, that might declare either his
resurrection into life eternal which they could not touch, or else the
disposition of his life here not left in the peoples hands, but reserved to his
own power, till he did willingly offer it as a sacrifice unto God. Ambrose
says of him. Ambro. de incarn dom. Sacramento. ca. 5.
Quasi arbiter exuendi suscipiendique corporis, emisit spiritum non amisit. As
having power in himself to lay aside and to take again his body, he sent
forth his soul, he lost it not. And likewise Eusebius. When Eusebius demonst.
Euangel. li. 1. ca. 8.
no man had power over Christ's soul he himself of his own accord laid it
down for man. Ibidem li 3. cap. 6.
(...). So (loosed from all force) and resting free, him self of him self
made the departure from his body. This the Scape-goate I say might figure, as
some ancient Fathers avouch, and your reasons to the contrary are but rushes,
unfit to conclude such a cause; considering that no figure agrees in all
things with the truth, for then it should be no figure but the truth, and you
collect some small disagreements between the figure and the truth..

Again as you suppose for some petite difference the Scapegoat could not
figure the deity, nor body of Christ: so I upon stronger grounds collect, it
could not signify the proper sufferings of Christ's soul, and if your word
were of any weight, your self avouch that which I entend. Those Trea. pa. 11.
li. 24.
b^asts sacrifices (say you) could not prefigure the immortal and reasonable
soul of Christ.] If that be true which is your own auerment, how could the
Scapegoat which I troe was a beast, as you say a sacrifice, figure the
sufferings of Christ's soul, which were inward and invisible, as was his soul?
Can you so closely convey contradictions, as in your treatise to tell us the
sacrifices of beasts could not prefigure the immortal soul of Christ, and in
your defense to assure us it must be ofnecessitie that the Scapegoat signified
the humane soul of Christ? Besides if the Scapegoat signified Christ's soul
sent away from his body, for the other goat was first slain; it must of force
import Christ's death; for without death, his soul was not separated from his
body. And so by your urging that it could not signify Christ's death, you
plainly confirm it did signify Christ's death. Thirdly the place whither the
Scapegoat was sent, was the Leuit. 16. verse. 22.
Wilderness and a land vnhabitabie. Now the soul of Christ severed from his
body, went to heaven as you hold or to Paradise. Is heaven or Paradise with you
become a wilderness and a land not inhabited? Fourthly the Scapegoat after he
was sent away, did Ibidem.
bear upon him all the sins of the people. Dare you say that Christ's soul
departed from his body did bear or suffer the punishment of the peoples
sins? Your meaning is but to Defenc. pa 40. li. 2.
show what you think to be indeed most probable and likely, knowing that yet
some such matter, as you aim at, they do signify without Question.] After it
must be of necessity, come you now with probability? and is your doubtless so
soon turned into likelihood? The Reader is well helped up to rest on your
word, and to believe SOME SVCH MATTER AS YOU AIM AT. But back to the matter
indeed, and then your Reader shall find even by your own confession, besides
my proofs, that you do but aim at these things upon the bare surmise of your
own brain; and that you can show no sacrifices of the Jews which did figure
the proper sufferings of Christ's foul; much less the death of his soul which
is the matter that we differ about, howsoever you would now loose your neck
out of the collar.

We Defenc. pa. 38 li. 21.
read of other sacrifices consisting of sacrifices of sundry and diverse sorts.
The bloody sacrifice had conjoined together with it, the unbloody sacrifice of
the meat offering, and an What salt, flower, ^le, and wine, added to the Jews
sacrifices ^ight signify.
other of the drink offering. Which may very likely represent unto us the
sundry and diverse kinds of Christ's meritorious sufferings in his life time and
at his death.] You conjecture still so far from truth, that few men will
regard your coniecturall likelihoods. Why Salt, Flower, Oil and Wine, were
added to the carnal sacrifices of the Jews; much may be ghessed, little can be
proved. They might well serve to make the sacrifice the sweeter, and the
fuller, and so resemble the fragrancie and sufficiency of Christ's death; but
what reason you have to make Christ's life to be thought his death; and his
merits all one with his sufferings; and things without sense or life to figure
the sufferings of his soul, and you know not what besides; I do not see, but
only that your will is your best weapon, when you be put to the push of any
proof. Yea in the same side where you reject the judgment of Cyrill, Ambrose,
and Bid, as Page 38.
wide conjectures and palpable mistakings, you come in with your foolish
supposals, and offer them to all the godly as matters of good moment, only
because you fancy them. But mock not your Reader with may, and must as you
think; your thoughts must be wiser and nearer the truth before a mean man
will regard them.

Page 38. li. vl.
Who but I (you say) would defend these palpable mistakings of the ancients,
and not see the Page 39. li. 1.
express text against them?] Nay who but you would so peremptorily trample
upon the credits of such men, with a proud presumption of the text before you
did better examine it? Is it so repugnant to the Scriptures as you pretend, to
say the wicked are a Redemption or propitiation for the godly, which in Moses
the Scape-goate is said to be for the people? Solomon says, Pro. 21. v. 1^.
COPHER LAZADDIC RASHAA a Redemption for the just (shall) the wicked (be,) and
the transgressour for the righteous. Where not only the same sense, but the
same word is found which Moses uses, when he says, the Scape-goate shall be
Leuit. 16.
presented alive before the Lord LECAPPE^ verse. ^0.
AALAV, to make (Redemption or reconciliation) by him. So God by Esaias said, Esa
43. v. 30.
I gave Egypt CAPHRECA to be thy Redemption; that is to be plagued for thee,
that thou might escape. And so God often lays the burden on the wicked,
that should fall on the righteous, and excuses the one by the punishment of
the other, as he did typically on the Scape-goate and truly on Christ for all
the sins of the people. Wherefore it was no such oversight in Cyrill,
Ambroses and B^de to resemble the Scapegoate to the wicked, when they are
punished to spa^ the godly as you would make it, their conjectures are far
more considerate then yours; the Savior of the world was Mark. 15.
counted among the wicked, and used in show as the wicked are, when he bare our
sins in his body, and took our burden on him. That which M^nster reports
out of all the Rabines, and especially out of Rabi Salom: Kimchi, and Aben
Ezra, that the Scape-goate was Munst. Annotat. in Leuitic. ca. 16.
sent to a strong hill in the desert, and there torn in pieces before he could
touch the middle of the hill; I leave to each man's liking, because the
Scripture notes no such thing; Howbeit Tertullian says, Tertull. contra
Marcio. li. 3.
extra ciuitatem abijciebatur in perditionem, the Scape-goate was cast out of
the City into perdition; And Iustine Martyr in his Dialogue with Triphon the
Jew, says, the Priests and Elders sent Christ away as the Scape-goate, laying
their hands on him, and doing him to death.

The Defenc. pa. 40. li. 8.
very like are your three reasons brought to show that the Holocaust can not
signify the sufferings of whole Christ, and therefore not of his soul any
way.] Whether the Holocaust What the Holocaust did signify.
were a figure of Christ's sacrifice, or did represent the joint sufferings of
the whole manhood of Christ, neither of these is in question betwixt us. You
took upon you to show, that the Jews by their sacrifices were directed to
believe the suffering of that which you call hell pains in the soul of
Christ, when he offered himself for our sins. That was the point which I
denied. The shedding of Christ's blood unto death, the Apostle in the ninth and
tenth Chapters to the Hebrews, does plainly deduce from those bloody
sacrifices of the Jews; other sufferings of Christ from their sacrifices he
does not derive. The Holocaust, you replied, was Trea. pa. 13. li. 18.
every whit chopped in pieces, and altogether put into the fire and burnt. I
answered this was done after the death of the sacrifice, whose dead body was
wholly consumed to ashes with one and the self same sire; and therefore this
could not be referred to the proper sufferings of Christ's soul; which could
not suffer any thing after the death of the body, much less be wholly consumed
with any sufferings common to the body, since the body of Christ it self
neither was, nor could be consumed with any corruption or affliction. Besides
that you your self in the leaf before made a plain resolution, that those
Trea. pa. 11. li. 24.
Sacrifices of beasts, could not prefigure the immortal and reasonable soul
of Christ. How then could the dead bodies of those beasts cut in pieces and
quite consumed with fire, represent the inward and proper sufferings of the
soul?

Is there Defen. pa. 40. li. 13.
any Similitude concurring in all points and circumstances with the thing
signified?] If it did, it were the truth it self, and not a figure thereof.
And therefore all your illations that the Scape-goate, which in some things
disagreed from the Deity and body of Christ, could signify neither, were
vain and idle. It suffices in figures warranted by the word of God, that one
principal action or circumstance be common to both, in how many things so
ever they be otherwise different. But where is your warrant in the Scriptures,
that the burning of sacrifices when they were dead, signified the sufferings of
Christ's soul? Show that, and then we will soon dispense with the rest of
your rules and my reasons also. Figures expressed in the word of God had no
doubt their similitude to the truth, though we perhaps see it not; and if any
one point of resemblance be ratified by Gods authority, that may and must
content us. But will you of your own head make figures to fit your fancies,
and then claim the same prerogative, which God himself has? What if many
figures in the Law had as great disparagement as you call it, To the things
signified, as the burning of the Holocaust to the sufferings of Christ's soul?
Is that a president for you to devise and establish what figures please you,
and thence to raise platformes for strange and new doctrine?

The Defenc pa. 40. li. 20.
bodies of beasts first sl^ine were after carried out of the host. Now these
signified Christ's going out of Jerusalem to be slain, but being yet alive. The
burning of the beasts after they were dead, was a sacrifice of a sweet savor
unto God, which in truth is Christ's very death, and nothing done by him
afterward, whereby Gods anger is fully pacified toward us.] In figurative and
bloody sacrifices could you distinguish the suffering, which was proper to the
living creature that was offered, from the offering which was peculiar to the
Priest, and from the accepting which belonged only unto God, you would not
thus iumble them together both in the figures signifying, and in the thing
signified. That the blood of the carnal sacrifices slain under the Law, did
foreshew the bloudshedding and death of Christ Jesus for the sins of the
world, the Apostle to the Hebrews is very plain, not only calling him
amongst other things (...), y Hebr. 10.
The shadow of good things to come, and Heb. 9.
(...), a similitude for the time present, but also making diverse comparisons
betwixt them and the blood of Christ, and proouing by the first testament that
the second must be ratified with blood and death. By which as by figures were
sufficiently testified, the joint sufferings of the whole manhood of Christ
even unto death. For the powers of ^ife and sense in those creatures that had
their blood shed vntodeath, naturally feeling and showing in their kind the
pains and terror of death, were fi^test to witness to all the beholders that
the violent and bloody death of the Messiah, which he would undertake for the
ransom of their sins, should be grievous and painful even to his soul.
And that being made so manifest to all men's eyes by the death of the living
sacrifices, what needed the burning of the same after it was dead and
senseless, obscurely to intimate if not falsely, that the fire of affliction
as you would have it, should consume the Messiah? God had therefore another
meaning, as I take it, in commanding each sacrifice after it was slain, to be
offered to him by fire. Forwhere of all creatures subject to man's sight and
sense, fire was the fittest for the light, heat, force, and motion thereof to
design unto the people, the brightness of Gods glory, the zeal of his
holiness the grace of his Spirit, and seat of his habitation in the heavens;
God gave the Jews fire from heaven to burn perpetually on his Altar; which
did teach them with what cleanness of hands and feruentnesse of heart, the
things which he required, should be offered unto him; and did separate the
sacrifices dedicated unto God from all profane abuse and humane use; and made
them ascend toward the place of his glorious presence, that he might accept
them with favor, and be pleased with them. All which significations of
heavenly fire were most perfectly accomplished in the sacrifice of Christ
Jesus. For never man nor Angel offered unto God any service with like purity
and charity, as the Lord Jesus offered himself to his Fathers will; and that
his oblation did not only cleanse his body from all corruption of mortality
and infirmity, as appeared by his resurrection; but pierced the heavens with
admirable celeritie and efficacy, and prevailed in the presence of God to be
a sweet smelling savor for all the sons of God.

Some of these things you seem to acknowledge, As fire to signify the Defen.
pa. 42. li. 8.
Acceptance of Christ's death, in that it was a sacrifice of a sweet savor
ascending up to God. What What fire did signify in sacrifices.
reason then have you that fire should note the wrath of God powered out on
Christ's soul and body before he died? Shall one and the same fire in one and
the same sacrifice import both gracious acceptance with God, and terrible
vengeance from God? These be contraries in mine eyes, whatsoever they be in
yours. That fire in sacrifices did show Gods favor and not his anger, the
sacrifices of Judges 6.
Gedeon, 2. Chron. 7.
Solomon, and 2. Kings 18.
Elias, do plainly prove, which God with fire from heaven consumed, not in
token of any displeasure against them, or dislike of their offerings, but in
sign of very favorable acceptations both of their persons and sacrifices. Even
so at the first offerings of Aaron Leuit. 9.
the glory of the Lord appeared to all the people and there came a fire from
the Lord, and consumed the burnt offering upon the Altar; which when all the
people saw, they gave a shout for joy and fell on their faces. This fire
descending from God and consuming that sacrifice, God commanded to keep
Leuit. 6. verse. 12. 13.
burning for ever on his Altar, and none might approach to him with any other
fire in incense or offering: in so much that when Nadab and Abihu the sons of
Aaron took strange ^ire to offer before the Lord, and not of that which
always burned on the Altar, God Leuit. 10.
destroyed them with fire. The fire then which consumed the sacrifices of the
Jews was miraculously delivered them by God, and joyfully received of all the
people, and therefore did not argue to them any wrath or vengeance on their
sacrifices, but rather the favor and good liking of God, which the Scripture
notes by the sweet odor of the sacrifice. As when Noah made his Genes. 8.
burnt offerings to ascend ( by fire) the Scripture says, the Lord smelled a
savor of rest, that is, he showed himself to be appeased, and his anger to
rest. So when Aaron and his sons were to be consecrated Priests, God said to
Moses, Exodus 29.
Thou shall make to smell, (by fire) (that is, thou shall burn) the whole Ram,
as a burnt offering; it shall be to the Lord a savor of rest: that is a
pleasing sacrifice. And for that cause God willed the Jews in their peace
offerings, whereby they gave thanks for their safety and prosperity, to use
fire; and says of it, Leuit. 3. v. 5.
ISSHE, this burning by fire, (or this sacrifice made by fire) is a savor of
rest unto the Lord. And so in incense, which Saint John resembles to the
Revel. 8.
prayers of the Saints, fire was likewise required, to teach them, that their
prayers went up before God as the smoke of sweet odours, and were accepted of
him. Then not affliction or indignation on the Sacrifice was declared by the
fire which God commanded to be used in all kinds of sacrifices, but rather an
ascending up to the presence of God, and an accepting thereof in the sight of
God, which is far from your suffering of hell pains in the soul of Christ,
for which you babble so much in both your books.

But the Apostle says, as the bodies of beasts were burnt without the camp,
so Christ Christ's suffering without the gate of the City.
suffered without the gate.] Were it granted, that fire in Sacrifices did
signify probation or affliction, which is no way proved; you are no whit the
nearer to your suffering of hell pains in the soul of Christ. For the bodies
of beasts, says the Apostle, were burnt, which can by no pretense of these
words be stretched farther than the afflictions of Christ's body, when he was
carried to be crucified without the gate. And the chopping of the holocaust in
pieces, that it might the more conveniently be laid on the wood to burn,
makes as slender proof, that Christ's soul suffered the pains of hell,
notwithstanding your grave device, that Christ's soul was chopped in pieces, and
not his body; which conceits of yours, declare your folly, but help not your
cause. Those Sacrifices whereof part was burnt by fire, and the rest reserved
for the Priest, and sometimes for the owner that brought them to feast before
the Lord, had their blood shed at the door of the Tabernacle as well as the
other, and so resembled the death of Christ no less than the other, though God
would have no part of the one to be eaten by the Priests or people, as the
other were, but to be wholly consumed by fire, because they were wholly
reserved or dedicated unto him. And this the Apostle respects in that
comparison which he makes of the bodies of beasts burnt without the camp,
whereof the Priests that served in the Tabernacle could not be partakers. They
were consumed by fire, because the Priests should not eat thereof; to foreshew,
as the Apostle notes, that such as were addicted to the service and ceremonies
of the Law and the outward Temple, could not be partakers of the truth, which
is in Christ, except they did leave those elements of the Law, which seemed so
glorious in their eyes; and followed Christ out of the gate, bearing his
reproach; whose blood was most holy and most sufficient to sanctify the people,
though he were cast out of the city to suffer as a malefactor and wicked
person. Neither were the dead bodies of those beasts consumed by fire out of
the camp, to make them sacrifices unto God; for then must they have been
burnt on the Altar, which was at the door of the Tabernacle of the
Congregation within the city, as the holocausts were; but after they were
slain before the door of that Tabernacle, and their blood brought and
sprinkled on the horns of the Altar of incense, and before the veil of the
Sanctuary, and their fat burned on the Altar of burnt offerings in the Court;
then was the rest carried out of the camp to be consumed with fire, that no man
might eat thereof. The place whither, and the purpose why the dead bodies of
those beasts were carried forth from the use of the Priests, are touched by the
Apostle in the thirteenth to the Hebrews; but the manner of burning them after
their blood was sprinkled, and their fat offered unto God upon his Altar by
sacred fire, he no way compares with the sufferings of Christ's body, much
less of his soul, neither of which was consumed in Christ's passion without
the gate as their bodies were by fire without the camp. For the fire of
probation and affliction by the witness of holy Scripture, consumes only the
wicked; which are as dross and Esa. 5. v. 24. Nah. 1. v. 10. 1. Co^inth. 3.
stubble before it; it consumes not the godly, but cleanses them, and makes
them pure as Pro. 17. v. 3. Sap. 6. v. 3. Eccles. 2. v. 5.
gold tried in the furnace, yea 1. Pet. 1.
much more precious than gold tried with fire.

So that my first and second exceptions stand good for ought you have proved to
the contrary. No Scripture does warrant, that fire in Sacrifices did signify
the torments of Christ's body, much less the proper sufferings of Christ's
soul, least of all the pains of the damned; but rather, as I have showed, the
perfection and purity of Christ's sacrifice before God, and the acceptance
thereof with God; which are things far distant from your device. As also that
Christ's body or soul were wholly consumed by any affliction when he suffered
for our sins; this has neither ground in the word of God, nor truth in it
self. Which reason you cunningly skip, and say, my Def. page 41.
second exception is also nothing. What mine exceptions were, my words are
plain. Conclus. pa. 236. li 30.
Why the burning of the holocaust should signify Christ's affliction on the
cross either in body or in soul, I see no proof made by this Confuter; and
why they should not resemble Christ's afflictions before death, these two
reasons move me: First it was burnt after it was dead; next it was wholly
consumed by fire: neither of which can accord with Christ's sufferings on the
cross. This was, as all men may see, my second exception, and not that which
you subject in place thereof. That indeed shows how carelessly you concluded
against your self. For where you make such a stir for the PROPER sufferings
of the soul of Christ, when you come to exemplify them but in a figure, you
bring the burning of the body of the holocaust, which either wholly excludes
the sufferings of the soul, or admits none but those that were also common
to the body of Christ, and so your PROPER sufferings of Christ's soul are
clean without your own example. But now you amend the matter, and plainly
affirm, that Defenc. page 40. li. 37.
one and the same torment afflicted Christ's whole manhood by sympathy.] Look
better to your words, Sir Trifler, another time. If it were common to the
body, how was it proper to the soul? If it were proper to the soul, how was
it common to the body?

You have shifts enough to save all this: for Defenc. pa. 42. li. 1.
according to the proportion of the holocaust, so WHOLE Christ, you say, and
then his very soul CHIEFLY was AS IT WERE chopped into pieces, and AS IT WERE
quite consumed in his fiery sorrows.] A learned and The Defenders ^aine shifts.
witty answer very like, as it were, to your self. To prove the proper
sufferings of the soul, you proportion out the sufferings of the whole man,
which are common to body and soul; and these because they are chiefly in the
soul, you make proper unto the soul. By that reason all the sufferings of the
body are proper likewise to the soul; because the sense of them is chiefly,
if not only in the soul. But what will you not say, that speaking both
monstrously and falsely in your fiery humor, salve it all with as it were? The
soul of Christ, you say, was AS IT WERE chopped in pieces, and as it were quite
consumed; and so in effect, when your words, which should be proper and
positive in points of faith, are absurd and senseless, you imagine they may be
as it were like to be true. Did you profess to speak figuratively and not
properly, as in positions of Religion you ought to do, many phrases might be
borne withal which otherwise are intolerable: but when your assertions are out
of all square and truth; then to qualify them with as it were (which is a
shift, though very shameful, thorowout your book in the greatest matters in
question) and still to defend them as principles of Christian religion; this is
fit for no man but for him that makes a Maygame of p^etie to support the
madness of his fancy.

With like learning you cure the contrariety that you readily ran into,
whiles over egerly you pursued your own purposes forgetting what fell from you
in other places. For where in your Treatise for an advantage you said, Trea.
pa. 11.
those sacrifices (of beasts) could not prefigure the immortal and reasonable
soul of Christ; and in your Defense you resolutely infer, Defenc. pa. 39.
li. 11.
It must then be of necessity (I think) the humane soul of Christ, which the
Scapegoat signified, which was a true sinne-offering: This you can FVL EASILY
reconcile, and that without trifling. In the former place you meant generally
and for the most part, but not always, nor altogether: Again, the Scapegoat
and the holocaust do not, in respect as they are bodily things, represent the
soul of Christ or any matter pertaining to it; but the particular usage and
manner of action about them, does lively represent the sufferings of Christ's
soul.] This indeed is not trifling, but plain tumbling in the mire. Your
words were: those sacrifices (of beasts) could not prefigure the immortal and
reasonable soul of Christ. Your new correction is now, you meant they did not
ALVV AIHS nor ALTOGETHER represent mere bodily sufferings. What is your new
addition but a clear confession, that your former words were false? For if
those sacrificcs did not always nor altogether represent Christ's bodily
sufferings, then sometimes they prefigured the sufferings of his soul. But you
said, they were Trea. pa. 11. li. 9. and 12.
ALTOGETHER UNFIT for those inward and invisible things, NEITHER HAD THEY ANY
RESEMBLANCE TOGETHER. Altogether unfit, and not altogether unfit to represent
the sufferings of the souls; as also not any resemblance and some resemblance
are contradictions in our country, whatsoever they be in yours.

But since you can not always nor altogether hit the truth, you will now go
to it with respects. The Scapegoat and the holocaust, you say, do not in that
respect as they are bodily things, represent the soul of Christ, or any matter
pertaining to it.] In that respect as they are bodily things without any sacred
action or passion, they figure neither body nor soul of Christ, nor are
indeed any figures at all. But you speak of sacrifices of beasts, which can
not bear that name in the Scriptures without some sacred action and passion
ordained by God to praefigure the sacrifice of his Son. And where every thing
which was appointed of God to foreshew the coming and dying of his Son, was
a figure of him, not in respect of any bodily matter or form, (for so all
things of that kind should naturally have been figures of Christ, and not by
gods appointment, which is most absurd and false:) but in regard of some holy,
rare, or beneficial action, passion, or property authorized by God to
represent the power and virtue of Christ appearing in our flesh; you like a
deep Divine sever from those sacrifices all sacred actions and passions
ordained by God, to make them both sacrifices and figures, and then tell us
that in respect of their earthly and bodily substance they were no figures of
Christ's soul. When you said Sacrifices, you included those sacred actions and
passions, which made them sacrifices and figures of Christ's sacrifice; and
therefore to exclude them again with an idle respect, is a silly and empty
refuge. If under bodily things you comprise external and sensible actions and
passions; then is it evident, that by sensible signs in those Sacrifices God
did always and altogether declare the joint sufferings of Christ for the
sins of the world, but not the pains of hell nor the death of the soul,
from which you always and altogether slide, under pretense of my gross
uttering it, though I utter it in the selfsame words and parts which the
Scripture does. But how considerate are you, when you vouch, that the Trea. pa.
41.
Scapegoat represents not Christ's soul, unless only in respect of the
escaping of it, when the other goat died; and yet not the body of the
holocaust, but the utter consuming by sire of the whole, signifies the
sufferings of whole Christ? What agreement has ESCAPING with UTTER CONSVMING?
and yet you make both these actions to be figures of the sufferings of Christ's
soul. So that Christ's soul by your refined figures did escape free from
death, and not escape free from death (for you defend that Christ died the
death of the soul) and was utterly consumed, and could not be consumed; but as
it were escaped, and yet escaped not, and was at it were utterly consumed, and
yet could no way be consumed, but escaped free and untouched as the Scapegoat
did. Such is your settlednesse, that yea and no, with you, are as it were all
one.

That fire did signify the Defenc. page 42. li 9.
incorruption of Christ's flesh after death, is very hard and far fetched.
Sacrifices had their respect to Christ's death, not to any thing further or
afterward.] All things are far fetched with you, that come not from the
whirlepoole of your own head. It is the judgment of S. Austen and other
learned Fathers, which you so lightly esteem. Aug. contra ^aust. Man^. li. 22.
ca. 17.
The same substance of the body shall be changed into an heavenly quality;
quod ignis in sacrificio significabat, velut absorbens mortem in victoriam;
which fire in sacrifice signified, as it were swallowing up death in victory.
Whom Bid disdaineth not to follow. ^eda. qu^st. super Leuit. cap. 3.
Ignis in sacrificio id significabat, velut absorbens mortem in victoriam. Fire
in sacrifice did signify victory even swallowing up death. Cyril is of the
same mind. Cyrillin Leuit. li. 1.
Agreeably (to the sacrifices) did heavenly fire consume all things that were
done by our Savior in the body, and restored them all nearer to the nature of
his Divinity: for rising from the dead, he ascended to heaven: his passage to
which place the nature of fire does show. To farther sufferings after Christ's
death no sacrifice had respect, because there neither were any, nor needed any;
but to the efficacy and glory consequent to Christ's death, the fire in
sacrifices had respect, as these Fathers affirm. Against whom though you every
where oppose the worm-eaten warrant of your own words, I trust you will
somewhat relent to the Apostles authority; who tells you, that the Hebr. 9.
v. 7.
high Priests going into the most holy place with the blood of the sacrifice
once every year, signified Christ's Verse. 8. 12. 24.
entering the heavens with his own blood; which I hope was after both his death
and his resurrection.

As for an Defenc. page 42. li. 12.
other sense out of Austen, that it should signify our perfection and burning
charity, it can not be true: for the holocaust-sacrifice out of question
primarily signified the person of Christ, not ours. Also you both here do seem
to double, understanding by the holocaust both incorruption after death, and a
perfect burning love in us now in this life; which things are far distant,
and can not stand together.] You are so giddie, that you dislike every thing;
and so hasty, that you conceive nothing right. S. Austen says indeed that
fire in the holocaust may note the fervent ^esse of charity, and brightness
of immortality, which are all one with perfection and incorruption. What fault
find you with this? The holocaust, you say, signified primarily the person of
Christ, not ours. Does S. Austen deny that? It suff^ceth for the truth of his
words, that those sacrifices did principally point out Christ's sufferings,
grace, and glory; and consequently ours. For as we have Phil. 3.
fellowship with his afflictions, and are conformed unto his death; so shall we
be partakers of his perfection and incorruption, and be Romans 8.
fashioned to (his) image. Romans 8.
(...); If we suffer as he did (says Paul) that we may be glorified as he was;
not presuming an equality with him, but promising a conformity to him. The
Sacrifices then which (as you grant) primarily signified the person, passion
and perfection of Christ, did secondly note and teach our dying to sin, our
rising again in glory and appearing before him in perfect holiness; which in
this life we endeavor but can not attain to the full, till by death we be
freed from sin. The bearing of Christ's Image is enough to justify Saint
Austens speech. For he neither says, that the holocaust did primarily signify
the members of Christ, nor that men could have perfection of charity in this
life: but when Christ shall present us righteous and glorious unto his Father,
then shall he offer us as holocausts unto God. And yet in the mean while what
hinders Saint Austen to exhort us, that the Divine fire of Gods wisdom and
grace may wholly inflame us, and even consume us? Who but a moth of your mould
would give Saint Austen the l^e twice in two lines for so speaking, and in the
third line after charge him with doubling, as if Christ's purity in this life
and glory after this life could not stand together? or the perfection of Gods
Saints here (such as it is, which the Scripture so Mat. 5. v. 48. Col 4. v 12.
I^m. 1. v. 4.
calls) were not coherent with that incorruption, which they shall have
there? The one is not the other, but the one is so consequent to the other,
that without holiness in earth no man shall ever enjoy happiness in heaven. And
to both does the imitation of Christ, and signification of fire in the
holocaust direct us.

Coming to the next reason you Defenc. page 42.
reproved me for saying, Sacraments are earthly Elements, they can not set out
the spiritual and ^uisible effects in Christ.] There was just cause I should
tell you, that this your asse^tion did mainly cross the very nature and
definition of a Sacrament. For Sacraments are visible signs of invisible
graces; that is, of the spiritual effects of Christ's power and grace abiding
in him, and yet working in us. Wherein did I wrong you? you meant they Defenc.
page 43. li. 1.
usually represent not spiritual and in^sible effects or acts in Christ him
self, but only the external and visible parts of his passion.] The two
Sacraments of the new Testament, Baptism and the Lords Supper; do they
represent only the external and visible parts of Christ's passion? Does
Baptism show no more in Christ, but that actual and substantial water ran
out of his side after he was dead? Is this the whole signification and
rep^esentation that baptism offers unto us? Surely you must leave
Catechizing and learn to be catechized; if this be all your skill in
Sacraments. The bread and wine on the Lords table, besides the reference which
they have to the body of Christ broken and his blood shed, do they not plainly
show the flesh of Christ is meat, and his blood drink nourishing our souls
to everlasting life, as the elements support and maintain the life of the
body? Water in Baptism does it not declare the power of Christ's death washing
our souls, and of his spirit renewing our minds? These you say are Defenc. page
42. li. 37.
spiritual effects wrought in us not in Christ. Power to cleanse, quicken,
nourish, and strengthen to eternal life, is that Christ's or ours? We indeed
are the persons that are cleansed, quickened, nourished and strengthened; but
the force and grace working these things in us, is Christ's and not ours. We
receive it as flowing from the fountain, but it naturally springs in him,
and from thence is derived to us. The Sacraments then teach us, that the
fullness of power and grace dwells in Christ really and truly; which he is
content shall work in us, but never leave him. The water washing, the bread
nourishing, the wine comforting, note no power in us to do any of these things;
it is evident impiety so to think or say; only they assure us, that as
Christ the true owner of all these things, by his obedience unto death, was
made the only disposer of them; so he will perform the covenant with us,
which the Sacraments do seal unto us; and that is the covenant of mercy and
grace in this life, and of glory in the next; which the Sacraments could not
seal, except they did signify those gifts and effects to be actiuely and
originally in the giver; as they are passiuely in the Receivers.

Defenc. page 42. li. 38.
VSVALLY Sacraments do not represent spiritual effects or acts in Christ.]
When text and truth fail you, your fashion is to fly to phrases; and so
still to say Sacraments do constantly and continually signify and represent
the same.
somewhat, though it want both learning and understanding. For example,
Sacraments (you say) do not VSVALLY represent spiritual effects or acts in
Christ. Did you speak of nature, which often fails; or of men, who change
their minds, usual and unusual might serve for some purpose; but what is this
to Sacraments? they constantly and continually keep the same order in their
significations and representations; so that usual and unusual in them are all
one. The nature of the Element is still the same; the action prescribed may not
be varied; the promise annexed never fails on Gods part. So that what any
Sacrament once resembles or signifies, it always expresses and observes
the same. Will you divert your words to diverse Sacraments, and make that
usual to one, which is unusual to another? This which you usually exclude
from Sacraments, is common to both the Sacraments of the New Testament of which
we reason; and being common to them both, as I have showed, to signify
spiritual effects or acts in Christ himself, with what truth say you now,
THEY do it not usually, speaking of both; whereas both do it apparently and
perpetually?

It is Defenc. pa. 42. li. 29.
your self indeed that denies the very definition of a Sacrament: for your
maine assertion is that neither the Jewish sacrifices, nor Christian
Sacraments, do signify any more then the bodily and blo^dy death of Christ,
which I hope was a visible, and no ^uisible thing.] Your Reader will shortly
take you so often tardie with foule-lies, that he will skant believe you, when
you speak a truth. Is it any position of mine that the Jewish sacrifices, and
Christian Sacraments do not signify any more then the bodily and bloody
death of Christ? Indeed I af^irmed they signified none other death of Christ,
but only that which was bodily and bloody, which I g^ant was visible; but as
for other effects of Christ's power and grace, by which we are Sermon. pa. 63. li.
22.
grafted into Christ, and quick^ed and nourished unto life everlasting,
Ireferred them to the Sacraments of the new Testament as unto Seals confirming
the covenant of mercy, grace, and glory made to us by the death of Christ, in
the same words that I now speak it. And so conclude of them, as I do now;
Ibid. li. 23.
These propose unto us no invisible pains of hell, but the body of Christ
wounded, and his blood shed for the remitting of our sins, and uniting us
unto Christ. Therefore your turning no invisible pains of hell, which are my
words, into no more then a bodily death, which are yours; and under pretense of
those words, excluding from the Sacraments all other significations and
representations of Christ's invisible power and grace proposed by them, shows
your accustomed vain of misconstering and altering my words, when you cannot
otherwise impugn them.

You Defenc. pa. 43. li. 3.
make me to cross the institution of the Lords table, because I said the
Ceremony of breaking the bread, cannot properly belong to Christ's body. But
even here do I not expressly say, that it shows forth how Christ's body was
broken for us?] Where by Christ's institution the bread was BROKEN, to note unto
us the breaking of his body for our sins; and Paul expresses that similitude
of the bread broken to Christ's body, in saying, s 1. Cor. 10.
The bread, which we break, is it not the communion of the body of Christ;
and to verify that resemblance, reports the words of Christ's institution in
effect to be these, This is my body which is broken for you: you to make a
siely show that the Sacraments declare t 1. Cor. 11.
Christ's suffering of Hell pains, avouch that the. Trea pa. 14. li. 12.
breaking of the bread cannot properly belong to the body, but to the soul,
and to the body by Sympathy with the soul. Wherein you first deny the
Similitude betwixt the bread and the body of Christ, to be true in deeds but
only in words; because you do not acknowledge the violence offered to Christ's
body by his persecutors, to be any kind of breaking properly and truly. For
howsoever with big words you talk of the anguish of Christ's soul bruising
his x Defenc. pa. 21. li. 4.
body jointly also; yet when you come to express your selse plainly, you say,
Trea. pa. 5. li. 27.
This grievous passion was in his soul immediately and properly, seeing then
his body was not touched with any smart. And since all sense of pain is in the
soul; if by breaking you understand not the violence offered to Christ's body,
in vain come you in with your Sympathy, which may show itself in the body,
but not be felt of the body, by reason the powers of sense are in the soul;
and so you control the Apostles words as void of all truth, whiles you
refer them truly and properly to the soul, and not to the body but only by
Sympathy.

The grounds, whereon you deny this Analogy betwixt the bread and the body of
Christ, are as absurd and false, as the Conclusion, which you build on them;
and are in number four. 1. That Klomenon (in Greek) is BROKEN TO PIECES
properly. z Defenc. pa. 43.
2. That MEDVCCA in the Prophet (Esaias) is also broken to pieces, properly, or
crushed and beaten to POWDER. 3. That Christ's body was not properly broken.
4. That the breaking of the bread into many pieces, does first and immediately
set out the breaking of his soul. In all which you violently follow your own
fancies, as your manner is, against all divine and humane testimony. For first
(...) does not by his proper signification import that only, which is broken in
pieces, as you mean pieces wholly parted the one from the other. Look back
to your Lexicons, to which you appeal, and namely to that of Budaeus, Tusanus,
and Constantinus which Crispine Printed, Anno Domini 1562. or to that which was
a fresh Corrected and enlarged by G^snerus, Iunius, Xylander, Cellarius,
Honygerus and others, and Printed at Basil 1584. and see whether Klan whence
Klomenon comes, be not there expressed by frango, flecto and luxo, and (...)
by (...); which are to break, bow, vnioynt, bruise, or cut. And though Robert
Steven in his Thesaurus, set down none other signification to the verb Klan,
but frango to break; yet he does not thereby mean only breaking of bones,
or making of pieces as you full wisely intend; but to break generally,
whatsoever or howsoever. And so Klan is to break the straitness of any thing
by wrying or bowing it, and the coherence of any thing by straining, tearing or
cutting it, and the roundnesse or fullness of any thing by bruising it.
Aristotle in his Problemes says, that as we clime up the hill Arist proble.
sectio. 5. numero. 19.
(...), the knees are bent (or strained) backward; as we go down the hill,
(...), the thighs are bent (or strained) forward: as also (...) with
Hippocrates is the straining of a joint, where he says; that in holding the
hand forth right, Hippocr. li. 1. (...).
(...), the bowing of the joint (at elbowe) is strained. For so does Galen
expound him; (...). The offer to stretch out the Galenus in ^undem librum.
arm directly straineth the joint at elbow, (...), to the out side. And Lucian
describing the iesture of a Tragical person, says; (...), Bowing and
straining himself. In all which Klan does not import any breaking of bones
nor making of any pe^ces, but the straining of the joints, by which the body or
the parts thereof may be bowed.

He ^ychius says klan is likewise to cut, expressing it by Hesychij I exicon
in (...).
(...), to cut vines, which Theophrastus calls Theophrasius de causis
^lantarun. lib. 3. cap. 19.
(...), the cutting of vines, with whom Suidas, Phauorinus, and the Greek In
verbo (...).
Scholiast upon Aristophanes agree, deriuing the metaphorical signification of
(...), from cutting the tender branches (of vines, and other trees) which are
properly called (...), because they will turn and bow every way; and the hook
that serves to cut them, is named (...). Yea the very breaking of bread in
Christ's institution, (to which the Apostle resembles the violence offered to
Christ's body) the Greek church never so understood, that Aristopha. (...).
it was not or might not be done with knives. For besides that the ancient
leiturgie under the name of Chrysostom, mentions a sacred knife in form of
a lance, wherewith the bread was cut, which is there expressed by Chrysostomi
Leirurgia Graece.
(...), and (...); Germanus Bishop of Constantinople reporting the use of the
Greek Church in his time continued fro former ages, says, the Lords body
Germani historis Ecclesiastica.
(...), is cut with a knife, which they call a lance, out of the bread; and
though that be divided, yet Christ remains whole and vnparted (...), in every
piece of the bread so cut.

That klan is also used to signify the tearing or bruising of fleshie parts,
where no bones at all are broken, Hippocrates the father of all learned
Physic, speaking in his own Art most skilfully and truly, does clearly
witness: (...): Hippocrates (...). li. 3. ad finem.
Less dangerous are any of the bones broken, than where the bones are not
broken, but the veins and sinews adjoining are on every side bruized. If the
veins and sinews of man's body are properly said (...), when they are bruized
or torn with any violence; the flesh of man, which is full of veins and
sinew^s to bring blood and sense to every part of the body, can not be bruized
with staves, or torn with whippes and thorns as Christ's was, but those
veins and sinews spreading themselves thorowout the flesh, must likewise be
bruized and broken, which Hippocrates calls (...), though the danger be the
less, because the veins and sinews serving to that use, the more outward
they come, the smaller they are. And lest you should still dream as you do,
that there is no breaking of any thing in man's body but of bones, and that
when the pieces be wholly severed one from the other; Galen, a man past
exception in his faculty, tells you, that in violent hurts of the hands or
feet, by leaping, falling or straming, (...), the knitting of the bones l
Galenus in 2. lib. Hippocra. (...).
rather breaks than the bones themselves. Where the word (...) is put to
signify the losing and tearing of the joints when the bones are not broken,
which Galene avouches is the properest word that the Greek tongue has for
breaking of bones, and used almost of every man that is acquainted with the
Greek tongue. Of breaking Galenu^ de ^eth. medendi lib. 6.
he likewise says: Galenus in 2. lib. Hippocra. (...).
(...) a part (may be) broken, the rest being yet coherent. Even as Hippocrates
said before him: Hippocrates in 2 lib. (...).
(...): when the lower iaw is broken, if it be not clean forced a sunder, but
that the bone is in some part coherent. By which it is evident that as well
joints as bones may be BROKEN, and that either in part or in whole.

Klan then, whence klomenon is derived, imports not necessarily the breaking
of bones in man's body, as by your new Divinity you have lately devised, to
make way for your hell pains in the soul of Christ; but it signifies
generally to break, as our English word does, and frango with the Latins
likewise; whether it be by bowing or straining that which is straight; by
losing that which is fast; by bruizing that which is sound; or by cutting and
seuering in part or in whole that which is coherent. And so much our English
word BROKEN expresses. We say the neck or back is broken, when neither bone
nor skin is broken, but the fastening of the joints is losed. Likewise the
head the face, the shinnes are broken, when the skin or flesh of these parts is
by some violence razed or torn. Yea the veins are broken with a rupture, and
children are broken out when their flesh does exulcerate. And since the
dividing of that which was coherent, (which the Physicians call Galenus de
Methodo medendi li. 6.
(...), the solution of unity or continuitie,) whether it be strayning,
cutting, razing, tearing, or bruizing the bones or flesh of man's body in part
or in whole, is contained in the English word breaking, and in the Greek word
Klomenon; the Apostle spoke properly enough when he said that Christ's body was
broken, for so much as all the joints of it were losed in sunder, the veins
and sinews tornc with piercing and grating of Iron spikes, q Psalm. 22. verse.
15.
the flesh and the skin cut and rent with thorns, whips, and spear, and
bruized with staves; though the bones were not broken, which is your ignorant
exception against the Apostles words.

But MEDVCCA in the Prophet is broken in pieces properly, or crushed and broken
to Defenc. pa. 43 li. 15.
powder; as these Scriptures do use the word likewise, and all Lexicons do
confirm.] Your resolutions are so rash, that no man will trust your report for
the proper signification of words. DACHA indeed is properly to bruize whether
it be with hand or foot, but not to pieces nor to powder, without some other
word added to express so much. For your Lexicons, to which you so confidently
appeal, consult that of Pagnine perused and augmented by Mercere, Ceuattere,
and Bertrame, and Printed at Lions in France Anno 1575. or Forsters Printed at
Basile Anno 1564. and see whether they do not plainly reprove your folly.
Forsteri Dictionarium H^braicum in themate Dacha. 2^8.
Forstere expresses the theme, whence MEDVCCA comes, by oppressione seu
depressione contusus est, to be bruized by oppression or depression; neither
does he so much as mention the signification of frangere to break in all the
examples of that theme. Pagnini thesaurus linguae sanctae.
Pagnine declares the force of that theme by conterere, frangere, contundere,
to beat, break, or bruize, but Mercere adds as Forstere did, oppressione
vel depressione, by oppressing and depressing. And against your beating to
powder, Pagnine takes special exception out of the Rabbis in the very same
place of Numbers, whence you would infer it. For upon the words Numbers 11.
verse 8. the people gathered Manna, and BEAT IT in morters, and made cakes
Number. 11. v 8.
of it. He says, differt a SHACHAK secundum Hebreorum Doctores, quod SHACHAK
Pag^. in themate Doc. page 457.
est minutatim contundere and terere. The word here used differreth from
SHACHAK according to the opinion of the Hebrew Doctors, because SHACHAK
signifies to beat a thing small or to powder, which cosequently this does not.
And though they had dissembled so much, yet the Scripture it self does
convince, that your observation out of that place, as out of all the rest which
you quote for that word is stark false. For Manna by the description of Moses,
was a small round thing, E^od. 16. ve^. ^4.
small as the hoar frost on the earth, and Number. 11. verse. 9.
fell in the night with the dew, and Exodus 16. verse. 21.
melted (away) when the heat of the son came. Now Manna being so moist, that
it would melt with the heat of the Sun, was not beaten in morters to bring
it to powder, as you boldly suppose, since it would rather cleave together then
come to powder; but by bruizing it between two stones, which was their kind of
Mill in the Wilderness, or in a mortar with some water they did work it to
batter or dough, thereof to make wafers or cakes. But were it so, that Manna
would come to powder, which yet the text does not infe^re; will you conclude,
because beating in a mortar brings dry things to powder, that therefore
beating does generally and necessarily signify beating to powder?

And as that place is mistaken by you, which only seemed to make for you; so
not one of the rest, which you quote in your ma^gin does convince either
beating to powder, or breaking in pieces properly, to which you so violently
wrest the words of ^say. For where the Prophet says, the Esa. 19. v. 10.
Nets of Egypt shall be torn, that is far from beating to powder, except
you have lately devised the powder of Nets to make a plaster of. And if we
should say they were torn to pieces, what necessity is there, that either
this tearing should be properly breaking, which you admit not but in things
that be stiff and hard as bones and such like; or that those pieces should be
divided from the whole, and not rather be ruptures in the whole, as we see in
torn nets, which are not always rent clean a sunder? The next and last
place which you quote for the proper use of this word, it as wide from your
purpose, as West from East. Deu. 23. v. 1.
None wounded (says Moses) with any contusion ^r abscission of his secret
parts, shall enter into the congregation of the Lord. Can thos^ parts of man be
properly broken in pieces, or beaten to powder? They may be bruized or wounded,
as other fleshy parts may be, but breaking to pieces properly, or beating to
powder, were very strange in that case. That bruizing was used as well as
cutting, to make men Eunuchs, appears by Paulus Aegineta; where he says:
Paulus Aegineta. lib. 6. cap. 68.
Hu^us re^ modus duplex est, vnus collisione, alter excisione absoluitur: The
way to do this is double, one by bruising, the other by cutting. And since
Moses compriseth both these ways in his words, it is evident that DACCA is a
bruize, and consequently the word may be properly applied to Christ's body,
which was sorely bruized as well with the beating of s^aues and whips, as with
piercing and grating of iron spikes.

These are the grounds on which you gather, the Prophet could not by that word
mean the wounding and bruizing of Christ's body; but because powder and
pieces, as you dream, are properly comprised in that theme, therefore it must
be referred to the soul of Christ. As if pieces and powder came nearer in
souls to the right signification of bruizing, than the mangling, tearing, and
contusing of Christ's body, which he suffered from the violent rage of the
Jews. Your other word of the very same nature, keep to your self. When your
proofs fail you in this, you may not be suffered to roue at your pleasure, and
to reach after other words, and out of your own unlearned skill to vouch, they
are of the very same nature. Wherefore there is no cause why the coherence of
Esaies words should be cut in sunder by your unhandsome device of the pieces
and powder of souls; but as the first words in that sentence, Esa. 53. v. 5.
he was wounded for our transgressions, and the last, with his stripes we are
healed, are plainly referred to the punishments of Christ's body; so the
midst, he was bruized for our iniquities, should have the same relation and
intention, especially the Prophet foretelling the people, what they should see
in their Messiah, and how they should misiudge of him. Ibid. v. 4.
We (says Esaias) did judge him as plagued and smitt^n of God, but he was
wounded for our transgressions, and bruized for our iniquities, and with his
stripes are we healed.

Neither is it any strange thing in the Scriptures to join this very word
which you talk so much of with wounding as with a word of the same nature and
force. For besides that Moses says, Deuteronomy. 23.
None wounded with any bruizing or ^utting of his secret parts, shall enter
into the Lords congregation; David says to God, Thou have bruized Rahab, as
one that is wounded. Where wounding and bruizing are more properly lincked
together as words of like force and effect, than your breaking of souls into
pieces, or beating them to powder. The very same word is also used in the
Scriptures, to note the bruizing of man's body by sickness, or of his estate
by wrong and oppression. David in a grievous sickness complaining that he felt
nothing sound in his flesh, nor any rest in his bones; adds: Psalm. 38. v. 8.
I am weakened and bruized very much. Bruize not the poor in the gate, says
Solomon; that is, oppress not the poor in judgment. The children of the
foolish shall be Job. 5. v. 4.
bruized (that is, oppressed) in the gate, and none shall deliver them. And
when it is applied to the soul, it may note that to be either wounded with
sorrow, oppressed with wrong, or humbled with obedience; but as for powder and
pieces, from which you would pull a just proportion, which nothing can answer
but the pains of hell, it is a sick conceit of your own brain; it has no
deriuation either from the Prophets or Apostles words.

You did not mean, that Defenc. pa. 44. li. 18. and 29.
the soul might be properly broken in pieces, but that thus it is nearer and
better applied to the soul than to the body; which was only pierced and
boared through.] Then was your former opposition out of the Scripture very
licentious, and your conclusion as frivolous. In that a bone of Christ's was
not broken, you inferred that Esaies words, He was broken for our sins, Trea.
pa. 10. li. 16.
could not be properly meant of Christ's body, flesh, and bones: as if there
were no breaking of joints, veins, sinews, flesh, or skin; but only of
bones. And yet as if the soul of Christ, which is by nature altogether
indivisible, might properly be broken in pieces, you conclude the breaking of
the bread can not properly belong to the body of Christ, BUT TO THE SOVLE. Had
you denied the breaking of the bread properly to belong to either, your words
must have been; It can belong properly neither to the body, nor to the soul;
but you deny the one, and avouch the other; It can not belong properly to the
body, but to the soul. Whether those words of yours do not expressly import,
that the breaking of bread does properly belong to the soul of Christ, as to
the truth wherein they must be verified, I leave it to the judgment of the
discreet Reader. [Howbeit, you deny not, but Defenc. pa. 44. li. 26.
broken applied to the soul (of Christ) is figurative.] And so you grant there
was no cause you should take such exceptions as you did to the Apostles words,
This is my body which is broken for you. For since it can not be verified of
the soul, but figuratively as you now confess; it may so be most justly
verified of Christ's body, without any sense of hell pains suffered in the
soul of Christ. And if the consent of the English, Latin, and Greek tongues
may be trusted for the use of a word; breaking may properly be affirmed of
Christ's body, which can not be of his soul; for so much as his joints,
veins, sinews, flesh and skin were broken and torn in sunder, Christ's body
truly broken by the judgment of new and old writers.
though his bones were not.

And but that your fashion is to follow no man farther than your fancy leads
you, you might have seen with what reverence and conscience Master Beza, that
otherwise vpholdeth the sufferings of Christ's soul, refers this word
KLOMENON to the tearings and torments of Christ's body, being hereto led by
the Apostles assertion. By the word Beze Annot. in epist. ad Cor. 1. ca. 11. v.
24.
broken (in Paul's words) is designed the kind^ of (Christ's) death; because,
besides that the Lords body was torn, bruized, and even broken with most
bitter torments, though his legs were not broken as the thieves were, Christ
breathing out his soul with a most violent death, was as it were rent in two
parts according to his humane Nature. This word then has a MARVELLOVS EXPRESS
SIGNIFICATION, that the figure should fully agree with the thing it self; to
wit, that the breaking of the bread should represent to our minds the very
death of Christ. Peter Martyr having made your objection, that a bone of Christ
was not broken, resolves: But Petr. Martyr i^ 1. epist. ad Corint. ca. 11.
hereof I will not greatly contend for so much as this breaking is by many
Fathers referred to the body of Christ. With whom the words following do
make, (broken) for you; which indeed leads me to consent unto them, and to
acknowledge a double breaking, (one in the bread, another in the Haymo in 1.
^pist ad Corint. ca. 11.
body of Christ.) Bullinger says, Bulling. in 1. epist. ad Corint. cap. 11.
The bread is properly said to be broken, the body of man to be slain;
howbeit, in the Hebrew tongue to break, is to waste, to kill and destroy. And
so the visible bread, which in our sight is broken with our hands, does
certainly set before our eyes that body (of Christ) which was broken or done
to death by us or for us. So Haymo: q Christ himself brake the bread, which he
delivered to his Disciples, to show that the breaking and suffering of his
body came not but of his own accord. Which words he took out of Beda upon
the Gospels of Mark and Beda in Marci cap 14. and in Iucae ca. 22.
Luke. Before whom, Prosper: De consecratione did. 2. Et cum ^ostia.
When the host is broken, and the blood is powered out into the mouths of the
faithful, what other thing is designed than the doing to death of the Lords
body on the cross, and the shedding of the blood out of his side? And
likewise Austen: August. de feria. 4. ca. 6. ^m. 9.
The table of thy spouse (says he to the Church) has bread that is whole,
quem fractum and comminutum vidimus in Passione, which we saw broken and
bruized in his Passion. Of this bread the Lord himself said; The bread which I
will give, is my flesh. And indeed whosoever shall duly consider the violence
done to every part of Christ's body before and on the cross, shall find a
far sharper and so^er kind of breaking, than if his legs had been knapt in
sunder as the thieves were; and see just cause why Paul compared the breaking
of Christ's body to the breaking of the bread, though you idly or falsely
say it was ONLY PIERCED or boared through. For if by piercing you mean all
kind of violence, that impressed any pain in the body; then is piercing
far larger and grieuouser than your kind of breaking, which is of bones; and
more than such piercing, Christ's body needed not, to answer the similitude of
breaking the bread. But if by piercing you mean boaring through, as you seem
to expound it; then did Christ's body suffer many violences, as buffeting,
striking, whipping, piercing with thorns, and such like, which were no borings
through. And so there is either no weight or no truth in your words, that
Christ's body was only pierced and boared through.

Defenc. pa. 43. li. 37.
Vainly you charge me, I know not how often, against my express words, that I
call hell, heaven, and descending, ascending; but here it is no wrong to charge
you with such an absurdity Proper opposed to metaphorical.
indeed, who expressly do make that, which you say is FIGVRATIVE, to be a proper
denomination.] If I charge you falsely, when you come to the place conceal it
not; in the meanetime, if there were any inconvenience in this, as there is
none, it was the tracing of you in your own terms. For you argued, that
Christ's body could not be said properly to be broken, because no bone of his
was broken; and consequently it is your collection, that if a bone (which is
but a part of Christ's body) had been broken, the body of Christ (which is
the whole) might be said to have been properly broken. Mine answer was, that
since Christ's body had other parts besides his bones, which by his own words
are contained under the name of his flesh, if any parts of his flesh were
truly broken, the whole body might be said to be properly broken, as well in
respect of his flesh, as of his bones. What absurdity find you in this, that
first proceeded not from your self? But, were the words mine own, when I
speak as a Divine of the propriety of signification, calling that proper
which is not metaphorical; and affirm, that as the sense of the word BROKEN
was proper in a part of Christ's body, so must it likewise be proper and not
metaphorical in the whole, because the whole, which takes his denomination
from a part, must retain the same signification of the word, which was
verified in that part; what boys play is it in you to come from metaphors to
other kinds of figures, and to trifle with terms of proper and siguratiue
(when I opposed proper to metaphorical) and child^shlie to charge me, that I
speak contraries with a breath? As if one and the same speech might not be
figurative in expressing the whole for a part, which is Synecdoche, and yet
retain his proper signification, and be no metaphor. Except therefore your
Grammar be so great, that every Synecdoche must needs be a metaphor; and your
Logic so little, that you can not distinguish a subject from a predicate; I
see no cause but one and the same speech or proposition may be figurative in
the subject, by understanding the whole for a part; and yet proper in the
predicate, by reason the sense thereof is not metaphorical. For these be
figurae dictionum, not orationum; figures of words, not of sentences. As in our
case whether Christ's body were properly broken, or no: if the body, which is
the subject in that proposition, by Synecdoche be taken for a part; then
broken, which is the predicate, must the rather be properly and not
metaphoricallie affirmed of that part, which was truly broken: how beit, as I
think, since the proper sense of breaking was verified of all or the most
parts of Christ's body, it must likewise be verified of the whole body.

But omit these Grammatical and Logical points, wherewith many Readers are
not acquainted, and come to the very pitch of my words. I do not affirm,
that the whole for a part is a proper speech, as you conceive me; but that the
whole from a part may properly (and not metaphorically) take his denomination.
That a man speaks, writes, hears; sees, tastes, smells, and such like,
are they proper or figurative speeches in your censure? Proper I think; and
yet no part in man's body is the instrument of speech besides the tongue, of
writing besides the hand, of hearing besides the care, of seeing besides the
eye, of tasting besides the mouth, of smelling besides the nose. Infinite are
the actions of the body naturally executed by certain parts, as eating,
drinking, sleeping, spetting, coughing, weeping, and other such, which no man
in his right wits will affirm to be figurative actions or speeches in man; and
yet in them all, a part does denominate the whole. In the virtues and vices of
the mind, as for men to be wise, sober, diligent, patient, liberal, learned,
mindful, watchful, and such like, or the contrary; shall we say, that men be
figuratively and not properly and truly such, because these are gifts of the
mind, and not of the body? The very essential parts of man, as
understanding, will, reason, sense, and appetite; shall they likewise make
figurative speeches in men, because none of them are common to all the parts
and powers of body and soul, but in every of them a part does denominate the
whole? It may be you will not greatly stick to turn Porphyries predicables
and Aristotle's predicaments into Mosellanes tropes, and make figures of them
all; what say you then to the branches of Christian faith and truth? are they
also figurative and improper speeches? That Christ is the son of God, and the
son of David; that he was borne of a virgin, and circumcised in the eight
day; that he fasted, hungered, and was tempted; that he eat and slept, wept, and
waxed weary; that he was buffeted, whipped, and crucified; that he died for our
sins, and rose for our righteousness; that he ascended into heaven, and
thence shall come to judge the quick and the dead; and an infinite number of
the like: are all these figurative speeches in your conceit? I hope you be not
so fastened to figures, that you will make us a figurative faith, and a
figurative Savior; and yet in all these, a part does denominate the whole.
Your eyes therefore were somewhat close, or your wits wandering, when you could
not see the difference betwixt taking the whole for a part, and denominating
the whole by a part; which is so common and constant both in Divinity and
Philosophy, that in all natural and necessary actions, passions, and
proprieties, the whole receives his attribute from a part. And so my words
rest sound and true, both in humane reason and in holy Scripture,
notwithstanding your vain proclamation of so clear and express an absurdity
in them. But you must be borne with, your humor is so sharp, and your head so
shallow, that your left hand knows not what your right s^ibleth.

Your despising the Ecclesiastical history as a fable, is a spark of your
pride, from which few ancient writers are free; howbeit the Scriptures are
plain enough for my purpose, to prove that Christ's body was truly broken.
They witness that the Jews Mark. 14. verse. 16.
buffeted him with their sistes, and smote him with their S^rieants staves;
thar Pilate Ma^th. 27. verse. 26.
scourged him, that the soldiers 29.
platted a crown of thorns on his head, and then did 3^.
beat him on the head with reeds and Ioh. 19. v. 3.
rods; that his crucifiers P^al. 22. verse. 16.
dug his hands and seete, and pulled Verse. 14.
all his bones out of joint; and that in this plight the weight of his body
hung on the cross three hours by the wounds of his hands and feet; and when
he was dead, his John 19. verse. 34.
side was pierced with a spear, besides the mockes, wrongs and taunts that
were offered him on every side: and yet all this you say is Defenc. pa 44. li.
21.
not in any sense proportionable to the propriety of the word KLO'MENON and
MEDVCCA. You prate of PROPRIETIES and proportions to no end, but to color your
absurdities and presumptions. What Christian Reader will endure you to say,
that the Apostle in applying the word KLO'MENON to the body of Christ, had
neither propriety nor proportion to the right sense of the word? If he did not
speak properly in those words, ( which is broken for you) as I think he did,
yet at least he must speak metaphorically and figuratively, and so keep a
resemblance and proportion to the original sense of the word; except your
wisdom will avouch that the holy Ghost ignorantly and unadvisedly abuses the
word. Which if you confess of your self, I will easily believe, because you
neither know what you affirm, nor what you deny. For where before you said in
plain words, Trea. pa. 14.
the breaking of the bread CAN NOT PROPERLY BELONG BUT TO THE SOVLE (of
Christ,) Now you grant it properly belongs neither to body nor to soul;
only from powder and pieces you take a just and full proportion in the soul
to the proper sense of those words. You have me in jealousy that Defenc. pa.
44. li. 16.
I think you to be a senseless fool; indeed I think you to be more conceited
then learned, and a great deal more shifting then sound, though in this book
you have sought the help of all your friends to maintain the most of your
matters with as it were; but if you reject the Apostles words as wanting both
propriety and proportion, except your hell pains be admitted; and make out
just and full proportions from powder and pieces unto the soul of Christ, I
doubt your Reader will think these be senseless and foolish Toys.

If I would play with proportions as you do, I need not depart from the words
of the holy Ghost to find a fairer resemblance to the proper sense of those
words in the body of Christ crucified, then you make any. Psalm. 22. v. 14.
All my bones are sundered, says David in the person of Christ, and and 15.
thou have brought me into the dust of death. Of which and all that went
before, Eusebius says, Eusebius demonstr^. Euangel. li. 10. ^a. 8.
what else do all these signify but the condition of (Christ's) dead body?
Wherefore he presently adds, and into the dust of death thou have brought me.
Here in express words is the dust of death to which Christ's body was brought,
and besides, all his bones were sundered. Now to be sundered is evidently to be
divided, and that must be with parts or pieces; the natural coherence
wherewith the bones were formerly joined, being losed and dissolved, though one
part be not severed from the other. Whether therefore the word broken be
properly or figuratively taken, I see no cause why the Apostles words may not
in either sense be fully true. For if the Joints, veins, sinews, flesh, and
skin of Christ's body from head to foot were properly straeined, rent and
torn, besides the seuering of his soul from his body; then was his body
truly broken. If by breaking we figuratively mean, as others do, the
affliction and anguish of Christ's body; then as no part was free from it, so no
increase of bodily pain in this life could be added to his sufferings: and so
in either respect your hell pains have their pasport, till you find some
fitter place and better proof for them then either KLO'MENON or MEDVCCA.

The next point you undertake is whether the blood of Christ be the full
Redemption The Defender aludeth the Scriptures with his terms of single and
mere.
as well of our bodies, as of our Souls in this life. Wherein, because the
word Redemption is diversely taken in the Scriptures, as for deliverance
sometimes from sin, sometimes from death, sometimes from the power and fear
of either; and all the promises of God we have now in hope, though not some of
them indeed till the general resurrection: you show your self cunning in
carping at words, which you labor to turn and wind every way. But before you
come to it, you make a short and swift answer to all the places of Scripture,
which I produce touching the force and effects of Christ's blood; least you
should have Defenc. pa. 45. li. 12.
any need to trouble your self hereafter about any of them. Where, as your
manner is throughout your book, you first change the question with adding
your witless and senseless terms of mere, single, and simple to my words,
and then without any more ado, Ibidem li. 7.
Your advised and resolute answer to all is this; and 11.
there is not one text any where that has any meaning of my strange conceit.
It were reason, a man would think, you took the pains to impugn my words,
and not to presume you know my meaning against my words, and so to frame it
after your fashion with your new found phrases, which I abhor as much as I do
your new found faith.

Defenc. pa. 44. li. 32.
You will prove the blood of our Savior is the true price of our Redemption,
and that as well of our souls as of our bodies. Who denies this as your words
run?] It is happy yet that my words run well, whatsoever my conceit be.
Now if I mean no more then I speak, and the sacred Scriptures fully concur
with that which I speak; then have I both the word of God to warrant that I
teach, and besides your own confession that as I speak it, it is truth.
Defenc. pa. 44. li. 35.
But you know I mean, that no more but the shedding of Christ's blood ONLY AND
MERELY, is the just and full satisfaction of all our sins.] What my meaning
is you cannot be ignorant, I have often declared it, not here only, but in my
Sermons and conclusion also, as I have formerly showed, and you have plainly
confessed. I will once more repeat your own words and hereafter by your leave
tell you it is a plain lie and a mere shift, if you father your terms of
Christ's mere blood, and single body upon me, as any part of the Question
which I moved, or Doctrine which I defend. Wherefore I pray thee Christian
Reader once more to take notice, that I be not driven in every page to prove
one and the same thing against the Discoursers unsavory, childish, and Idle
phrases, with which he would feign elude the Scriptures, and delude the world.
Your confession both of my Sermons and conclusion (Sir Descourser) is this;
Defenc. pa. 36. li. 9.
Sundry times you teach, that Christ did suffer peculiarly and severally some
proper punishments in his soul, besides his bodily sufferings: yea that this
was a part of his cross, and the effect of Gods wrath on his soul, as well as
the suffering in his body. Against my words so often witnessed in my writings,
and so openly confessed by your self, you take upon you (by some secret
revelation belike) to know my meaning, that Defenc. pa. 45. li. 3.
no more but the shedding of Christ's blood MERELY is the full satisfaction of
all our sins; which MERE BLOOD of Christ the Scriptures mean not, nor only
his body SINGLY and SIMPLY considered.] The MERE blood, and SINGLE and SIMPLE
body of Christ, with such like couerts of your cause, are terms fit for such a
teacher as you are, to which if you could once convert the Question, we must
have as many Lexicons to bring us out of these Laberinthes, as there be leaves
in your book. Keep them therefore as whelps of your own litture, the faith
of Christ and the word of God has stood without them these sixteen hundred
years.

What I mean by the body and blood of Christ, given, and shed for our
Redemption, and the remission of our sin; I have meetly well expressed; I
must not in every section fall to fresh repetitions. When I speak as the
Scripture speaks, I mean as the Scripture means. They know not your new
terms of the MERE blood, nor of the single and simple body of Christ; but by
his blood and death they mean that manner of shedding his blood, and that kind
and course of death suffered in the body of his flesh, which the Gospel
describes; no way excluding from Christ, when he presented himself before God
to undertake man's cause the due consideration of man's infirmity and iniquity
abounding, or of Gods justice therewith displeased; nor his humble and
voluntary submission to the mighty hand and righteous will of his heavenly
Father, to excuse us from the heavy judgment that otherwise did hang over our
heads. So much as the Scriptures mention in declaring the manner of his death
and bloodshedding, so much they contain in the name of his Cross, blood and
death. For as the description, which the holy Ghost makes, is in no point
idle; so the comprehension of all under one word excludes nothing formerly
described. This I take to be a sound and sure way to expound the Scriptures by
their own direction and intention. For since the manner and order of Christ's
death was so carefully regestred by the spirit of God, that we should not be
ignorant of it; whenever the Scriptures speak of Christ's Cross, blood, and
death, they refer us to all that, which either by the Prophets was foretold,
or in the Gospel is expressed touching the order and manner of his death. And
so Christ 1. Cor. 15. verse. 3.
died for our sins according to the Scriptures (as Paul adds.) Then to take
any thing from it, which is mentioned in the Scriptures; or to add any thing
to it, which is not there expressly recorded; is to depart from the word of
truth, and to dishonor and deface the death and blood of Christ with our
inventions.

This being my meaning even from the beginning, as my words declare, I moved
these two general questions: The first, Whether in the cross and death of
Christ described in the Scriptures, the death of the soul, or the death of the
damned, were by any good warrant of the said Scriptures comprised: Secondly,
Whether the cross and death of Christ, as the Scriptures describe them, be not
the full and perfect price of our redemption from sin, and reconciliation to
God by the testimony of the same Scriptures, without the death of the soul,
or pains of the damned. The Discourser finding himself enclosed with these
questions, speaks directly to neither, and proves nothing in either; but
declining the envy of these speeches, the death of the soul, and the pains
of the damned, which indeed are the points misliked and rejected, he changes
the first question into the general terms of suffering Gods wrath, and the
souls proper suffering, which may import many things besides those two; and
in the second, he every where bears the Reader in hand, that by the death and
blood of Christ, I mean the MERE bodily sufferings of Christ, without any
sense or sorrow of the soul in her spiritual powers. And lest the Scripture
should stand in his way, he casts them all behind him, that any way witness
the force and merit of Christ's death and bloudshedding, as figurative
speeches; because they name not the MERE blood of Christ, nor only his body
SINGLY considered. But Sir, all this while you forget, that you have proved
nothing, but only supposed and avouched what pleased you; and that in matters
of faith you may not add to the word of God without manifest apostasy. The
things questioned by me, were the Sermo. pa. 8. li 23. and pa. 9. li. 14.
death of the soul, and the very pains of the damned, as appears evidently
by my words, when I first moved the question. Of these you say nothing all
this while; which yet you must soundly and fully prove before you may add them
to the words of the Holy ghost testifying the power and virtue of Christ's
blood and death. Therefore howsoever you seem to shift off the Scriptures as
figurative speeches with your MERE and SINGLE terms, they will stick faster
by you than so. For as there The Scriptures teach no redemption, but by the
blood and death of Christ.
can be no doubt of my meaning, comprising all in the death and blood of
Christ, which the Scriptures report of the order and manner of his sufferings,
when he yielded himself to die for the sins of the world according to the
counsel of his Fathers will; so you may not presume any thing to be contained
in the death or cross of Christ, as requisite for our redemption, which is not
clearly witnessed by the Scriptures. Prove therefore by the Scriptures, that
Christ died the death of the soul, or the death of the damned, which are the
true pains of hell; and then add it to the cross of Christ when you will.
Till so you do, the Scriptures which I have produced, stand in their full
strength against you. For as they bind all Christian men steadfastly to believe
that which is written touching their redemption by the death and blood of
Christ; so do they straightly prohibit all and every, be they men or Angels, to
add any other device to the doctrine of our salvation, than what is evidently
revealed, and directly witnessed in the Scriptures.

August. contra literas Petil. li. 3. and ca. 6.
Whether it be of Christ (says Austen) or of any other thing what soever
touching the faith; I say not, if we, who are no way comparable to him that so
spoke, but that which follows, if an Angel from heaven teach you BESIDES
that which you have received in the Scriptures, of the Law and the Gospel,
hold him accursed. Basil. in sermon. de fide.
It is a manifest fall from the faith (says Basil) either to abrogate any
thing that is written, or to bring in any thing that is not written. For
Tertul. aduers. ^aeretices. cap. 8.
when once we believe (the Gospel, says Tertullian) this we first believe,
that there is nothing besides, which we ought to believe. So that the mere
blood and single body of Christ are but sleights of yours, with unknown
phrases to draw your Reader from asking or eying your proofs for the death of
Christ's soul, and the pains of the damned to be suffered by him, before we
could be redeemed. The Scriptures are maine and manifest for that which I
believe and teach, and which the whole Church of Christ before me, taught and
believed these fifteen hundred years, before your conceit of hell pains in
the soul of Christ was either hatched or heard of. The sufferings of the soul
and the wrath of God, which things you now catch hold on to make some
introduction to your secret and private fancies, are too general to infer
either the death of the soul or the pains of the damned, except to the rest
of your absurdities you will add these, that the soul never suffers but it
dies the death of spirits; and that Gods anger in this life has none other
effects, but damnation.

Defenc. pa. 45. li. 13.
Here you urge a reason against us: if then our souls be not redeemed by the
blood of Christ, our bodies have no benefit of Redemption from death.] You
hunt so headily after advantages of words by some ambiguitie in them, that you
neither remember what the Scriptures teach, nor what your self defend, nor
when I use a word in the same sense that the Apostle does. It is not my devise,
but the Apostles doing, to take REDEMPTION of the body for the incorruption of
the same. Romans 8. 23.
We sigh in our selves, says Paul, waiting for the Redemption of our body. And
again, you are Ephesians. 4. 30.
sealed by the holy spirit of God unto the day of Redemption. When that day
shall be, our Savior tells us in these words. When the Luke 21. 28.
powers of heaven shall be shaken, and you see the son of man come in a cloud
with power and great glory, then lift up your heads; for your Redemption
draws near; In all which places Redemption is taken for none of those
mercies or graces, which are bestowed on Gods children in this life, but for
that glory and immortality, which shall be reueiled on them, when Christ
shall come to judge the world; and namely the Redemption of the body for that
incorruption, wherewith Philip 3. 21.
our vile bodies shall be changed and made like to his glorious body. Take
then the Redemption of the body for the incorruption of the same, as the
Apostle plainly does and I did; and see what absurdity or obscurity there is
in my reason, which you so much wrangle with, and wonder at, as though it
passed all understanding. The Redemption, which we have in this life by the
blood of Christ, must needs be either of body or of soul; we have no more
parts to be redeemed by Christ. But the Redemption of our bodies we have not in
this world, we must wait for it, till 1. Cor. 15. 53, 54.
this corruptible put on incorruption. The Redemption therefore which we have
in this life, or shall have before the last day, is the Redemption of our
souls. And so the words of Peter, 1. Pet. 1. 19.
You were Redeemed with the precious blood of Christ, and of the Saints in
heaven, saying to the Lamb, Reave. 5. 9.
Thou have redeemed us to God by thy blood, pertain expressly to the Redemption
of their souls, because their bodies then did, and yet do lie in corruption.
What so strange monsters or marueiles, does your Logical head find in this
reason, that you should make such wonderizations at it, and protestations
against it? Is it not open and easy to all, that be meanly witted or soberly
minded?

But you have Defenc. page 45. li. 17.
three things to note (in my words which you allege:) 1. The Proposition is
vain and Illogicall, having no consequence in it at all.] It is a special
point of Art memoratiue in you to note three things, and utterly to forget two
of them. For in this whole Section, you do not so much as mention any second
or third thing to be noted in those words which you cite. The first and al,
which you note, is that my proposition is vain, Illogicall, and vncoherent.]
Your idle and vntheologicall head has over busied it self with many mad
multiplications, and what ifs upon this proposition; and yet you come nothing
near the sense or coherence of it. The Proposition has two parts, whereof the
second is either an illation out of the Apostles words, upon the first being a
supposition of yours, if we limit it to the time of this life; or if we speak
without restraint of time as you do, it is a necessary consequent to the
former, being the condition and cause of the latter. That our souls are not
redeemed by the blood of Christ, but by his soul, is a resolution of yours;
wherewith you give a fresh onset in the next Section, as the Reader shall
there perceive, though here in show you somewhat relent after your inconstant
manner. That being a position of yours; I added by the Apostles warrant, that
our bodies have not their Redemption in this life, but must stay for it till
the day of Redemption, or general resurrection. And so the reason stands:
Conclu. pa. 240 l. 24.
If our souls be not (here) redeemed by the blood of Christ, (which is your
Assertion) our bodies (by the Apostles doctrine) have no Redemption in this
life. But this, That we should Ibidem 241. li. 6. et m 8.
presently have no Redemption (in body or soul) by the blood of Christ is
quite m contrary to the words of Peter, who says, Ye are redeemed by the
blood of Christ, (not ye shall be;) and of the souls in heaven that say to
Christ, thou have redeemed us by thy blood, when their bodies were rotten in
the earth. Since therefore either body or soul must have Redemption in this
life, and the body as Paul assures us, has not Redemption in this life; Vt
supra. pa. 240. li. 31.
Ergo the Redemption which we have in this life by the blood of Christ, must
be referred to our souls; and our bodies must expect the general day of
Redemption in the end of the world, before they shall have it. If the sober and
wise Reader understand not this reason, or can dislike the sequence of it, I am
content he shall condemn it as dark and obscure; but if it be open to all
men's eyes save yours; then is your dull conceit or eger stomach rather
betrayed by your foolish rolling to so many what ifs, then my reason any way
refuted. [I alter, you will say, the order of it.] Though I spoke then more
shortly then now I do, because I had no leisure to stand so long thereon, yet
he that will Read but the third part of that Section whence you take this,
shall find the very same parts and words, that now I use, there contained and
expressed.

But I afterward defend the proposition with the condition annexed to be
simply true.] When I saw your humor was so frantic, that not understanding
my words, you would presently pronounce them in the view of the whole Realm to
be a notorious Paradoxe and impiety, I bid you take your uttermost advantage
of my words; and as they stood, though that were not my first intent, they
were sound and good, and your impugning them was profane and false. I yet
avouch the same. For where the Scriptures teach no Redemption but by the death
and blood of Christ, your other deu^sed Redemptions by the death of the soul,
and pains of Hell, I account no better then false and profane. And therefore
if our souls be not that way redeemed, which the Scriptures reueile, which is
by the death and blood of Christ; they are not redeemed at all. And being not
at all redeemed, I would feign know by the best of your skill, what benefit of
Redemption our bodies shall or can have, more then the bodies of Infidels. Yea
set that redemption aside, which the Scriptures attribute to the death and
blood of Christ, and neither body nor soul can be saved, but infidelity and
the wages thereof, I mean damnation both of soul and body, prevail in all
men. So that you were not well in your wits, when with such an heat and huffe
you cried out Trea. pa. 23. li. 13.
What a Pradoxe is it, yea what impiety? But I must choose whether I will
speak this sophistically or absurdly, you say.] Is it any sophistry or
absurdity to speak as the Spirit of God speaks in the Scriptures? Your
MERE blood of Christ is indeed absurd Sophistry: for you imagine by that
word, that Christ shed his blood for our sins without any meritorious action
or passion of the soul concurring, which in the Redeemer of the world was so
impossible, as nothing more. If I speak otherwise than the Scriptures speak,
take your pleasure at it, so you bring reason for it; but when I keep my self
within the compass of their speech, your a^ouching that I speak
Sophisticallie or absurdlie, reprocheth the Scriptures, whom I follow. In
either of those points which you impugn, as that our souls are redeemed by
the blood of Christ, and that our bodies have not redemption in this life, I
have the Scriptures plainly precedent before me, and therefore except they
speak sophistically or absurdly, I in retaining their speech and sense can do
neither.

The difference betwixt the deaths of the faithful and infidels, is a thing
well The ^oly has not his redemption before the last day.
known to me, and approved by me; yet must the Apostles words stand true, that
in this life we have not the Redemption of our bodies, but we must wait for it
Acts 3. 21.
till the time that all things be restored. That Christ has already purchased
and obtained it for us by his death and passion, I make no doubt, as also that
we rest in hope assured of it; but Romans 8. 24.
hope which is seen, is not hope: and though the souls of the Saints retain
a firm faith and full expectance of Gods promise for the raising and Redeeming
of their bodies from corruption, and in the mean time discern and feel as
well the comfort that is in the death of Gods elect, as the great blessings and
benefits that follow their death; yet their bodies lying in dust have no show
nor sense thereof, much less have they that which Paul calls the Romans 8. v.
23.
Redemption of the body. From which words Saint Austen collecteth very truly,
Aug. de nuptijs and concupiscentia li. 1. c. 1^
Si Redemptio corporis nostri secundum Apostolum expectatur, profecto quod
expectatur adhuc speratur, nondum tenetur. If the Redemption of our body by the
Apostles doctrine must be waited for, that which is expected is still hoped
for, but not yet obtained. Take then the Redemption of the body for the
incorruption of the same, as Paul does, whom in that point I followed, and tell
me what benefit of incorruption (which is the word you so much storm at) the
bodies of the faithful have more then the bodies of infidels. You range aside
as your manner is, to the ceasing of sin in the godly, and their resting from
labors, as also the entrance of their souls into heaven; as if the bodies of
the wicked did sin in their graves, or were tossed with troubles when they
were dead and rotten, or in the Saints your sight did not serve you to
distinguish their souls from their bodies. For when I say as Paul says, their
bodies have not yet redemption; you reply, their souls after death have an
entrance into heaven. Even so, when I say, that the death of the body to the
saints is a part of that wrath, curse, and punishment which God inflicted on
all mankind for their sin in Adam, as shall after (God willing) more largely
appear; you oppose the benefits which God of his peculiar goodness toward
his children, has reserved for them, after they have obediently and patiently
submitted themselves to his divine pleasure, in bringing their bodies to
corruption for the sin that dwells in them. And thus by your mangling of
matters you confound in the godly their souls with their bodies, and in God
himself his justice against sin with his mercy toward his own. You might
have learned of S. Austen rightly to sever them as he does, though you cross
him in this, as in most of the things that are in question betwixt us. Aug.
contra dua^ epistolas Pelagianor. li. 4. ca4.
Quamuis bonis conferatur per mortem plurimum boni (vnde nonnulli etiam de bono
mortis congruenter disputaverunt) tamen and hinc quae praedicanda est nisi
misericordia Dei, quod in bonos vsus conuertitur poena peccati? Though much
good come to the godly by death; (whereupon some have accordingly written of
the benefits of death) yet what else in this must we acknowledge but the mercy
of God, that the punishment of sin is turned to good uses? And so that
ancient writer of the book Hypognosticon amongst S. Austens works: Hypognosti.
li. 1. ca. 3.
Vt moriantur homines poena peccati est, vt reuertantur ad vitam Domini
miserantis est: That men die is the punishment of (their) sin, that they
return to life again is the Lords mercy.

Defenc. page 47. li. 1.
Before you depart from this point, that not the blood of Christ nor his flesh
without respect to the merit of his whole soul, was the full price of
redemption, you will show how sundry of Both body and soul must suffer in
Christ.
the ancient Fathers do agree with you sufficiently in this matter, though
afterward in my book I seem to bring them against you.] If you had Fathers
to witness your fancies of Christ's suffering the death of the soul and
pains of hell, you would soon reckon them and more regard them, than now you
do, when they directly gainsay your late device of a new kind of redemption,
which the Scriptures never specify. These Fathers I brought not against you,
as you imagine, not perceiving what makes with you nor what against you. In
show these places seemed to make against me, and to disclaim that assertion
which I concluded out of the Scriptures, that the blood of Christ redeemed and
sanctified both our bodies and souls. Lest therefore the simple should stumble
at any such sayings of the Fathers, not knowing their meanings, I brought them
to expound them, and to let the Reader see that indeed I dissented not from
them: but confessed, as they intended, that in Christ's suffering for sin the
whole man, that is, body and soul, must be joined together. And if any part
of Christ's humane nature were wholly freed and exempted from suffering, that
part in us was not fully ransomed. By which they never meant that Christ's soul
must have several sufferings for our souls, and his body likewise for our
bodies; but as Adam sinned in both jointly, so the punishment of sin, which
Christ undertook for us, must be felt jointly in both, and if either part in
Christ's sufferings were untouched, some part in us was vnrestored. This to be
the true meaning of those Fathers, and all that their words must infer, if
they will speak truth, and agree with themselves, as no doubt they do, your
self is a witness sufficient against your self. In defense of your doctrine
you say: Treat. page 22. li. 21.
It is most false, that we precisely say, that Christ's body satisfied for our
bodies, and his soul for our souls, yea each of them in a several and
distinct kind of satisfying: which thing we never meant, but acknowledge the
sufferings of the whole man Christ do satisfy for us wholly, without any such
precise partition.] What you dare not affirm, because it is false and
repugnant to the Scriptures, I hope you will not impose on the Fathers, so long
as their words conclude no such thing. They say precisely Christ Irenaeu^. li.
5. cap. 1.
gave his flesh (to be a redemption) for our flesh, and his soul likewise (to
be a redemption) for our souls, Whereby they mean no distinct sufferings of
Christ's soul for our soul, nor of his body for our bodies; but a joint
suffering of both for both, which you call the sufferings of the whole man
Christ for us wholly. So far we agree; you acknowledging Cyril. de fide ad
Theodosium.
mine exposition of the Fathers to be such as you do not, nor dare not
impugn: for otherwise you must make them contradict both the Scriptures, and
themselves which they never meant, if they should say that our souls are not
cleansed, redeemed, and sanctified by the blood of Christ: What now infer you
farther out of their words?

Defenc page 47. li. 27.
Mark well how these Fathers do not say that Christ gave his life for a
ransom only (as you would construe it) but even his very soul for our
souls.] You are a worthy Clerk if you understand not, that nothing but the
very soul of man is the life of his body, and therefore Christ in giving his
life for us, must needs give his very soul for us. The one of them does not
exclude the other, as you vainly collect, but implies the other, as by the
usual speeches of the Scriptures, and general consent of all Interpreters
old and new may soon appear. Matt. 2. v 20
They are dead (says the Angel to Joseph) that sought the childs soul;
meaning Herod that went about to destroy Christ in his cradle. Matt. 6. v. 25
Be not pensive for your soul (says our Savior) what ye shall eat or what ye
shall drink. Is not your soul of more value then meat? Meat and drink
maintain life, and so continue the soul in the body, otherwise they are no
way needful for the soul. Matthew. 10. verse. 39.
He that loses his soul for my sake, (says Christ) shall save it. How can a
man lose his soul for Christ, but by laying down his life for Christ? There
shall be no loss Acts 27. verse. 22.
of any man's soul among you, but of the ship, said Paul to them that sailed
with him; which was performed in that they Ibidem v 44. Philip. 2 30.
came all safe to land. So of Epaphroditus Paul says; for the work of Christ
he was near unto death, not regarding his Soul. Nothing is more often in the
Scriptures then for life to use the name of Soul, which is the cause of life;
and by the soul to express life, which is a necessary consequent of the Soul
remaining in the body, as death is of the Soul departing from the body. This
kind of speech so familiar with the Hebrews, and so frequent in the old and
new Testament, our Savior keeps, when he speaks of his own death. ^ohn.
10. verse. 11.
The good sheepeheard (says Christ) lays down his soul for his sheep. I
am the good sheepeheard, and Verse. 15.
lay down my soul for (the) sheep. Verse. 17.
Therefore the Father loves me, because I lay down my Soul to take it
again. Verse. 18.
No man takes it from me, but I lay it down of my self. As also when he
said; Matthew. 20.
the Son of man came to serve, and to give his soul for the ransom of many;
he intended no more then when he said, I lay down my soul for the sheep,
which must needs be for the ransom of the sheep. So the Prophet foretold that
Christ should Esaias. 53.
power out his soul unto death, and make it an offering for sin; which 1.
Ioh. 3.
love of God we know by this, (says John) that he laid down his soul for us.

If ancient Fathers and learned expositors may be heard concurring with the
Scriptures, and observing this in the Scriptures, we want neither old nor new,
all confessing it to be a case most clear, that by dying for us Christ laid
down his Soul, and gave it for us. Christ Athanas. de incarnat. Christi
contra Apo^inarium.
bowing his head (says Athanasius) and yielding up the spirit which was
within his body, that is his soul, declared whereof he spoke (this,) I lay
down (my soul) for my sheep. Austen; August. de sermon Domini in monte. li.
1. cap. 15.
the Soul is put for the life, as where it is said, he that hates not his
soul, can not be my Disciple. And likewise is not the soul more worth then
meat? that is, this life, for which meat is needful. And (so) that which
Christ says, he will lay down his soul for his sheep, by which he means
his life, when he pronounces that he will die for us, Ambrose; Ambros. in
Psalm. 118. sermo. 20.
Christ took upon him the person of a sheepeheard, and said; a good
sheepeheard lays down his soul for his sheep. Ideoque pro rationali grege
seipsum passioni corporis non negauit, and therefore for his reasonable flock
he yielded himself to the passion, (or death) of his body. Cyrill. When Christ
Cyril. in Ioh. li. 9. ca. 2.
might have declined the rage of the Jews, and the gibbet of the cross, he so
loved his, that he refused not to die for the life of all. And that this is
most perfect charity, Idem in Iohannem li. 10. ca. 22.
I will cite our Savior himself for a witness (where he says;) greater love
has no man, then to lay down his soul for his friends. By all this Christ
teaches his Disciples to be so far from shunning dangers and troubles for
the salvation of men, that the death of the flesh must not be refused; for even
to that does charity stretch. Fulgentius an other of the Fathers, on whom you
would feign fasten your error of Christ's redeeming our souls by the death of
his soul, and our bodies by the death of his body; not only notes when and
how Christ laid down his soul for us, but why that phrase is applied to
Christ's death, and to all theirs, that die willingly for love, not necessarily
upon constraint. Fulgent. ad Thrasimundum li. 3.
The whole man (Christ) laid down his soul, when his soul departed, his
flesh dying on the cross. And so again, Ibidem.
Christ dying in the flesh, laid down his Soul; and showing the difference
betwixt delivering the body to death and giving or laying down the soul, He
says Ibidem.
Where love is not, the body is said to be delivered, but not the soul to be
laid down; as the vessel of election plainly testifies, If I give my body to
be burnt, and have no love, it avails me nothing. (Here Paul) declares,
that without love the body may be yielded, but not the soul laid down. For
where he purposes to signify the pureness of his love, he thus writes to
the Thessalonians. Our goodwill was to bestow on you not only the Gospel of
God, but even our own souls; and to prove this an effect of his love he
adds, because ye were dear unto us. So that it is proved by manifest
witness of Scripture, that there wants love, where the body only is laid
down to death, but there is charity, where the soul is laid down together
with the body. Beda. Beda in Euangelium Johan. cap. 10.
Ponere ergo animam, mori est. Sic and Apostolus Petrus Domino dixit, animam
pro te ponam, id est, pro te moriar carne. To lay down the Soul is to die. So
the Apostle Peter said to Christ, I will lay down my Soul for thee, that is,
I will die in the flesh for thee. Ibidem.
A good sheepeheard (says Christ) lays down his soul for his sheep. He
did, that he taught; he performed, that he commanded, he laid down his Soul
for his sheep; and showed us a way to contemn death, which we must follow,
and a pattern after which we must be Printed, which is first to extend our
outward works of mercy toward his sheep; then if need be to offer our death
for them.

The later writers are all of the same mind, and expound those words of our
Savior, the Son of man came to serve, and to give his soul a ransom for
many; and I lay down my soul for my sheep; to have none other sense, then
that he would die for us, as the Fathers before them did expound the same.
Erasmus in his paraphrase expressing our Saviors meaning in both places says
in the person of Christ; Eras. paraphra. in Matthew. cap. 20.
Therefore I came even to serve the welfare of all, in so much that I think it
no burden to give my life; by the loss of one soul to redeem many. And
again; Idem in Ioh. hannis. cap. 10.
Therefore my Father loves me singularly as his Son, because of mine own
accord I bestowed my life for the safety of my Fathers flock. Bullinger
likewise in the person of our Savior; Bullingerus in Mat. ca. 20.
I came to serve the good of all, and that which is far greater, I came into
this world to give my life for sinners. And so, Idem in Ioh. cap. 10.
I yield my self to death, and even to the death of the cross, that my sheep
believing in me, may live by my death. And alleging and relying on Saint
Austens words on the same place, he adds out of Austen. To lay down the
soul is to die. So Peter the Apostle said to his Master; I will lay down my
soul for thee, that is I will die for thee. Attribute this to the flesh, for
when the soul goes out of the flesh, and the flesh remains without a soul,
then is a man said to lay down his soul. What says the Evangelist? Christ
bowing his head gave up the Ghost; this is, to lay down the soul. Musculus;
Christ declares what his Muscul. in Matthew. ca. 20.
ministry is; even to redeem mortal men, and the chiefest degree of this
ministry is; that he would give his soul (for them.) Then are we redeemed by
the only begotten Son of God, and that dearly, even with his own death.
For the Lord of heaven and earth humbled himself unto death, and that unto a
most shameful death. What was more vile or more abject in the world, then the
death of the cross? And in the person of Christ; Idem in Ioh. cap. 10.
Therefore my Father loves me because I lay down my soul; that is, because I
die for (my) sheep. Calvin upon those words of Christ, I came to give my
soul a Redemption for many: Calvin. in Matthew. ca. 20.
Therefore Christ mentions his death, that he might withdraw his Disciples
from a perverse imagination of an earthly kingdom. In the mean time the force
and fruit of his death is aptly and rightly expressed, whiles he affirms his
life to be the price of our Redemption. Whence it follows that the price of
our reconciliation with God, is no where found but in the death of Christ; and
so; It is no marvel that Christ Idem in Ioh. cap. 10.
affirms himself to be therefore loved (of his Father,) because he esteems
our salvation dearer then his own life. Ibid.
He would by this arm his Disciples, least seeing him soon after to be carried
to death, they should faint in heart, as if he were oppressed by his enemies,
but rather acknowledge it to be the wonderful providence of God, that he
should die to redeem the flock. Gualter; Gualtherus in Matthew. cap. 20.
Christ (says he) came to give his soul to be the price of Redemption for
many. This passes all offices, that men may yield one to another. For as him
self says, no man has greater love then this, to give his soul for his
friends. But he vouchsafes to die for his enemies. And dying for us he
bestowed life on us, because his death was a ransom sufficient for the sins
of the world. And so; A good sheepeheard (says Christ) lays down his soul
for his sheep.b As if he should have said, who can deny him to be a good
sheepeheard that so Idem in Ioh. cap. 10. homilia. 97.
much loves his sheep, as not to refuse to redeem their safety with the
loss of his own life? Ibidem.
And because the Son of God has exposed (or yielded) his life for us, who
can doubt, but he has satisfied abundantly for us? Vitus Theodorus. Vitus
Theodorus in Mat. cap. 20.
Christ says the son of man came to minister, and to give his life for the
Redemption of all. That surely is the chiefest and truest love and service,
when a man serves his enemies with body and life. And likewise in the person
of Christ. Idem in Ioh. cap. 10.
I alone am the good sheepeheard and lay down my soul for my sheep; that is,
by my death men are delivered from eternal death.

I ask now the Christian Reader whether he think it a shift of mine, when
Christ Christ's Soul suffered, but died not for us.
gave his soul for us, or our souls, for me to say, that he gave it by the
loss of his life, in such sort as the Evangelists describe; or whether the
Scriptures and Fathers together with the later writers do not consent with me
in the same exposition of Christ's words. This conclusion then that Christ gave
his soul for our souls, does not infer that he had distinct times, places,
or manners, of suffering or dying for our souls and then for our bodies; (that
is erroneous and injurious to the death of Christ and openly disclaimed even by
the Discourser himself) but that in suffering death on the cross, by which
his soul was separated from his body after long and sharp torments first
endured in his body; his soul was the chief or rather the only patient, that
discerned and sustained the bitterness of the pains, and perceived the cause
for which, and the counsel of God from whence, all that affliction was
ordained and decreed. For as we sinned in body and soul, but chiefly in soul,
so Christ's death for our Redemption must grieve both body and soul, but
chiefly the soul, which was joined with the body in suffering death; that both
soul and body might be redeemed: and the pain thereof proportioned to the
soul, as the pleasure of sin chiefly delighted the soul. More then this, no
Father ever meant, and this is no way denied by me. You would feign wring in a
conceit of your own into their words, which is mainly and directly against
their words and resolutions in all other places, and therefore which of us two
deserves best the name of a shifter, let the Reader judge.

The Fathers Defenc. pa. 47. li. 30.
strive to express an exact proportion, so far as was possible between
Christ and us; first in the parts that suffered in Christ, and are saved in us:
Ibid pa. 48. li. 3.
Next in that which Christ suffered for us, and which we are saved from
thereby.] They justly conclude, that no parts of our nature are saved in us,
but such as Christ assumed into the unity of his person; and therefore in
Christ's sufferings there must be body and soul, before they could be humane
sufferings or auailable for us. As 1. Cor. 15.
by man came death, so by man came the resurrection of the dead. But that they
do or would affirm, that we are saved from no more then Christ suffered for
us, or that we are wholly freed from all those kinds of pains, which he
suffered for our sakes, this is a false and fantastical proportion of your
own inuenting, it is no part of their meaning. Sundry things should we have
suffered for sin, as the death of the soul, and the death of the damned,
besides reiection from all grace and bliss, confusion, malediction, and many
other terrors and torments of conscience, which by no means these Fathers
apply to Christ; but in evident and vehement words avouch the contrary. Christ
likewise suffered wrong, reproach, shame, pain, and death of the body, from
which we are not freed; yea rather we must have fellowship with his
afflictions, and be Philip. 3. 10.
conformed unto his death, before we shall be partakers of the comforts that
are in him, or of his resurrection. So that your running to proportions of your
own compounding, when you should bring sound probations for that you defend,
is mad Music, though best becoming the discords of your doctrine.

Defenc. page 47. l. 32.
As we are saved not in our bodies only, nor only in the external sensitive
part of our souls (wherein stands that suffering with and by our bodies) but
we are saved, redeemed, and sanctified in our whole spirit and understanding
also; even so (by their verdict) Christ suffered for us not the bodily and
outward sufferings by Sympathy only, but he suffered for us even in his mind
also. Now this is directly against your present assertion.] A man can not
readily tell, whether your assertion in this place be more false, absurd, or
idle. The Scripture teaches us, that a man has but two substances, of which
he consists, a mortal and visible, which is his body; an immortal and
invisible, which is his soul. Our Savior, who best knew what man had, says
as much: Matt. 10.
Fear not them, which kill the body, but can not kill the soul; fear him
rather, that can destroy soul and body in hell. The names of these parts are
sometimes varied, and sometimes divided into sundry powers and faculties, but
the parts themselves cannot be increased. Solomon speaking of man's death,
says: Eccles. 12.
Dust goes to the earth as it was, (meaning the body) and the Spirit
returns to God that gave it, (meaning the Soul.) Of a Virgin Paul says, 1.
Corin. 7.
she cares for the things of the Lord, that she may be holy both in body and
spirit; that is, in body and soul. And writing to the Thessalonians the same
Apostle says that their 1 Thessalonians. 5. verse. 23.
whole Spirit, and Soul, and Body may be kept blameless unto the coming of
the Lord Jesus Christ. Of this place diverse have diversely thought. In 1 Thessalonians. 5. verse. 23.
Chrysostom, Theodoret, Ambrose, Jerome, Oecumenius, and Theophylact,
commenting on these words, take the spirit for the grace of Gods spirit,
wherewith our minds are lightened and renewed; and indeed sometimes Paul uses
the word spirit, for the gifts of the spirit, as where he says, 1 Thessalonians. 5.
Quench not the spirit; and calls them our spirits, as the 1. Cor. 14.
Spirits of the Prophets are subject to the Prophets. Howbeit Athanasius de
commune essentia patru filij and spir. san^ts.
Athanasius, Tertullian de resurrectione ca^.
Tertullian, Epiphan in Anchorato.
Epiphanius, Nyssenu^de de opificio homin^. cap. 8.
Gregory Nyssene, August de origin animae ad Vincentium. l. ^. cap. 22.
Augustine, In 1 Thessalonians. c 5 v 23.
Bid, and others, take here the spirit for the understanding and mind of man;
as also In 1 Thessalonians. c 5 v 23.
Calvin, In 1 Thessalonians. c 5 v 23.
Zanchius and In 1 Thessalonians. c 5 v 23.
Beza do; who refer the soul here spoken of, to the will and affections of
man; not that any of them makes two souls in man, which were most absurd, but
that by those names they note two different faculties or functions in one and
the same substance of man's soul.

Come now to your words and see how handsomely you proportion them, either to
your Authors, or to the truth, or to your purpose. Not one of the Fathers
which you cite, names the mind of Christ, but only his soul and his body,
save Nazianzene; who speaks not of Christ's suffering in the mind, but of his
sanctifying the same, by assuming it in his incarnation. Let himself explane
his own words in the very same place. Nazianzepistoia. 1. ad Ciedonium.
Our mind (some say) is condemned. And what our flesh? is not that also
condemned? then either cast away man's flesh (from Christ) for sin, or admit
man's mind, that it may be saved. For if Christ take the worse part (of man) to
sanctific it by his incarnation, shall he not take the better part, that it may
be sanctified, (...), by his assuming of man's nature? I speak not this, as if
it might not safely be granted, that Christ's soul suffered as well by his
mind, as by his sense, and you nothing the nearer to your purpose of his
suffering hell pains in mind from the immediate hand of God; but to let the
Reader see how you catch at Fathers for an advantage without any show of their
words, and when they make against you, you reject with disdain the whole array
of them.

Your dividing of man into his parts, and your resolutions thereupon, are more
absurd, and have neither truth, learning, nor common understanding in them. Of
man (to show your exactness) you make these parts, ^e body, the external
sensitive part of the soul, the whole spirit, and understanding also. You name
here the body, the soul, and the spirit, but so untowardly, that neither your
self, nor any man else can tell how to make them agree. Has the soul, if you
will needs distinguish it from the spirit, no more parts or powers to suffer or
to be saved, but the external sensitive part? will you take the soul to be
all one with the spirit, and so make the whole spirit, as much as the whole
soul? But the Apostle reckons the 1 Thessalonians. 5.
whole spirit, the soul and the body, (whose words you would seem to follow)
and so seuereth the soul from the spirit. But not by the external sensitive
part as you do. Again, why add you the understanding also after the whole
spirit? As if it were no part thereof, but a different thing from the spirit?
But this is your skill, when you come to any matter of importance, to wrap it
in ambiguous and confused terms, that it shall be more masterie to understand
you, then to refute you. And how comes it about by your Philosophy, that the
sufferings of the soul by and from the body pierce no farther, then into the
external senses of the soul? Do the sufferings of the body offend and
afflict the powers only, or the substance also of the soul? Is not the very
substance of the Soul passible and punishable as well by the powers of sense,
as by the affections, and understanding? The actions, passions, powers, and
faculties of the soul, are they not all grounded on and seated in the
substance of the soul, so that from thence all the actions thereof must
proceed, therein all the passions thereof must be received, and thereon all the
faculties thereof depend? Are you so learned in logic, that you will bring us
passions without a subject, or powers and faculties without a substance?
Whether it be therefore by the understanding, will, affections, or sense, that
the soul suffers; the substance thereof suffers by those powers and
means, and not any part thereof; for so much as the substance of the soul is
not diuisible into parts as being a spirit, though the powers and faculties
thereof may be distinguished, and called parts. Then is it a strange position
of yours that the sensitive part suffers, or that the understanding
suffers, and not the soul by either of them, when indeed the substance of
the soul suffers by or from her power or faculties of sense, understanding,
and will, which are the means that God has made to impresse pain on the
soul. For the understanding, which you call the mind, is no more a several
substance in the soul, then the power of sense is: and the soul not only
discerns particular things by her faculty of sense, as she does consequent
and general things by her faculty of reason, but by the ears and eyes she
hears the word, and beholds the works of God, whence comes information of
faith and truth.

Of the understanding Epiphanius says. Epiphanius contra Here^im. 77.
(...) etc. I think not our mind to be any substance of it self, neither has
any of the children ofthe Church so thought; but to be an effectual power or
operation given of God, and abiding in us. Of the sense Tertullian says.
Tertullian de anima. cap. 8.
Anima perinde per corpus corporalia sentit, quemadmodum per animam
incorporalia intelligit. The soul perceives corporal things by the sense,
even as she does understand incorporall things by the mind. And showing how
both those powers depend on the soul, he adds. Sit nunc and potior sensu
intellectus, dummodo and ipse propria vis animae quod and sensus. Let the
understanding excel the sense, so that it be a proper faculty of the Soul,
as the sense is. Of the passions of Christ's Soul Fulgentius writes;
Fulgentius ad Trasimundum cap. 3.
Nunc ostendendum nobis est passionem tristitiae, maeroris, taedij and timoris,
ad animae substantiam proprie pertinere. Now must we show that the passion of
sorrow, heaviness, and loathing of heart, and fear (which our Savior felt)
pertain properly to the substance of the soul. And at the length concluding
that Ibidem.
the flesh of it self can neither have life, nor sense, nor sorrow, nor
desire, nor fear, nor mourning, he says; Ibidem.
Haec ergo cuncta in anima, quam susceperat, pertulit Christus, vt veram
totamque in se cum suis infirmitatibus hominis demonstraret accepti
substantiam. All these (passions) Christ endured in his soul which he took,
that he might show in himself THE TRVE AND WHOLE SVBSTANCE of a man with his
infirmities.

The purpose for which you pretend so many Fathers is as idle, as all the rest:
for Christ's Soul suffered by all her powers but not the death of the Soul.
the Soul of Christ might suffer by her senses, by her affections, by her
understanding and will, and yet not suffer the pains of hell, nor the death of
the soul, which is your doctrine. Though therefore the Fathers do say that
the soul of Christ suffered in his death and passion, which is a thing I never
doubted of, much less called in question; yet neither avouch they, it suffered
your hell pains, neither from the immediate hand of God, as your device
leads; which things are as strange to them, as those they never heard of.

Defenc. pa. 48. li. 23.
By the Fathers, Christ suffered exactly all and whatsoever sorrows and
pains, which we should have suffered, as well spiritual as corporal, as well
in all the powers of the soul subject to suffering, as in that which suffered
always with and from the body. This if you would prove by the Fathers
themselves, and not by your false translating and misapplying their words,
which otherwise have no such thing, you said somewhat. You have raked together
some places alleged Sermo. pa. 25.
formerly by me, or formerly refuted by me, and out of them you would make
fresh shows, if you could tell how. There is only one place of Cyrill, taken
out of my Sermons by you, (as you do the rest of your authorities) which has
general terms apt to be wrested by you, and forced against the Authors mind,
which you forget not to strain to the uttermost: the rest are miserably
racked, without cause or color, from the Fathers minds and words. Cyrill
says, Cyrillus Thesaur. li. 10. cap. 3.
Omnia Christus perpessus est, vt nos ab omnibus liberaret. Christ suffered all
things, that he might free us from all; where the word ALL is found, which you
make the ground of all your descant: but thereby it plainly appears you take
not the pains to read the Fathers words in the places where they are written,
but rashly catch at them to serve your turn, without all respect to the
antecedents or consequents, which would declare the writers meaning. In that
Chapter whence these words are taken, Cyrill treats not of the punishments
which Christ suffered for our sins, but of the passions and infirmities of
our nature; ALL WHICH Christ received, and suffered to rise in himself, that
they might be repressed by him, and our nature reformed. And therefore in those
words, Christ suffered all to free us from all; Cyrill evidently means all
the natural infirmities and passions of our flesh. And those are his express
words twice or thrice in that Chapter. Cyrill. Thesaur^. li. 10. cap. 3.
When thou hear, (says he) that Christ wept, feared, and sorrowed,
acknowledge him to be a true man, and ascribe these things to the nature of
man. For Christ took a mortal body subject to all the passions of our
nature, sin always excepted. And again. Cyrillus ibid.
How comes it to pass, that these men know not, that all these things must
be applied to man's nature (in Christ) which he truly took unto him with all
the passions thereof, but still without sin. And the very recollection of the
words which you stand on, conuinceth Cyrill spoke of the natural passions and
infirmities of our flesh. For when he had exemplified his general words,
Christ suffered all to free us from all, by death, fear, and sorrow, which are
natural to our corrupt condition; he concludes, Ibidem.
and it a singulas passiones carnis fuisse in Christo absque peccato commotas
inuenies, vt commotae vincerentur, and natura nostra reformaretur ad melius.
AND LIKEWISE ALL THE PASSIONS (or affections) of our flesh shall thou find
moved in Christ, but without sin, that being moved they might be repressed,
and our nature reformed to the better. What is this to hell pains, which I
trow are no natural infirmities or affections in man, or to the proper
sufferings of the soul, which you would hence establish; since here is no
mention but of the natural infirmities and affections of the flesh, which
Cyrill calls the passions thereof, as both Divines and Philosophers do?

' Thus I take Bernards meaning to be (when he says) Christ spared not
himself, who Defenc. pa. 48. li. 12.
knows how to spare his.] Your taking may soon show you to be a wilful
mistaker, but it concludes nothing for your cause. Does Bernard say that
Christ suffered hell pains, and therein spared not himself? you would feign
have him say so, but he is as far from it, as you are near it. Bernard in
that Chapter which you cite, but never saw; (for you went no farther for all
your authorities, then my sermons,) speaks of the sixth and seventh time
Christ shed his blood for us; and when he comes to the piercing of Christ's
hands and his feet with spikes of iron to fasten him to the cross; wondering
at Christ's patience and love toward us, that endured such things for us, he
says; God which either Bernard. de passione Domini. cap. 41.
shortneth, lightneth, or takes from his servants the force of their torments,
did in nothing ease unto himself the wine press of his passion: he spared not
himself, that knows how to spare his. Does this conclude that Christ
suffered the pains of hell? or that he shed his blood unto death for us, not
sparing himself, (from that, or, in that, which he suffered) though it were
painful and grievous to him? But, I my self confess that Christ S^rm. pa. 7.
suffered and endured all to the uttermost with exact obedience and patience.]
Even as Bernard favored your untoward fancies, and said nothing for them, so
do I: but do either Bernards words or mine import, that Christ suffered all,
which else we should have suffered, as you enterlace Cyrils words to make them
sound somewhat to your purpose? are you so seely that you can not, or so sly
that you will not see the plain seames of humane speech? If a man should say
you affirm all things boldly, you prove all things weakly, you translate al
things corruptly: Do his words imply, that you translate Euclide and
Aristotle? that you prove the roundnesse of the earth, and the bigness of the
Sun? or that you affirm the sea burns, and the Moon melts? Is it not
the usual course of al speech and speakers, when they express how things are
done, to restrain the word all with a relation to the same person and action,
whereof they spoke? as you affirm all things (which you affirm) boldly, you
prove all, (that you prove) weakly; and you translate all (whatsoever you
translate) corruptly. Does not the Scripture observe the like? The people said
of Christ, Mark. 7.
he has done all things well. Will you infer, that Christ made ships, built
Towers, cast Lead, and did whatsoever, because he did all things well? or did
they intend, that whatsoever he did, he did it well? John. 1.
The true light says Saint John lightneth every man, that comes into the
world. Where if you take all men without exception, you plant a palpable error
upon Saint John's words; if you restrain them to all (that are lightened) his
speech is a manifest truth in Christ, and an excellent honor to Christ. So
said I of Christ, that he suffered all, (that he suffered) with exact obedience
and patience; not expressing there what he suffered, but how he suffered, to
wit obediently and patiently. Which words of mine give you no great cause of
advantage, if you look well unto them, and abuse them not after your idle
manner. But such poor shifts you are forced to seek to set some color on your
cause; which otherwise would bewray it self to want all good grounds and
proofs.

As you deal with me, so you do with Tertullian, Ambrose, Ierom, Cyprian, and
Cyrill, whose words partly you mistranslate, partly you misconster, and build
upon them what best pleases your self without any precedence or sequence of
their text. Tertullian says; Tertul. aduers. Praxeam cap. 30.
sic reliquit, dum non parcit. So God left his Son, whiles he spared him not.
If this make for you, why quote you not the Apostle Paul as one of your
partners, who spoke the word before Tertullian, and whom Tertullian cites by
name for that word? God Romans 8.
spared not his own Son, says Paul, but delivered him for us all. This
place you baulked; because it expounds Gods not sparing his Son by
delivering him; (for God spared not his Son, but delivered him; that is, God
did not spare him from delivering;) and also for that it excludes your
imagination of Gods immediate hand tormenting the soul of his Son, with the
substance of hell pains. For if God delivered his Son for us all, he
delivered him to others, and not to himself; and consequently your dream of
Gods immediate hand inflicting hell pains on the soul of his Son, is
against the Apostles words, God delivered his Son. Which Christ himself
expounds very often in the Gospel, saying; Matthew. 17.
The Son of man shall be delivered into the hands of men, and they shall kill
him. And again, Matthew. 26. verse. 2.
The Son of man shall be delivered to be crucified; and immediately before
his apprehension; Matthew. 26. verse. 45.
Behold the hour is come, the Son of man is delivered into the hands of
sinners. This delivering of Christ into the hands of men to be crucified, was
the not sparing him, which the Apostle meant; and was that for saking, which
Christ testified on the Cross, as Tertullian thinks. Tertul. aduers.
Praxeam. cap. 30.
Filium dereliquit, dum hominem eius tradit in mortem. Hoc and Apostolus
sensit, scribens, si pater Filio non pepercit. Sic reliquit, dum non parcit;
sic reliquit, dum tradit. Ceterum non reliquit pater filium, in cuius manibus
Filius spiritum suum posuit. Denique posuit, and statim obijt. Spiritu enim
manente in carne, caro omnino mori non potest. Ita relinqui a patre, mori fuit
filio. God left (or forsook his Son (as Christ complained on the Cross)
whiles he delivered his humane nature unto death. This the Apostle meant when
he wrote, if God spared not his Son. So God left him, whiles he spared him
not; so God left him, whiles he delivered him. Otherwise the Father forsook
not the Son, into whose hands the Son commended his spirit. He laid it
down and presently died. For while the spirit abides in the flesh, the flesh
can not die at all. Then to be left of the Father, was as much in the Son,
as to die. Here are Tertullians words in order as they stand. Where first he
makes the Son to die, when he laid down his soul into his Fathers hands.
This death, by which the soul of Christ departed from his body, was that
delivering, that not sparing, which Paul meant; and that forsaking which Christ
spoke of on the cross. What find you here for the pains of Hell, or for the
proper sufferings of the soul? You may pervert any man's words, if you will,
but of them selves these are very coherent and evident.

In Ambrose you find more hold. He says: Minus contulerat mihi, nisimeum
suscepisset f Defenc. page 48. li. 17.
affectum. Christ had done less for me if he had not been (altogether)
affected, as I should have been.] Though you be no good concluder, yet are you
a notable translatour. For you can turn the English not only clean from, but
quite against the Latin. Where Ambrose says, Christ had done less for me,
(if taking my nature unto him) he had not also taken my (natural) affection
unto him) as fear, sorrow, and such like; you misconster affection for
punishment, and mine, that is naturally mine, for that which I should have
suffered in hell; and adding the word ( altogether) of your own, you make
Ambrose say; that Christ was altogether affected (that is punished in soul) as
I should have been, (in hell) if I had not been redeemed. But by what Grammar
does affectus signify hell pains? Fear, grief, and sorrow, are natural
affections in all men, and passions of the soul; they signify not in their
own nature the torments of the damned. How shall we know this to be Ambrose
meaning? He that has but half an eye, may see by that whole Chapter the
root of this sorrow, to be the infirmity of our nature in Christ, and the
cause thereof to be his compassion and pity had of us, and for us. The next
words to those which you bring, are. Ambros. in Luc. li. 10. de tristitia and
dolere Christ's.
Ergo pro me doluit, qui pro se nihil habuit quod doleret. And presently,
taedio meae infirmitatis afficitur. Christ therefore sorrowed for me, who had
nothing in him self for which he should sorrow; he is affected with the
tediousness of my infirmity. The tediousness of our infirmity affected him,
not the torments of hell suffered in his own soul. Ibidem.
Neque speciem incarnationis suscepit, sed veritatem. Debuit ergo and dolorem
suscipere, vt vinceret tristitiam, non excluderet. Christ took upon him not
the show, but the truth of our flesh. He was therefore to feel grief, (as a
consequent to our nature) that he might overcome sorrow, and not exclude it.
Ibidem.
Tristis est non ipse, sed anima. Suscepit enim animam meam, suscepit corpus
meum. Anima obnoxia passionibus. Christ was sorrowful not in person, but in
soul. For he took unto him my soul, and my body. Now the soul it is, that
is subject to passions. Is hell with you of late become a natural infirmity
and affection, that wheresoever you read either of these words, you straight
infer the pains of hell? The causes of Christ's sorrow will put all out of
doubt, and are plainly recited by Ambrose in the end of this Chapter, though
stiffly rejected by you, because they sort not with your conceits. Ibid.
Tristis videbatur, and tristis erat, non pro sua passione, sed pro nostra
dispersione. Christ seemed sorrowful, and indeed was sorrowful, not for his
own suffering, but for our dispersing. You say Christ's sorrow was for the
suffering of hell pains in his soul; Ambrose says in express words; Christ
sorrowed not for his own suffering: which of you twain shall we think best
understood Ambrose meaning? him self, or you? Christ, sorowed, says Ambrose,
Ambros. ibid.
for our dispersion; he sorrowed because he left us orphans, he sorrowed for
his persecutors. All these occasions of sorrow in Christ at the time of his
passion mentioned by Ambrose you utterly disauerre, and in spite of Ambrose
teeth, you will have the infirmity and affection of man's nature in Christ to
signify hell.

Yet Ierom shall help at a need, who says; Defenc. pa. 44. li. 20.
That which we should have borne for our sins, the same (Christ) suffered for
us.] You might have done well to have put quicquid for quod, as one of your
fellows has done alleging this place, that where Ierom would not say, Christ
suffered for us, whatsoever we should have suffered, your selves may speak it
in his name. Neither is it so strange a thing with you to translate all for
some. In the very next Page before, citing Ambrose words, hoc in se obtulit
Christus, quod induit; Christ offered that in him self, which he took (of
us;) you render it, Christ offered in sacrifice Defenc. pa. 47. li. 17.
ALL that which he assumed; which translation is evidently false, whatsoever
the illation be. This place of Ierom I have already answered in the Page 350.
conclusion of my Sermons; and but that the book happily will not always be
at hand, I would spend no more words therein. The particular can not hurt me, if
it be simply granted; and the general is not affirmed by Ierom. Howbeit Ierom
in plain speech presently expresses what he meant Christ suffered for us. By
this (says he) Hiero. in Esa. cap. 53.
it is manifest, that as Christ's body whipped and torn bare the printes of the
stripes and wrongs, so his soul truly sorrowed for us. What need we any
other exposition then his own, that Christ suffered for us smart of body and
grief of mind, which were due to us in this world where Christ suffered for
us, besides the torments of the next world, where Christ neither did, nor could
suffer any thing?

Cyprians words are far weaker for your purpose, and wider fro your matter. He
says, Christ was called sin, and a curse; Cypria. de passione Christi.
pro similitudine poenae, non culpae; for the likeness of punishment, not of
fault: LIKE is far less then the same. If therefore Christ's punishment were
but like, there is no necessity it should be the same. Again, when Cyprian
names the likeness of our punishment suffered by Christ on the cross; he
means the punishment of sin, that God inflicted on Adam, and all his
offspring in this life, where Christ suffered for us, as sorrow, shame,
reproach, pain, and death which were the punishments that God laid on Adams
transgression in this life. The death of the Soul Adam pulled on him self by
sinning; that Christ suffered not: the other God inflicted with his own mouth,
and by them accursed and punished sin in this world, reserving his terrible
and eternal judgments, which are the pains of hell, to an other time and
place, when the bodies of the wicked should be altered and abled to endure
those intolerable and everlasting torments, threatened, but not executed in this
world. The first kind of punishment due to all men in this life for sin,
Cyprian saw and knew full well, and by the Scriptures found that to be in
Christ on the Cross; the pains of hell Cyprian knew not, much less could he
be sure that Christ suffered them, since no such thing is mentioned in the
Scriptures. Let then the Reader judge, whether Cyprian were likely to speak of
that, which he knew and read, or rashly to pronounce that to be like, which he
neither knew nor read. But if Cyprian be the fittest man to declare his own
meaning, Cyprian even in that place speaks directly against your supposed
pains of hell, suffered in the soul of Christ on the Cross. Admiror te cruci
inter damnatos affixum, iam nec tristem, nec pauidum, Cypria. ibid.
sed suppliciorum victorem eleuatis manibus triumphantem de Amelec. I admire
thee, o Lord, being once fastened to the Cross amidst the condemned (thieves)
to be now neither sorrowful, nor fearful, but despising the punishments
(laid on thee) with thine hands lifted up to triumph over Amelec, (the enemies
of Gods people.) If Christ once fastened to the Cross had neither sorrow nor
fear, but a neglect of his pains, and a joyful triumph over all his foes, I
trust he felt not the pains of hell; which were very easy, if they brought
with them neither sorrow, nor fear, but rather contempt and triumph.

Christ feared before in the garden, you will say, and for fear or pain did
sweat blood.] That Cyprian remembers and explaineth, wherein you shall see
the difference betwixt his judgment and yours of Christ's sufferings. Cypria.
ibid.
Thou did Lord (says he) profess before thine Apostles thy self to be
sorrowful unto death, and for exceeding grief did power forth a bloody
sweat. Hearing this (in the gospel) I was utterly abashed. For who will not
fear, if be fear whom all things fear? His answer I will set down in
Latin, though it will be the longer, as well to let the Reader hear Cyprians
resolution in his own words, which many will desire, and to discharge my self
from all quarrels of mistranslating, whiles I sometimes seek to make that
plain to the simple, which in the text is more dark and obscure; as for
diverse other respects, which I will after mention, when Cyprians mind is fully
known. His words are, Cypria. de passione in initio.
Sed metus ille infirmitatis humanae communem exprimebat affectum, and
generalitatem omnium in carne viuentium hoc dolor vrgeri, and dissolutionem
corporeae spiritualisque naturae hac molestia non posse carere, and hanc poenam
vniuersae successioni Adam sine exceptione impositam, vt difficultas extremi
transit us timeretur. Hanc nemo anxietatem euasit, and nemo egrediente anima
sine amaritudine expirauit. But that fear (of thine o Lord) did express the
common affection of man's infirmity, and the general state of all living in
the flesh to be pressed with this sorrow; and that the separation of body and
soul can not be free from this grief, but this punishment is laid on all
Adams posterity without exception, that the difficulty of departing this life
should be feared: this woefulness no man ever escaped, neither did ever any man
breath out his soul without bitterness.

Here you may learn; first, whence Ambrose, who was a great follower of
Cyprian, took his words of humane infirmity and affection, and what he meant
by them. Secondly, that this is a punishment (which you deny) laid by God
himself on all mankind, to fear and feel death separating the soul from
the body. Thirdly, from this was no man ever exempted, but even Christ
himself, though he were free from that necessity, yet would he be partaker
of this our infirmity. Fourthly, that where on the cross Christ neither
feared nor sorrowed, but showed him self terrible to his persecutors, and a
conqueror of all their malice, and a triumpher over all their injuries, yet to
his Disciples in the garden he opened his affection incident to our nature,
thereby to confirm himself to be a true man by his taking as well our
infirmities, as our flesh. Lastly out of Cyprian in that Sermon you may learn,
that to Christ the Cypria. ibid.
sight of (God) his Father could not be formidable, that it was his Fathers
will the sacrifice of his flesh should begin with fear and sorrow, that he
sorrowed to heal our weakness, and feared to make us secure, by repressing
those infirmities in his own person, to cure them in us for ever after. All
these and many more good lessons you clean ouerslip in Cyprian, and broching a
new doctrine quite contrary to his, you lay violent hands on one poor word in
that whole treaty, which yet makes nothing for you; and as though you had
performed a worthy work, grossly to mistake the like for the same, you muster
Cyprian as a maintainer of your new made hell.

Defenc page 47. li. 24.
Say as Fulgentius says, and we ask no more. Quicquid fuit infirmitatis
animae, sine peccato suscepit and pertulit. Christ took upon him and suffered
whatsoever infirmity may be in the soul without sin.] I hope you will your
self accept the condition, which you offer to others, and I require no more.
But what is there in these words on which you so stoutly stand, and so
confidently crake, that helps your device forward? Grant them absolutely, and
what conclude you? The grief of hell pains suffered from the immediate hand
of God, is an infirmity of the soul, you must say; if you will say any thing
toward the matter you have in hand. But who ever said so, that knew his left
hand from his right? What passing dullness and surpassing drowsinesse is this,
to make the suffering of hell pains from the immediate hand of God an
infirmity of the soul? As if it were weakness in man, not to be stronger
then God; or imbecilitie, not to be able to resist his power? [ Fear and
sorrow are infirmities; and Fulgentius says whatsoever infirmity, that is
whatsoever fear, or sorrow may be in the soul, the same Christ took and
suffered.] These must be your collections, if you open your mouth to make any;
and these be so gross, that no boy would engage himself with them. For the
name of Infirmity does naturally note the special kinds thereof, by which
they differ from other things that are not infirmities; it does not import
either degrees, to which they may grow; or the causes, from whence they may
rise. Is it then any consequent, that if Christ took upon him all kinds of
infirmities, and passions of the soul, he must therefore undergo all degrees,
and all the causes of fear and sorrow, that may be in the soul? Christ did
fear, and Christ did sorrow; for those without question were infirmities of his
humane soul. Will it thence follow that Christ suffered all those dangers,
losses, harms, which men in this life do, and may fear? If these will no way
follow upon Fulgentius words, how will the pains of hell be thence derived,
which I utterly deny to be any infirmity in man's soul, since no creature is
so strong, though he were an Angel, as to decline, or resist the hand of God
in punishing? Fulgentius words therefore, that Christ took unto him every
infirmity of the soul, do not infer that Christ suffered every degree, or
every object of fear and sorrow, but only that he feared and sorowed, which
makes as much for your hell pains, as feathers do to rear a fortress.

The words of Fulgentius at your best advantage do you little good; his true
meaning does you far less. For going onward to debate this matter more at
large, he adds two conditions to the infirmities and affections of Christ's
soul: the one that they were natural, that is necessarily consequent to the
nature of man; the other that they were voluntary in Christ, though in us they
be necessary. These limitations are very often in that Book expressed, whence
your words are taken. Fulgentius de passione Domini ad Trasimundu^ lib. 3.
Animae tristitiam and perturbationem, quam voluntariam in anima Dei filius
habuit sic habuisse credatur, vt etiam ipsas humanae animae passiones, and
voluntate veras, and in veritate voluntarias non n^gemus. The sorrow and
trouble of soul which the Son of God had voluntarily in his soul, he must
be believed so to have had, that we done them not to be true, because they were
voluntary; nor to be voluntary, because they were true. This he makes
common to body and soul. Ibidem.
Quia verum hominem suscepit, ideo cunctas humanae naturae infirmitates veras
quidem, sed voluntarias in eadem veritate naturae duntaxat humanae sustinuit.
Because Christ took upon him to be a true man, therefore he sustained ALL the
true infirmities of man's nature, but yet voluntary in the truth of the same
nature only. If you know not what natural and voluntary passions in Christ's
manhood do mean, you may learn of Damascene, whom an adherent of yours much
esteems, and often alleges, though Damascene make nothing for his or your
purposes. We confess, says Damascene, that Christ took unto him Damascenus
orthodox. fides lib. 3. cap. 20.
ALL NATVRALL AND BLAMELESS passions. For he assumed the whole man, and all
that pertained to man, save sin. Natural and blameless passions are those,
which are not in our power, and whatsoever entered into man's life, through the
condemnation of (Adams) sin, as hunger, thirst, weakness, labor, weeping,
corruption, shunning of death, fear, agony, whence (came) sweat and drops of
blood. These things are in all men by nature. Christ therefore took all these
unto him, that he might sanctify them all. Howbeit our natural passions were
in Christ according to nature, and above nature. According to nature they were
stirred up in Christ, when he permitted his flesh to endure that which was
proper unto it. Above nature (they were in Christ) because nature in him did
never go^ before his will. For there was nothing forced in him, but all things
voluntary. When he would he hungered, when he would he thirsted, when he would
he feared; when he would he died. The natural infirmities and passions then,
which Christ took unto him, as Damascene teaches, were common to all men by
nature, and so are not the pains of hell; they were in this life, so a^ not
the other; they were sanctified, so cannot the torments of hell be; they were
voluntary, that is, they moved not in Christ, but at his own will. Wherefore
by Damascenes judgment, Christ did not suffer your hellish torture from the
immediate hand of God, by which he was wholly amazed and overwhelmed, as you
say, with the weight and anguish of them, which could not be with his will.

I have stood to Fulgentius words, more then which you did not ask; will you
now likewise be tried by Fulgentius testimony, whether you teach an error
exiled from all Christian hearts in his age? Or if you will not, your Reader
will soon perceive, that what was then rejected for an absurdity and
falsitie, (I will spare heavier terms till I come to fuller proofs) can not
now be professed as piety. Touching Christ's death by which we are redeemed,
that it had in it neither the death of the soul, nor the pains of hell,
Fulgentius is very plain even in the same book, where you would have him so
much forget himself, as to speak the contrary. Fulgentius ad Trasimundum lib.
3.
Quis ignoret Christum nec diuinitate, sed in solo corpore mortuum and
sepultum? Who can be ignorant (if he be a Christian) that Christ died and was
buried not in his divinity, but only in body? and again, Ibidem.
In morte solius carnis immortalis fuit. Christ was immortal, nothing dying in
him but his flesh. And so Ibidem.
Cum sola caro moreretur and resuscitaretur in Christo, filius Dei dicitur
mortuus. When only the flesh died and was raised again in Christ, yet the
Son of God is said to have died. And as though no repeating were susficient;
Ibidem.
In tota (humanitate) traditus idem Christus, secundum solam carnem mortuus,
secundum solam carnem de sepulcho surrexit. The same Christ delivered in his
whole (humanity) died in his flesh only, and rose again only in his flesh.
And least you should wrench aside, as you afterward do, that the name of
Christ's flesh contains soul and body; besides that the word body directly
excludes the soul, which can not be the body; and so does the burial and
resurrection of Christ, for so much as the soul of Christ neither was, neither
could be buried nor raised from the grave; Fulgentius in full and fair words
exempteth not only the deity, but the soul of Christ as well as the deity
from death. Fulgentius eodem libro.
Moriente carne non solum deitas, sed nec anima Christi potest ostendi
commortua. When Christ died in the flesh, neither can the godhead, nor the
soul of Christ be showed to have been also dead. And of hell pains he says,
Ibidem.
Dignum fuit, vt animam dolor non contigisset inferni, quam seruitus nequiuit
tenere peccati. It was a meet (and right) thing that the pains of hell should
not touch that soul, whom the servitude of sin could not fasten on.

Yet Cyrill in the place above cited Defenc. page 48. li. 35.
SEEMS to acknowledge A KIND OF DEATH EVEN OF THE SOVLE, from which Christ
revived again. But of that in due place hereafter.] Is the death of Christ's
soul so slender a matter, that you may collect it by a seeming, and a kind of
death, without any mention, or occasion of any such thing comprised in Cyrils
words? The Reader may there observe what your maine intent is, and whereon you
fasten your eyes all this while, even on the death of Christ's soul to be
requisite for our Redemption, though you find no such thing in Scripture or
Father; but miserably and childishly slide it in at last with a seeming. Now if
there be no such thing in Cyrils words, nor any such seeming, how well deserve
you to be hissed out with hands, if not to be hurled out by the heels, for a
seeming sleeper, if not for a waking dreamer? what are those words of Cyrill,
that seem to acknowledge the death of Christ's soul? Christ bestowed his flesh
as a ransom for our flesh, and made his soul likewise the price of redemption
for our souls, although he lived again, being by nature life it self. It is
lawful for you to further every place you bring, with a mayned and forced
translation. Cyrils true words stand thus: Cyril. ad Theodosium de rectafide.
(...). Without constraint of any, Christ of himself laid down his own
soul for us, that he might be Lord of dead and quick: yielding his flesh in
recompense, as a gift fully worth it, for the flesh of all, and making his
soul (or life) a ransom for the soul (or life) of all, though he revived
again, being life by nature, in that he was God. The words which you would
cite, are here no perfect sentence, as having no principal verb in them, and
therefore must be joined with the former and depend upon the verb (...) (
Christ laid down his soul) which governs the whole; as appears also by
the two participles (...), yielding in recompense, and (...), making, which
must be directed by the same nominative case that (...) is, and likewise by the
opposition of the verb (...), he revived. Of what death Cyrill here speaks,
is more then manifest by the words of our Savior here used and derived from
the Gospel, where he said, John 10.
None takes my soul from me, or constrains me to die, I lay it down of my
self; and likewise, Matthew. 20.
the Son of man came to give his soul (or life) a ransom for many. What
kind of death those words of Christ imported, I made it appear but a little
before by the full consent of Scriptures and interpreters old and new, and of
Cyrill himself, who all with one accord refer both those sayings to the
death of Christ's body, and the loss of his life on the Cross, when his soul
departed from him. Set that down in Cyrils first words for the death which
Christ died by the constant assertion of Scriptures, Fathers, New writers, and
of Cyrill himself; and then the words which you allege show plainly the
force of his corporal death to be available for the bodies and souls of all
men, in that his flesh yielded to death was a recompense or exchange for all
men's flesh; and his soul laid down without constraint of any, was the
ransom of all men's souls; and he notwithstanding rose again the third day to
life by his own power, as being God and life it self, against whom death
could prevail no farther, nor longer, then he him self would.

Where are the words that acknowledge the death of Christ's Soul, or that so
much as seem to acknowledge a kind of death in the soul of Christ? Here are
the clean contrary. For if the death of Christ's body, by which he laid aside
his soul for us, be sufficient to redeem the bodies and souls of all men,
then superfluous and needless even by these words was the death of Christ's
soul, the whole being fully performed without it. But he gave his flesh to be
a ransom for our flesh, and his soul for our souls, you say, and yet lived
again.] Cyrill does not say by several deaths, but by one and the same death,
which was the laying down of his soul or life for us, as Christ himself in
the Gospel said he would. If those words infer the death of Christ's soul,
why bring you not the words of Christ himself, saying; Matthew. 20.
The Son of man came to give his soul a ransom for many. You saw the
Scriptures themselves and the whole Church of Christ, first and last, I mean
all old and new writers, translators and expositors would condemn your folly
therein, in most exact words taking soul there for life, which must needs
import the death of Christ's body. And therefore you thought it more safety to
catch at the same words in some Father, for whose meaning there could not be
brought so many, and so sound deponents. But all in vain. For if Christ had no
meaning in those words to point out the death of his own soul, then Cyrill
alleging and observing the words of Christ, can have no such purpose as to
cross the Scriptures, himself, and all the Fathers of Christ's Church in a
matter so dangerous and desperate, as the death of Christ's soul amounts
unto. In the mean while his words conclude no such thing, neither in saying
nor in seeming; and so your embracing them to that end, argues your good will
to seek, but your evil luck to find any such thing as the death of Christ's
soul in all the Fathers.

Cyrill does not say Christ rose again, which properly belongs to the body,
but he revived or lived again which seems to be spoken of the Soul.] Then
Saint Paul makes more for you, then Cyrill does: for he affirms both os
Christ; to this end (says he) Christ died, and rose again, and revived, that
he might be Lord of dead and living. And indeed resurrection properly notes
from whence Christ arose, to wit from the grave; Reviving expresses the
blessed and glorious life which he enjoyed, after he was risen from the dead.
Christ himself says of his, they shall come forth (of their graves) Ioh. 5.
v. 29.
unto the resurrection of life, to separate them from the wicked who shall come
likewise forth unto the resurrection, but of judgment and condemnation.
Notwithstanding in Christ there is either no difference betwixt them, the one
ever implying the other; or if we make any, Christ's reviving always
presupposes his Resurrection as antecedent, since he possessed not that
immortal and heavenly life, which now he has, but upon his arising from the
dead. And so the Apostle places them, Christ died, and rose again, and
revived (into such power and glory, that he was) made Lord over dead and
quick. And Cyrill who often times uses this word ( he revived) of Christ,
means the third day after Christ's death, when the Scriptures affirm he rose
from the grave. So Cyrill and the Synod of Alexandria that joined with him in
writing unto Nestorius say of Christ. Epist. Cyrilli and Synod Alex. ad
Nestorium.
(...), he revived the third day having spoiled hell; and so in his second
confession of the true faith to the religious Queens, Cyrill de fide ad
Reginas li. 2.
(...). Christ spoiling death revived the third day. And in his Epistle to
those of Egypt. Christ is said (in the Scriptures) first to have died as a man,
Cyrill epist. ad Presbyt. and mo^ch Egypt.
(...), and after that to have returned to life, by that which he was by
Nature. If then he died not in the flesh according to the Scriptures, he was
not quickened by the Spirit, (...), that is he revived not again. So that
Cyrill has not any seeming words for the death of Christ's Soul; but says as
Christ said in effect before, that the Son of man gave his (soul or) life to
be a ransom for the life of all, and not for the Soul of all, which in the
singular number is neither good English, nor good Divinity, though to smooth
it, you put the plural and say, for our souls, which is not in Cyrill.

The words of Ambrose will prove that Christ offered his Soul for us; Defenc.
pa. 47. li. 17.
hoc in se obtulit Christus quod induit. Christ offered in Sacrifice all that
which he assumed.] Besides that you falsify Ambrose by adding ALL to his
words, which have no such thing in them, you ^est Ambroses words against
Ambroses meaning. For though it may well be granted, that Christ offered body
and soul as a Sacrifice of holiness and obedience unto God; and that Christ's
Soul likewise was laid down unto the death of his body to feel the smart
thereof, and to be severed by the force thereof; in which respect Esaias says,
that Christ powered forth his Soul unto death: Yet Ambrose speaking of Christ's
sacrifice for the sins of the people, means (as the rest of the Fathers
do) that part of the Sacrifice, which was slain; which was by his and their
confession, Christ's body, and not Christ's Soul. Hear Ambrose him self
Ambros. de fide. li. 3. ca. 5.
In quo nisi in corpore, expiauit populi peceata? In quo passus est nisi in
corpore? Wherein did Christ sacrifice for the sins of the people, but in his
body? wherein did he suffer (death) but in his body? And so Theodoret: Christ
was Theodoret. Dialogo. 1.
called a Priest in his humane nature, (...), and offered none other Sacrifice
but his own body. Athanasius names what Christ put on, and what he offered.
Athanasius contra Ar^anos ^ratio. 3.
The word of God that made all things, was afterward made an hie Priest, (...).
Putting on a body that was borne and made, which he might offer for us.
Nazianzene says to Christ. Nazianzen. in illud Euangelis, Cum consummasset
Jesus hos sermones.
Thou art a sheep, because thouwast a Sacrifice; thou art an hie Priest,
because thou offeredst thy body. Augustine also, Sacerdos propter victimam,
quam pro nobis offerret, a nobis acceptam. Christ (...) a Priest, for the
Sacrifice, he took of us, that he might offer it for us. What that Sacrifice
was he shows saying: Idem in Psalm. 64.
Assumpsit a nobis, quod offerret Domino; ipsas diximus sanctas primitias
carnis ex vtero virginis: Christ took of us that he might offer to the Lord,
we mean the holy first fruits of his flesh y August. in Psalm. 109.
(taken) from the womb of the Virgin. Theophylact; Theophylact in cap. 8
e^st. ad Hebraeos.
A Priest may by no means be without a Sacrifice. It was then necessary that
(Christ) should have somewhat to offer. Quod autem offerretur praeter eius
corpus nil quidpiam erat; necessario ergo and mortuus est. Now there was
utterly nothing that he might offer, besides his body; it was needful then he
should die.

This that Christ took a body to offer, is most agreeable to Ambroses mind as
well in the book which you cite, as in other parts of his writings. Ambros. de
incarnat. Doman. sacramento. ca. 6.
Ex segenerauit Maria, Marie conceived of her self, (to wit, of her own body)
that what was conceived of her, might be the true nature of a body. And
alleging Saint Paul's words; that Christ was made of the seed of David
according to the flesh, Romans 1. and made of a woman, Galat. 4. He concludes;
Ibidem.
Ergo ex nobis accepit, quod proprium offerret pro nobis, vt nos redimeret ex
nostro. Then Christ took of us, that which he might offer as his own for us,
to the end he might redeem us by that which was ours. And declaring what he
meant even by the words, which you bring, Christ offered that in himself which
he put on; Ambrose adds: Ibid.
Non igitur diuinitatem induit, sed carnem assumpsit, vt spolium carnis
exueret, Christ put not on the nature of his Divinity, but he took flesh that
he might put off the spoil of his flesh (when he should die.) Now if the flesh
of Christ were subject to all injuries, how say you, that Christ's flesh is of
the same substance with his Godhead? What else do you in so saying, but
compare Adams slime and our earth to the Divine substance? Here Ambrose
plainly confesses, what he meant, Christ took unto him, and offered for us;
even Adams slime and our earth, whereof his body was made. Which elsewhere he
precisely avouches, saying. Ambros in Epist. ad Heb. cap. 10.
Corpus suscepit nostrae mortalitatis, vt pro nobis haberet quid offerret.
Christ assumed our mortal body, that he might have what to offer for us.

And least you should after your trifling manner, ask whether we exclude an
humane soul from the body, which Christ took of the substance of his mother,
and which he offered for us to death on the Cross, I answer with Ambrose.
Ambros. de incarnat. Doman. Sacram. cap. 7.
Cum susceperit carnem hominis, consequens est vt perfectionem incarnationis
plenitudinemque susceperit. Nihil enim in Christo imperfectum. Where as Christ
took unto him the flesh of a man, it is consequent that he took unto him the
perfection and fullness of incarnation; for there is nothing imperfect in
Christ. And what need was there, he should take flesh without a Soul, when
as an insensible flesh, and an unreasonable soul was neither subject to sin,
nor capable of reward? An humane soul was a necessary sequel to Christ's
body, which he took of the seed of David and substance of his mother, as it
is to all ours before we can be men: but the soul is not comprised in the name
of the body, much less does it receive the same conditions and properties
which the body does. Though then I make no doubt, but Christ at his birth and
at his death, as all his life long, had both a body and a perfect reasonable
and humane soul, endued with all the powers, affections and infirmities of
man's nature, save sin and the corruption of sin; yet is it no consequent
with Ambrose, that Christ's soul was made of a woman as his flesh was, nor that
Christ died the death of the soul, when his body died on the Cross. Let them
doubt (says Ambrose) Ambros. de incarnat. Domin. Sacram. cap. 7.
of that which the Prophet says (my soul hates your new Moons and
Sabboths;) This that is testified in the Gospel (therefore the Father loves me
because I lay down my soul to take it again) they can not refute to be
spoken of the propriety of the soul, when as it is spoken of the Lords death
and resurrection. The body of Christ could not die, but by laying down his
soul, as also it could not rise to life, but by taking it again. So that both
Christ's death and his resurrection do clearly prove, that he had a true
soul as Ambrose notes, which by his death was severed from his body, and by
his resurrection was assumed again into his body. And yet that death was
proper to Christ's body and not to his soul; though the soul felt the smart
and sting thereof as well before, as when it departed from his body. Tertull.
contra Marcionem. li. 5. cap. 9.
Corpus est quod amit tit animam, and amittendo fit mortuum; it a mortui
vocabulum corpori competit. Porro si resurrectio mortui est, mortuum autem non
aliud est quam corpus, corporis erit resurrectio. It is the body (says
Tertullian) that loses the soul, and by loosing it dies, so that the word,
dead, agrees to the body. Now if the resurrection be of that which was dead,
and nothing can be dead besides the body, Resurrection must likewise pertain
to the body. This death and this resurrection, I mean of the body, was found
in Christ, yours is very strange to Ambrose and to all the Fathers. Ambro. de
fide li. 3. cap. 5.
Per quam nisiper corporis mortem, mortis vincula dissoluit? By what other
death (says Ambrose) then by the death of the body, did Christ break the
bands of death?

Thus have you spent your great store of Fathers with small success; and
though you dissemble where you borrowed them, yet you dissemble not your
excessive bragging of them, as if they were Defenc. page 49. l. 1.
clean against me, and for you in the chiefest point of this question: where
indeed you do but reach after a word in them here and there, and that not
rightly conceived, or not rightly translated; from whence you would feign
infer your fancies, save that neither the grounds of truth nor learning,
will bear you out in your conclusions. That Christ's sufferings did belong to
body and soul the Fathers affirm, whether by Sympathy or without Sympathy
they say nothing; much less that Christ suffered in mind distinctly from
soul or body. Nazianzene says he assumed man's mind at his incarnation, that
thereby he might sanctify it; besides him not one of your places so much as
names the mind. As for Gods immediate hand punishing the soul of Christ, in
his passion, if you should fast till you find that in these or any other
Fathers, you should fast, not forty days but years. And as though these
were not falsities enough to load the Fathers with, you hoyse up the top sail
of untruth, and flant it out, that Defenc. page 49. li. 6.
these Fathers say, Christ suffered all these pains, which else we should have
suffered, and was spared in nothing: plainly belying your Authors, which say
no such thing, and out-facing your Reader, as if his sight did not serve him to
sever your shameful additions from the texts of those ancient writers. Cyrill
says, Christ suffered all things (that is, all natural and innocent
infirmities and passions of body and soul, as Cyrill explaineth himself in
the same Chapter, yea in the close of the very same sentence) to whose words
you add of your own, WHICH else we should have suffered. Only, you joined them
at first so cunningly to Cyrils sentence having two parts, that a man could not
readily tell to which you referred this addition, save that now in the
recapitulation of your proofs, you apparently tie them to the former. For if
you made Cyrill to say, Christ suffered to free us from all, which else we
should have suffered, that assertion is very true; only, these last words are
yours and not Cyrils. If you make him to say, Christ suffered all, which else we
should have suffered, this has neither truth in it, nor any color in Cyrils
text. Jerome indeed says, Christ suffered that which we ought to have
suffered, meaning, what Christ suffered, was due to us, and not to him; but
Jerome is far from your all, which else we should have suffered.

Your slight then in collecting your conceits from the Fathers sayings, is
worth the observing. Nazianzene says, Christ in his incarnation assumed man's
mind to sanctisie it. Cyrill says, Christ SVFFERED ALL the infirmities and
passions of man's nature. Jerome says: That which was due to us for our sins,
Christ suffered for us. And Tertullian says, God spared not his own Son,
but delivered him for us, that is, God spared him not from delivering. Out of
these four places, having different causes, ends, and respects, for which, to
which, and in which they were written, you clout this conclusion, as common to
them all, which is repugnant to every one of them; that Christ IN MIND (so
says Nazianzene) SVFFERED ALL, (so says Cyrill) WHICH WAS DVE TO US, (so
says Jerome) WITHOUT SPARING, (so says Tertullian.) By this order and manner
of hudling and hampering different things and diverse places together, you may
collect what you will, when you will, and out of whom you will; and this is
your Defenc. pa. 49. l. 8.
clear and plain sense of the Fathers against the which you say I can take no
exception.

After this you fall again to your first trench more of terms, and wandering a
while about the phrases of Gods proper wrath, the true and right punishment of
sin, two countenances in Christ, and the coincidence of his soul and spirit;
you would feign conclude if you could, that if Christ suffered the wrath of God
for us, he suffered the true pains of hell; which I avouched you never should
be able to do. Whether I or you abuse the Reader with ambiguous and doubtful
words I leave to his judgment, that takes the pains to peruse what is past,
and what follows: truly I disadvantage my self very much so precisely to
divide, distinguish and prove every thing as I do, if I meant to slide away
with generalities. But you that neither can, nor will specify any parts, nor
bring any proofs of your chiefest assertions, but keep your self safe under
the shelter of certain phrases devised by your self without any warrant of
Scriptures or Fathers, and never expounded nor defined in all your writing,
save only with AS IT WERE, and after a sort; what meaning you can have to
handle so great matters as man's redemption and salvation after so slight a
manner, besides a vain ostentation of your contentious and curious humor, I
leave it to the Readers censure. Now to the return of your terms.

Defenc. page 49. l. 31.
According to the most usual and common sense of Gods wrath, so in my whole
Treatise I take it for Gods perfect holiness, justice, and power properly
executing vengeance and punishment John 3.
(whether little or great) due to them on whom sin lies.] Take from you your
Psalm. 20.
terms no where found in the Scriptures, but invented and authorized only by
your 2. Corin. 3.
self, and you can not step one foot further in this question. You have
named, I know not how often, Gods PROPER WRATH in the premises, though you
never took the care nor pains to describe or define it. Now you come to the
most usual and common sense of Gods wrath, which you say is Gods PROPER wrath.
Except that old starting hole of yours, which here you call the proper
executing of punishment; and there is nothing more repugnant to your own
assertion, then your own description. For all the afflictions of this life,
whatsoever they be, come from Gods perfect holiness, justice, and power, and
are due to the children of Adam for sin abiding or dwelling in them, though
God of his secret counsel may have other purposes in sifting his Saints for
their good and his glory. Your sense of Gods wrath you say is most usual, but
you show not where, nor with whom. If you mean with your selves, I can easily
yield that; if you mean in the Scriptures, I greatly doubt whether the wrath
of God in the Scriptures do more usually signify his everlasting judgments
against sin after this life, or his temporal plagues upon sinners in this
life. Howbeit it is not greatly material, which is most usual, since either
is usual in the word of God. You quote but four places for that purpose in
your Margin, and miss two of them. For in the 2. Cor. 3. verse. 17. and 9. I
find not the name of Gods wrath at all expressed in either of them. But I so
use the phrase as signifying any punishment of sin whatsoever.] The
Scriptures so use it before me, and you can give no reason, why I should not so
use it after them. It is altogether an improper speech, you say.] So say you,
but the Scriptures say not so. They make degrees and differences betwixt the
wrath of God in this world and in the next, and his displeasure against the
sins of his own, and his enemies; but they take not wrath for favor as you
do, though Gods wrath against the wickedness of his children be never
executed without favor to their persons, which in the faithless is far
otherwise.

Defenc. pa. 50. li. 5.
It is true, all troubles, pains and griefs in their first ordinance were the
effects of Gods proper wrath: but in their state and condition now, they are
not, namely as the godly do suffer them.] You are full of shifts, but they are
so slender, that they do but shame you. After much wrangling you grant it to
be true, that all troubles, pains and griefs in their first ordinance were the
effects of Gods wrath; you say of Gods PROPER WRATH. Which last I think to be
untrue, though the former be very true. If by their first ordinance you mean
the judgment of God pronounced against Adam and all his offspring for sin,
and the punishment irreuocably inflicted on mankind therefore, it is in effect
the same which I avouched against you, and so true, that you your self dare
not contradict it. For if you should, you should openly gainsay the Scriptures,
which witness that man was created in all integrity of nature, felicity of
state, and perpetuity of life; and that by sin, this impuritie, misery, and
mortality, which now we all feel, entered into the world as the wages of Adams
sin, and namely, that Genesis 3. v. 16.
pain, 17.
sorrow, and 19.
death were imposed on Adam (and so on all his) by Gods own mouth, as effects
or degrees of his most just displeasure against the sin of our first parents.
If you start from this with any shift of words, you start from a maine
principle of the Christian faith: but I suppose, that you confesle it by this
that you say, they were effects of Gods wrath in their first ordinance, that
is, when they were first inflicted on Adam and all his posterity.

But NOW you say, they are NOT so, specially to the godly.] Since what time
began The first man punished for his sin, after Christ was promised.
your Now? or when was their state or condition changed? These things were
generally and irreuocablely inflicted on all men, as the punishment of sin in
the first man, when as yet they were signs and tastes of Gods wrath not in
words, but in deeds; notwithstanding we were then, and long before, even before
Ephesians. 1. v. 4.
the foundation of the world, elected and adopted in Christ Jesus to be heirs
of eternal salvation. Wherefore 2. Tim. 1. v. 9.
God even at the first, when by your confession they were the effects of his
wrath, laid them on all, even on his own children, whom he meant everlastingly
to save; and so does continue them to this day, as monuments of his just
displeasure against sin even in his own servants and saints. Yea, before God
would inflict them, he made open promise of the woman's seed, that it should
Genesis 3. v. 15.
bruize the serpents head; and then to teach his own, and not only the
wicked, for whom he reserved everlasting destruction, what it was by sin to
provoke him; he loaded the life of all the godly with sorrow, pain and death;
to make them for ever by that grievous but righteous punishment of sin in
themselves, the more mindful how offensive sin was unto God; and the more
wary how to give ear to the Serpent against the voice of God. And therefore
at the very first inflicting of them, if we cast our eyes either on our own
deserts, or on the lot of the wicked, we shall find the wonderful favor of
God, not only in opening his purpose unto us, for our everlasting salvation in
Christ, but even in so tempering the smart of his rod, that by the punishment
we did feel in our selves the weight of sin in some sort, yet by his mercy
we should be strengthened, eased, and comforted under that burden in this life;
and after be received into everlasting bliss. Notwithstanding, when we compare
this mortal and miserable condition here with our creation, and with the
abundance of Gods blessings richly powered on us, when he first made us; we
should behold what sin had deprived us of, and subjected us unto, though it
did not exclude us from Christ, who loved us so dearly, that he would and did
give himself for us, rather than we should everlastingly perish. So that the
sorrow, pain, and death which the godly feel, were even at the first laid on
them by the same mixture of Gods justice and mercy, with which they now
continue; neither did Christ die for us, presently to free us from that
sentence of bodily death, which God had irreuocably pronounced and executed on
Adam and his offspring, by returning him and them to the earth for many
thousand years before Christ came: but rather in that to partake with us, that
he might save us from the rest, which in all the wicked did accompany this
death; and in the end to raise us again to a better life, lest we should faint
under the hand of God, who fastneth us to the afflictions of this life by the
example and fellowship of Christ's sufferings. For if we suffer with him, we
shall reign with him; and we must first die in Adam, before we can be quickened
again in Christ.

They are now profitable for us, you will say; and so rather help us than hurt
us in this corruption of sin, with which we are compassed.] I doubt not
thereof, and so were they from the first instant that they were imposed on
Adam: but how came this corruption of our nature, if not as a punishment of
sin in Adam? and consequently the remedies thereof do also witness Gods
displeasure against sin, though they be far more wholesome for us, than to
rot in the sores of our inward corruption. Can any man doubt, but God was and
is able to clear us, though never so corrupt, from the infection and dominion
of sin, by the working of his Spirit more mightily and casilie than by
troubles and griefs, if it had so seemed good to his wisdom and justice? And
had he determined to show us only love without all regard to his justice, how
ready was it for him in Christ to have released as well all corporal and
temporal affliction to his elect, as he did spiritual and eternal? But he
resolved otherwise in his most wise counsel for the conservation of his
justice; and so now heals our corruption with the salve of affliction, to let
us have continually presented before our eyes, and impressed in our bodies,
what our sin at first did, and still does deserve, though he never withdrew
his mercy from us, which in the end shall most abundantly recompense all.
Wherefore it is no reason, that because troubles are profitable or necessary
for our corrupt state, therefore they are not effects of Gods displeasure
against sin: yea rather because God could have otherwise cured sin in us,
and would not but by perpetual affliction; it is an argument, that God so
hated sin in our first parents, that he would have the very remembering and
curing thereof to be always in this life painful and grievous to our outward
man, though he would also comfort us in Christ, whiles here we live; and
hereafter crown us with glory for Christ's sake.

Neither is this a question of words, whether they be proper or improper in the
Scriptures, but a point of doctrine necessary to be received of all men, that
the corruption and dissolution of our nature and life in this world, does
manifest the exceeding hatred that naturally God has of sin, who rewarded
it in all mankind so severely, that he spared neither the bodies, souls,
states, nor lives of his elect, from sensible signs of his detesting sin in
them: though for his sons sake, in whom they were beloved and adopted, he
would by his wonderful power rather further than endanger their salvation even
by those maladies and corrosiues of sin. This shows the greatness of Gods
power, and goodness of his mercy toward us, but this alters not the
judgment which God pronounced, and punishment which he inflicted on Adam and
all his offspring for sin. The corruption and infection of sin, which
naturally and continually dwells in all the godly, called by Divines
concupiscence, is it no punishment of sin, because the guilt thereof is
remitted in Baptism, and now it is left in us to humble us, and awake us to
call for grace, and to resist sin, that striving with it, we see not only the
danger of sin assaulting us, but the Spirit of God assisting us, and bounty
of God rewarding us? The actual sins of the faithful, shall we think them
no sins but favors from God, because by them God works repentance,
submission, conversion, yea faith, zeal, joy and thanksgiving in his elect?
August. de corrept. and gratia. cap. 9.
God works (says Austen) all things for the good of those that love him, and
so far forth utterly all things, that if any of them stray, and for sake the
right way, even that God turns to their good, because they return more
humble and better taught. The like I say of death, and other miseries of man's
life, pronounced first by Gods mouth, and still inflicted by Gods hand. They
are, as they were, degrees or effects of Gods anger against sin in Adam;
pursuing him and all his posterity for the confirmation of his justice, though
by Gods mercy toward his, they now serve as they did even at the first in
Gods children, to repress sin, to work repentance, to raise confidence in
God, and contempt of all earthly things, and to exercise the graces of Gods
Spirit given them, as patience, obedience, and such like, and to give them
assurance of a better life.

The Church of Christ ever was, and is of the same mind with me, that the
death of the body with her seeds and fruits in this life, first entered, and
still remains as a PUNISHMENT of sin. August. de Trinitate. li. 4. cap. 12.
Men shunned (says Austen) the death of the flesh, rather than the death of
the spirit, that is, the punishment rather than the cause of the punishment. We
came unto death by sin, Christ by righteousness, and ideo, cum sit mors
nostra poena peccati, mors illius facta est hostia pro peccato; and therefore,
where our death is the punishment of sin, his death was the sacrifice for
sin. Theodoret speaking of the separation of body and soul, whereby that
which is mort all sustaineth death, the soul remaining free from death as
being immortal, asks his adversary, Theodor. dialogo. 3. cap. 2.
(...)? Do thou not think death to be a punishment? Who answering; The
Divine Scripture teaches so much; Theodoret infers; Is death then the
punishment of sinners? The other yielding that this is granted of all men,
Theodoret concludes: Why then, since both the soul and body sinned, does the
body alone sustain the punishment of death? Fulgentius: Fulgen. de incarnat.
and gratia Christ's. cap. 12.
Nisi praecessisset in peccato mors animae, nunquam corporis mors in supplicio
sequeretur. Except the death of the soul had gone before by sin, the death
of the body had never followed after as a punishment. And therefore of our
flesh he says: Ibid. cap. 13.
Nascitur cum poena mortis, and pollutione peccati: It is borne with the
punishment of death, and pollution of sin. And of young children: By what
justice is an infant subjected to the wages of sin, if there be no
uncleanness of sin in him? or how do we see him strooken with death, if he
felt not the sting thereof (which is sin?) Maxentius in the confession of his
faith; Maxentius in libello fidei cap. 3.
We believe (says he) that not only the death of the body, which is the
punishment of sin, but also the sting of death, which is sin, entered into
the world; because we consent not to these men (who say the contrary) but to
the Apostle, who testifies that sin and death went over all men. Prosper:
Prosperde promissio. and praedict. part 1. cap. 5.
The punishment of sin, which Adam the root of mankind received by (Gods)
sentence, (saying, Earth thou art, and to earth thou shall return) and
transmitted to his posterity as to his branches, the Apostle says, entered
into the world by one man's sin, and so ranged over all men. Beda: Beda in
Psalm. 34.
The death as well of us men, as of Christ, is called sin, because it is the
effect and punishment of that sin which Adam committed. The second council
of Arrange about 450 years after Christ confesses no less; Concilium Arausic
anum 2. cap. 2.
If any man affirm, that only the death of the body, which is the punishment
of sin, and not sin also, which is the death of the soul, passed by one
man to all mankind, he ascribes injustice to God, and contradicts the
Apostle, who says; By one man sin entered into the world, and by sin death
passed over all men.

Our later writers, though they fully defend that God does not punish his
either to destruction, as he does the wicked; nor for satisfaction of sin, as
he did his own Son for the sins of all his Saints; and to comfort the
afflicted, they set before them the presence of Gods power assisting them in
their miseries, or delivering them from their troubles, the purpose of God
respecting wholly their good, and the promise of God exceedingly recompencing
their patience; yet when they come to the causes provoking God to this
severity, they acknowledge that to be sin, and teach every man to descend
into himself, and to give God the glory, in that his righteous judgment
begins at his own house. Of the evils, (which we suffer in this life)
Bullingerus decadis 3. sermo. 3.
there be many and sundry causes, says Bullinger, but sin it self is
counted to be the general cause. For by disobedience sin entered into the
world, and by sin death, diseases, and all the mischiefs in the world.
Ibidem.
The persecutions and cruel tortures inflicted on the Church of God, or on
particular Martyrs, as they were offered them for the confession and testimony
of the faith and truth of the Gospel, so for the most part they had for their
causes the offenses and sins of the godly, which the justice of God did
visit in his servants, though for the good and welfare of his Saints. Ibidem.
The people of Israel sinned against the Lord in the desert under the Judges
and Kings very often, and very enormously, and were grievously punished by the
Lord; but again they were speedily delivered as often as they acknowledged
their sins, and turned unto the Lord. Ibidem.
If therefore any man suffer any evil for sin committed, let him acknowledge
the just judgment of God upon himself, and humble himself under the mighty
hand of God, confessing it unto God; and asking pardon with lowly prayer, let
him patiently bear that which he has so well deserved to suffer. Zanchij
tractat. Theolog. lib. 1. cap 2. these. 8.
It is certain, says Zanchius, that all the punishments and miseries, which
we feel in this world, are from sin, and inflicted for sin. In which place
he resolves by a plain thesis, that death is the punishment of sin, and (so
are) all those things which are the fruits of death, as well in Soul, as in
body, and in (our) external state. Gualther. homil. 118. in 12. cap. Joh.
It is an argument (says Gualther) of a mind skant religious wholly to despise
death, quam per peccatum ingressam, and peccati poenam esse omnes Scripturae
testantur, which all the Scriptures witness came in by sin, and is the
punishment of sin. In the Philosophers commendations (of the death of the
body) Petri Martyris loci communes, class. 3. lo. 14. and sect. 5.
there are some things (says Peter Martyr) not agreeable to the Christian
faith, and to the sacred Scriptures. For we say, that death must not be
accounted any good, but an evil thing. Quandoquidem Deus illam vti poenam
inflixit nostro generi; For so much as God inflicted it as a punishment on
mankind. And so else where: Idem class. 2. loc. 1. sect. 51.
Omnes pij statuunt in morte ^rae diuinae sensum esse, ideoque sua natura
dolorem and horrorem incutit. All the godly resolve, that in death there is a
sense of Gods wrath, and therefore of his own nature it impresseth a grief
and terror. And if there be any to whom it is contenting and acceptable to die,
they have that from some other fountain, and not from the nature of death.
Musculus in locis communibus theologicis de Ira Dei.
There might be assigned (says Musculus) many kinds of the wrath of God, but
for this present we content our selves with a triple division thereof, whereby
we divide it into general, temporal, and eternal. The general (wrath of
God) is that wherewith the whole posterity of Adam is enwrapped for original
sin. Hence come all the miseries of mankind, which equally follow the
condition of men, and cleave as well to our minds, as to our flesh. The
temporal wrath of God is that (Qua peccat is non impiorum modo, sed and piorum
irascitur, ac paenas de illis sumit in hac vita,) whereby God is angry with the
sins not of the wicked only, but of the godly also, and takes punishment of
them in this life. Whether I speak or think otherwise, then these new and old
Divines have spoken and taught, let the Reader judge.

But mine own Authors in the very places, which I allege, do say that the
nature of death is changed, and that God is angry with his elect, as a Father
with his beloved children, to chasten and amend them.] Peter Martyr says
indeed the nature of death is changed by Gods goodness making that profitable
to us, which of it self is very harmefull: but with what condition does he say
it is changed? Pet. Mart. loc. com. class 3. lo. 14. sect. 7.
Puta, si quis obediente animo eam sube at, neque poenam illam reijciat, quam
diuina iustitia nos omnes voluerit exoluere: If a man submit himself unto it
with an obedient heart, and reject not that punishment, which the justice of God
would have us all to suffer. And so it was changed, even when it was inflicted
on the elect in Adams loins. For Christ was first promised to be the bruizer
of the Serpents head. Now if death afterward took full and everlasting hold on
Christ's members, then the serpent prevailed against Christ and his chosen, and
not Christ against the Serpent. Wherefore God so moderated his sentence, that
he adjudged Christ's members in Adam no farther then to the earth, whence Christ
should raise them, and utterly abolish from them all the Serpents poison, that
is, sin, death, and corruption: but this proves not death to be good in
Gods Children, or to be no punishment of sin in them, because God conuerteth
it to their advantage in the end; no more then their sins are good, because
God turns them also to the benefit of his elect. For, as you heard before,
Saint Austen says of their sins as he does of their death, that God turns
them, and all things else to the good of those that love him. Touching Gods
fatherly Anger against the sins of the faithful for their amendment, which
Musculus mentions; He does not say as you do, it is no Anger; neither do I
defend any other kind of Anger in God then such, as a Religious and wise
Father in some sort resembles, when he persueth the wickedness of his unruly
son. Whose person though he favor as being his Son, and by chastisement
seek to reform; yet is he or ought he to be, not in words or looks only,
but inwardly and truly displeased and offended with the lewdness of his
Son. And though love do temper the correction, that he mean not to kill or
overthrow his own flesh and blood; yet the zealous Father spares not to make
his Son thoroughly smart, till he confess, mislike, and leave his former
looseness, and frame himself obediently to his Fathers will. Does not this
Father as much hate the vices, as he loves the person, and seeks the welfare
of his Son? And since his Son will not be otherwise recalled, may not the
sharp correction, which the Father uses to repress the unbridled and untamed
appetites of his licentious child, be called punishment? The Scriptures so
speak, and so do the Fathers, as also the later writers; only this fabler
has found out a new faith, and new phrases of Gods improper wrath, and untrue
punishment of sin, which God uses toward his children, that provoke him with
their impuritie and iniquity.

Defenc. pa. 50. li. 26.
It may not be said properly, that (Gods) Justice leads him to inflict these
things on us, (as you affirm) but his holiness and love.] Your mouth belike
is the measure of proper speeches. If you intend that not only Justice, but
also Love did and does lead God is just in punishing his Saints.
God to inflict these things on us, you say the same that I affirm; but if you
mean, (as you must, if you will cross my position,) that Love without Justice
did and does lead God to inflict these things on us, then speak you both
absurdly and wickedly. For the Scriptures ascribe Justice and Judgment to God
in chastening his Church, and punishing the sins of his servants, as well as
they do Love and holiness. When the Prophet told Roboham and the Princes of
Judah, that 2. Chro. 12. verse. 5.
they had left God, and therefore God would leave them in the hands of Shishak
the King of Egypt: the King and Princes Verse. 6.
humbled themselves, and said, the Lord is just. When Jerusalem was burnt and
her people carried captive to Babylon, the Prophet lamenting her misery says,
the Lord has Lament. 1. verse. 5.
afflicted her for the multitude of her transgressions: and teaches her to
say; Verse. 1^.
Just is the Lord, for I have rebelled against his mouth. Daniel at the time,
when God would deliver his people from that Captivity, makes confession of
his and their sins, and says; Dan. 9. v. 11.
All Israel have transgressed thy law, and departed from harkening to thy
voice. Therefore the curse is powered upon us, because we have sinned against
him. Verse. 14.
And the Lord has watched over this evil, and brought it upon us, because the
Lord our God is just in all that he does; for we would not hear his voice. The
Levites after their return making confession of their sins unto God, and
mentioning their afflictions, do add; N^hem. ca. 9. 33.
And thou (Lord) are just in all that is come upon us; because thou have kept
(thy) truth, and we have done wickedly.

The Apostles confess the like after Christ's coming. Romans 3.
If our iniquity (says Paul,) commend the Justice of God, what shall we say?
Is God unjust in punishing? God forbid. Very plainly the same Apostle
denounces Gods justice and vengeance to all Christians that wrong their
brethren; 1 Thessalonians 4. verse. 6.
You know (says he) what Commandments we gave you by the Lord Jesus, that no
man oppress or defraud his brother: for the Lord is the Auenger of all such
things, as we foretold and protested unto you. And to the Colossians; Coloss. 3.
He that does wrong shall receive (at Gods hand) for the wrong, which he has
done, and there is no respect of persons. Prou. 12.
The recompense of a man's hands (that is works) shall (God) give unto him,
either in this life if he repent, or in the next if he persist. Prou. 11.
Lo (says Solomon) the righteous are repayed on earth (he means the evil
which they have done to others) how then the wicked and the sinner? For here in
this life is the 1. Pet. 4.
time, that judgment begins at the house of God. If it first (begin) with
us (says Peter) what shall be the end of them, who obey not the Gospel of
God? Howsoever you tattle that God utterly forgets his Justice in afflicting
his Church; the Scriptures teach us, that Judgment begins here at the house
of God, for an example of the just judgment of God against the wicked, and
that the very righteous are repayed on earth the wrongs which they do to
others, God by his Apostle openly professing himself to be the Auenger of such
believers, as wrong or defraud their brethren. Now whether there may be
Judgment, Requital, and Revenge in this life from God against evil, without
some admixture of his justice, though he purpose not to destroy the penitent, I
leave it to the Christian Reader to consider.

Has not Christ then borne the burden of our sins to free us from all
punishment? How we are freed from sin by Christ.
Christ has not presently and generally freed us and every part of us from all
corruption and affliction of sin; he will do it at his appointed time, when
the day of our redemption comes. In the mean time our inward man is freed,
though our 2. Cor. 4.
outward man daily perish. For Christ 1. Cor. 15.
must reign till he have put all his (and our) enemies under his feet. The
last enemy, that shall be destroyed is death. Then shall be the end of sin,
death, and corruption in all his; and not before: though we be already
redeemed by Christ from it, in Gods purpose and promise (which shall then be
fully performed) and in part, whereof we presently have an assurance in that
our souls are renewed in this life by grace, and received in the next to a
blessed rest and comfort, till that day rise, when Christ will set a crown of
righteousness on them all, that love his coming. Again we are presently
freed from all that, which is solely the punishment of sin, and has no
farther or other profit or use in it, then only to punish and revenge sin.
And such are none of these things, whereof we speak. For God in them all has
so tempered a taste of his justice with his manifold and great mercies, that it
is not expedient for us as yet to be wholly freed from them. This respect
prevails so far with God, that whiles the world must dure, he has
subjected his children to the capital and penal laws not of Christian
Magistrates only, but even of infidels also, for that without discipline of
the sword, man's state and life on earth can not be maintained. And therefore
the politic and penal laws of Princes be not derogatorie to Christ's
death, nor injuries to Christian men, as the Libertines would have them; not
because men have more right to punish then God has, or their interest to
punish could continue, when Gods does cease; but for that it is expedient and
needful for us so to be governed in outward and earthly things, till the time
come, when Christ will 1 Cor. 15. Verse. 24.
put down all rule and all authority and power, that God may be all in all.
Now if Christ's death repeal not man's laws, how much less Gods irreuocable
judgments fastened to our nature, and not hindering our salvation, but renewing
the memorial of our sin, lest we should forget it, or neglect it; and
teaching us by tolerable and temporal pains, what intolerable torments we
have escaped by Gods mercies toward us? Wherefore Christ by his obedience unto
death has showed us an example what to follow, and thereby rather confirmed
then reuersed his Fathers sentence for the time, till he come to wipe all
tears from our eyes, and to restore us to the glorious liberty of the sons
of God, which he has presently purchased for us, though he will not presently
execute it.

Lastly the death of Christ does not belong, nor any benefit thereof, but to
such as repent and believe. After his death Christ commanded Luke 24.
repentance and remission of sins to be preached in his name among all
nations; and with all denounced, Mark. 16.
He which will not believe, shall be damned. So that neither the incredulous,
nor the impenitent have any part or pardon in Christ's death and sufferings. If
then all the children of God would fully repent and perfectly believe: surely
all which they should suffer in this life (I still except the natural, and as
yet unchangeable corruption of body and soul, which abides in them from their
birth) were only trials of the graces, and signs of their blessedness.
Matthew. 5.
Blessed are they (says our Savior) that suffer persecution for
righteousness sake: for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. When you do well
and suffer, taking it 1. Pet. 2.
patiently, this (says Peter) is acceptable unto God. But what praise is it,
if when ye be buffeted for your faults, you take it patiently? Now how many
thousands are there in Christ's flock, which defect in faith and specially in
true repentance? Yea how rare are they, that repent when, and as they ought?
Then has Gods justice cause enough, and enough to punish all, that either
shrink in faith, neglect his will, or slack repentance; notwithstanding the
general freedom obtained and proclaimed by the death of Christ; and out of
this number very few Christians are exempted. Wherefore to make men believe,
that God has no justice, or regards not his justice, to punish them in this
life, after he has once engraffed them into Christ, because Christ has
suffered all the punishment of their sins for them; is but to deceive them.
God is most faithful in his promises, if we could take assured hold of them;
but if we fall from them by diffidence or disobedience, God wants no justice
to aggrauate his hand according to our deserts, though in mercy he spare us,
even when he strikes us, and intends our conversion and not our destruction,
how sharp soever his plagues be, which would be far sharper, if his love
toward us in Christ Jesus, did not overrule his just displeasure against our
sins.

Defenc. page 50. l. 31.
The case with Christ was clean otherwise. He needed no amendment, but that
which he suffered was right punishment.] Right and proper, if you may be
moderator, shall be The Defenders partition of punishment, applied to Christ,
is insufficient and impious.
what please you. What is RIGHT AND TRVE PUNISHMENT you never define; but
pretending sincerity, when you come to the issue, you enclose your conceits
with very, proper, right, and such like phrases, and so take your leave. But
declare, if you can, or will vouchsafe to make others partakers of your
mysteries, what is proper and right, very and true punishment. You must define
punishment either by the pain, which is suffered; or by the purpose of the
punisher, that is, by the cause, for which it is inflicted. You stand not in
this place on the pain imposed, but rather on the purpose of the punisher, or
cause of the punishment. For if you measure punishment by the same pains, then
tell us why the miseries of this life, as penury, sickness, and death, be
punishments in the wicked, and not in the godly; since they be the same in
both, setting aside the purpose of the punisher, which is different in both.
They are, you say, for correction and amendment in the godly, not for
destruction and vengeance, as they are in the wicked. Then the purpose of the
punisher, by your intention, makes the pain to be punishment; which being
referred to another end, as in other patients, is no punishment, though it be
the self same pain in both. And thence you draw your conclusion, that since
the sufferings of Christ could not be for correction and amendment in him,
therefore Defenc. page 52. l. 1.
his afflictions every one, SMALL AND GREAT, were true and proper punishments,
and the effects of Gods very wrath for sin lying upon him. Otherwise the
bodily afflictions which Christ suffered were the self same which the godly
often suffer; and yet you avouch them in the faithful to be no punishments,
because they serve for correction and amendment in them; which having no place
in Christ, you conclude his sufferings great and small to be true, right and
proper punishments. But Sir how prove you this division, that all the
punishments, (you call them pains) which God inflicteth in this life, are
either for correction or for vengeance properly so called? there is neither
sufficiency, nor piety in this partition of yours thus applied to Christ. For
in the wicked Gods purpose is only to revenge sin, and therefore in the end
God allotteth them the just and full punishment of sin, which is everlasting
damnation. And in the mean season during the time of his patience, he
mitigateth his hand in respect of that which shall follow, but gives them no
inward grace to repent, whereby they are in all their afflictions hardened and
ripened for sorer vengeance, as still repining and murmuring at the hand of God
but never misliking or leaving their sins. In the elect when they are
disobedient and impenitent, God persueth their sins with corporal and
temporal plagues, that they may return and fly unto him for mercy; to which
end he gives them grace in the midst of their miseries to acknowledge their
offenses, and by faith to take hold of his promises made to them in Christ
Jesus; and so upon their submission and conversion he receives them to favor;
whose persons he always loved in his only Son, though he hated and scourged
their uncleanness. In Christ Jesus the case was clean different from the one
and the other. You confess there was nothing in him to be corrected or
amended; then was he not punished for correction. On the other side, much less
did God purpose to destroy Christ's person being his own and only Son; as he
does the wicked, whose bodies and souls he will destroy in hell: and
consequently Christ was not punished to destruction. That is proper to the
reprobate, whose persons God hates, and leaves in their sins, that they may
provoke his just wrath to their utter destruction. Then was Christ neither
punished as the godly are for amendment, nor as the wicked are for vengeance;
and so your partition is false, and defective; and all your collections
grounded thereon are like the foundation, that is void of all strength and
truth.

What then was Gods purpose in punishing Christ for our sins? even that which
Gods purpose in the death and Cross of Christ.
you always pass by with deaf and dull ears, though it be often repeated
and urged unto you, because you will not be turned from the trade of your
hellish pains. Why God would not have man redeemed, but by the death and
passion (that I call the punishment) of Christ Jesus, the Scriptures yield many
causes, (though of Gods will no cause may be required;) some respecting God
himself, some concerning Christ, and some regarding us. Touching God, the
cross of Christ does commend his wisdom, show his power, manifest his love,
content his holiness, and preserve his justice. 1. Corin. 1.
Christ crucisied (as Paul says) is the power of God, and the wisdom of God
to them that are saved, howsoever the cross of Christ seem foolishness and
weakness to them that perish. Then to control the carnal wisdom of the
world, and to confound the pride and strength of Satan and his members, God
would use the baseness and feebleness of the Cross in saving his elect.
Also, to witness his love toward us, he decreed the same: John 3.
So God loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, Ephesians. 5.
to be an offering and a sacrifice of a sweet smelling savor unto God. With
which Sacrifice the holiness of God rests so 2. Pet. 1.
well pleased, that he accepts us as holy, and Hebr. 10.
sanctified by the oblation of the body of Jesus Christ once made. The
upholding of Gods Justice by the death of Christ is often specified in the
Scriptures. 1. Corin. 15.
By a man (came) death, and by a man the resurrection from the dead. 2. Corin.
5.
Him that knew no sin, God made sin for us (to wit, a sacrifice for sin)
that we should be made the righteousness of God in him. Therefore it was John
11.
expedient, that one man should die for the people, and that the whole Nation
perished not. Esa. 53.
He was wounded for our transgressions; and by his stripes are we healed. The
Lord laid upon him the iniquity of us all. Hebr. 9.
And where a Testament is, there must be the death of the Testator: for a
Testament is confirmed, when men are dead. So that by the Scriptures themselves
God decreed the Cross of Christ in man's redemption, to reveal his wisdom,
power, and love to the world, and wholly to satisfy his holiness and justice,
which were thoroughly displeased and provoked with man's disobedience, but as
thoroughly recompensed and appeased by the submission and obedience of Christ.

As for Christ himself, it is evident by the Scriptures, that his enduring the
cross declared his obedience, patience, humility, charity, perfection and
power, in more effectual manner, than without it he could have done. For
therein he Phil. 2.
emptied and humbled himself, and became obedient unto death, even to the
death of the cross. 1. Pet. 2.
When he was reviled, he reviled not again; when he suffered, he threatened
not. He Esa. 53.
was oppressed and afflicted, yet did he not open his mouth. For so Galat. 2.
he loved (us) that he gave himself (for us;) John 15.
and greater love than this has no man, to bestow his life for his friends.
But Romans 5.
God sets out his love toward us, that whiles we were yet sinners Christ
died for us. Once (then) 1. Pet. 3.
he suffered, the just for the unjust, that he might bring us to God; and being
Hebr. 2.
consummate through affliction, was made the Prince of (our) Salvation. For in
that he suffered and was tempted, he is able to succor them that are tempted,
and became a merciful and faithful high Priest, to make reconciliation for
the sins of the people. And Romans 14.
therefore he died and rose again, that he might be Lord of the dead and the
living, and Hebr. 2.
through death destroy him that had power of death, even the devil.

On our behalf it was not needless, that Christ should die the death of the
cross. For besides that we are 1 Cor. 6.
bought with a price, lest we should be our own, even with the 1. Pet. 1.
precious blood of Christ, as of a Lamb unspotted and undefiled, and Romans 5.
reconciled to God by the death of his Son, which covenant is irreuocable,
being sealed with his blood: by his cross Christ 1. Pet. 2.
left us an example how we should follow his steps, and be 1. Pet. 4.
partakers of his sufferings; that when his glory shall appear, we may be
glad and rejoice. For it is a 2. Tim. 2.
true saying, if we be dead with him, we shall live with him; if we suffer
(with him) we shall reign with him. Romans 6.
We are buried then by Baptism into his death, that like as Christ was raised
from the dead by the glory of his Father; so we should also walk in newness
of life: knowing this, that our old man is crucified with him, that the body
of sin might be destroyed, that henceforth we should not serve sin. 2.
Cor. 5.
He died for all, that they which live should not henceforth live unto
themselves, but to him, which died for them, and rose again.

Infinite are the places of Scripture witnessing the causes, effects, and
fruits of Christ's death on the Cross; all which this Dreamer must deny or
delude, before he can defend, that Gods purpose in Christ's sufferings was only
to punish our sin lying on him. For if Gods purposes in appointing Christ's
Cross, were so acceptable to the Father, so honorable to the Son, and so
profitable for man, as the Scriptures mention; with what face can it be said,
that God punished his Son only for vengeance? or that whatsoever Christ
suffered (all his life long) specially at his death, was Defenc. page 51. l. 4.
very wrath and vengeance from God properly taken? Christ suffered the same
things here on earth, which the godly likewise do in this life, as appears by
the history of his death and passion; and other pains or deaths in Christ the
Scriptures do not specify. Gods counsel in decreeing the Cross of Christ
for man's redemption, considering the true desert of our sin and terrible
vengeance provided for others, was vary favorable and fatherly, not
ouerpressing the patience of Christ's humane nature, nor wearying his
obedience; and had in it far more gracious and glorious intents and events,
than our afflictions can or ought any way to match or approach. If then Gods
favor to his elect make their sufferings in this life no wrath, nor vengeance,
nor so much as punishments; why should the exceeding love and admirable honor
wherewith God accepted and advanced the death of his Son for man's salvation,
seem to any sober man very wrath, true vengeance, or the proper punishment of
sin provided and reserved for reprobate men and angels?

It was not for correction, you say.] What then? ergo for vengeance? Who being
in his right wits would so reason? God afflicts his Saints often times for
probation, for perfection, for coronation, as the Scriptures avouch, and not
for correction. May a man thence conclude by your Logic, that these
afflictions of the Godly are true punishment and proper vengeance? Your self
most withstand it. Why then since Christ's afflictions had in them a clear
illustration of Gods wisdom, power, and love toward man, somewhat blemished
and obscured in man's fall by Satan's craft, and a full recompense to his
holiness and justice, neglected and irritated by man's unrighteousness,
besides the obedience, sufficience, and preualence of his Son thereby
declared; why should, I say, those afflictions of Christ great and small,
during his life and at his death, seem to any man that is well advised, the
true wrath, proper vengeance and right punishment that was prepared for
sinners? Yea since the proper vengeance and right punishment of sin must be
common to sinful men with the sinful Angels, in as much as they both sinned,
and shall both receive the due wages of sin; how can the corporal
afflictions of this life, wherein the devils can not partake with men, be
called the proper vengeance and right punishment of sin? And who but you,
hearing our Savior pronounce that everlasting fire is the full payment and
proper punishment of wicked and accursed men and Angels, would labor with such
loose and lewd collections to bring Christ Jesus within the compass of the
full punishment and proper vengeance due to sin? Wherefore take back your
riotous and irreligious terms: As they are not proved by any Scripture, so
are they not to be suffered in Christian Religion, because they are but clouds
to cloak the fantastical frame of your new hell. In the sharpness of the
punishment exacted by God on the manhood of his own Son for our sins,
though far different from that which the wicked do and shall feel, and
which the Scriptures call the wrath to come; (wherein the devils shall have
their portion, even in the lake that burns with fire and brimstone,) God
would have us learn, how much he detesteth our sins; how easy all the
plagues, which we suffer in this life, are in respect of that we deserve; how
infinite the love and mercy of God was toward us, to lay the burden, which we
could not have borne, on the shoulders of his only Son, who for his
dignity, innocence, and every way sufficiency was able to quench that wrath,
that everlastingly and intolerably would have burnt against us to our final
and perpetual destruction of body and soul. For if Gods own Son, though he
did recompense our sins with his infinite humility, obedience, and
sanctity, was yet pursued unto death in most painful and reproachful manner
for our sakes, before we could be quited from the guilt and load of our sins;
had we appeared in the just judgment of God to receive the reward of our
manifold iniquities, what could have been the end thereof but a most dreadful
damnation of body and soul to hell fire for ever with the desperate and damned
spirits? This God would have us observe in the death of his Son, though there
be many other points of Gods wisdom, power, and love toward Christ himself,
which the Scriptures enclose in the Cross of Christ.

That then Gods wrath and displeasure against our sins appeared in the Cross
v^ngeance proper to the wicked appeared not in the Cr^sse of Christ.
of Christ, I do not deny, speaking of wrath after the manner of the Sacred
Scriptures. But that any wrath or vengeance proper to the wicked was therein
offered or executed on Christ, or that he suffered the just and full punishment
allotted to others for sin, (Save that his sufferings were in his person the
full price of our Redemption, I mean a most sufficient satisfaction and
recompense for all the sins of the world) I find no mention made thereof in
all the Scriptures, nor see any just cause or proof thereof alleged by you in
all your writings. For since you will not endure, that any thing executed on
the godly shall be truly called wrath; it is evident that the wrath which you
imagine Christ suffered, must be proper to the wicked, before it can be rightly
called wrath; because the godly feel no part of Gods wrath, little nor great,
as you suppose. Now that Christ suffered the wrath of God provided for the
sins of the wicked only; and no way common to the godly; this is both a
false, and a wicked proposition of yours, and though you every where urge it,
you no where prove it, but boldly, as your fashion is, affirming it, you
think the world bound to embrace it.

I find by the Scriptures that the wrath which Christ suffered in Soul and
Body, differed from that which is proper to the wicked as well in the Nature
and measure of the pains, as in the purpose of the punisher, and inward peace
of the sufferer, and in all the consequents of the pains themselves. In this
world the wicked find subtraction of all grace and favor, confusion and
desperation; in the world to come exclusion from glory, Malediction, and
damnation wholly and everlastingly light on them; none of which may be
transferred to Christ without intolerable blasphemy. Yet pain you think
Christ suffered, and more then pain the wicked and damned do not suffer.]
Were that true which is most false, that the damned suffer no more then pain,
though indeed in hell cuery thing does pain them, yet all pains are not of
the same nature and kind; and no pains felt in this life come near the pains
of hell whereof this mortal life and flesh is not capable. The pain of fire
we see does presently cut of this life, and some diseases so much heat the
body, that they do the like; and yet the pain and force of this natural
fire, or of any sickness is nothing comparable to the fury of hell fire, for
which the bodies of the wicked must be made immortal, before they can endure
it. All aches and agues do pain the body, all fears and sorrows afflict the
soul and spirit of man. Shall we thence conclude, that all men at all times,
when they are pained or grieved, suffer the pains of hell, because it is pain
which the damned do suffer? It is more then profane abusing and deluding the
terrible judgments of God against sin to suppose, that all pains of body
and soul are hell pains in nature and kind, which you wrap under the fold of
proper wrath and right punishment of sin, because they are pains. Wherefore
they must either be the self same pains, that God in his just and fierce
wrath inflicted on the damned; or you shall never infer by phrases of your
own making, which only serve to hide your own meaning, that Christ suffered
the pains of hell.

As for Gods wrath against sin, it has many degrees and parts by the verdict
of Gods wrath against sin has many degrees and parts.
holy Scripture, though you will not hear thereof. For as Gods blessings and
benefits, when he first made man, were of his heavenly goodness richly provided
for man, and plentifully powered on the body and soul of man; as well for the
leading of this life in plenty, safety, and delight, as for the surer attaining
of everlasting joy and bliss in an other place: so when man by sin fell from
God, by justice God deprived him and his of all those earthly and bodily
favors and comforts no less then of the spiritual and inward gifts and
graces of the mind; by that means making way to his everlasting and dreadful
Judgments against sin. Now if these external things bestowed on man in his
first creation, were justly called, and must be confessed in their kind, to be
the blessings and favors of God afforded to all mankind, when he made man and
the whole world for his use; then out of question the taking them away from
man, and subiecting him by justice to the contrary for sin committed, may as
truly be named, and must be believed, to be the signs and effects of Gods
displeasure against sin, which the Scripture names wrath. And so God calls
either of them when he Deuteronomy. 28.
promises the one to the obseruers of his Law, and Deuteronomy. 28.
threatens the other to the breakers thereof; who uses not to promise or
threaten words but deeds. Neither has it any reason because the rejecting of
man from the greater and higher blessings of inward grace and eternal bliss
was far the sorer and sharper punishment of man's sin, that therefore the
withdrawing of these should be no degree nor effect of Gods wrath against
sin; no more then the loss of a leg or an arm should be counted no mayme,
because a man has an head and an heart, which are more principal parts of his
body. Wherefore though in comparison they may be justly diminished, and abased
far beneath the worthiness of the rest of Gods blessings, which are reserved
for his Children in an other life; yet can they not be denied to be Gods
blessings even in this life: and if to give them to man, when he was first
made, were the favor and bounty of God toward man, which no Christian may
deny; to take them from man for sin, must truly argue Gods displeasure
against sin, not in improper speech, as you gloze, but in a less degree then
those, which bring with them perpetual subversion of Body and Soul.

And when the Scriptures mean to express the spiritual and eternal wrath of
God, they do it not by propriety of words as you pretend; but by different
circumstances: either of the TIME after this life, when no wrath is executed
but that which is everlasting; as Christ 1 Thessalonians. 1.
delivers us from the wrath to come; and thou Romans 2.
heapest up wrath against the day of wrath, which is the day of judgment; or
of the PERSONS, who are wicked, and the Romans 9.
vessels of wrath prepared to destruction, and for whom is reserved the mist of
darkness for ever; as, Ephesians. 5.
for such things comes the wrath of God on the Children of unbelief; or of
the CONTINVANCE which never cease, as John 3.
the wrath of God abides on him that believes not; or of the HIGTH thereof
when it is full, as 1 Thessalonians. 2.
the wrath of God is come upon them to the uttermost: or of the CONTRARY when
it is eternal life; as, 1 Thessalonians. 5.
God has not appointed us unto wrath, but to obtain Salvation by Jesus
Christ: or of the CONSEQVENTS which are sudden destruction and such like; as,
Psalm. 2.
kiss the Son, least he be angry, and ye perish in the way; when his wrath
shall suddenly burn, blessed are they that trust in him. By these and such
like particulars we may perceive, when the Scriptures speak of the one wrath,
and when of the other; but otherwise the words are common to both, as also the
cause which is sin. O Lord, says Moses, Exodus 32.
why does thy wrath wax hot against thy people? turn from thy fierce wrath
and desist from this evil toward thy People. And again, Deuteronomy. 9.
I fell down (says he) forty days and forty nights before the Lord,
because of all your sins, which ye had sinned, doing wickedly in the sight
of the Lord and provoking him. For I was afraid of the wrath and indignation,
wherewith the Lord was kindled against you to destroy you, and the Lord heard
me at that time also. Exceeding many are the places, which teach us, that our
iniquities auert the outward blessing, of this life, and that our sins Iere.
5.
hinder good things from us; Though God after that, comfort his people, when
their Esa. 40.
warrefare is accomplished, and they have received sufficient Correction at the
hands of God for all their sins. Surely these warnings of the holy Ghost are
not empty words or improper speeches; but effectual and faithful instructions
for the Church of God; to learn them, that God does visit their sins, when
they forget to repent and obey; though he spare them in comparison of that
wrath, which is effunded on the wicked. And therefore the name of wrath is
rightly and truly applied in the Scriptures, even to those afflictions
wherewith God scourges his own Children for their negligence and impenitence,
though God have an other and greater, which is eternal wrath, laid up in store
for the Reprobate, who die without Repentance and Remission of their sins.

Howsoever the strife for words stands, wherein I confess I may not be
brought to disalow the tongue and pen of the holy Ghost; it is most certain,
that the Gospel reports of Christ's sufferings nothing, but what was common to
him with his members, even in this life where he suffered. The Apostles
plainly prove as much, to wit that we have Philip. 3.
fellowship and 2. Co^in. 1.
communion with Christ's afflictions, and are 1. Pet. 4.
conformed to his death. Now there is no communion, but where the same things
are common to both, though the degrees may differ. And you your self, when it
makes for you, can urge, that the Apostle speaking of Christ's sufferings,
says; Hebr. 4.
He was tempted in all things like (to us) yet without sin. So that in my
judgment it is a most clear case, as well by the witness of Scripture, as by
your own confession; that all Christ's sufferings were LIKE, yea the SAME that
ours are, as being common to both; and consequently if you any way understand
what belongs to truth or reason, the sufferings of the godly must either be
wrath as well as Christ's, or if their be not, his were not, since they were
the same. And so the godly must either in all their afflictions, small and
great, suffer as Christ did the proper wrath of God, and true pains of hell,
which you make equivalent: or if the godly do not so suffer, then Christ did
not so suffer. If you fly to the purpose of the punisher, which was different
in Christ and his members, and think there to succor your self, you come to
short: the purpose of God in Christ's afflictions, as I have showed by the
Scriptures, was far more favorable and honorable in Christ, then it can be
to any of the elect. And therefore Gods purpose in Christ's punishment will far
der free him from hell pains, then it will any of the faithful.

The proportion of the pain which Christ suffered, and the inward peace of the
sufferer, will prove the same. For where the pains of hell exceed the patience
of men and Angels, and are no way possible to be suffered in the weakness of
our mortal bodies; the measure of Christ's pain was so proportioned to the
strength of his flesh, that it neither overwhelmed his life, nor his patience.
And though his sweat were like blood in his earnest prayer and Agony, yet no
Scripture decideth, whether that were for pain, fear, or zeal; and that
dured but a while in the Garden, where as after, when his afflictions and
pains were at sorest, he showed no sign of shrinking either at the torments
of his body, or at the affliction of his mind; but as the Apostle says, Hebr.
12.
For the joy set before him, endured the Cross, and despised the shame; not
wearied nor fainting in mind, but with most perfect obedience, and quiet
patience persisting to the end. This conflict between pain and patience, to
serve Gods glory and obey Gods will, Christ proposes to all his members on
the same condition that it was offered to his humane nature. Revel. 3.
To him that overcomes (says he) will I give to sit with me in my throne,
even as I overcame, and ^it with my Father in his throne.

As for the consequents of hell pains, it is so brutish blasphemy to affirm
them of Christ, that I forbear to object them. I have often named them, and
you say, you Defenc. page 52. li. 8.
abhor such blasphemies as well as ^ do, that Christ so suffered hell
pains.] But Sir, you and your friends must show by the Scriptures that God
has severed these consequents I mean, reiection, reprobation, confusion,
malediction diction, desperation, and such like, from the true pains of hell.
The Scripture proposes them as necessary and infallible consequents to the
true pains of hell: You will sever them, because otherwise Christ must either
not suffer the true pains of hell, which euerteth all your new Doctrine; or he
must also suffer these, which the Scriptures annexe to the true pains of hell.
If you confess the first, that Christ did not suffer the true pains of hell;
the Question is well ended: If you sever these consequents from the true pains
of hell, show by what authority of sacred Scriptures you do it; and then you
may be excused from lewd and wicked presumption. For if God by his word
revealed has joined them together, you do or should know what sacrilege it
is for your pleasure to pull them in sunder. Let your Reader therefore judge,
whether you can be quited from the one, except you show good warrant for the
other; which as yet you neither have done, nor offered to do.

Defenc. page 53. l. 6.
Your self grant expressly, that the wrath of God is hell; indeed only it
causes hell to be cruel; yea you grant it to be sharper then hell. So that we
see hereby how vainly you say; out of this proposition, Christ suffered for us
the wrath of God for sin, I shall never conclude, ergo he suffered the true
pains of hell. I have here showed you I trust that this follows well, seeing
the wrath of God, which Christ fel^ in his spirit, was his right and proper
wrath, albeit he suffered not all, nor the whole wrath of God, nor every part
thereof, just as the damned do.] Here you see your full purpose is to
conclude, that Christ suffered for us the true pains of hell, though it has
been your policy to conceal so much from the Reader all this while. And
indeed howsoever you dissemble it, because you can no way prooueit, The death
of Christ's soul, and the true pains of hell or of the Damned are the maine
marks which you shoot at; though you closely carry it in other terms, which
are more general and ambiguous, as the wrath of God, and the punishment of
sin, to keep your Reader from discovering your foolish reasons, and
rejecting your wicked devices. But cough up your conceits freely, and wander
not thus about a wood of words, to show your contentious spirit, or at least to
hide your hateful mysteries. Here you have showed, you trust, that it
follows well, seeing the wrath, that Christ felt in his spirit, was right and
proper wrath.] You have showed us what you intend; but neither here, nor else
where do you show by what grounds of reason, and truth you can infer it.
Christ suffered proper wrath and that in spirit, you say.] You never went about
to define or describe what proper wrath is; much less have you any way proved
that, which Christ suffered, to be proper wrath. And now on the sudden you bend
up your bristles, and boast you have showed, that Christ suffered the true
pains of hell. But by what Scriptures I pray you have you showed it, or by
what Fathers? Or if you have neither of those to derive your doctrine from;
what grounds of reason have you produced for it? You have roued ignorantly,
confusedly, and absurdly at the sufferings of man's soul; you have filled our
ears with certain new phrases of proper, very, and right wrath and vengeance
for sin; but first and last you have proved nothing; nay I see not so much as
any offer of proof, but a bold project of trifles and terms to support your
errors.

But I grant expressly, that the wrath of God is hell.] Having showed by sundry
Fathers the very page before, that the wrath of God is often taken for the
effects thereof, and so for any punishment which God inflicteth for sin; I
granted that hell and Conclus. pa. 247. li. 20. and 21.
all the ^orments there, mightiustly be called the wrath of God, because they
aret the sharpest effects of Gods wrath against sin. What conclude you
thence? ergo every effect or degree of Gods wrath is hell. If you clamper us
such conclusions, you are fitter to ring a bell, than to write a book. What
show of reason has this illation of yours? The wrath of God is applied to all
the pains and punishments of sin, and so by consequent to hell, as to the
greatest vengeance that God takes of men or devils for sin. Will you hence
infer, hell is the greatest punishment of sin, ergo hell is all the
punishment that God inflicteth for sin, or whatsoever God inflicteth for
sin, is hell? By this Logike, a rotten tooth, a gowtie toe, a broken head, or
a lame leg, are the true pains of hell, and all men living and dying are in
the pains of hell. But you will create us a new compass of hell, that shall
contain all that the wicked do suffer in this life or elsewhere, be it never
so little.] If you will fall to creating of new helles, show your commission;
otherwise you may create your self a worse condition than you are ware of.
Think you that any wise or godly Reader will rest himself upon such
inventions or such conclusions as these be?

Defenc. pa. 53. li 4.
Who can say how little or how small the pain was which Christ suffered?] You
only can tell how great it was; for you say, Christ Ibidem page 52 li. 26.
suffered a sense of Gods wrath equal to hell it self, and to all the
tor^ents thereof. For this, if you would spare us as well proofs as words, we
might at length perhaps believe you meant some truth. Why presume you to
determine a just equality in Christ's sufferings to the very pains of hell
upon your own head? What Scripture teaches you so to say? Defenc. page 53.
li. 5.
Nay, who can (say you) decla^ or comprehend the infinite greatness of it?]
You have comprehended and declared the just measure of it; for you make it
equal with hell. And yet, as constant in this as in all other things, you
presently add, that [ Christ's Defenc. page 52. li. 32.
anguish might very well be, and was no doubt infinite, even in those bodily
stripes and wounds, whose pains otherwise were Christ and not suffer pains
truly infinite.
finite.] Where if you take infinite for great, or above men's reach and
knowledge, as sometimes the word is used, then speak you nothing to the
purpose. For Christ's pains may be great and intolerable to us, though nothing
near the pains of hell. But if you take infinite, as contrary to finite,
which you do in this place by opposing it to finite, then infinite indeed is
more than hell: for the pains of hell are finite in degree, though infinite in
having no end. Howbeit, in the mean while you wrong the Godhead of Christ, in
whom nothing is infinite, besides his Divine Nature, and the force thereof. So
that if Christ did suffer pains truly infinite, his Godhead must suffer,
which is infinite blasphemy; by reason his manhood being a creature could not,
nor might not suffer but that which was finite, both in weight and end. Such
speculations you broach out of your own breast, without any likelihood of
truth or concurrence with the sacred Scriptures; and then you ask Who can
limit or measure ^ Defenc. page 52. li. 28.
the fury of Gods severe justice against sin?] As if God who is truly
infinite as well in power, as in all other points, did his uttermost against
Christ; and the creature in Christ were able to bear the brunt of the most
that Gods justice and power could inflict upon him. Such desperate untruths
well become your sobriety, who will say any thing, so you may have some shift
of words to shroud your self under: but the Scriptures will teach you, that
Christ's sufferings were of infinite price in respect of the person who was God
and man, not of infinite pain which exceeds the power and strength of all
creatures.

I ask, do you grant, that Christ suffered Gods wrath in spirit, as the
Apostle (1 Thessalonians. 5.) distinguishes the spirit and the soul?] I answer, do
you hear, that you grossly mistake the Apostle, if you make the soul and the
spirit two several substances in man? otherwise if they be but one, your
question is very childish. For the immortal substance of man's soul suffers,
whether it be by her sense, affections, understanding, or will. And this is no
Sophistry deceiving you with the word soul; but it is the recalling you to
conceive rightly of the soul of man, which is an immortal and spiritual
substance, subject to pain as well by her understanding and sense, as by her
affections and will; and by what other means soever it pleases God to punish
her. As for the wrath, which you would have suffered in Christ's spirit, when
you tell us what you mean by wrath, whether the apprehension of Gods wrath
against our sin, or the absolute impression of pain from the immediate hand
of God; or the due consideration of the case wherein Christ stood, when he
suffered for our sins, which might justly breed fear, care and sorrow in his
soul, besides the affliction of bodily pains and anguish, which his immortal
and humane spirit must needs discern and feel; you shall receive a fuller
answer. Till then hold us excused, if we spend not time to guess and grope
after your blind and hid fancies. Howbeit, whatsoever Christ suffered in his
soul, it was religious and meritorious in him, I mean even the fear, sorrow
and smart, which he humbly, obediently, and patiently suffered, as from the
hand of God, whosoever were the means: and other wrath than that, you shall
never be able to prove was inflicted on Christ's spirit or soul.

Defenc. page 52. li. 28.
Who can say, but that this was as hot and scorching as hell fire it self?] We
see then your forwardness to have it so; but withal your foolishness, that
daunting all others as vnpriuie to Gods secrets, and Christ's sufferings, you
only take upon you to tell us out of your casting box, how great and how hot
the pain was, which Christ suffered in soul; even as great and as hot as hell
fire it self. What dreams be these to mock men withal, and to freight the
Christian faith with? As if you had of late received some Revelation from
heaven, that Christ's pain was full as hot as hell fire. I will not diminish
the pains which the Son of God suffered for our sakes; but am well content
to aggrauate them to the highest, so far as the Scriptures give me any light
or leading; but you that extenuate his pains described in the Scriptures, and
devise other pains for him as hot as hell fire, no where testified by the Holy
Ghost, what defense can you bring for your doings? ( Who can say no?) Nay who
can say yea, that does not rush headlong into Gods secret counsels, as you do?
Be these the proofs whereon you pin the pains of hell suffered in Christ's
soul? Who can say they were not as hot and scorching as hell fire it self?]
Fry in your folly, I wish you no worse fire; if I knew not your vain, I
should think you sicker than you are.

I have no doubt but Christ's pain on the Cross was proportioned to his
patience; which God meant to prove, though not to ouerpresse: otherwise the
measure of his pain, save that it exceeded not the strength of his manhood, as
I do not know, no more does any man living, except he will deceive himself
with his own dreams, as this Discourser does. For though we may by nature, in
some sort, conjecture how grievous it was for Christ to hang three hours by
the wounds of his hands and feet, all his bones being unjointed; yet know we
not how far the power and justice of God made way to that pain, who can by
any means, as well as without all means, increase pain to what degree he
will. For my part therefore I will not meddle with any certain measure of
Christ's pains felt in his body or soul, by which his soul might easily be
afflicted as far as his humane strength could stretch: but the matching and
evening of it with hell fire, I take to be a presumptuous and irreligious
device of this Dreamer, for the reasons which I have formerly showed; to wit,
that hell pains are not executed in this life, where Christ suffered; nor
sufferable to the body, which is mortal; nor tolerable to the strength of men
or angels. Now though the gifts and graces of Gods Spirit in the soul of
Christ exceeded the measure of angels, as well for himself who is Lord and
Judge over all, as for us that receive of his fullness; yet in his crucifying,
the Scriptures note his infirmity, not his infinity, and avouch him by the
suffering of death, to be inferior to the angels, and not in strength of flesh
to be superior unto them, who are not able to endure hell pains with
patience, as we find by trial in devils. Wherefore assure thy self Christian
Reader they are more than follies, which this man fableth of Christ's pains
equal and even to hell fire it self; and such is his constancy in his new
Divinity, that sometimes Christ suffered the very pains of hell themselves,
and the same which the damned do; sometimes Christ's pain was equal to it,
and as hot as hell fire, and so not the very same that the damned do suffer,
who feel indeed the true force of hell fire, though not in that heat and
height, which they shall feel it, at and after the day of judgment.

Defenc. pa. 51. l. 18.
It is most necessary and most comfortable to be understood of all men, how
the Lord assigned to his Son in the work of redemption two persons as it
were, or countenances or conditions. His own naturally, which God ever dearly
loved, and our countenance or person or condition, which the Lord truly
accursed and punished. His own Nature felt the sorrow and pain of the curse
and hatred: but the hatred and curse was bent against the load of our sin,
wherein he stood forth as guilty before God, and appeared as it were clothed
therewith.] The taking of our Nature, person, and cause by the Son of God for
our salvation, is a key of Christian piety that most concerns, and most
profits us, if it be rightly understood. But as Waspes out of sweet flowers
gather sharp and hot liquors; so out of the wholesome mysteries of true
religion, you labor to increase the tartness of your unwholesome humor. The
eternal and true Son of God, by the determinate counsel of his Father,
took our humane nature (that is, both the body and soul of man) into one and
the same person with his divine glory; that by the sanctity, power, and
dignity of the one, the baseness and weakness of the other might with more
certainty, security, and facility, perform the work of our redemption. For
by the near and inseparable knitting of those two natures together, not only
the person was able by his own power to destroy sin, death, and Satan; and
of his own right to give the spirit of truth and grace, and everlasting
righteousness and happiness to all that believe in him, but his birth, life,
and death; that is, his humility, obedience, and patience were of infinite
price and value with God, by reason the same person that so humbled himself to
obey the will, and suffer the hand of his Father, was also God; though he could
not suffer in his divine, but only in his humane nature. And to assure us of
his mercies toward us by making us partakers of his graces and merits with
him; he took all his elect into one and the same body with him, joining
himself unto them by the power of his spirit, as the head to the members, that
from him they might draw the strength, hope, and joy of eternal life; and all
his meritorious passions, and victorious actions be fully theirs, as performed
in their names and to their uses, by him that for their sakes became their like
and their leader, I mean their head and their Savior.

And because sin was the thing which severed us from Gods holiness, and
provoked his justice against us, subiecting us to death and damnation; Christ
therefore took upon him the recompense of his Fathers holiness by his
obedience, and the preseruance of his Fathers justice by his patience;
admitting into his humane soul and body, not the infection or pollution of
our sin, much less the confusion or destruction due to us for sin, (since
he could neither be defiled with our sin, nor damned for our sin;) but the
purgation and satisfaction of our sins. To which end, by his obedience he
abolished our disobedience; that Roman. 5.
as by one man's disobedience (which was Adam) many were made sinners, so by the
obedience of one (which is Christ) many (should) be made righteous; and
Coloss. ^.
through death (suffered) in the body of his flesh Hebr. 9.
for the redemption of (our) transgressions he Col^st. 1.
reconciled us to God, and set at peace by the blood of his Cross, things in
earth, and things in heaven; 1. Pet. 2.
bearing our finnes in his body on the tree, that we might be healed by his
stripes, We then were in our selves defiled, hated, accursed, rejected and
condemned for sin; yet Christ our Redeemer and Savior took us into
himself, and our cause upon himself, not to partake with us in our spiritual
filthiness, and eternal wretchedness, but to cleanse us from the one, and to
free us from the other. So that we did neither defile, nor endanger him; But 1.
John ^.
his blood washed us from all our sins, and by (his) Hebr. 2.
death he destroyed him that had power over death, even the devil.

You speak then not only without book, but without truth, when you say,
that Christ was ever dearly loved of God for his own condition; yet in or for
our condition he was truly accursed and hated. You might with as much faith
and religion have said, That Christ by or with our condition was truly
polluted with sin, and truly rejected, confounded, and damned for sin. For
so were we, and if his taking our cause upon him do truly and necessarily
subject him to our deserts and dangers, then can none of these things be
avoided, which you so much abhor as blasphemies. All those things were due to
us in the highest degree, even when Christ took us and our cause unto him; and
were not released unto us, but in Christ and for Christ; and consequently if
your two countenances and conditions in Christ be such as you make, you may
as well affirm the last as the first, that is as well pollution of sin, and
damnation for sin, as malediction and hatred for sin. But who is so foolish
amongst men, as to think or call him a Thief and a Felon, that upon
repentance of the party, and recompense for the fact, entreats and obteineth
pardon for one that was a Thief and a Felon? or so childish to say, that none
can ransom a Prisoner condemned to death, but by suffering the same death
which the other should have done? How come you then to conclude of Christ,
because it pleased him to be our Mediator and Redeemer, that therefore he was
guilty of our sin, or liable to the same death of body and soul, which
otherwise we should have suffered? A ransom he paid for us of far more value
than we were worth, which was his obedience unto death, and the shedding of
his precious blood for us. But he neither owed nor paid the destruction or
damnation of himself, who neither by his person could, nor by his office
needed to suffer any such thing. He came John 6.
to give his flesh for the life of the world; and Ioh. 10.
to lay down his life for his sheep, that his death might be a ransom for
us, and for our transgressions. Farther or other ransom than this, the
Scripture mentions none, and therefore God required none, who by his will
revealed has thoroughly expressed what recompense for us best contented both his
holiness and justice.

Could not Christ stand ever blessed and beloved in his own Nature and yet be
truly accursed and hated in our condition and person?] In the wicked God hates
and accurseth their persons for their sins, because their iniquities are
neither ransomed, nor repented, and so not pardoned: but in Christ and his
members it was and is far otherwise. God still hates and abhors the
sins as well of the faithful, as of the wicked; but because he loves the
persons of his elect whom he has adopted in Christ his Son, therefore he
destroys their sins in them by repentance, and remission thereof for
Christ's sake, and saves their persons, whom he can not be said to hate;
though he truly hate their sins, by reason that love and hatred in God can
not be permixed or varied, as they are in men. For Gods love is perfect and
constant, as likewise his hatred; and for that cause either in him is
perpetual without ceasing or altering. If Gods love to men for Christ's sake
be so settled, that it can not be removed, nor transferred to the contrary, how
much more then was the natural and eternal love of God toward the person of
his Son, so fixed, and fervent iu the highest degree, that for no cause, and
in no condition he could be truly hated or accursed of God? The partaking with
us in penury, sorrow, shame and death; which first came in as signs and
effects of Gods just displeasure against sin, and curse upon sin; made him
the more blessed, and beloved of God; since the voluntary submitting himself
to these things in his humane nature, taught us obedience and patience under
the mighty hand of God; and how rightly to distinguish, and willingly to want
temporal and earthly blessings, that we may be partakers of eternal and
heavenly.

It is no consequent therefore in us, that we are truly accursed or hated of
God, because we are often deprived of his earthly blessings, and so subjected
to his temporal and external curses; for that we enjoy by faith and hope,
greater and perfecter blessings; which being in honor, comfort, and use, far
above the other, make us blessed; and so remaining blessed for possessing the
better, we can not be accursed for wanting the smaller; which indeed do not
truly make men blessed or cursed, since the lack of them does not exclude the
true and eternal blessings of God. Much less then might the nature or person
of Christ, which so greatly abounded in all spiritual and heavenly blessings,
be counted accursed and hated of God, because he was content to taste of those
things, which were inflicted on our condition as remembrances of Gods
displeasure against our sin. For since no man's person can be truly blessed
and truly accursed with God, in as much as they are perfect contraries, and so
the preualent state does prove the person to be either blessed or cursed, but
not both; much less then might the person of Christ be both, though he did
undergo some things in this life, which were the priuations of Gods outward and
earthly blessings, and so kinds of curses in their first entrance and
ordinance. And yet because those temporal and external curses were nether
permanent, nor predominant in Christ's person or condition, whether you respect
his own or ours in him, and he otherwise was a fountain of blessing for
himself and all us; it is evident that Christ's suffering those outward and
earthly curses (for so the Scripture calls the priuations of Gods blessings
in the same kinds) imposed on man's condition for sin, could not prevail to
make him accursed or hated with God. For as Christ was 2. Cor. 5.
made sin for us, and yet no sinner, but still continued holy, Hebr. 7.
harmless, undefiled, and separate from sinners: so was he made a curse for
us, and yet not accursed: by reason he endured the smart of our sin, and
tasted of our curse in this life; but he no ways received the guilt, or
endured the dominion of either; much less was he by them deprived of any part
of his inward and everlasting blessings; which being by many degrees superior
to the other, must needs uphold his blessedness, and ouerwhelme the grief and
name of those curses, which were temporally and tolerably laid on man's state
and condition, to make him the humbler in him self, the mindfuller of his
maker, and the warier against the flatteries of that old and crafty Serpent
the Devil. You shall do well therefore, Sir Collector, to learn more reason,
if not more Religion, and even in natural things to remember, that the night
is darkness though it have some light; and the tree may be fruitful, though
some bough wither, and the ^thiope is black, though his teeth be white; and
the Bones be hard, though the Marrow be soft; and so in all cases and creatures
the most prevails, and names the subject, though there be in them some small
admixture of the contrary.

The next thing you undertake is the saluing of a contradiction, with which,
you say, you are charged by me: wherein the patient Reader if he be at leisure
and have the Book at hand, may take a plain view of your idle Rouing, and
little understanding. For I do not charge you with saying, that Christ suffered
ALL he suffered in his whole manhood, as you untruly Defenc. pa. 53. li. 2^.
report I do; Let the Page 248. of my conclusion which you cite, be perused by
him that will: I there expressly touch the contrary. My words are. Conclus. pa.
248.
This Antecedent, as you utter it, does neither good nor hurt to the Question.
That Christ suffered in his whole Manhood for the Redemption of our sins, is
a thing by me never doubted, nor denied: (and) that he suffered all that he
suffered in his whole manhood your self do disclaim in the next Page. Your
Indefinite proposition I said proved nothing; and your self disclaymed the
general. Where now do I charge you with saying that Christ suffered all he
suffered in his whole manhood? Irather discharge you from it, then burden you
with it; only I added, if you should mean otherwise, then your words were
uttered, which I did not say, you did; then your Antecedent had a flat
contradiction in it self. For so you should in one and the same reason
affirm, that Christ suffered all which he suffered in his whole Manhood, and
yet had some sufferings proper to his Soul.

But Defenc page 53. li. 22.
granting Christ to suffer all that he suffered in his whole Manhood, yet Gods
wrath (as Gods wrath) must (you say) be suffered properly and immediately in his
Soul.] The best part of your defense rests on As, and As it were, and you
take it for foam ^ine trick to face out your Reader with an As; but where
before you committed one absurdity, now with helping that, you incur twain.
For still you make one and the same fuffering proper to the soul, and yet
common to body and soul; which in our country is a contrariety,
notwithstanding your As: and adding your As, whereon you presume; you now
affirm, that Gods wrath (as Gods wrath) must be suffered properly and
immediately in Christ's soul; and so the bodily sufferings of Christ by this
latter resolution of yours, were no part of Gods wrath (as Gods wrath;) which
is contrary to your conclusion but the page before, that Defenc. page 52. li.
1.
all (Christ's) afflictions small and great were the effects of Gods very
wrath; and Page 51. li. ^.
whatsoever Christ suffered was very wrath properly taken. But you understand
suffering. for discerning, and so the soul only discerns Wrath must be
measured by Gods intention not man's discerning.
the wrath to be from God, which the body suffers.] Then by your
understanding, Christ's body suffered nothing at all, because it discerned
nothing at all; and so Christ suffered nothing in his whole manhood, which is
contrary to your maine assertion. But here you take suffering for sensitive
discerning, which may be in the body, through or from the soul.] If you may
be suffered to leap to and fro, with what significations of words you please
to devise, you may reach what contrarieties you will for the principles of your
faith, and one As in the end shall mend all. Were it worth the time or pains
to oppose your trifling As, I could ask you, whether condemnation of sin,
corruption of nature and infliction of death on the children of Infidels, be no
parts of Gods wrath (as Gods wrath) because they are not yet by age able to
discern the wrath of God: or whether the curse which God laid on the Genesis 3 v
17.
earth, and Christ on the Mar. 11. v. 21
fig tree, were no curses; because neither the earth, nor the fig tree,
could discern them? But Gods intention makes it wrath; not man's discerning:
and in man it is wrath on either part, body and soul; though only the soul
can discern what and which is wrath from God. As for the goodness of your
reason, if your say may stand for reason, you have said it indeed; but any
thing else that you prove there or elsewhere touching the proper wrath of God,
or the sufferings of Christ's soul from the immediate hand of God, truly I
see not; and that I likewise leave, as I do the rest, to the Readers censure.

Having freed your self from contrarieties, as your manner is, with increasing
them, you hasten now to unload your al surdities: in which, whatsoever I have
said, I could thoroughly fasten on you, notwithstanding your new found shifts of
directly and indirectly, primarily and secundarily; if it could stead Christ's
Church to have your speeches proved absurd: but because I seek to maintain
the truth of our redemption, which is needful for all men to know; and not to
publish your follies farther than the pride of your own reasons compelled me;
as I shortly touched them at the first, so will I now as shortly ouerrunne
them, to-let you see, that I mistake not your words, howsoever you will now
amend them; and not spend long time in displaying your ouersights which may be
better bestowed about the matter itself. You deny not your words, that Christ
assumed not our Nature nor any part of it, but only to suffer in it properly
and immediately. You would feign salve them if you could: but how? Defenc. page
53. li. 37.
All men may see it to be manifest that here you speak of Christ's suffering
for our redemption. Why run you then so unadvisedly to his incarnation, where
Christ assumed our Nature, and not in his passion? Defenc. page 54. li 7.
Your meaning (you say) was no more b^t to exclude that which I affirm, that
Christ took hi^ humane soul to suffer in it only from and by the body. Would
you excuse your follies by belying my words? Where do I affirm, that Christ
took his humane soul to suffer in it only from and by the body? You talk of
reasonable and just aduersa^ies; what reason or justice call you this, to cite
words in my name, which I never spoke nor wrote, and so falsely to excuse your
words by mine? And yet there is good difference between these two sentences;
Christ took his humane soul to suffer in it only from the body and Christ
assumed not our Nature, nor any part of it, but only to suffer in it properly
and immediately. The first admits Christ's sufferings as one respect why he
took an humane soul; which is very true: The other excludes all other
respects of taking body or soul, save only to suffer; which is as false as
the first is true. That was not your meaning, you will say. Then learn to
balance your words better, before you so rashly power them forth; and blame
not your mi^ker, who reads the words, but sees not your meaning. But come to
your words affirmative, since your negative are so far out of square.

Defenc. pa. 54. l. 1^.
I grant Christ intended, that his humane soul should suffer by Sympathy; but
yet this he intended not DIRECTLY nor PRIMARILY in taking two distinct parts of
our humane nature, our soul and our body.] You would seem learned to the
simple by your doughty distinctions of DIRECTLY and PRIMARILY: and under this
visard of empty words, make them believe there lay some great mysteries. But
take back your toys, wherein you put so much trust: the Christian faith was
preached, written, and received without these needless bon graces of direct
and indirect, primarie and secondari^: they are but dens of your devices to
lurk in. Christ took our soul and our body unto him purposely and fully to
save both: which of the twain he meant directly and primarily to suffer in,
and which indirectly and secondaril^, is a fruitless speculation of yours. The
Christian faith neither has nor needs any such questions. For since man
consists of both, and without either can be no man the Son of God
descending for us and our salvation, directly and primarily purposed to sane,
and suffer in both. And because the body being made of earth, was the weaker
and ba^r part of man, (the soul in will and reason, though not in power and
l^ght, as yet, drawing near to the Angels of God) and by that means further
removed from the dignity and majesty of the Son of God; herefore the
Scriptures more carefully express that he took our flesh; and even therein
suffered death sor the ransom of our sins; though he wanted not a soul,
when he became man; nor any part in him did or could feel and discern the
pain and affliction of his body, but only his soul. The respects of Christ's
coming into the world, and suffering sor us, if we will learn, we need not
your terms of directly and primarily; the holy Ghost has taught us this to be
a 1. Tim. 1.
faithful saying, and worthy of all admitta^ that Christ Jesus came into the
world to save sinners. Himself is a witness without all exception; that Matthew
20.
he came to serve, and to give his life a ransom for many. Yea his John 6.
flesh which he gave for the life of the world, is the bre^d that came down
from heaven. If then Coloss. 1.
things in earth and things in heaven were pacified by the blood of his Cross,
and we reconciled through death in the body of his flesh, in which he bare our
si^es on the tree: It is certain that Christ's body, blood, and death on the
Cross, and consequently his sufferings from these and by these, were directly
and primarily intended as the means of our redemption and reconciliation: and
your vain imagination of the souls most principal disposition, in comparison
whereof Christ (say you) did not respect this sensitive suffering by Sympathy
with and from the body, which is common to us with beasts; is a lewd and
irreligious reproach to the death and Cross of Christ Jesus. For, what if the
body of a beast may be crucified, and his blood shed, by piercing and wounding
as Christ's was? shall we therefore say that Christ's death and passion were
common to brute beasts? Would any man frame his heart thus to think, or his
tongue thus to speak, but he that is bruter then a beast? Of your hell pains
may it not more truly be said, that as you would cast them on Christ's soul,
they should be common to him with devils; who I troe are worse then beasts?
But these be meet matters for such a master in Israel as you are.

You untruly and unlearnedly suppose the corporal afflictions of the Saints,
and of Christ himself, to pierce no further then into the external sensitive
part, which you make common to them with beasts: and sufferings proper to
reasonable creatures you admit none, but your hell pains, which are common to
them with devils. So that by your profound divinity all Christian men suffer
either as beasts, or as devils. Which error of yours I have sufficiently
refuted before; and by that informed the Reader that the chastening and
afflicting the soul of man by temporal and external means and pains from
the body is proper to men, and not common to beasts, who have no souls, nor
to devils, who have no bodies: and that God does thus chasten and correct his
children, whose patience is precious in his sight; thereby to try, increase,
and quicken his graces in them, which is blasphemy to affirm either of beasts
or devils. And from what spirit this can proceed, to yield Christ no more
sense, taste, nor thought of his bodily sufferings, then you do to a beast,
let the Reader judge; for my part I abhor such heathenish, if not hellish
comparisons. But sense you will say, is common to man and beast.] I have no
doubt that beasts do hear and see, smell, taste and feel, as well as men;
but even in all these five, and specially in hearing, seeing, and feeling, the
soul of man shows difference sufficient betwixt a man and a beast. For man
by his immortal and reasonable spirit, discerns and understands what he
hears, sees, or feels, which beasts cannot do; and he conceaueth not
only the things, which affect his senses, but the causes, effects, adjuncts,
consequents, and remedies thereof; and thereby frames himself, if he be
religious, to behold therein the work and will of God, which is as far from
beasts, as reason and grace. Though then ears, eyes, and sinews be common to
men with beasts; yet in them and by them the soul of man works, and
suffers; which because beasts have not, it is a very gross oversight of
yours (Sir Discourser) to make the bodily sufferings of Christ common to him
with beasts; in which the soul of Christ showed so much obedience, patience,
submission, devotion, and love, that God accepted those sufferings violently
and injuriously inflicted on Christ's body, but humbly, religiously, and
willingly received in his soul, as the full satisfaction for our sins.

Defenc. page 55. l. 8.
There is no reason in the world, nor likelihood, that the natural faculty in
Christ's soul of proper and immediate suffering for our sins should have no
use; and a suffering of pains only from and by the body should be
sufficient; when as in his doing of righteousness for us, his souls joint
obedience, and mutually knit together in and with his body was not alone
sufficient. This must needs be a perfect reason for us against you, except you
could by express Scripture disprooue this proportion of like necessity
between the operation of the proper faculties of Christ's humane soul, that is
between his doing and his suffering for us, which you shall never be able to
do.] When and how came you by this authority or liberty, that you may say
what you will in matters of faith without all warrant of holy Scripture, and
your fancies must stand for authentike, except I can disprove them by express
Scripture? Nay first prove them, before we receive them, as you and all other
Christians ought to do, if you will have them pass for grounds of religion;
and then if I can not disprove them by the same Scriptures, they shall go for
good. An answer to this perfect reason of yours if you would have, I answer
you with Tertullian: Tertull. de carne Christi. c. 7.
Non recipio, quod extra Scripturam de tuo infers. I receive not this, which
you bring of your own without the Scripture. And with Athanasius: Athanasius
de incarnatione Christi.
If you will babble other things besides those which are written, why strive
you with us, that are persuaded neither to hear, nor to speak any thing
besides the Scriptures? Show us this proper and immediate suffering for sins
in the soul of Christ (which you so much talk of) by the Scriptures, and we
will think our selves bound to answer it; otherwise it is as easily rejected,
as it is offered.

But there is no reason in the world nor likelihood it should be otherwise.]
Indeed Proper and immediate suffering for sins in the Soul of Christ, is
the Defenders proper device.
there is no reason in the world, nor likelihood it should be so as you have
said. For in Christ's doings and sufferings there was observed, and must be
confessed a clean contrary course. His doings were all just and holy, as he
himself was, and proceeded first from his own mind and will, by the immediate
power and grace of Gods spirit in him, whencesoeuer the outward occasions were
offered him. The sufferings which he received in his body, were all unjust and
violent, proceeding from others, that wickedly persued and oppressed him;
though in all his afflictions he beheld with his mind, and with his will
obeyed the Acts. ^.
hand and Counsel of God, thus by the malice and ignorance of his enemies
Acts. 3.
fulfilling those things, which God before had showed by the mouth of all his
Prophets, that Christ should suffer. So that Christ's obedience and patience in
all his persecutions, came from the same inward powers and graces of his soul
from which all his actions did; though the wrongs and violences were first
offered his body by the wicked. In his inward affections and passions of fear,
grief, and sorrow; his mind was the first apprehender of the causes, that
moved them; and his will the admitter of them. But as in all his actions he
was holy and just, so in all his affections and inward passions, were they
never so grievous unto him, he was not only righteous and innocent, but
religious, and patient; and other passions of the soul in Christ, the
Scripture knows none. As for your suffering of hell pains in the soul of
Christ properly from the immediate hand of God, it is a device proper and
immediate to your self, which you would feign bring in as an other and chief
mean of our redemption, besides that which the Scripture speaks of Christ's
sufferings. Wherein you must pardon me and all true believers, for not
accepting your fancies as any parts of our faith. We read that God is the 2.
Cor. 1.
Father of mercies: that he is the tormentor of souls in hell with his
immediate hand, we do not read; much less that he ^o tormented the soul
of his Son in the time of his passion, which is the maine plat of your new
found hell. The judge shall say, Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting
fire, prepared for the devil and his Angels. Which fire we confess is created
and established by the might, power, and hand of God, as a mean to torment the
damned, both men and Angels, according to their deserts; but that this fire is
nothing else, but the immediate hand of God tormenting the wicked spirits in
hell, as it did the soul of his own Son on the Cross; I take either of
these assertions, not to dissemble with you, to be a gross and palpable
error; strange to the Scriptures and strange to the whole Church of God, before
these our days, wherein some make it their glory rather newly to invent, then
rightly to believe, what the Scriptures deliver, and the Church of Christ from
the beginning received, and reverenced as principles of Christian truth and
piety.

The next point, to wit that by your new found Rules, you make Christ's flesh
needless to our redemption, you grant is an Defenc page 55. ^. 29.
horrible heresy; but you ask how it follows upon your words] I did not
charge you with maintaining purposely that wicked heresy, but with reasoning
so foolishly, and speaking so unadvisedly, that without your direct meaning,
that error was consequent to your words. You would feign see how. Truly it
follows stronger upon your words then I would wish, or you are ware. For
whatsoever was by Gods ordinance needful to the work of our redemption, that
made properly to our redemption. But the sufferings of Christ's soul by or from
the body (which you call by Simpathy) did not make properly to our Redemption,
as you say: ergo the sufferings of Christ's Soul by or from his body were not
needful to the work of our Redemption. Now if the sufferings of Christ's flesh
were not needful to our Redemption, then was his flesh needelesse for our
Redemption by your illation. Which of these propositions can you avoid, but
they are either plainly true, as the Mayor: or fully yours, as all the rest?
Our Redemption being no natural thing, but wholly depending on the counsel and
will of God; whatsoever God appointed as necessary for our Redemption, that
most properly made to our Redemption; and things needless could not appertain
thereto, but improperly. Of all men you may not start from this force of the
word PROPER. For with you, improper wrath is no wrath, improper punishment is
no punishment, and therefore improper belonging to our Redemption, is no
belonging at all, but needless to our Redemption. And since Christ's sufferings
in his body by your assertion, did not make properly to our Redemption; it is
evident they were needless to our Redemption: and if the sufferings of his
flesh were needless, the flesh it self was needless to our Redemption, even
by your own Conclusions. For Trea. pa. 17. ^. 1^.
Christ (you say) assumed not our Nature, nor any part of it, but only to
suffer in it properly and immediately, even for the very purchasing our
Redemption therebyOtherwise he had NO NEED to assume both, but either the one
part or the other. You hear your own Doctrine, that except Christ suffered
properly and immediately in either part of our nature for the purchasing of our
Redemption thereby, he had NO NEED to assume both. But Christ suffered not
properly and immediately in his flesh for the purchasing of our Redemption
thereby, if your words be true, that bodily sufferings properly made not to our
Redemption: He had no need therefore to assume flesh, in which he suffered
nothing, that properly made to our Redemption. Here are the Cart-ropes of your
own collections; the sequels whereof if you deny, you must recall your own
answers and arguments, so peremptorily pronounced in your Treatise.

How false your Resolutions are, and how dissonant from the sacred Scriptures,
will easily appear to him, that has but half an eye. For the sufferings of
Christ's body were not decreed by God to make no more to our Redemption, then
Christ's Defenc. pa. 55. l^. 37.
hunger or his Defenc. pa. 55. l^. 37.
sleep, which are your Resemblances; but they were directly intended by God
himself in Christ's incarnation, and expressly foreshewed by the mouths of his
Prophets, and necessarily to be borne in the body of Christ, before we could be
redeemed, in respect of Gods will so settled and revealed. The Apostle to the
Hebrews going about to prove that Christ was to offer his body and shed his
blood for our sanctification and Redemption, lays this for the ground; Hebr.
8.
Every high Priest is ordained to offer gifts and Sacrifices. Wherefore it was
of NECESSITY, that this Man (Christ) should have somewhat to offer. For (else)
he were not a Priest. And concluding what must be offered; Christ (says he)
being Hebr. 9.
an high Priest of good things to come, by his own blood entered in once into
the holy place, and found eternal Redemption for us. Wherefore Hebr. 10.
when (Christ) comes into the world, he says; Sacrifice and offering (which
are offered by the Law) thou would not, but a body have thou ordained me;
then said I, Lo I come to do thy will, O God. By the which will we are
sanctified, even by the offering of the body of Jesus Christ once. The
suffering of Christ's body and shedding of his blood were exactly purposed, and
openly revealed in Christ's incarnation, as the WILL OF GOD for our Redemption;
and the offering of Christ's body on the Cross WAS OF NECESSITY, as the
Apostle teaches. Our Savior said as much; when he Matthew. 16.
Mark. 8.
Luke 9.
began to show his Disciples, that he must suffer many things of the Elders,
and of the high Priests, and Scribes, and be shine, and rise again the third
day. And when they had forgotten his words, the Angels put them in mind thereof
after his resurrection, bidding them Luke 24. v. 7.
remember, how he spoke unto you saying, the Son of man MVST BE delivered
into the hands of sinful men, and be crucified, and the third day rise again.
And when some of them reporting how he was condemned to death by the Rulers and
crucified, skant believed he was risen again, himself said unto them; Luke.
24. v. 25. 26.
O fools, and slow of heart to believe all, that the Prophets have spoken.
Ought not Christ to have suffered these things, and to enter into his glory?
And to all his Apostles; Verse. 46.
Thus it is written, and THVS OUGHT CHRIST TO HAVE SVFFERED. So that Christ's
bodily sufferings for our Redemption were foreshewed by the Prophets, and OF
NECESSITY to be performed by Christ, in regard they were FOREDECREED of God,
as a part of the ransom for our sins. For though Pilate with the Acts 4.
verse. 28.
Gentiles and the people of Israel gathered themselves together against Jesus,
yet did they nothing to him but whatsoever the hand and counsel of God
determined before to be done. What greater necessity or propriety can you
prove by the Scriptures for any other things, which you dream the Soul of
Christ suffered from the immediate hand of God? If these things did not properly
make for our Redemption, but indirectly and secondarily and by consequent as
you prate; show by the word of God, that your hell pains pertained more
directly to our redemption then these things, which the Scripture speaks of.
But with your rabble of insolent and impertinent terms you come right within
Tertullians Rule. Tertullian aduers. haereticos. cap. 2^.
You believe (these things) without the Scriptures, that you may believe (them)
against the Scriptures. Yea, Hilarious ad Constant^um August.
with a magniloquent vanity you delude the ears of the simple with deceitful
words, whiles you shun to believe that of Christ, which he has taught to be
believed of himself.

It may be, that answerable to the rest of your Idle shifts, you will now say,
Christ's bodily The Souls suffering by Sympathy ^ the Defenders own phrase.
sufferings made directly and properly to our Redemption, but the Souls
suffering them by Sympathy did not.] This is an other of your own phrases
brought in of purpose by you to blind the simple, and to brabble with the
learned. What you mean by Sympathy knows no man but your self. And
therefore if that word have in it any ambiguitie, the fault is yours, who first
used it, and not mine. I teach as Nature and Scripture do warrant me, that the
Soul of man suffers, as well by the force of her sense, as of her
understanding; and to the body of it self, I attribute neither motion, sense,
nor life, but all these are the powers and effects of the Soul in the Body;
and so is pain an impression on the Soul from or by the Body. As therefore
the Soul sees the works of God by the eyes of her body, and hears his
words by the ears of her flesh, and neither of these by Sympathy: so the
whole body and every part thereof serves as an Instrument, or a mean for the
Soul to feel in her self, and not by Sympathy, the touch of Gods hand upon
the body. Had the Body sense of it self without or besides the operation of
the Soul, then might it justly be called a Sympathy, for the one to feel
what the other suffers and feels, as friends do, that are like affected
each with other: but because all discerning by sense in man's body is proper to
the Soul, I do not see how the Soul should be exactly said to discern and
feel by Sympathy those things, which the body receaueth; but rather by her
original and natural faculty of suffering from and by the Body, with which
she is joined to do all in the body, and suffer all from the body. Howbeit I
strive not about the word, which some learned men have used for the Communion
of suffering between the Soul and the Body; but only note that the word was
first uttered by you, not by me; and therefore if you cavil with the
signification of that word, you Cavil with your self and not with me. It
suffices for me, that not only Christians but even miscreants, by the pains
of their body have perceived and acknowledged the hand of God upon them selves.
The Job. 19.
hand of God has touched me, says Job, when he was spoiled of all his goods,
and his body blasted by Satan with a sore disease. David in a sharp sickness,
that consumed his bones, and turned his moisture into the drought of Summer,
said to God; Psalm. 32.
thine hand is heavy upon me. Yea the Philistimes of Ashdod, Gath and Ekron,
when they were plagued with Emerods for detaining the Ark of God, could say, 1.
Sam. 5. v. 6.
his hand is sore upon us. And so much Paul told Elimas the Sorcerer, when he
withstood the preaching of the Faith; Behold the Acts 13.
hand of the Lord is upon thee, and thou shall be blind. Of Christ then there
can be no doubt, but he felt the hand, and beheld the counsel of God in all,
that the Jews did unto him; which whether you may call a suffering by
Sympathy or no, makes nothing to my Question or purpose. It is evident by the
Scriptures that God by these outward pains urges the Souls of his Servants
to seek him; and Christ without urging, submitted himself to the cruel and
bloody rage of the Jews, as to Gods decree and ordinance for our Redemption;
who John 19.
could have no power at all against (him) unless it had been given (them) from
above.

Hence you go to examine the deriuation of sin from Adam, the satisfaction
for sin by Christ, the beginning of sin in the first man, and the
continuing thereof in us all: matters of good weight and worthy due
consideration; wherein if either you did understand what I said, or not so
hastily catch after shows, that as soon deceive you, I should need fewer
words to repress your follies. But such is your course and custom, that you
fly after feathers, and think you get great purchases. In your Treatise you
framed an objection in my name, as if I had reasoned, that Trea. page 19. li 7.
Adams sin was propagated into us not by our Souls, but only by our flesh,
which only we derive from him: and therefore Christ only by his flesh and not
by his Soul procured satisfaction for us. Indeed I might have said that our
Bodies, and not our Souls, are derived from Adam, and showed the consent of
Scriptures, Fathers, and the best writers on every side, as well Protestants
and Papists, as Pagan Philosophers all joining in that opinion; but I thought
not good then to trouble the people with that Question: and therefore I rested
on a known and confessed principle of Christian truth and faith, that we
inherit pollution and death from Adams flesh, without resolving whence the
Soul comes, which I did refrain before the multitude to speak of. And
since by the Scriptures the first Adam was a Romans 5. v. 14.
figure of the second, the flesh of Christ given for us must be as able to
cleanse and quicken us, as Adams flesh was to defile and kill us. To this reason
you here pike many quarrels, but in the end you slide it of, as else where
answered. Your first quarrel is, that I force, what I promised to forbear,
even the difficulty whence the Soul of man is derived. As though the grounds
of our Faith might be doubted, because that Question in former times was
undecided? That we derive flesh from Adam, and have men for the Fathers of our
bodies, did never man yet, that was in his right wits, call in Question, were
he Christian or Heretic, Jew, Turk, or Pagan. That likewise we derive with
our flesh pollution and death from Adam, the faith of Christ rightly grounded
on the Scriptures does not suffer us to stagger at, though whence our Souls
are given us, some have stood perplexed. You think it much I should deliver
the one, which is the pollution of our flesh professing not to determine the
other; and make it in me a kind of inconstancy to urge the propagation of the
flesh with her sequels, of which no Christian may doubt, because I thought it
not fit to trouble the people with the deriuation of the Soul. But so has the
Church of Christ always done; it has clearly confessed the deriuation of
sin and death from Adam, and made it necessary for all Christian men so to
believe, though some would not hastily, or could not easily resolve the doubt,
whence the Soul comes.

Defenc. pa. 57. li. 3.
If our Souls arise in Generation from Adam, as well as our flesh, how can
your reason be good by any possibility?] The conceit that our Souls are
engendered together with the The Soul is not derived from the Fathers of our
Bodies.
seed of our bodies, is so gross and pestilent an error, and so repugnant to
all authority Humane and Divine, and so dissident from daily experience, that
I had no cause to make that a Question in Religion, or therein to refrain the
audience of the people. Ambros. de Noe and arca. cap. 4.
Ex nullo homine generantur Animae. Souls are not generated from any man,
says Ambrose: Clemens Stromat. li. 6.
(...). The principal faculty of the soul, says Clemens Alexandrinus, by
which we have discourse of reason, is not engendered by proiection of seed.
Hilarious de Trinitate. li. 10.
Anima vtique nunquam ab homine gignentium originibus prebetur. The soul never
comes from man in the generation of men, says Hilarie. Ierom upon those
words of Solomon, the spirit (of man) after death returns to God that gave
it, writes thus: Hieronym^ in Ecclesiast. cap. 12.
Ex quo satis ridendi sunt, qui putant animas cum corporibus seri; and non a
Deo, sed a corporum parentibus generari. Whereby they are worthy to be thoroughly
derided, which think souls to be sown together with bodies, and not to be
from God, but to be generated by the parents of (our) bodies. For since the
flesh returns to the earth, and the spirit to God that gave it, IT IS
MANIFEST, that God is the Father of our souls, and not Man. And when Ruffinus
professed he could not tell how the soul came to be joined with the body,
whether by propagation from Man, or infusion from God; Ierom replieth: If (the
soul) Idem Apologia 2. aduers. Ruffinum.
come by propagation, then the souls of men, which we grant are eternal, and
the bruit beasts, which die with the body, have one condition. And do thou
marvel that the (Christian) brethren are scandalized at thee, when thou
swearest thou know not that, which the Churches of Christ confess they
know? Theodoret in many places gives the like testimony: Theodoret. diuinorum
decretorum Epitome li. 5. cap. de homine.
The Church believing the divine Scriptures, says, the soul was (and is)
created as well as the body, not having any cause of her creation from
natural seed, but from the Creatours will, after the body once perfectly
made. The most divine Moses writes, that Adams body was first made, and
afterward his soul inspired into him, Again in his laws the same Prophet
plainly teaches us, that the body is first made, and then the soul created
and infused. And blessed Job spoke thus to God: Did thou not power me forth
like milk, and thicken me like curds of cheese? thou did clothe me with
skin and flesh; and compact me with bones and sinews. And when by this Job
had showed the frame of his body to be first made, he adds a thanksgiving
for his soul, saying; Life and mercy thou laydst with me, and thy
watchfulness preserved my spirit. Idem. deprouident.
This confession touching the soul and body of man, the Church has learned
from the divine Scriptures. The same reasons and resolutions he repeateth
elsewhere in his fifth Idem de depro^dent Craecorum affect ib. Sermo. 5.
sermon touching the nature of man. Leo the great: The Le^. epist. 93. a^
Turibium ca 10.
Catholic faith does constantly and truly preach, that the souls of men were
not before they were inspired into their bodies; nec ab also incorporentur nisi
ab opifice Deo; neither are put into the body by any other workman than God.
And Austen himself, who to decline that difficulty, how the soul comes to
be infected with original sin, was the first that made this doubt, whether
the soul were created and infused, or else derived from the soul, though not
by the seed of the parents; refuses Tertullians opinion, That the soul rises
from the seed of the body, as perverse and strange to the Church of Christ:
August. epist. 157. ad Optat.
They, says he, which affirm souls to be drawn from the parents, if they
follow Tertullians opinion, took them to be (in some sort) bodies, and
corpulentis seminibus exoriri, and to rise from the seed of the body; quo quid
peruersius dici potest? than the which what can be said more perverse? Now in
Austens rehearsal of heresies, Tertullians assertion, That the soul was a
(kind of) body, is excused as no heresy; but his conceit, That August. de
(...) Tertullian.
the state of the soul is propagated by traduction (of seed) is expressly put
amongst his August. de (...) Tertullian.
errors.

From these ancient Fathers swerve not the best of our new writers. Bullinger:
Bulling. decadu. 4. Sermon. 10.
All those (other) opinions have been refuted with sound reasons by the
writers Ecclesiastical, and that received and avouched for the truest, which
teaches the soul to be created of nothing, and to be infunded into the body
from God, when the child has his perfect shape in his mothers womb. And that
we are not at this day otherwise created of God, than by infunding the soul
into the body first fashioned, Job is a most plentiful witness, where he
says: Thine hands (o God) have made me, and fashioned me wholly. Did thou
not stroke me like milk, and curd me like cheese? with skin and flesh thou
coueredst me, with bones and sinews thou ioyntedst me. Lo here the conception
and formation of man's body in his mothers womb most excellently described. It
follows now in Ieb touching the soul: Life and mercy thou have given me,
and thy visitation has kept my spirit. Behold life, that is the soul,
infused of God into the body already framed. Therefore rightly and according
to the Scriptures do we hold, that men's souls are created of God, and
inf^nded into their bodies perfectly framed before in the womb. Calvin:
Caluinus in epist. ad Heb. cap. 12.
God is the Father as well of the soul as of the body; and the only Father,
if we speak properly: yet because in creating souls he uses not the
(service, or) work of man, after a peculiar manner, by a kind of excellency,
he is called the Father of spirits. Beza: Be Za in lihello Qu^stionum and
Responsionum.
I think not good to dissemble this, that the doctrine of traducing the soul,
(from the parents) seems to me very absurd, because either the whole, or a
part must be traduced. If the whole, the fathers of force must presently dic,
(having wholly lost their souls:) If a part, how can a part be cut off from a
simple (and spiritual) substance? Vrsinus: Vrsin. tract. Theolog. de peccate.
We grant the souls of all men are created of God, when they begin to live;
for they at one time are created, and united to the body. Zanchius: Zanchius
de (...), Dei part 3. li. 2. cap. 4.
That the whole soul is created by God, I believe, confess, and teach with
the whole Church, and avouch it may be proved by firm reasons. His reasons
are largely delivered in the fifth chapter of the same book, and all that can
be said for generation and propagation of souls against their creation by the
immediate work of God without any humane means, is there learnedly and
sufficiently refuted. So that in respect of Austens doubt, whether God derive
the soul from the souls of the parents, when he puts it into the body
being first finished, or creates it of nothing, as he did Adams soul, I did
relinquish that in question; but as for the souls rising in and by generation
from Adam, which you now catch hold of, I never meant to favor that fancy so
much as to make it any question in matters of faith; since with one consent
Philosophy, Physic, evident experience, and the Scriptures themselves
convince that to be an erroneous and manifest untruth.

Defenc. pa. 57. l. 8.
I have showed before at large, that your Minor is nothing true: for pollution
that is sin and real iniquity is not in our flesh without a soul.] You
said so much in effect before in your Treatise, and if your word be a proof,
you have showed it; but other proof you bring none, save that which inclines
rather to heresy then Christianity, if you speak to the purpose, and stand
to your words as they lie either in your Treatise, or in your Defense. In your
Treatise you say, Trea. pa. 21. li. 28.
Let us not be curious in this hard point, holding this most evident truth,
that sin is a proper and inseperable quality of the soul, and can not be
found being in any thing, where a reasonable soul is wanting.] If you take the
word sin in his right sense, as you ought to do speaking of the propagation
of sin, and so comprise in it as well original as actual sin; here are
two gross errors even against the Christian faith. For if sin can not be
found in any thing, where a reasonable soul is wanting; then can no sin be
found in the devils, for they have no souls. August. Retract. li. 1. cap. 11.
Angels to have souls I do not remember that ever I read in the divine and
canonical Scriptures, says Austen. If Angels have not souls, then devils
have none; for they were holy, and now are reprobate, but still Angels, as
Christ calls the devil and his Angels. Again, sin being either actual or
original; children in their mothers Matthew. 25.
womb have not actual sin, neither dispute we of actual sin, when we
talk of deriuing and inheriting sin; for actual sin is neither derived,
nor inherited. If then that, which is conceived, have no original sin so
long as the soul wants; since you Trea. pa. 21. li. 4.
content your self, as you say, with the opinion of the most at this present,
that the soul does not pass together with the seed of our generation and
conception; most evidently you deny original sin, till the soul come to
quicken the body; and so contradict the express words of David, who says, He
was Psalm. 51.
begotten in sin and conceived in iniquity. No marvel then you stumble at
Ambroses words, that we are Ambros. in Apologia David. cap. 11.
defiled, before we hau^ life, as repugnant to your purpose; when you spare not
David's words, who says as much, if not more then Ambrose.

I Defenc. page 5^. li. 10.
pray omit men's Authorities in this case, and prove by sound reason, that
which you would. For pollution that is sin and real iniquity, is not in our
flesh without a soul.] We were best to omit all learning, experience, and
truth; that only your conceits may stand upright. It has pleased God in
things natural, by sight and experience to lead Philosophers and Physicians
to the truth of his works; as far as man's wit can reach; and with one
consent they resolve, that the reasonable soul of man neither rises in the
body, nor comes to the body presently with the conception. Mothers and
midwiues do certainly distinguish the time of quickening, from the time of
conceiving; and he that would persuade them, that the child quickneth
immediately upon the conception, might as easily bring them to believe, that
the moon is made of a green cheese. But sound reason you require.] As if
truth of experience were not the soundest reason men can give, till God do
speak. That the body is not straight way framed upon the conception, many
thousand scapes in all femals, and namely in women do perfectly prove. The
Physicians and Philosophers interpose many months between the conception and
perfection of the body. Job himself declares that we were first Job 10.
as milk, when we were in seed; then Job 10.
condensed as curds, when we turned to blood; and after that Job 10.
clothed with skin and flesh, and lastly Job 10.
compacted with bones and synewes, before we received life and soul from God.
The new Testament notes these three degrees in forming our bodies; to wit,
seed, blood, and flesh; and calls our parents the fathers of our bodies, but
not of our spirits, which God alone is. If then nothing can be defiled with
sin, as by your doctrine you resolve, except it have a reasonable soul; of
necessity we either had reasonable souls at the instant of our conception,
which is a most famous falsehood repugnant to al learning, experience, and to
the words of Job; or else we were not conceived in sin, which is a flat
heresy dissenting from the plain words of the sacred Scriptures, and from the
Christian faith. Choose which of these issues you will; you either way show
your self to have little sense, and less truth.

But I must Defenc. pa. 57. li. 13.
add the word only, or else I say nothing against you.] No good Sir, that
shall not need. We inherit pollution by Adams flesh before our Souls come to
our bodies; and that suffices for my reason, though the pollution, which we
inherit, be derived as well from the Souls, as from the Bodies of our
Parents; because their bodies, when they begat us, were joined with their
Souls, whose natural and animal faculties were still in them wholly
corrupted, and their sins communicated unto their bodies, though their
spirits were renewed and sanctified. The very Seed, of which we were begotten
and conceived, was an unclean thing, (as Job calls it, when he says; Job.
14.
Who can make a clean thing of an unclean?) and corruptible; that is full of
Corruption, as Peter names it when he says; 1. Pet. 1.
borne again not of corruptible Seed, of which we were borne by our Parents.
The corruption of sin then is first derived by our Bodies, though our Souls
be likewise wrapped in the same pollution and condemnation, that our bodies
are; and sin still abides and rebelleth in our flesh so long as we live,
though our Souls be washed and cleansed from sin. And therefore the Apostle
calls our flesh, Romans 8. v. 3.
the flesh of sin, in the similitude of which Christ was sent, and confessed
that Romans 7.
in his flesh dwelt no good thing; assuring us, that though Christ be in us,
Romans 8. v. 10
the body is dead because of sin, when the Spirit is life, (or lives)
because of righteousness. Neither is this news to Zanchius, whom you cite in
your Treatise as if he favored your error. Zanchij tractat. Theolog. cap. 4.
de peccato originali.
Quod attinet ad contagium illud, certe citra controuersiam, in corpore primum
inest, and deinde per corpus in animam deriuatur. Job docet aperte cap. 14.
Quis potest facere mundum de immundo conceptum semine? Quid autem proprie de
immundo concipitur semine? Caro. As for the contagion (of original sin) that
is surely without Question first in the body, and after by the body is derived
into the Soul. Job teaches us plainly in his fourteenth Chapter. Who can make
one clean, conceived of unclean Seed? Now what is properly conceived of
unclean Seed? Flesh. If any man list to read more I remit him to that place
of Zanchius, least I should be ouerlong; or else to Peter Martyr where he
largely treats thereof against Pigghius. Pet. Martyr ^ocis communibus class.
secunde loco primo Sectio. 26.
The common received Opinion is (says he) that the Soul draws original
sin by her conjunction with the body, which is infected and vitiated from our
Parents. Wherefore if any ask, what is the seat or subject thereof, (as they
use to speak;) We answer, that original sin has place in the flesh as in
the root, and beginning thereof: afterward from that fountain, it occupies
the Soul, and so is extended through the whole man. Idcirco semen est
instrumentum quo hoc peccatum ex parentibus traducitur in filios. Therefore the
Seed (of man) is the instrument whereby this sin is traduced from the
Parents to the children. And least he should seem to rest himself on the
received opinion only, not long after he adds. Idem Sectione. 30.
Now reasons are to be brought, which may firmly and soundly prove, that
original sin is propagated in men by Seed and generation. And that we will
therefore show out of the Scriptures, because many reclaim and think this
whole matter to be a fiction.

Defenc. page 57. l. 19.
With one breath you overthrow your self. For you say we have pollution before
the soul comes, whence soever it comes. Yea, whence soever? What if the
soul do come in and by generation? you see how you cross your self.] To
that perverse and false supposition of yours, that the soul of man comes in
and by generation, which now you cleave so fast unto for an advantage, I never
gave any allowance or forbearance. Look to my words as narrowly as you can. I
say, the minor (proposition of my reason) is clear Conclus. pa. 252. l. 25.
without intermedling with the question, whence, (not when) the soul comes.
I there resolve, that the soul is the life of the body, not of seed nor of
blood, as you grossly would wrest my speech; and therefore before life come,
the soul which brings life, comes not to the body. Then if pollution
cleave to the flesh before life come, (as Ambrose teaches) and consequently
before the soul come, (which comes not before the body is made, as I
avouch) whence soever it comes; it is evident that Adams flesh defiles, and
so condemns us (before the soul come.) You in the abundance of your wit,
take whence soever to be as much as when soever; and so by your misconceiuing
you would fasten a contradiction to my words. But coaxe not your self with
such contrarieties grounded upon your own most ignorant mistaking; I made no
question of the time, when; but of the root, whence, the soul comes. I
learned by Leo, that I^o. epist. 93. ad Furibium.
the Catholic faith did truly and constantly teach, that the souls of men
were not before they were inspired into their bodies: and consequently the
body must first be framed, before the soul can be inspired. And the contrary
conceit, which you now take hold on, is a manifest repugnancie to the Church,
and faith of Christ. I saw that inconvenience which you see not, when you
pronounce, sin is not in our flesh without a soul, that is neither before,
nor after the soul. For if the soul of man arise in and BY GENERATION, and
that can be no man which never had man's body; what kind of creatures, I pray
you, call you those abortions and scapes, that pass from their mothers, when
they are yet but seed or blood, before the body be framed? Souls they have,
in and by generation, as you now suppose; bodies they have none, that be
humane. Men therefore they be not for want of bodies; other kinds they are not,
seeing they have souls; what name then will you give to these unfashioned
births, having reasonable and immortal spirits as you imagine, or what place
will you assign them after this life? 2. Cor. 5.
We all must appear before the Tribunal of Christ, every one to receive
things done (in or) by his body. They have nothing to receive for any thing
done in or by their bodies, which they never had; neither can they expect the
resurrection of the body, which pertains not to them. 1. Cor. 15.
It is sown (says the Apostle) a natural body, it is raised a spiritual
body. These have no natural bodies of men, and so shall never rise with
spiritual and glorified bodies; yea they have no part in Christ's resurrection,
which was corporal, since they do not communicate with him in their bodies,
which may be conformed to his glorious body. You must then devise some new
name, and some new place for those new creatures of yours, which having no
bodies of men, can not by the Scriptures look either for the resurrection, or
for the salvation promised to men.

You do not avouch it, you will say, you did but object it.] Your most evident
truth, as you call it, that sin cannot be found being in any thing, where a
reasonable soul is wanting, does directly infer, that either we were not
begotten and conceived in sin, which is an evident heresy, repugnant to
David's words; or else the untimely fruits and scapes of women, have reasonable
souls at the very instant of their conception, when sin is found in them by
David's words, which is this gross, absurd, and false conceit, that now you
would shun. If you fly for help to actual sin; have children actual
sin in their mothers wombes, or as soon as they have reasonable souls? Or
is actual sin traduced and inherited from Adam? or spoke I of actual sin
when I said, we inherit pollution from Adams flesh before the soul comes?
Will you stick to it, and say; original pollution is no sin? David
conuinceth you, who says, he was Psalm. 51.
begotten in sins, and conceived in iniquity; and Paul affirms that Romans
5. v. 12.
death went over all men, (infants not excepted) for so much as all men have
sinned, and even over them also who Verse. 14.
sinned not after the likeness of Adams transgression; that is, who did not
commit sin as Adam did, actually and voluntarily; but naturally inherited
sin from Adam, which Romans 4. v. 20.
dwells in them from the hour of their conception, to the time of their
dissolution; and Verse 23.
works the evil in them that they would not; leading them captive to the law
of sin which is in their members.

But how could David say, he was conceived in sin, when at the time of his
conception he had neither body nor soul?] Howsoever man's reason judge
thereof, which yet often gives the name of the whole to a part, and the titles
of things represented to their images; with God nothing is more frequent than
Romans 4. v. 17
to call those things which are not, as though they were; because he not only
made all things of nothing, but quickens the dead, and has things past and
to come present before him. Leui is said by the Scripture to have Hebr. 7.
paid tithes to Melchisedech by Abraham, as being then in Abraham's loins,
when Leuies grandfather was not yet borne. So God by his Prophet spoke to Cyrus
many years before Cyrus was borne, calling him his anointed, and saying to him
by name, Esa. 44. and 45.
thou art my shepherd. So certain is the counsel of God, and his purpose so
immutable, that he speaks in the Scriptures of things to come, as if they
were past or present. Out of this infallible decree of God, David and Job call
that seed which was prepared to be the matter of their bodies, by the names of
themselves, because it could not be altered, what God had appointed. But the
void conceptions of women, which miscarie before the body be framed, never had
either life or soul; and so neither name, nor kind; but perish as other
superfluous burdens and repletions of the body, which God has appointed to no
use, save to ease the body.

In satisfaction for sin you run the same course that you do in the rest:
for neither understanding my words, nor almost any man's else rightly, you fight
with your own fancies, as if they were parts of my faith. I said, the
Scripture acknowledges no satisfaction for sin but by death. I did and do so
say; what then? Defenc. ^ag. 57. li. 26.
Still we must note, that by death you mean only the bodily death.] In
Christ's person I always mean by the death which he suffered, the death of
the body; though you would include the death of the soul, which I do not. In
the wicked I take death for all kinds of death, corporal, spiritual, and
eternal. What can you hence distill? Then Defenc. page 57. li 32.
surely the wicked should satisfy easily for their sins. Far be it from me
to utter such a sentence.] Do the wicked with any kind of death satisfy for
their sins? or is their condemnation to hell pains therefore eternal,
because by no death they can satisfy for their sins? Were the justice of God
once satisfied by any thing the wicked could suffer, their torments should
cease; but their punishments everlastingly continue, for that no satisfaction
can be made to God by them, suffer they never so much, or never so long. Whose
folly then is it, to pronounce, that the wicked may satisfy for their sins?
mine or yours? I said no such word; I directly avouched the contrary. Sermon.
page 43. li. 23.
The pains of hell have neither worth nor weight sufficient in themselves, to
satisfy the anger, or to procure the favor of God. Satisfaction for sin I
ascribe to none but only to Christ, and in him to no death but only to that
of his body. Will it thence follow, the Scripture acknowledges no satisfaction
but by (some kind of) death: ergo the wicked may satisfy for their sins by
the deaths which they suffer? Be it far from all wise men to make such
consequents, and from all Christian men to make such conclusions. The
antecedent in effect is confessed by your self. Defenc. page 58. li. 20.
The Scriptures (you say) do show indeed that Christ should not satisfy
without death. I said the same. By satisfaction, I meant full satisfaction,
when no more could be exacted, as the word imports; and not the concurrents
or precedents to satisfaction, when the chiefest is unpaid. Why then does your
absurd and lewd conclusion follow more upon my words than upon your own?

My proofs are not good, with those you find fault.] If yours were no worse,
they would go more currantly. The Apostle says: Christ is the Hebr. 9.
Mediator of the new Testament, that through death, which was for the
redemption of transgressions, we might receive the promise. Here death is
avouched to be the redemption, which is all one with satisfaction, for sin:
for wherewith we are redeemed, therewith God is satisfied. Defenc. page 58. li.
3.
Christ's bodily death merely and alone (you say) without any thing else
together therewith (which is my intent) is not here mentioned.] You will not
tell where your shoo wringeth. Death was for the redemption or satisfaction for
sin says the Scripture. Now the death of Christ's body, or of his soul, or
of both, must here be contained. The death of Christ's soul you dare not
openly profess, and therefore all this while you carry it covertly under the
sufferings of Christ's soul. But you must come plainly to it: for these
assertions of the Apostle; Hebr. 9.
Death was the redemption of our transgressions, and we are Rom 5.
reconciled to God by the death of his Son, will make this to be the
question, as I first set it; whether the death of Christ's soul, or the death
of the damned, which is the true pains of hell be a necessary part of Christ's
satisfaction and our Redemption. Other sufferings of the Soul are mere shifts
to harbor your folly, if you strive in words; or your impiety, if you strive
indeed for the death of Christ's Soul, as requisite by the Scriptures to our
Salvation. That Christ did not die the death of the Soul I do not prove;
there is no cause I should, it is your assertion that he did, and must be
proved by you; which you be so far from coming near, that you purposely
conceal it, and only skirre at it here and there in SOME KIND OF SENSE.
Otherwise you offer nothing as yet to the Reader, but the Defenc. pa. 58. li.
35.
proper sufferings of the soul; which I trust are not always privation of
grace, and exclusion from bliss. For so the faithful should never have any
proper sufferings of the Soul, or else utterly loose both the spirit and
favor of God, which they never do.

The other Authority which I cite, ( In the day that thou eatest thereof, thou
shall die the death) is not so sound you think. For Defenc. pa. 57. li. 31.
am I sure that death here is but the bodyly death only and no more? I no
where say, that death threatened in these words was only the death of the body;
it is one of your rash and rude illations, it is none of my assertions. I knew
that God gave this Commandment, and threatened this punishment as well to Adams
posterity, as to his person. Otherwise had this prohibition been made to Adam
alone, neither could the woman have been within the compass of it, who was
not then created when this precept was enjoined, neither could Adams offspring
have tasted of death, as well as Adam, if this penalty had stretched no farther
then to Adams person. But he being the root and stock of all mankind, as he
received blessings by his creation, which should be common to all that
descended of him, so by his transgression he lost them as well from his Issue,
as from himself, and subjected them to the same death and condemnation, that
he did him self, when he rebelled against God his Creator. Death we see
executed on all the children of Adam; and therefore we may not doubt but death
was threatened to them all, before it was inflicted on them. Howbeit the
commination in this place is like to Gods th^eats in all other places against
the transg^ssours of his Law. It denounces what shall ^e due unto all, but it
binds not God, that he shall not have power to release, or mitigate what, and
to whom pleases him. In death then here threatened I contain all kinds of
death; corporal, spiritual, and eternal; either as expressed in the general
name of death, which is common to them all, or as consequent each to other and
coherent, if by Gods goodness and mercies in Christ Jesus they be not severed.
Saint Austen learnedly and truly teaches the same. August. deciuitate Det.
li. 13. cap. 12.
When it is asked, what death God threatened to the first men, if they
transgressed the Commandment given them, whether the death of the body, or of
the soul, or of the whole man, or that which is called the second death; we
must answer, ALI. When therefore God said to the first man, what day soever
ye eat thereof, ye shall die the death, that threatening contained what
soever death there is even unto the last, which is called the second death, and
after which there is none other.

If any man stand more strictly on the time and kind of death, when and which
Adam should die by this Commination; Saint Austen has an other answer.
August. deciuitate Dei. li. 13. cap. 15.
In that which was said ye shall die the death, because it was not said,
deaths; if we understand that only death whereby the soul is forsaken of her
life, which to her is God; (for she was not forsaken, that she might forsake,
but she did (first) forsake that she might (after) be forsaken) though I say we
understand, that God denounces this death, when he said, what day ye eat
thereof, ye shall die the death; as if God had said, what day ye forsake me
by disobedience, I will forsake you by justice; Surely in that death were the
rest denounced, which without Question were to follow. For even in that a
disobedient motion rose in the flesh of the Soul disobeying, for which they
covered their privy parts, one death was perceived, wherein God forsook the
Soul. And when the Soul forsook the body now corrupted with time, and wasted
with age, an other death was found by experience, which God mentioned to Man,
when punishing sin he said, earth thou art, and to earth shall thou return:
that by these two deaths that first death of the whole man might be
accomplished, which the second death at last does follow, except man be
delivered by the grace of God. By Saint Austens judgment concording with the
Scriptures, God threatened all kinds of death to the transgressor; the death of
the Soul the same hour to take place that he disobeyed; the rest to follow in
their order; as next the death of the body, and at last eternal death of body
and soul, if the grace of God by Jesus Christ did not release and free man
from it. That the death of the Soul took present hold upon the disobeyers,
the Scripture gives testimony sufficient, when it notes their shame, fear,
and flight of Gods presence, who before sin was their delight, joy and
bliss. The death of the body was a long time differred in Adam, even Genesis 5.
v. 5.
nine hundred and thirty years, before it did separate his Soul from his
Body, but it began presently to work and show his force in either of their
bodies. Theodoret an Genes. Que^. 38.
The sentence of mortality God called Death, says Theodoret. For after Gods
sentence Adam every day expected (or feared) Death. Beda says the like. That
which God said, (...) Gen^ ^2.
In what day soever thou shall eat thereof, thou shall die the Death, was as
if he had said, Morti deputatus eris, thou shall be deputed (or adjudged) to
death, not that he should that very day die, but be mortal. Chrysostom
imbraceth the same opinion. Chr^ ^n (...).
In what d^y soever ye shall eat of the tree, ye shall die the Death. But
Adam lived still; how then died he? By the sentence of God and the nature of
the thing it self. For he that makes him self subject to punishment, is
under pun^shment, sinonre, tamen sententia; If not by deed and execution, yet
by guiltiness and sentence pronounced.

So that if we will rightly conceive Gods commination to Adam, we must so take
the words of God, as threatening Adam and his posterity with all kinds of
death, to which they all should be subject as guilty thereof and deserving
the same; though he would keep to himself the dispencing and moderating
thereof, not binding himsel^e thereby but the offenders, as every supreme
Judge does on earth after sentence given, and before execution finished. Else,
if we ^e God, who is truth it self, to the rigor and tenor of those words
without reserving power to him to dispose of Adam and Adams offspring at his
pleasure; and in the words, Thou shall die the death, comprise the execution of
all sorts of death, which can not be revoked: then we conclude Adam and all his
issue without remedy or mercy under all sorts of death, that is under
spiritual, corporal, and eternal death; which is not only an utter overthrow
to all Christian ^eligion, promising salvation in Jesus Christ, but a mecre
madness against all mankind, deuoting them without exception or mitigation to
eternal destruction of body and soul. We must therefore know that God truly
and justly threatened Adam, and in him all mankind to be guilty of all so^ts of
death, and to be thereto subjected as to their due, if they transgressed
against him; but this commination neither included execution of all sorts of
death on all mankind, nor excluded pardon where pleased God; only thence may
rightly be gathered; first, that all Ada^ of spring should be condemned and
subjected to the guilt of all, as deserving all the one no less then the
other. Secondly, that some of Adams issue should effectual feel the sting of
all, which God allotted to the reprobate. Thirdly, that even the elect as well
as the reprobate, should bear in themselves the monuments of this
transgression by the corruption and dissolution of their nature, though the one
should in this life be reformed by the working of Gods spirit in them, and the
other be restored after this life by the Resurrection from the dead. All these
we find performed by God in the truth of his judgments, and therefore we
may be sure they were intended at the time of his threatening. And consequently
this collection is very true, that God threating Adam with these words, Thou
shall die the death; purposed, if Adam transgressed, that none of his
posterity should escape the death of their bodies, to which, God forthwith
punishing sin, irreuocably subjected Adam and all his children, as Gods own
words declare, when he said to Adam, and in him to all men, Genes. 3.
Dust thou art and to dust shall thou return. The judges revenge then for
sin, which we deserved and to which we were justly condemned, was temporal
and eternal death, of the body and soul, here and in hell. But this was not
executed on all, because some were freed by the favor of God in Jesus Christ,
though none excused from a corporal death; which proves my position the
truer, that God never released sin to any, no not to his own Son, without
some kind of death.

It Defen^ pa^. 58. li. 7.
must not be forgotten, that here you renounce all satisfaction for sin, in
respect of merit as from Christ's soul utterly.] If you mean I utterly
renounce all satisfaction for sin as from the death of Christ's soul, I
easily grant it; and would gladly hear what you can say against it, because
the soul of Christ, as I believe, could not die the death of spirits. But if
you conceive; that Christ's soul had neither part, sense, nor merit in the
death of his body, by which satisfaction for sin was fully made, it is the
weamishnesse of your wit to mistake so much, and understand so little. I
attributed all sense of pain as well in death as other wise to the soul of
Christ; and the death of his body I communicated to his soul, by reason it is
a separation of the soul from the body, not thereby to be deprived of sense
or grace, which Christ's soul could not be, but therein to feel the pain and
sting which the death of the body brought with it. I told you but the Conclus.
page 251.
leaf before out of Austen; that August. de ciuitate Dei. l. 21. cap. 3.
the pain which is called bodily, belongs rather to the soul, and that the
E^. li. 14. ca. 15
pain of the flesh is only the offending (or afflicting) the soul by the
flesh. Wherefore I made the soul of Christ to be the principal agent in all
his meriting, and patient in all his suffering; and though the soul of Christ
could not pay the satisfaction for our sins by her death, because she could
not die; yet that is no impediment, but the soul of Christ might have, and had
the chiefest pain, sense, and merit in the death of Christ's body, by which
the whole person made full satisfaction for the sins of the world. And this
is so far from renouncing all merit of satisfaction from the soul of Christ,
as you conceive, that it ascribes the whole power and force thereof to the
obedience and patience of Christ's soul, and makes the body the instrument
ordained of God to convey pain unto the soul; and to lie dead when the soul
is departed from it. As for Bernards words which I allege, if you did or could
tell how they cross mine, I would take the pains to reconcile them; now you
say they suit not with mine: but awake out of your wonted maze, and you shall
see that I give the chief place and part in the meritorious sacrifice unto the
soul of Christ, which you dream I do not; as also that you neither like nor
allow of Bernards words. For he declaring the cause and manner, why and how
Christ's mind was afflicted in his passion, says, it was with a Sermon. pa. ^4.
double affection of most humane compassion, on the one side, for the
uncomfortable grief of the holy women; on the other, for the desperation and
dispersion of his disciples. These causes you reject as fond and absurd, and
now you would seem to join with Bernards words. But you must say of him, as
you do of Ambrose, and pray that Defenc. page 57. li. 10.
men's authorities may be omitted in this case; for all the Fathers of Christ's
church are utter strangers or enemies to your new doctrine.

Defenc. pa. 58. l. 20.
That nothing may satisfy for sin but death, is not sound; the Scriptures
do show indeed that Christ should not satisfy without death: but they deny
not, that there are other parts of Christ's satisfaction, which differ from his
death, as his bloodshedding, his shame, his Every thing in Christ was
meritorious, but not satisfactory for sin.
reproaches, his apprehension, his buffeting; and besides that, poverty,
hunger, and wearines. These doubtless, yea all other sufferings of Christ what
soever, small or great, are satisfactorie and meritorious.] That all Christ's
actions and passions were meritorious with God, I have no doubt; but that all
his sufferings as well natural as voluntary, did every one, small or great,
satisfy for sin, This is a speech of yours, which except it be well
qualified, has in it an whole heap of absurdities and contrarieties. For if
the least and the first thing that Christ suffered either naturally or
voluntarily did satisfy for sin, superfluous were all the rest to our
redemption, when God was once satisfied. And so by his birth or circumcision
you grant a Supersedeas to all his life and death as needelesse to our
redemption. Then the which what can be more repugnant to the word of God, and
faith of Christ, and even to your self, who by this means make your hell
pains of no importance to our salvation? By satisfaction you mean not full
satisfaction; but that which any way tends to satisfaction, or is requisite
before satisfaction can be made.] It is easy and often with you to abuse
words, though you talk much of their propriety. What is Satis in Latin,
whence to satisfy comes, but enough? and what is enough for sin, but after
which more is not requisite? If then Christ satisfied, that is, did or paid
enough for sin by the first of his sufferings, then all that followed, as I
inferred, were more then enough, and consequently superfluous. That you will
say is the proper and strict signification of the word satisfy, but you take
it more largely.] For the abuse of words I will not greatly strive, so you
build thereon no impieties; howbeit when I say that nothing might satisfy for
sin but death; I take satisfaction properly for the last and full payment,
after which no more was due for sin; and that apparently by the Scriptures
was the death of Christ, before which the rest was not sufficient, and after
which no more was required by the righteous will and counsel of God. So that
although the obedience and patience of Christ all his life long did tend to
satisfaction, and made way for satisfaction, as his hunger, weariness,
poverty, and such like; yet none of these did satisfy for sin, or acquit
us from sin by the verdict of the holy Scripture; but Christ after all these
must yield himself to suffer that kind of death, which the justice of God
should appoint and ordain, before we could be freed from our sins. His blood
you think did wash us from all our sins. Because his blood was shed for us
even unto death, therefore his bloodshed expresses the manner of his death, as
likewise his apprehension, buffeting, reproaches, and shame; which the Scripture
describes in the order of his death, and therefore compriseth under the name
of his death. For by Christ's death, as I have often said, the Scripture
means that kind of death in all respects and circumstances, which the
Evangelists in their writings report.

Defenc. page 58. l. 29.
Who will grant in proper speech, that those are his death?] The name of
Christ's death in the Scriptures contains all those things, which were
coincident and concurrent to that death, which Christ died for our sins
according to the Scriptures. Neither What is contan^ in the name of Christ's
death by the Scriptures.
shall we need your figure Synecdoche, by a part of Christ's sufferings to
understand all that he felt or suffered from his mothers womb: that is a loose
devise of yours to make any thing of every thing; and so to confound the
Scriptures, that no man shall know either what to believe, or what to beware.
For where S. John says, the blood of Christ does cleanse us from all our
sins; by your Synecdoche you imagine that the Matthew. 26.
wine, which he drank at his last Supper; John. 13.
the water, wherewith he washed his disciples feet; John. 11.
the tears which he shed for Lazarus death; John. 4.
the journey, which he took to Galilee; the Matthew. 8.
sleep, which he fetched in the ship; the Matthew. 4.
hunger, which he sustained in the wilderness; and what not, should do the
like; since every thing that befell our Savior, small or great, did satisfy
for sins, as well as his death and passion. What else is this but to mayme and
mangle the Scriptures, which name the blood of Christ to be the price of our
redemption, and his death the mean of our reconciliation; if every thing that
Christ did or endured shall be of the same force and weight to satisfy for
sin, that his blood and death were? His blood, you will say, is not his
death.] The shedding of his blood unto death, which the Scripture intends by
his blood, is a plain description of his death: Matthew. 26.
This is my blood, said he, which is shed for many for the remission of sins.
And the rest which were appendants to his death, express the manner of his
death, which the wisdom and justice of God would have to be full of violence,
injury, reproach, contempt, shame and pain. All which as they note the manner
of his death, so are they enclosed by the Scriptures in the name of his death;
and that I trust more properly being parts thereof, than the natural
infirmities of his body, as sleep, hunger and weariness; or the voluntary
events of his life, as the rest of his actions and passions, long before the
hour came that he should be delivered into the hands of sinful men.

Defenc. pa. 58 li. 33.
Why may not the proper sufferings of Christ's Soul be as well admitted into
the work of Christ's satisfaction, although his SOVLE COVLD NOT PROPERLY DIE?]
The sufferings of Christ's Soul at the time of his death, which the Scriptures
mention, we easily admit into the work of his satisfaction for sin; but your
satis-fiction of hell pains and of the death of Christ's Soul we do not
admit; because the holy Ghost so diligently describing the whole order and
manner of Christ's sufferings, when he went to his death, teaches no such thing
as you falsely collect from certain words of his, and chiefly from his bloody
sweat; whereof not knowing precisely the cause, you surmise what best pleases
your humor without all warrant of the word of God. Prove therefore by the
Scriptures, and not by your own ghesses, that Christ's Soul suffered these
things from the immediate hand of God, which you suppose; and we shall soon
find a place for them, in the work of Christ's satisfaction for sin. Till
then give me leave to expound the Scriptures by themselves, and not by your
unjointed and vntidie Commentaries confounding Christ's life and death, nature
and will, affections and punishments, satisfaction and merits; as if they were
not different parts of our salvation, to take our nature upon him, to work all
righteousness in our names, to suffer a shameful and painful death for our
sins, and to obtain all spiritual and celestial graces and comforts, here
and in heaven for us.

The first sin committed by Adam, and our continual treading in his steps,
rest yet undiscussed; wherein we should not need many words, if you could, or
at least would rightly conceive what is said; and not ignorantly or purposely
mistake, and measure all things by your hasty humor. To prove that Christ
must satisfy for sin by the proper sufferings of his Soul, and not with or
by his body, you brought this reason in your Treatise. Trea. pa. 19. li. 27.
Whereby Adam first did, and we ever since do most properly commit sin, by
the same the second Adam Christ has made satisfaction for our sins. But Adam
first did, and we ever since do most properly commit sin in our Souls, our
bodies being but the Instrument of the Soul, and following the Souls
direction and will. Therefore Christ in his Soul most properly made
satisfaction for us: In my Conclusion to your objections I first denied your
Mayor or former proposition. For though the Soul of Adam, as also our Souls
quickly might, and worthily did die for sin and by sin, wherein they were
the principal agents; yet the Soul of Christ by no warrant of holy Scripture
did, or could die the death of Spirits, and so could make no satisction for sin
by her death. Now by the Scriptures without death there was no satisfaction for
sin: and therefore the soul of Christ must satisfy for sin by the death of
her body, and not by any death proper to her self. And so much the Scriptures
avouch teaching us, that we have Ephesians. 1.
redemption even the remission of sins through his blood, and are Romans 5.
reconciled to God by the death of his Son: who 1. Pet. 2.
bare our sins in his body on the tree, that we might be delivered from
sin, and healed with his stripes. And without satisfaction to God for sin
we have neither remission of sin, nor redemption from sin, nor
reconciliation with God. Upon this ground I then did and still do reject your
mayor, as guarded neither with text nor truth, but leaning only to your private
liking, as the best help to commend it. From thence I came to your assumption
or second proposition; that Adam first, and we ever since most properly
committed sin in our souls, our bodies being but the instruments of our
souls, and following the Souls direction and will. The which because it had
diverse branches, one touching Adams transgression, an other touching ours; and
likewise two parts, the soul and body in either; I reserved for diverse answers.

In Adams sin if you meant, as your words made show, that his Soul and body
were joined in transgressing Gods Commandment, the Soul as the agent, the
body as the instrument; That I said was MOST TRVE, but repugnant to your
intention and maine Conclusion. For then as Adams Soul transgressed the
Commandment with and by her body; so in fatisfying for sin Christ's Soul
must be punished by and with her body, which was the thing you so much
labored to overthrow. To this you now reply. Defenc. pa. 59. li. 8.
Nay, the Conclusion will follow, that the immortal part, the mind, was
punished peculiarly, and not by and from the body only: seeing in all even
outward sins the Soul sins both principally, and also in a proper and
peculiar manner by it self, yea before the body sins. Albeit the body
sins also secondarily and in a manner proper to it self, even as the
instrument as you say.] The principal and peculiar action of the Soul, in
sins that be common to the Body and Soul, makes no proof that the Soul
must have a distinct and several punishment from the body; or that it may not
be punished from and by the body. The true and full punishment of all sin in
all the wicked is the casting of Body and Soul into hell fire, where one and
the same punishment is common to both, even as their sins were;
notwithstanding the proper and peculiar manner which the Soul has in sin by
it self above the body. The punishments of this life are likewise common to
both. For the Soul feels whatsoever greeueth the Body, neither can any thing
offend the Soul, which does not likewise disquiet the Body. How beit the
effects and impressions of one and the same punishment are different in Soul
and Body; not only because the Soul is the chief patient and sentient in all
pain, as it was the chief agent, and disponent in all sin; but also for
that the Soul sees and greeueth farther upon feeling the pain, then the body
can do. For the Sense of the Body can only judge how tolerable, or
intolerable the pain is; but the Soul reaches unto the cause, continuance,
and consequence thereof, which often times afflict the Soul as much, or more
then the pain it self. This difference depends on the nature of the Soul
which because it is endued with reason, remembrance, and intelligence,
perceives not only things present and subject to sense, as the Body does, but
things past and future together with their dependences; and things spiritual,
as well as corporal; and the loss of joy and bliss, no less then the
anguish of perpetual pain and misery. So that in all punishments of sin,
which be common to the Soul and Body, the Soul is far deeper engaged in the
grief thereof, then the Body can be. But this is no reason to prove that
Christ's Soul must die the death of Souls, or feel the pains of hell,
because his Soul considered better of his pains then his body could do.

Two Rules of Gods Justice in punishing the sins of men the Scriptures
report. Which though they be kept in all others, yet may no man affirm them of
Christ, farther then the Gospel gives evident Testimony to them. The one is
the means, the other is the measure of punishment. As, Wisdom. 11.
Wherewith a man sins, by the same also shall he be punished: and Revel. 18.
How much she exalted her self and lived in pleasure, so much torment and
sorrow give ye to her. Neither of these ruies could rightly fasten on Christ,
because he never sinned; and therefore touching the means, by which he
satisfied for our sins, the Scriptures and not your imaginations must be
consulted. Now they testify that he 1. Cor. 15.
dyed for our sins according to the Scriptures; and that we were 1. Pet. 1.
Redeemed by his precious blood, which was Matthew. 26.
shed for Remission of sins. Here is the satisfaction for the sins of men
which the Scripture delivers without any other death of the soul, or of the
damned, which men must suffer, if they be not freed from it by the death and
blood of Christ; but Christ neither did nor could suffer. For the measure of
pain, which Christ suffered in the death of his body described in the
Scriptures, we must leave it to God, who only knew what proportion of pain in
the person of his Son was sufficient for the sins of the world, and not
therein trust the deceitful balance of your presumption, who neither know
what degree of pain Christ suffered on the cross; nor how much in the person of
Christ would satisfy the justice of God for our sins. Only this we are
assured, that he Hebr. 5.
learned obedience by that which he suffered, and his patience was thereby
proved, but neither of them overwhelmed, or endangered. And therefore that
Christ's pain on the Cross was equal to hell pains, or the very same, which
the damned do suffer; these be your rash and violent intrusions upon Gods
justice; allotting to Christ out of your own brain the same punishment (as
you call it) in substance, that the wrath of God inflicteth on the wicked and
damned for their sins; but in all these collections you rest on the rules of
your own reason without any warrant of the word of God, which never sorteth
our Savior in his sufferings with the reprobate and damned; and contrary to the
Christian faith, which groundeth the weight of our redemption, and strength of
our Reconciliation to God upon the infinity of the person that died for us,
and not of the pain that was suffered in our steeds.

Defenc. pa. 59. li. 14.
Yea farther I mean, that some sins the Soul acts in and by it self
merely: and therefore it suffers likewise some punishments merely in it
self, which touch not the body at all, unless it be by Sympathy only, and
that only when they grow vehement.] What you now mean upon better advise,
makes nothing to the Conclusion, which you would have forced out of your
former words. Your assumption was, that Adam first did, and we ever since do
commit sin most properly in our Souls, our bodies being but the Instruments
of our Souls. In which words you speak of no sins, but only such as Adam
did, and we still do commit jointly with Soul and body, though most properly
in the soul, the body being her Instrument or accessarie to follow her
direction and will. And would you wrie and wrangle never so much, from sins
common to Soul and Body, most proportionably follows punishment likewise
common to Soul and Body; though in that common punishment the Soul perceives
and feels greater and grieuouser hurt and smart, then the body can do. If
now you add a farther meaning then you there expressed, your reason remains
as weak as it was at first, and your new meaning must have a new answer. For
which I must pray the Reader to stay till we have more fully examined Adams
fact, where you first began, and wherein you would seem to have some great
advantage. Howbeit if you mark well either your own purpose, which you offer
to prove; or your Assumption, which you bring for proof thereof; or my words
depending thereon; you will have but a cold suite of all this hoate challenge.
Your purpose was to prove, that Christ's sufferings for sin must be proper to
the Soul, and not with, from, or by the Body, which you reject as common to us
with beasts. The reason, which you brought for it, was, that Adam first and we
ever since (so) sinned, that is, MOST PROPERLY in our Souls, our Bodies being
but the Instruments of our Souls to follow the Souls direction and will. Now
because your wonted phrase (MOST PROPERLY) is so loosely set in your
assumption, that a Man can not tell whether you mean most properly in the
Soul, together with the Body being the Instrument of the Soul, as your words
lie; or else most properly in the Soul, without and besides the Body, which is
it that you intend, and must conclude before you can thence infer the proper
sufferings of Christ's soul, without and besides his body: I asked you which of
these twain you meant. If the former, then Adam first, and we ever since
committed sin jointly with Soul and Body, the Soul being the Principal,
and the Body her Instrument and accessarie. This I said was most true, but
repugnant to your purpose, as I before have showed. But if you meant OTHERWISE,
that Adam transgressed the Commandment of God MOST PROPERLY in his Soul,
without his Body concurring to the same transgression, which is more pertinent
to your purpose; then you contradicted, the fact of Adam and Gods precept, both
which do plainly witness, that Adam disobeyed as well by Body as by Soul.

If you will needs examine my words upon this your intention and assumption, I
am well content. That Adam sinned in soul and body, I say is most true. There
is my full resolution: Against this I never go. But if you meant Conclus. pa.
254. li. 6.
OTHERWISE, that Adam brake the commandment of God, not by his body properly,
but by his soul (only) as your words most properly might intend, then your
assumption was a manifest contradiction to the fact of Adam, and to the precept
of God. That the body alone without the soul does or can commit actual
sin, which has neither life, sense, motion, nor action without the soul, is
a position so absurd and false, that I thought it not worth the mentioning. I
asked you then whether you meant that Adam brake the commandment, not by his
body properly, as by an instrument to his soul, which is Defenc. page 59. li.
13.
proper to the body, as your self confess; but by his soul without his
body, that is, by his soul only. For what is by the soul, and not by the
body; but by the soul only? I asking you that question of your meaning, you
as eclipsed of your wits, suppose that I say, Adam sinned only by his body
and not by his soul; as if Adam when he sinned, were a body without a soul;
or his body did any thing without the direction and operation of his soul.
This is therefore a very foolish dotage of yours, to dream that I defend Adam
sinned by his body without his soul, when I prove and infer by Adams fact
and Gods precept, that Adam transgressed not by his soul (only) but by his
body (also:) even as in murder, theft, and adultery, these facts men commit
by their bodies (as instruments) and not by their souls ( alone or without
their bodies.) For can men commit these facts without their bodies, or are
their bodies requisite as well as their souls before they can commit these
facts?

Adam was Defenc. pa. 60. li. 2.
as well forbidden ^o desire or like that fruit, as to eat it; which you
deny.] To prove that Adam sinned not only by his soul, but also by his
body; I brought the words of Gods precept, Thou shall not eat thereof. Which
commandment since Adam wholly transgressed, the words had more in them than
the prohibition of desiring or liking; and Adams sin reached farther than to
liking or lust, even to the complete fact, whereby the commandment of God was
thoroughly in every part of man broken, which could not be done without the
joint actions of Adams body. Wherefore take back the heresy of the Pharisees
to your self, and bestow it among your friends that have lent you their
labors in this Defense. I am not to seek, that Gods law is transgressed as
well with heart and tongue, as with hand and deed. Howbeit, I distinguish facts
from words and thoughts, and avouch that FACTS can not be performed without the
body. And yet are there special reasons which you see not, why the wisdom of
God would not give this commandment without evident mention of an outward
fact. For the breaking of this precept was the transgression, that should
subject Adam and all his posterity, to the dominion of sin and death, in
every part of body and soul. Wherefore God would not have the first sin to
be secret within the soul alone; that all Adams offspring should openly behold
and confess the wickedness, unworthiness, and unthankfulness of their first
parents, that so lightly regarded and presently transgressed the charge and
precept, that God gave unto them. Secondly, since Adams carriage in this case
should be the retaining or loosing of all Gods graces and blessings for him and
his children, bestowed on man in his first creation; the transgression must
reach to all the senses and faculties of body and soul, that should infect
and corrupt all the parts and powers of body and soul. Thirdly, the first
sin was to extend as well to body as to soul, lest the soul sinning should
be adjudged to everlasting death, and the body not sinning reserved for
eternal life; and so man be divided contrary to his creation, the one part in
hell, and the other in heaven, which was utterly impossible. And if Adam after
liking had yet remembered Gods precept and threat, and so refrained the eating
of the forbidden fruit, it would trouble your wits to make a true answer,
whether Adam had obeyed or transgressed the commandment. But it suffices for
my purpose, that Adam sinned jointly with both parts, as well with body as
with soul; and so Christ, (if your proportion were any thing needful, which I
wholly reject, as needless in the Son of God) by this reason of yours needed
no proper sufferings of the soul without and besides the body.

Defenc. page 59. li. 34.
Paul understood (Romans 7. verse. 7.) when he became a Christian, that the
desiring of evil is sin before the outward act be consummate.] You allege
Saint Paul, as you do the rest, for matters that he never meant. Paul speaks
not Romans 7. verse. 7.
there of the actual desire of evil, when the will has thereto consented,
such as was in Adam, when he resolved to eat the forbidden fruit; but of the
natural inclination and first motions to sin, which are in us after Adams
disobedience, but were not in him before his fall. For that precept, thou shall
not lust, conuinceth and condemns our nature to be corrupt and sinful, to
which original concupiscence (the root and spring of all sin in us)
cleaves so fast, that even in our cradles this corruption excludes us from
the kingdom of God, if we be not regenerate in Christ by water and the holy
Ghost. In Adam besore sin there was no such thing, his nature was upright and
sincere, as it was first created, and void of all concupiscence intended by
this precept, as the Sea Peter Martyr, M. Musculus, Calvin, Gualter, and
others upon this place. Romans 7. verse 7.
best learned of our time teach, till by his transgression sin entered and
infected both body and soul. Neither do you conceive right of Paul, as he was
a Pharisee, when you suppose he took the outward fact of sin only to be
sin. Never read he, think you, when he was a Pharisee, the words of Esaias;
Esaias. 7.
Aram has taken wicked counsel against thee, but it shall not stand? Nor of
Solomon; The Proverb. 15.
thoughts of the wicked are an abomination to the Lord, and the Et 24.
evil thought of a fool is sin? Could he not tell, what to judge of Hamans
Ester. 3.
thoughts against the Jews, or of Achitophels 2. Sam. 17.
purpose against David, or of Balams Numb. 31.
counsel against the Israelites? The very heathen Philosophers placed virtues
and vices in the minds of men, and the profane Poets would have men's
enterprises measured by the intent, and not by the event. The Pharisees were
never so blind, as to think all counsels, thoughts, desires, and lusts to be
lawful, against the manifest and express words of the law and Prophets; but
they blindly mistook the law of God, as forbidding external facts only which
are hurtful to others, upon pain of malediction and damnation. They rather
stood upon the Popish opinion of venial and mortal sins, and did not think
that venial sins did exclude them from the righteousness of the Law, nor
from the kingdom of heaven. Of that opinion was Paul when he was a Pharisee,
but upon his conversion and better instruction by the spirit of Christ he
understood, that not only evil desires and thoughts were forbidden by the
several precepts of Gods law as deadly sins, which the Pharisees would not
admit, to uphold their own righteousness; but that even the secret tentation
to sin, and the inward propension and corruption of our hearts are
interdicted and condemned by this precept, thou shall not lust, as sin
sufficient to exclude us from the kingdom of God.

Defenc. page 59. li. 18. and 28.
Your doctrine is very strange, where you teach, that the soul properly
commits no sin, but by and with the body; that is, the soul in it self and
by it self alone sins not. You say, all prouocations and pleasures of sin
the soul takes from her body, all acts of sin she commits by her body;
which speeches are exceeding untrue and hurtful.] To him that either fully can
not, or rightly will not understand what is said, all things seem strange;
otherwise set aside your old ordinary phrases of proper and mere, without
which you can say nothing; and the matter which you so much maruaileat, is very
plain, as well by the rules of Scripture, as proofs of nature. Is it so
strange a doctrine with you, that the whole man, and not this or that part of
man, is by the word of God charged with the committing of every sin, and
guilty thereof in such sort, that the whole person is defiled therewith, and
shall be condemned therefore? Luke. 5.
Depart from me Lord, says Peter to Christ, for I am a sinful man. Psalm. 32.
Blessed is the man, says David, to whom the Lord imputes no sin. Luke. 18.
O God be merciful unto me a sinner, says the Publicane. Romans 2.
Tribulation and anguish upon the soul of every man, that works evil, says
the Apostle. By which, as by infinite other places of Scripture we are taught,
that the whole person, which is man himself, is the sinner, by which part so
ever he sins. John. 8.
Every one that commits sin, is the servant of sin; says our Savior.
Can the soul be in bondage for sin, and the body be free? Deuteronomy. 27.
Cursed is the man, says Moses, that keeps not all the words of the law to
do them. Can the soul be accursed for sinning, and the body be blessed as
not sinning? The Romans 6.
wages of sin is death, says the Apostle. Shall death prevail against the
Soul for sin, and the Body escape death as void of sin? Surely no. Sin
defiles the whole Man, by what part soever it is committed; yea the very
thoughts of the heart coinquinate the whole man. When the Pharisees held
opinion, that meat eaten with unwashed hands defiled the Body, our Savior
reprooueth that error in them; and teaches his Disciples, that Marc. 7.
nothing without a man can defile him, when it enters into him: but the things
which come forth of him, are they that defile the Man. For from within out of
the heart of Man come forth evil thoughts, covetousness, wantonness, a
wicked eye, pride, foolishness. All these evils come from within, and defile a
Man. Where we see that envy, (which Christ notes by a wicked eye) and pride,
and such like inward sins, yea and evil thoughts defile the Man, that is as
well the Body, which the Pharisees took to be defiled with unclean hands, as
the Soul. The Apostle stretches the infection of sin farther, even to the
meats them selves, that are eaten of the wicked. Tit. 1. v. 15.
All things (says he, speaking of meats, which the Jews counted unclean)
are clean to the clean; but to the unclean and unbelievers nothing is
clean; but even their mind and conscience is unclean. So that the
uncleanness of the inward Man, defiles the outward Man, and all things, which
the outward Man uses.

This is so true, that not only the guiltiness, and filthiness of sin is
in this life communicated from the Soul to the Body; but both shall be therefore
condemned in the righteous judgment of God to everlasting fire. 2. Cor. 5.
We must all appear before the tribunal of Christ every man to receive the
things done by his Body. Where all sorts of sins in thought, word, or deed,
are by the Apostle called (...), or as others read, (...), things done by the
body, or the things proper to the Body. And though we expound it, as some do,
for the things done in the Body; yet all three expositions convince that the
Soul can not sin without the Body, but by or in the Body; and that the
condemnation for sin reaches as well to the Body, as to the Soul. Else the
resurrection of the Body were superfluous in the wicked, if Gods Justice did
not determine for sin to punish the Body together with the Soul. Where
Tertullians Rule takes place to prove them both guilty of sin, that shall
be both punished for sin. Tertullianus de resurrect. carnis.
They can not be severed in the reward which were joined in the work. Let not
the flesh be partaker in the sentence, (that is of judgment) if it were not
partaker in the cause, that is in sin. Of his opinion in this point were all
the learned Fathers of Christ's Church.

Athenagoras an ancient and Christian Philosopher and writer, in his Treatise
of the resurrection of the dead, ve^ie learnedly persueth this argument, and by
many reasons proves, that the whole man sins, and not this or that part;
and therefore the whole, as well body as soul, must be judged for every
sin. Athenagoras de resurrectione (...).
If t^ whole nature of man (says he) be universally composed of an immortal
soul, and a bod^ made and at tempered thereto; and God has not given either
birth, breath, or this whole life to the soul by her self, or to the body
apart, but to men consisting of these (two:) it is altogether necessary,
(since one living creature consists of both, and feels all the affections
of the soul, and does and performs whatsoever belongs to the body, and
all things needing the judgment of sense or reason) the whole course of these
things should be referred to one end; (...): that all should wholly concur to
one harmony and sympathy, (that is, to one joint action and passion) of the
(whole) man. And if there be one joint action and passion of the whole living
creature, as well in those things that proceed from the soul, as in those that
are performed by the body; then must there be one close and reward for all
these things. Ibidem.
(...), I affirm both together to be a man composed of body and soul, (...),
and the man so composed to be brought to judgment for all his actions, and for
them to receive either honor or punishment. Ibidem.
It is therefore apparent to every man, that according to the Apostle, this
corruptible, though it be dispersed, must put on incorruption, that every one
may justly receive the things that he has done by his body, whether they were
good or bad. Gregory Nys^ene teaches the very same in effect. ^.
What define we a man to be? both (a body and a soul) joined together, or
either of them severed? It is manifest, that the conjunction of both makes a
man. Let us also consider this, whether those things which men do and commit;
for example, adultery, murder, theft, and whatsoever is consequent to these;
or on the other side, sobriety, continency and every action that is opposite
to vice, may be said to be the effects of both, or be referred to the soul
alone. ^dem.
But in this the truth is manifest. For in every action both coupled each with
other, do jointly undertake and perform the things which are done. I^dem.
If then in good deeds the body labors and suffers together with the
soul, and in sins it is not absent; what moves thee to bring the soul
without her body into judgment? Thine assertion is neither just nor well
advised. For if the soul alone and by her self have sinned, God will then
punish her al^ne; but if she have a manifest helper, the just Judge will not
let that escape. Epiphanius refu^ing those that thought we should rise with
another body than here we live in, says. How shall the soul remain alone,
the body not present, that sinned together with ^.
it? Such a soul may contradict the judgment of God, and say: I (alone)
sinned not, but the body (with me.) For since I departed from the body, I
committed neither fornication, nor adultrie, nor theft, nor murder, nor
idolatry, neither did I any evil; and her defense shall be found reasonable.
Upon this reasonable defense of hers what shall we say? Shall the judgment of
God cease? or will God punish men unjustly? God forbid. Therefore as God made
the man one compound of body and soul, the just Judge will raise the body
again, and give it his own soul, and so shall the judgment of God be just,
both parts communicating either in punishment for sin, or in reward for
virtue. Ambrose gives the same reason for the resurrection of the body. (...)
(...) de (...) (...).
Et haec est series and causa iustitiae, vt quoniam corporis animique communis
est actus, quae animus cogitauit, corpus efficit; vtrumque in iudicium veniat,
vtrumque aut poenae dedatur, aut gloriae reseruetur. This is the course and
ground of justice, that because the act (of sin) is common to body and
soul, the body performing what the mind devised, both should come into
judgment, and both be awarded to punishment, or reserved to glory. For it
seems almost absurd, where the law of the flesh impugneth the law of the
mind, and the mind often does that which she hates whiles the sin (or
corruption) of the flesh dwelling in man works, that the soul should be
subjected to the injury as guilty of another fault, and the flesh should
enjoy rest, which is the author of the misery; and the soul alone should be
punished, which alone did not sin; or alone be glorified, which alone did not
strive for glory. Theodoret treads the same steps, though with a larger
process: Theodoret. de prouidentia. Sermon. 9.
To suspect that souls alone shall be released, or punished, and the body
cast away to corruption, as a brute thing and altogether unprofitable, what
reason can it have, that the ^le deprived of the body should be adjudged to
torment? For being condemned she may worthily say to the Judge: I did not
alone transgress thy laws, Lord, but together with the bod^e (...)! fall on
the rocks of wickedness; or rather if I must speak the truth, the body drew
me into the pit of sin. Snared with his eyes did I curiously view the beauty
belonging to others and affected both lands and riches, they compelling me to
behold such things. The affections of the body brought me to servitude, and
took away the liberty which thou gave me. I was forced (...), as bred with
him and his fellow-seruant, to minister unto him, and provide for his wants.
Often times grieved therewith, have I yielded to the necessities of the flesh,
yea not knowing what else to do, and very much sorowing, have I been driven to
wait on the desires of the body. And often have I resisted, and stiffly
repelled his snares; but his continual conflicts many times overcame me. When
I repressed him, I afflicted my self, for I received back the grief: when I
cherished him, I was impugned by him, enduring his wanton assaults. Therefore
assign not me alone to punishment, o Lord, but either free me together with
the body from these straits, or cast that together with me into torment.
Howbeit the Judge needs no such supplication; but as he governs wisely, so
he judges justly, restoring the body; to their souls, and so giving to
every one according to their deserts. Damascene alleges the conjunction of
the soul with the body, and the cooperation of both in all virtues and vices,
as causes sufficient why the body must be judged and rewarded together with
the soul. Damascen. de fide Orthodoxa. l 4. cap. 28.
If the soul alone sustained the trials of virtue, alone shall she be crowned:
and if she alone were entangled with pleasures, justly she alone must be
punished. (...); but because she had no several being (from the body) neither
passed through virtue or vice without the body, justly shall both together
receive rew^ (of good or bad.)

For the better conceiving the truth of these speeches, we must know what
these What powers an^ faculties of the Soul the Father call corporal, and why.
Fathers mean by the body; and what powers and faculties of man they comprise
in that name, and why: so shall we the sooner discern what cooperation in
sin man's body has with his soul. The body, as it is the instrument or
servant of the soul, to do good or evil, is no dead nor senseless lump of
flesh; but has annexed unto it, besides life, both sense and motion, and those
as well inward as outward. For external and internal sense and motion are not
only performed by vital and animal spirits, which are plainly corporal;
(though their vigor and force be from the soul, which brings life and
sense;) but so affixed to the body, that they die with the body, and are not
found in the soul, so long as she is separated from the body. Those faculties
these Fathers ascribe the rather to the flesh, because in some sort they be in
beasts, who in their kind have sense and motion, both outward and inward; and
sensitive desires and affections depending thereon: which all must needs be
corporal, for that brute beasts led only by sense to desire and delight in
things present before them, have no spiritual nor immortal part from which
they should proceed. The same powers of sense, and sensitive appetites, and
affections in man's body, these learned Fathers account and call corporal, not
that they discern or move without the soul, but that the sensitive and
inferior powers of the soul are mixed with corporal spirits in man, and by
them apprehend and desire external and sensible things, by which corruption of
senses and affections the soul is drawn to diverse delights and desires, that
are continual occasions and inducements to sins. Therefore Theodoret names
(...), the desires, affections, assaults and conflicts of the body seeking by
pleasures and sundry lusts to conquer the soul. Neither want they the warrant
of holy Scripture in so speaking. Romans 6.
Let not sin reign in your mortal bodies, says Paul, to obey it in the
lusts thereof; neither give your members to be weapons of unrighteousness unto
sin. So that the members of our mortal body are called by the Apostle the
weapons of unrighteousness, by which sin fights against the soul. Iam. 4.
Whence are wars and strifes in you, says James? not hence, even from the
pleasures which fight in your members? 1. Pet. 2.
Abstain, says Peter, from carnal desires, which fight against the soul.
Romans 7.
I delight in the law of God, says Paul, according to the inward man: but I
see another law in my members fighting against the law of my mind, and leading
me captive to the law of sin, which is in my members. O wretched man that I
am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death? Where the inward man
(which is the mind lightened and the will directed by grace) is divided against
the outward man, which must n^eds be the inferior powers of the souls joined
with the parts and spi its of the body, where and whereby sin still dwelling
in our earthly and irregenerate members, iusteth against the spirit, and
strives against the mind; which Peter calls fighting against the soul.

To strengthen this doctrine, which you think so strange, it shall not be
amiss to consider somewhat further, what communion the soul has with the
body; that thereby we may perceive, what use the soul has of her body in
well or evil doing. The habitation of the soul in the body, and her
conjunction with the body making one man of two contrary parts; mortal, and
immortal; visible, and invisible; reasonable, and unreasonable; is so
wonderful a work of God, that the manner thereof wholly pas^eth our
understanding: only by consequents, and effects we gather, what she uses in
the body, what she perceives by the body, and what she imparteth to the
body. Howbeit her habitation in the body, and union with the body, composing
one person of both, called man, is sufficient by the Scriptures, if we knew no
more of the communion that is betwixt them, to make both parts guilty of all
sin committed and liable to the punishment thereof both in this world, and in
the next. And so much the Scriptures teach us, when they require confession of
our sins, or promise remission of our sins or threaten vengeance for our
unrighteousness; wherein the body is not severed nor excepted from the soul,
but both are con^oyned in one person, to whom and every part of whom, either
mercy is afforded unto salvation, or justice awarded unto damnation. And yet
because the communion which is betwixt the soul and body, will give us some
light, how the soul uses the help of her body in accomplishing her actions;
I may not omit to speak thereof, though happily it will be somewhat obscure to
the simple, and more remote from their understanding, then in this case I could
wish.

As man was ordained of God to have in him the several operations, of life, of
sense of reason, so was the soul created with three diverse faculties
answerable to those three functions; to wit, with a vital or vegetative for
the first, with a sensitive and motive for the second, with a reasonable or
intellectiue for the third. The vital faculty provided for the quickening,
nourishing, increasing and preserving of the body in moderate strength to the
discharge of our duties to God and our neighbor, is so fastened to the body
that without the body it has neither use, nor action.

The second faculty called sensitive was given of purpose to the soul, not
only to perceive by sense the natures, helps, and uses of all external and
sensible things, and by voluntary motion to pursue that, which was profitable
for us; but chiefly, that by seeing the works and hearing the words of God we
should come to the knowledge of his will, and open our lips to praise his
name, and to direct and comfort others; as also stretch out our hands to aid
and relieve our selves and our brethren, and with all the parts of our body
to perform all outward actions and duties of piety and charity. To which
ends because sense and motion both external and internal were requisite as
well as reason, the wisdom of God has placed in the body, and specially in
the head and heart (the seats of understanding and will) certain thin,
quick, and aeriall vapors, or spirits, which rise from the blood, and are
brought by the brain to a marvelous force and agilitie, that they should
carry to the mind of man with incredible celeritie the resemblances of all
things subjected to sense, and with like vehemency stir and excite the heart
and will of man, with consent to embrace, and with all the powers and parts of
soul and body to follow after that, which provoke and delights the
sensitive spirits. So that these corporal and active spirits are the means,
whereby particular things and circumstances, together with their profits and
pleasures, are in a moment presented to the mind: and the heart and will
likewise moved and inflamed to accept and allow that, which contenteth and
pleases the senses. For according as the things objected to sense, or
remembered after sense, seem good or evil to the powers of the soul united
with these spirits, so is desire or anger kindled by pleasure on the one side,
and dislike or grief on the other, which presently and violently prevail with
the soul, where grace wants, and lust and strive even in the Saints against
the spirit of God. This is that part of the soul, which in the faithful is
not regenerate, whiles here they live; lusting still after the things of this
world, even the delights of the flesh, the desires of the eye, and the pride of
life; and by these baits and snares fighting against the Soul.

The third power of the Soul is intellectiue, that is the mind endued with
understanding and will; which in the natural man is ignorant of God and auerse
from God by corruption of sin, and so carried through the love of it self
either to carnal pleasures at the provocation of the senses, or to vain
desires under color of humane reason and glory. This part in the faithful is
lightened and persuaded by the Spirit of God to see and acknowledge the good and
acceptable will of God, and strengthened with a measure of grace to resist the
dominion of sin dwelling in our mortal body, that is in the sensitive
powers and affections of the soul mixed with the members and spirits of the
body; though in this life the mind even of the regenerate has not that
perfection of knowledge and love, which the law of God requires; and therefore
shrinketh often from the leading of Gods spirit by ignorance and infirmity,
but never by rebellion and obstinacy.

This much being said touching the powers of the Soul, which may more largely
be perused in that learned Zanchius de operibus dei part. 3. lib 2. cap. 3.
work of Zanchius alleged by this Discourser; It is most evident by the very
grounds of humane and Divine learning and experience, that the principal part
of the Soul, which is the mind enabled with reason and will, has in all sorts
of sins a manifest communion with the Body; either by information of the
senses, or by tentation from the affections, or by impression on the spirits
and parts of the body, or by the ready subjection of the whole body to the
will; besides original corruption, which the Soul draws from the Body,
sufficient of it self to make the Body guilty of all evil committed by the
Soul, and actual execution, whereby the Soul needs and uses the Body to
effect and accomplish, whatsoever she intends. And first of information for
the senses.

The knowledge of good and evil, which the Soul of man has in this life, is
not infused by creation, as it was in Angels, to whom that kind of knowledge is
peculiar, but collected from the sense, and taught by time, as we see by
experience in all mankind without exception. I still reserve the revelation and
inspiration of Gods Spirit; when, where, and to whom pleases him. A plain
proof of the former point we daily behold in children, who utterly know
nothing, no Jonas. 3.
not their right hand from their l^ft, as God himself testifies, till by
sense and use they learn to distinguish, and at length to conceive the things
set before them. The Rule of natural Philosophy expressing, that the
understanding has nothing, which came not from the sense, you would feign
tumble out of your way, but it is very true and consonant to the Scriptures, if
it be taken as it was meant, and the revelation of Christ's Spirit thence
excepted, of which in deed the Philosophers knew nothing. For that was not
spoken of conclusions in reason, as if they must be first in sense, before they
could be inferred by consequent; nor of the dividing and compounding things in
man's imagination, that came from the sense, as dreams and fictions; but of the
principles or premises in reason, which must be plain to the sense; and of
the natural and true proprieties and differences of all particular things,
which the sense must first apprehend, before the mind can rightly discern
them. So that the mind conceaueth truly no singular things, which were not
first apparent to the sense, since man has no natural means given him of God
to get the true knowledge of any thing, that is not revealed or inspired from
above, but only his senses. To this the Scriptures bears witness, where the
means to inform man's Heart of good and badde, in which sin consists, are
set down to be the eyes, and the ears, still saving to God, what he reuealeth
by the power of his spirit. Ignorance and neglect of Gods will, whence all
sin comes, are described in the Scriptures by the dullness of the ear, and
blindness of the eye. God has given them (says Paul) the spirit of slumber;
even eyes that they should not see, and ears that ^ Romans 11.
they should not hear unto this day. Our Savior confirms the same out of
the Prophet Esaie. Matthew. 13.
The Heart of this people is wexed fat, they hear dully with their ears, and
wink with their eyes; least they should see with their eyes, and hear with
their ears, and (so) understand with their hearts. But blessed (says he to his
Disciples) are your eyes, for they see; and your ears for they hear. In so
much that the Apostle doubts not to assure us, Romans 10.
faith comes by hearing, when the heart believes unto righteousness, and
without hearing there is no believing; How shall they believe in him, of whom
they have not heard? And God requiring his people to be wise and learn, says,
^ Esa ^2.
Hear ye deaf, and ye blind behold, that ye may see. As God then uses no
outward means besides his works and his words to teach us his will; so has he
given us no natural course to learn, but by the eyes and the ears; by which
we must come to the knowledge of all heavenly, and much more of all earthly
things.

The loosing and decaying of man's knowledge in this life, after he has gotten
it, will prove the same, no less then the lacking thereof, before he does by
sense attain it. For when the sensitive spirits in the brain be either gross
and heavy, as in fools; or extreme hoate and whirling as in mad men; or
obstructed and choked as in Lethargies and Apoplexies; men want the use of
reason, because the objects, whereon the mind works, are by these means
hindered and hid from the understanding. This is the true resolution both of
Philosophers and Divines. Zanchius de operibus dei part. 3. li. 2. cap. 2. fol.
507.
Ad facultatem intelligentem exercendam non eget (men's) organo tanquam medio,
per quod intelligat: quanquam eget obiecto, in quod intueatur, and ex quo
intellectionem concipiat. Hoc autem obiectum, sunt phantasmata, seu rerum a
sensibus perceptarum simulachra ad phantasiam perlata. To exercise the faculty
of understanding the mind of man, says Zanchius, needs no instrument, as a
mean by which she may understand, but she needs an object, whereon to look,
and whence to conceive the act of understanding. This object are the sensitive
apprehensions, or the resemblances of things received from the senses and
carried to the phantasme or imagination of man. And to this objection that upon
the hurt or weariness of the brain we find by experience, our mind can not
understand and work in those things as it did before; he answers. Zanchius
ibidem. fol. 507.
Ideo non potest lesis aut defatigatis turbatisque organis men's nostra
intelligendis contemplandisque rebus operam dare, quia phantasmata ipsa, quae
sunt in organo corporali, and quae sunt ceu obiectum intellectus, turbato
ipsorum organo, videri and percipi non possunt. Therefore our mind can not
contemplate and conceive, when the instruments are hurt, wearied, or troubled,
because the resemblances of things, which are in a corporal instrument, and
are as an object to the understanding, can not be seen and perceived. For the
Ibidem.
resemblances of things in man's Imagination are to his understanding and mind,
as colors are to his sight. Now the eye sees nothing but the color of every
thing, though therewithal it distinguish number, quantity, motion and figure,
and so takes the knowledge of every sensible thing. In like manner without the
similitudes and shapes of things carried from the sense to the phantasiue
imagination or apprehension, and there remaining, the mind understands
nothing of those things, that are without it; and no knowledge is naturally
within it, but what God has revealed to it. His conclusion is. Zanchius de
operibus Dei part 3 li. 2. cap. 3. Thesi. 2. de phantasia.
Haec partis sensiti^ facult as propinqua est intellecti^, and huic suppeditat
materiam cogitandi, intelligendi, and denique omnia sua officia faciendi. This
faculty of the sensitive part, is placed near unto the intellectiue, and
ministers thereunto matter of Cogitation, understanding, and performing all
her duties.

In inward tentation to evil, Saint James rule does generally take place.
Iam. 1.
Every man is tempted being drawn away, and entised by his own concupiscence.
And lust conceiving brings forth sin. So that lust naturally dwelling in
us, and conceiving and bringing forth sin, is the very mother and nurse of
all sin in us. Austen makes two chief roots of sin in man, desire, and
fear. August. in Psalm 79.
Omnia peccata du^ res faciunt in homine, cupidit as and timor. Cogitate,
discutite, interrogate cord^ vestra, perscrutamini conscientias, videte vtrum
possunt esse peccatanisi cupiendo aut timendo. Two things cause ALL SINS in
men, desire and fear. Bethink your selves, discuss, examine your hearts,
search your consciences, and see whether there can possible be any sins, but
by desiring or fearing. Where least Austen making two fountains of all sins,
desire, and fear; should jar with Saint James, that sets down lust for
the first spring of every tentation to sin: we must either take tentation, of
which Saint James speaks, for a delightful provocation to sin, resting
within us; and terror, which Austen adds, for a violent and external
induction thereto proceeding from others: or else we must derive, desire and
fear from the love of our selves, which originally dwells in us, and lusts
after every thing that likes us: or lastly we may join the one as a
consequent to the other; since the natural desire we have of our own ease
and welfare, breeds in us that dislike and fear of evil, which so much
urges and forces us. If then desire and fear, be the motives and inducements
to ALL SINS, that men commit; as most resolutely Saint Austen avouches; and
these two desire and fear, on which depend the rest of our affections, be
passions of the sensitive part of the Soul permixed in this life with
corporal spirits: certainly all sins in men have their prouocations and
incitations from and by bodily senses, spirits, or motions. Clamens Alexand.
Stromat. li. 6.
(...). By bodily spirits (says Clemens Alexandrinus) man has sense, desire,
rejoices, and kindles to anger; yea and by the same (spirits) do the
thoughts and resolutions of the mind proceed to action. Athenagoras de
resurrection^ mortuorum.
(...), etc. Where is it just, says Athenagoras, that DESIRES, pleasures,
FEARS and sorrows should have their motion (or rising) from the body, and the
sins occasioned by them, and the punishments for the same sins should lie
on the Soul alone? Damascene defining the passions or affections of the Soul,
says. Damascenus orthodox. fidei li. 2. cap. 22.
(...). A passion (or affection of the Soul) is a sensible motion of the
desiring or appetitiue faculty, upon the imagination of good or evil. In
which description are three plain proofs, that the passions of the soul
(which by the confession of Damascene, and all other Divines are Ibidem. li. 2.
cap. 12.
DESIRE, FEAR, joy and sorrow) do not move in this life without the body.
First in that they are sensible motions, they must be perceived in the body;
next in that they rise from the sensitive appetite, they are conjoined with the
body; thirdly in that they come upon the phantasiue imagination of good or
evil, they are kindled from the senses of the body. What sensible motions
these affections of the soul do raise in the outward and inward parts of man,
we shall anon perceive, when we come to the impressions, that the soul makes
on the body: in the mean time it is not amiss to know, how Satan, who has
that name from his desire and power of tempting, works and prevails in his
temptations upon men.

It is evident by the Scriptures, that God alone searches, and changes the
heart of man, because he alone is the maker of it; and therefore Satan, though
he be a spirit, yet can he not by himself either discern the thoughts, or
alter the will of man; but in the one he observes the secret impressions of
the soul on the body; and in the other he stirs and uses the spirits and
affections of the body against the soul. So that when he will put any evil
thoughts into the hearts of men, as he did into John 13.
Judas and Act. 5.
Ananias, and daily does into the children of disobedience, and often time,
into the godly themselves, when he is so permitted; he can not of himself
turn and wind the heart as pleases him, that is proper to God alone; but he
abuses our ears and eyes, or else he stirs the humors and spirits of the
body, and by tempering and mixing the resemblances of things received from the
sense, and reserved in man's imagination, he obiecteth to the mind what he
lists, and incensing the How the devil may discern and incense our
affections.
affections, that are likewise bodily, he tries whether he can draw the heart
to consent. Which he discerns not by any inward power of his own, but by the
different motions of the heart, where the will of man is seated, and according
as he finds his temptations to be either refused, or admitted in the heart of
man, so he either desisteth from his lost labor, or persueth the suggestion
once allowed, till the sin be performed. S. Austen discussing how devils
could divine at men's thoughts, and induce men's hearts, says: August de
Diuinatione Damonum. cap. 5.
Suadent miris and inuisibilibus modis, corpora hominum non sentientium
penetrando, seseque cogitationibus eorum per quaedam imaginaria visa miscendo,
sieve vigilantium, sieve dormientium: The devils persuade by marvelous and
invisible means, entering the bodies of men when they feel it not, and by
certain resemblances or sights of the imagination intermingling themselves
with the thoughts of men, either waking or sleeping. Of discerning our
thoughts, the writer of Ecclesiastical opinions amongst S. Austens works,
says: De ecclesiast. Dogmatibus. cap. 80.
Internas animae cogitationes diabolum non videre, certi sumus, sed motibus eas
corporis ab illo, and affectionum indicijs colligi, experimento didicimus. We
be sure the devil sees not the inward thoughts of the heart, yet find we by
experience, that he collecteth them by the motions of the body, and the shows
of men's affections. To which S. Austen agrees: August. de Diuinatione Damonum.
cap 5.
Sicut apparet concitatior animi motus in vultu, vt ab hominibus quoque aliquid
forinsecus agnoscatur, quod intrinsecus agitur: Ita non debet esse incredibile,
si etiam leuiores cogitationes dant aliqua signa per corpus, quae obtuso
hominum sensu cognosci non possunt, acuto autem damonum possunt. As a vehement
motion of the mind appears even in the countenance, that men may outwardly
perceive what is inwardly purposed; so ought it not to be incredible, that the
lighter thoughts of men give some signs by the body, which can not be
descried by the dull sense of men, but yet may be discerned by the quick sense
of devils. By themselves then devils can not infuse any thoughts into us; that
only belongs to the spirit of God; immediately to inspire the heart of man;
neither can they so much as discern our secret thoughts, which none can do,
but he that framed the heart; yet as the soul gets her knowledge by
resemblance and informance of things carried from the senses to the
imagination, and thence presented to the mind: so the devil has his means
to work in the outward and inward senses, which have corporal seats and
spirits, and by the similitudes and shows of things there found, to offer
suggestions to the mind of man. Whether it be therefore the world without us,
the flesh within us, or the devil both without and within, that tempts us;
our senses, imaginations and affections are the means which are used by all
those three; and these have such union and communion with the body, that after
death there is no means for new temptations to be offered, nor new sins to
be committed, but each man shall receive judgment for the things done in the
body, and not after or before the body.

That all the thoughts of man, be they never so light, give signs in the
body, I by no means affirm: for so the devils should easily discern
thoughts; and S. Austen wisely did moderate that assertion, and make some
doubt, August. retract. li. 2. ca. 3.
how thoughts are known to devils; but in sins, (of which I speak, not of
thoughts) it is more manifest, that the devil has his means to see, whether
his temptations take place in the heart or no. For when S. James says, James.
4.
Resist the devil, and he will flee from you; surely the devil must see when
he is resisted in the heart of man, else how shall he flee? E hes. 4.
Give no place to the devil, says Paul. Then does the devil perceive, when
place is given unto him, that he may enter and possess the heart; neither are
his temptations so vainly offered, that he can not discern when the heart
imbraceth them. The soul therefore pleased or displeased with evil, causes
certain natural motions and impressions on the body, by which the wicked
spirits observe the inclination of the heart; and that to them is as clear, as
the outward carriage of the countenance is to men, or the inward feeling of our
affections is to our selves.

Of outward motions and impressions Jesus the son of Syrach says: Eccles. 13.
The heart of man changes his countenance, either to good or evil. Ibid. v.
27.
A cheerful face is the token of the heart for good: and when the countenance
falls, the heart is displeased. Why is thy Genes. 4.
countenance cast down, said God to Cain, reproving his dislike, that Abels
sacrifice was preferred? And when Labans heart altered toward Jacob, Labans
Genes. 31.
countenance was not as it was before. Genes. 33.
I have seen thy face, as the face of God, because thou have accepted me, said
Jacob to Esau; and usually in the Scriptures, to find grace in the eyes,
notes a favorable and loving respect had to any. Nature teaches us as well
as Scripture, that anger and favor, sorrow and joy, fear and shame, and all
the affections of the heart appear in the very faces of men, and so do
pride, envy, luxury, a^arice, impudency, and such like vices betray
themselves by the very looks. The Esa 2.
lofty eye of man shall be humbled, that is, his pride shall be abased. The
Eccles. 14.
wicked enuieth to see with his eye, and turns away his face; and the eye of
the covetous is not satisfied with any part. Of wantons Peter says, They have
2. Pet. 2.
eyes full of adultery. By what outward signs of face, eyes, gostures and
motions of the body, the inward affections and dispositions of the mind may
be gathered, would be long to deliver. Tertullian says truly; Tertullianus de
resurrectione carnis.
Facies intentionum omnium speculum est. The face is the glass of all (our)
intentions or affections. And Ambrose: Habitus mentis in corporis statu
cernitur. The disposition of the Ambros. officio. li. 1. cap. 18.
mind is perceived by the state of the body. Basil. in Psalm. 29.
(...). What is more deformed (says Basil) and more displeasing even to the
sight, then the soul when she is in her affections? Observe an angry man, and
the fierceness of his looks. Mark a man sorrowing, and the baseness and
deiection of his soul. One that is subject to luxury or gluttony, or amazed
with fear, who can endure to behold? (...). The disposition of the soul
piercing to the very outsides of the body, even as the prints of the
seemlinesse of the soul appear (...), in the composed behavior and gesture
of the godly.

The alterations of the blood, and motions of the spirits within the body,
which All affections make sensible alterations in the heart.
the soul raises in all her affections, are not so open to the eye as the
former, yet are they the causes of all outward mutations, and sensible enough
to the parties themselves, when they grow any thing vehement. For this is Gods
ordinance in all things which have sense or reason, that good any way
perceived, should delight, stir, and inflame the will and appetite of beasts,
men and angels, with desire and love thereof: and evil contrariwise should not
only auert and quench the will and appetite with hatred, but offend and
oppress the patient with fear and grief. When then the soul of man united
to her body, likes any thing objected or apprehended under the show of good;
she kindles and moves her self to attain her desire, and therewithal
incenseth the vital and animal spirits, which warm the blood, enlarge the
heart, and diffuse themselves to pursue, or embrace the good that is approaching
or present. And when she sees any evil which she can not decline, but must
endure, she staggereth, and sincketh for fear, which quenches the spirits,
cools the blood, and closes the heart, depressing all three with a slack,
cold, and heavy remissness. If she may withstand or requite the evil that is
toward, she raises her self to anger, which makes the blood to boil, the
heart to swell, and the spirits to fly to the outmost parts, as ready to
resist or revenge. So that LOVE and HATRED of good and evil objected to the
sense or mind of man, are the two chief springs of all his affections and
actions; and the branches thereof, which are desire, fear, joy, grief and
anger, moved either by the sense or understanding, have their manifest or
secret alterations of the blood, and motions of the heart, by the intension or
remission of the spirits kindled, or quenched more or less, according as the
object of good and evil is greater or nearer. By this means the soul
affected and moved with good or evil, affects and moves her body, and
shows her inward disposition and inclination to either; and the heart of man,
which is the seat of will, has his natural and different motions raised by
the soul, upon het liking or disliking of good or evil, perceived by sense or
by understanding.

These alterations and motions naturally impressed by the soul on the body,
not only Philosophers and Physicians have observed, but the Divines of all
ages, that have waded therein, have fully confessed. Aristotle by the rules of
nature collected and inferred thus much: Arist. de animalium moti^ne. cap. 8.
(...). The beginning of motion is that, which in our actions must be persued
or declined; and of necessity heat and cold do follow upon the cogitation or
imagination of either. That which is grieuing, is declined; that which is
pleasing, is persued. Howbeit, in small things this is scant sensible. Ibid.
cap. 7.
So that almost all things grieuing and pleasing (us) bring with them a
(sensible) kind of cold and heat; as it is evident by our affections; the
parts enlarging by heat, and shrinking with cold. This alteration, either the
sense, or the imagination, or the cogitation can make. Wherefore some shake and
fear only upon the cogitation of things. The evil or good which grieueth or
pleases us, brings naturally cold or heat to the blood, and so enlarges or
shrinketh the heart; which alterations do come as well upon cogitation and
imagination, as upon sense. Galene an exact and skillful obseruer of man's
body, writes that the first and principal cause of shaking is the Galenus de
causis Symptomatum. li. 2. cap. 5.
recourse of the natural heat to the inward and outward parts, which is found
in many affections of the soul; and with the same are as well the spirits as
the blood carried sometimes inward to the fountain (of the heart) and there
compressed; sometimes extended to the outward parts, and there diffused. Those
spirits and blood, together with the heat that is in either or both, the soul
uses for her first instruments in all her operations, or else dwells in them;
and those motions of the soul we may plainly behold in many other things,
but chiefly in the affections of the soul. For fear presently drives the
spirits and the blood to the inward parts, and presses them to a narrow room
by cooling the outsides of the body. Anger does hastily send forth, diffuse,
and heat (the blood and spirits) and therefore the beating of the arteries and
the heart, in them that fear, are small and weak; but very great and vehement
in them that are angry.

That fear does straiten and contract the heart, and joy dilate it and make it
leap, and the signs of either prevail and appear in the body; the ancient
Father Saint Basile did long since observe. Basil. Homil. 4. de gratiar.
Action.
Tears (the effect of grief) do rise, says he, when an impression against
our wills does strike the Soul, and draw it together, the spirit about the
heart being compacted and straightened. Joy is as it were the leaping of the Soul
exulting (or advancing it self) for things answerable to our mind. Wherefore
the Soul shows signs in the Body accordingly. For in those that sorrow the
mass of flesh is pale, wanne, and cold. In those that rejoice, the habit of
their body is floorishing and ruddy, the Soul even leaping, and for pleasure
offering to rush to the outmost parts. Thomas Aquinas a man well learned,
though led with the errors of his age, very truly notes; First, Quod in
Thomas 1. 2. q^aest. 24. a^t. 2. a^ 2.
omni passione animae additur aliquid vel diminuitur a naturali motu Cordis, in
quantum cor intensius vel remissius monetur: That in all the passions of the
Soul somewhat is added to, or diminished from, the natural motion of the
heart, in as much as the heart moves either swifter or slacker. Secondly, that
Quaest. 84. artic 1. in respons.
From the love of temporal things all sin proceeds; all (our) affections
being caused by love, which Quaest. 25 artic 2. quaest. 28. artic. 5.
melts and mollifieth the heart, that the thing loved may pearce it, contrary
to coldness and hardness of heart, which is a disposition repugnant to love,
whose perfection is to be zealous and fervent. The cause of all sin then,
which is the love of our selves and of temporal things delighting us, so
flameth in our hearts, that it seeks all occasions, and undertakes all
actions to content our appetites; and this heat and motion of love being
impressed in the heart by the soul, it is manifest that the consent of sin is
communicated from the Soul to the Body. Leonardus Fuchsius a learned Physician
of our time, and a professor of true Religion, in his institutions of Physic
shows, that joy Fuchsius insti^utio medicine. li. 1. Sectio. 7. cap. 4.
sorrow, hope, desperation, confidence, fear, love, hatred, mercy, envy,
anger, wrath, waspishnesse, rage, shamefastness, blushing, staggering,
hastiness, humanity, morositie, and such like have their MOTIONS in the heart,
heating or cooling it, and so dilating or contracting it more or less,
according to the differences and degrees of their impressions. Zanchius a wise
and worthy Divine treating of the parts of the Body, says; Zanchius de
operibus Dei part. 3. li. 2. cap. 1. Numer. 7.
The second use of the heart is to impart vital spirits specially to the head,
in which the mind properly works, and so to minister matter whence the
sensitive spirits are produced in the brain; by which, motion, sense, and
cogitations are stirred. The third use of the heart is that it should also be
the seat, fountain, and cause of all our affections. For there are in the
heart two motions, the one of pulse, to maintain life by the ordinary breathing
in and out of the air: the other of affection, which follows the thought of
man, and is made by the extraordinary dilating of the whole heart, as in joy;
or compressing it, as in sorrow. With sorrow and grief we pine away, with joy we
revive. Whereupon the heart in one affection is opened and cheered, in the other
it is shut and dried. Hereby we perceive why the Scripture by the name of the
heart under stands the WILL and all the affections of man, as by the name of
the mind it notes all the thoughts and knowledge of man. Wherefore as motion,
sense, and cogitations spring from the brain or head, so all affections from
the heart. Then Ibidem.
from the heart ascend to the brain vital spirits, whence sensitive spirits
are engendered. By these sensitive spirits thoughts are moved, and knowledge
planted in the mind. Again, those sensitive spirits by cogitations and
conceptions strike the whole heart, and kindle diverse affections, and raize
diverse motions in it. And this has great profit in Divinity. For besides that
we understand how the Soul uses the Body, and works by the Body; two chief
points of true godliness are illustrated by this Doctrine: the KNOWLEDGE and
LOVE of God, whence comes obedience and the observance of all his
commandments. For the holy Ghost sliding into our hearts first lightneth the
mind, which works in the head, and with that effectual knowledge kindles
in our heart the affection of love. And from thence comes the motion (of all
the parts) to perform the will of God. By this means God truly dwells in
our mind, in our heart, and in our whole Body. There is then neither good nor
evil affection in the soul of man, which is not somewhat communicated to the
heart of man, and expressed by the very motions of the heart; that the body may
justly be drawn by consenting and serving in either, to the reward and
punishment of either.

The READY SVBIECTION of the Body to the Soul in all sin is the last point
that I mentioned of their mutual communion. For though understanding and will
were given at first with all facility to rule and govern the other powers and
parts of Soul and Body; yet the corruption of sin once entering, not only
divided the Body against the Soul, but even the Soul against it self. So
that in good things this corruptible Body is now an heavy burden loading the
Soul, when it is lightened with grace; and the inferior and sensitive powers
of the Soul rebel and strive against the spirit, which renueth the inward man
of the heart. Some ignorance, infirmity and selfeloue remain still in the
mind, as defects, till we come to the place, where our knowledge and love shall
be made perfect; but when we would do good, even then the law of sin in our
members Romans 7.
REBELLETH against the law of our mind, and leads (us) captive to the law of
sin, that is in our members. The Galat. 6.
flesh lusts against the spirit and the spirit against the flesh, and these
are repugnant the one to the other, so that we can not do the things which we
would. For which cause the Apostle professed of himself, that he did 1. Cor. 9.
press down his body, and bring it into subjection; least (the Body rebelling
and prevailing against the spirit) he should become a castaway. This sharp
and strong resistance, which our earthly members make against the mind and will
delighting in the law of God, and guided by his spirit, shows the
willingness and readiness of the flesh to conspire and join with the WILL in
the servitude of sin; to make her members the weapons of unrighteousness; so
that the will no sooner consents to any evil, but the sensitive and motive
powers of the Soul permixed with the bodily spirits, attend with delight and
forwardness to promote and execute each sinful purpose. This is that Ephesians. 4.
greediness, which the Apostle notes in some to uncleanness, from which if
either fear or grace restrain, it is not without some sensible grief to the
flesh, disappointed of her desires and lusts.

We see the manifest and manifold conjunction and communion of the soul with
the body as well in good as in evil; which is strange to none, neither
Philosophers, Physicians, nor Divines, but only to this Discourser, to whom
all sound and true learning is strange. For not only virtues and vices are
common to both; but spiritual graces, as faith, hope, and love, the soul in
this life receives, perceives, and practices together with her body, and by
her body. Athenagoras de resurrecti^ mo^tuorum.
Virtue and vice, says Athenagoras, can not so much as be conceived in the
soul without the body. For the virtues, that are, we know to be the virtues
of men, (as also the vices that are contrary) and not to be in the soul apart
from the body, or consisting by her self. Of faith we said before, it comes
by hearing: and so does hope, since that is expected which is believed.
Touching ^ Romans 10
love, God by his law commands himself to be loved Mark 12
with all our mind, with all our heart, with all our soul, with all our
strength; not making an empty variation of words, but binding all the parts
and powers of body and soul, capable of that affection or serviceable to it,
with one common duty to perform him love. The soul then believing and
loving the promises and graces of God, opens the heart and diffuseth the
spirits to accept and embrace the goodness of God in like manner, as she did
before dilate it to entertain the desires of earthly things; and God detesting
an h hard and ^opho. 1.
frozen heart, as void of all love, requires to have the (...). 5.
bowels moved toward Mark 16.
him, and the heart kindled with a vehement Cap. 8.
flame: describing zeal and devotion by the natural motions and passions,
which are felt in the heart, when it is affected with vehement and strong love.
So in repentance the soul depresseth and humbles the heart, raising it again
with hope, which before was exalted with pride, and incensed with self love;
by the same natural means and motions testifying the one, that she did the
other, and drawing the body with the powers and parts thereof to the obedience
of faith, so far as the law of sin lusting in the flesh will permit, and
the measure of grace given us does prevail.

Against this doctrine you would seem to bring many objections; but they are
such as will prove you either to understand nothing at all besides your own
fancies; Our natural knowledge comes by s^nse.
or to play with shadows, when you most profess to be serious and earnest.
Your first is; Def^nc page ^0. l 9.
Heresies, Turcisme, and Atheism are committed and determined simpl^ly in the
mind, without any necessary employment of any parts of the body.] If you can
tell me what religion you were of in your cradle, before you did speak or
understand; your instance were of some weight. But if men be taught as well
errors as truth, by their parents and masters, then this is a wodden reason to
make us believe, that heresies are inspired without teaching or hearing. S.
Paul says, Romans 10.
Faith comes by hearing; and so I trust you did first learn it, and not by
revelation. If we be not borne Christians in knowledge, but must be taught; no
more are any men borne Jews, Turks, or Heretics, but their ears and hearts
must be first infected with the tongues or pens of others. This is one of
your surest weapons, wherewith you thought to do great works: but put it up;
at such strawes children will not stumble. The first inuenters of heresies, you
will say, were not taught.] The first authors of errors shut their eyes or
ears against the truth offered them, and so declined from truth to
falsehood, by leaning rather to their own corrupt judgments grounded on
earthly reasons, then to the voice of God directing them aright. For why do
men disbeleeue and impugn the word of God, as all heretics do; but because
they measure divine things, that pass their reach, by humane sense and
experience, which are not gathered without the body? The Turks are strangers
(you think) to the word of God, and Atheists are utter despisers of it.] The
Turk destitute of truth, and so notable rightly to judge of Gods favors in
this life, bends his eyes on the worldly miseries of Christians, and
comparing them with the victories and felicities (as he thinks) of his own
nation, condemns the faith of Christ, as displeasant to God, by reason of the
manifold afflictions of the faithful, and prefers his own profession, and
Mahomet the first erector of it as most acceptable to God, because they have
their desires in this world, and are conquerors over Christians, not knowing
the final reward of the one and of the other after this life. Atheists are
carried with almost the same respects to deny or desp^se the power and
providence of God. For they being earthly minded, and seeing the wicked and
profane persons not only free from punishment, but most to flourish in this
life, do hence collect, there is no God; whose patience and justice they
deride, because he dispenses not transitory things according to their
expectation.

Defenc. page 61. l. 4.
Further as the Angels sinned in the beginning by their mere spiritual
conceit against God, so nothing lets but that man in his Angel-like nature
(the reasonable soul) may sin likewise, without any bodily means
thereunto.] This is another of your reasons not much unlike the former. For in
Angels, which now are devils, their understanding and will might and did sin,
because they were spirits, and other essential parts in them we do not know.
In men that cannot be, because they consist of body and soul, and have many
powers of the soul permixed with the body, and so must sin in both the parts
of their nature, before they can sin, as the Angels did, that is, in their
whole substance. If then you see no difference between Angels, that are only
spirits, and men, that must have bodies as well as souls, before they can be
men; your Angel-like nature is not very bright. If you see the difference, and
yet urge your consequence; that is a mere spiritual conceit of yours, but
utterly void of all reason. For as well men as Angels must sin in their
whole natures, least whiles you place one part in hell as nocent, and the other
in heaven as innocent, you bring us as strange judgments, as you do
doctrines. In Gods judgment, Cyrill. in Joan. lib. 1. cap. 9.
Ea solummodo quaeruntur, quae cum corpore gessit; those things only are
required, (says Cyrill) which (man) committed with his body. Neither will
this serve your turn, that the body is the instrument of the soul. For as
whiles man lives, many faculties of the soul are tempered with the body; so
when man sins, the whole soul is not guilty, if the sensitive powers and
affections of the soul be exempted from sin. And since by Gods ordinance
after Adams fall, the corruption of sin first rises in the body, the
information and tentation to sin comes from the body, and the consent of
the soul to sin is impressed on the body, as also willing subjection to
sin is yielded by the body; this is let sufficient, why the soul alone
neither can, nor does sin in this life without her body.

Defenc. page 61. l. 8.
Also as we can think well without using our body, God so inspiring us: so
may we think. ill (which is sin) our inborne corrupt understanding, and
reason, and will moving us only.] If Gods power be not tied to the course of
nature prescribed us, will you thence infer, that we are likewise freed from
it? He that framed the heart, can open it, and alter it as pleases him; but
that is no charter, for us to challenge any knowledge, save what is naturally
gathered with our eyes, or with our ears, or supernaturally revealed to us.
Wisdom infused from our cradles we have none; we KNOW not our right hand
from our left, till by time we be taught; and our teachers, be they men or
Angels, must use our outward senses, or our inward imaginations to direct and
instruct us: otherwise we can neither conceive nor understand, what they say or
show, since they can not lighten our hearts. And when God does inspire us with
that which is good, he not only opens our hearts, but fills them with the
love of his truth and goodness, without which 1. Cor. 13.
all knowledge is nothing. Now the love of God diffused in our hearts here on
earth, raises the self same inward and natural motion of the heart, which is
incident to that affection; and which other kinds of love do; least our
hearts should be colder and slower in loving God, who requires all the parts
and powers of soul and body to be devoted to his love, then they were in
affecting and loving the world. So that first your Antecedent is false; for
things inspired must be embraced with the whole heart, before they can please
God; and your consequent is ^orse; since God works above nature in things
that be good, and leaves us in things that be evil, to the natural course of
our corrupt condition, which receaueth sin from the soul and body, and
imparteth it unto both, that neither escape unpunished.

Defenc. page 62. li. 29.
If the Souls operations were so necessarily tied to the faculties and
instruments of the body, as you do avouch, I greatly doubt how the Souls
immortality will be defended against the effect of your assertion.] I give the
body no essential cooperation with the Soul in understanding and will; I give
it a provocation, impression, subjection, and execution in evil, which argues
a communion with the Soul in sin, though understanding and will be the
proper actions of the Soul. Now if the soul, so long as she is joined with
her body, communicate her sinful operations to the body, is that any proof
she can not be severed from the body? Children in their cradles have no
knowledge of good and evil. Shall they therefore remain children for ever in
mind, and not discern either their happiness in heaven, or their
wretchedness in hell? What here they want because the soul is coupled with
the body, shall there be supplied, when the soul is parted from the body. Here
the soul sees with the eyes, hears with the ears, and speaks with the
tongue; but after this life our Savior teaches us, that the Soul shall see,
hear, and speak after an other manner, as spirits do, though she want eyes,
ears and tongue. Here the soul can not move from place to place, but with
her body: when she is severed, she shall be carried to Paradise, or hell
without her body. Here the passions of the Soul, desire, joy, fear, and
sorrow are common to both parts of man: hereafter they shall be proper to the
soul, so long as she abides uncoupled to the body. Here foolishness,
madness, forgetfulness, sickness, weariness, do hinder the operations of
the soul: there shall be no such thing. Here the soul sins, repents,
and believes: there is no place, nor power to commit new sins, nor to repent
the old. S. Austen says thereof. August. in Ench^rid. cap. 11^.
Istis voluntas, illis facultas non poterit esse vlla peccandi. The Saved can
have no will, the Damned no power to sin. So that the condition of the Soul
severed from the body, much differs from the state of the soul joined with
the body; and though she communicate her actions good and bad in this life to
her body, yet in the next she shall use her understanding and will, and feel
her affections and passions without her body.

Defenc. page 62. li 32.
Surely it brings in the heresy of Pope John the two and twentieth, and of
certain Anabaptists, that the Soul has no being till she resume her body at
the last day.] Your ignorance is no argument to bring the soul a sleep, till
she resume her body. She has no several being from her body in this life,
for that Man consists of soul and body united and joined together. Shall
she therefore not be severed, or have no being, when she is severed? Are you
a Divine and do not know, that God has so framed the Soul, that she may be
united to the body, and also severed from the body, without loss of her
essential powers, which yet during this life are seated in the body, and in
some sort assisted by the body? The very faculties of sense and motion, which
are permixed with the body, and can not be exercised but in the body, retain
their root and force still in the Soul, when their operation cease for want
of the body. To gather knowledge, and declare consent, the Soul here uses
the spirits and parts of the body; yet after this life her understanding and
will shall not only persist the same, which they were, but be exceedingly
increased and confirmed. For 1. Cor. 13.
now we see through a glass darkely, but then face to face. Now we know in
part; but then shall we know, even as we are known. Yea love and joy, which
here are discerned by the motion of the heart, and alteration of the spirits,
shall there be most perfect, and never fall away. So that your doubt of Pope
John's heresy to be consequent to my position, is a drowsy slumber of your
distempered brain, it has no coherence with any conclusions or assertions of
mine.

Defenc. page 62. li. 35.
Hence is it, that you say, Gods justice punishes the soul (only) by the
body, that is, not till the resurrection.] You can hatch errors foul enough,
and fast enough, if you may be suffered to add and alter, what pleases you,
in other men's words. Between the professions of Arians and Christians, there
was but a diphthongs difference, (...) for (...). Atheists holding there is
(NO) God, swerve but one syllable from the truth. What heresy then may you not
come by adding (ONLY) to my words, which I precisely did decline; and made a
manifest exception against it, lest any should suspect it? Give me the like
liberty in your words, and I will find you holes in every leaf to harbor the
grossest heresies, that ever were heard of in Turk or Pagan. But Sir, this is
the devils occupation, plainly to pervert the words, that otherwise contain
nothing in them but the truth. That the Conclus. pa. 254. li. 34. and pa. 255.
li. 1.
justice of God both temporally and eternally punishes the soul by the body,
which are my words, is a notorious and manifest truth: for he punishes
temporally in this world, and eternally in the world to come after that sort;
so that no man is so doltish as to doubt thereof. That God never punishes
otherwise in this life, nor the next, but (ONLY) so, this is your exorbitant
imagination, it is no conclusion depending on my words, much less any part
expressed in them. Defenc. pa. 62. li. 38.
In truth thus you must needs affirm and hold, you can not avoid it, if you
will hold your maine question.] In truth your Mastership is mis-sighted; I do
not see, nor you do not show, how any such thing is consequent to my question.
The absurdity, with which you would entangle me, that Defenc. page 63. li. 3.
else God did not properly punish Christ for our sins, is weaker than a spiders
web. The proper punishment of sin, without respect to persons, is
spiritual, temporal, and eternal death; which Christ could not suffer. The
full satisfaction and punishment of our sins in Christ's person, was the
death of his body suffered on the cross, with those pains preceding and
accompanying it which are described in the Scriptures. And this is so evident
and easy, that besides such conceited Sirs as you are, few do or need doubt it.

Defenc. pa. 61. li. 11.
If I grant this point of heathen Philosophy, that the Soul takes occasion
to think all things, which she thinks, universally from the Body and bodily
objects, yet it follows not, The means of man's knowledge.
that she takes occasion to mis-thinke from thence also.] Do you call that
heathen Philosophy, which is so plainly perceived by nature, so fully
confirmed by Scripture, and so universally confessed on all sides, that the
very Heathen could not gainesay it? Tell us I pray you, if you have lately
lighted on any new way, how Man may come to knowledge, but either from sense,
or by revelation. Our Savior knew no more ways, when he said to Peter, Matthew.
16.
Flesh and blood has not revealed it unto thee, but my Father which is in
Heaven. Where men, that are teachers or learners, are called flesh and blood,
because without the Body the Soul learneth nothing in this life, but what is
revealed unto it by the spirit of God. Saint John knew as few. 1. Ioh. 1. v. 3.
That (says he) which we have seen, and heard, declare we unto you, that you
also may have fellowship with us. This a man would think were plain enough,
that all knowledge must be either naturally infused in us, as it was in Angels;
or collected of us by sense and experience, or revealed to us from God. For if
we be borne void of all knowledge, as the Scripture expressly testifies we
know not (at first) our right hand from our left; then must we get it by
means. And means to come by the knowledge of particular and external things,
what can you assign besides the sense? If therefore the Heathen saw this, and
you see it not, you prove your self to have less understanding then the
Heathen. The Soul indeed by the power of understanding and reason wherewith
she is endued of God, does in continuance observe, discern, and compare the
agreements and contrarieties of things, as also their causes and consequents;
and what of her self she can not perceive, she learneth with more ease of
others, who are longer and better acquainted therewith, and whose phantasiue
spirits are thinner and quicker to pearce into the depth of things. The
differences then and defects of men's wits do cleerele witness, that not only
the instruments of sense, but the Imaginatiue spirits must concur to attain
and increase knowledge in this life, unless God inspire the Heart above nature;
which he does when and where pleases him.

These may be the means of thinking, and yet not the causes or occasions of
misthinking.] The natural means of thinking must still be the means of well
and ill thinking: they vary not, howsoever the mind vary in her resolutions.
What or how many may be the causes or occasions of ill thoughts, makes
nothing to this question; it suffices for my purpose, to make the body liable
to the punishment of every sin, that the parts, powers, or spirits of the
Body have any communion with the suggesting, admitting, or performing of each
sin. For in all sin not only the Doers, but the leaders, directors,
aduisers, helpers, consenters, allowers, and reioycers are in their degree
partners with the principal. Yea all the instruments are justly detested,
where the crime is worthily condemned. But whence ill thinking comes, can you
tell? A man may think and speak of all the errors and heresies in the world,
and yet not sin. It is the liking and embracing of them, that makes the
offense, and not thinking or reasoning of them. The will then causes thoughts
to be good or evil, the understanding does not. Now the will must have
somewhat to lead it, which is either the show of truth, or the love of some
other thing, which does prejudice the truth. There is no truth but in the word
of God, which we must either hear or read, before we can apprehend. If we stop
our ears against the word of God, shall not that wilful deafness of ours
turn to the deserved destruction of Body and Soul? If we open our ears, but
not our hearts to the voice of God, does not the love of some earthly good, or
fear of some temporal harm close our hearts against the truth? Both which, as
well love as fear, come from the bodily senses and affections, and make their
manifest impression on the heart, leading the will to consent to their law. For
where all ill thoughts are against verity, charity, or temperance; men are
led from the truth, by August. de vtilitate (...). ap 1.
commodity, glory, sovereignty, or credulity, as Austen observes; whereto
if we put, ease, envy, and luxury, we see the causes of all ill thoughts,
which have no place in the Soul apart from the Body.

Defenc. pa. 62. li. 15.
The proper prouocations and pleasures of sin, are often times not outward at
all, but the m^ere peruersitie and malignitie of our evil mind is usually the
very cause of ill thoughts, and ill determinations.] You would say some what,
if you could tell how. Does any Prouocations and pl^asures come by the senses.
thing properly provoke it self? Does the fire provoke it self to burn, or
the Sun provoke him self to shine? Lamenesse makes a creeple to halt, it
provoke him not. And so does pitch defile the hands, and not provoke them to
fowlenesse. The next and necessary causes of things are called efficients, and
not provocations. So that will you, nill you, prouocations are external either
to the person, or to the part, that is the principal, or special Agent. The
Apostle teaches you how to use the word properly, when he says, Galat 5.
(...), provoking one an other. The very composition of the word proves as
much, (...), or prouocare, is first to call or urge a man to any thing, before
he him self be willing. Then the natural and inward corruption of the mind
is no provocation, but the cause ef^cient of ill thoughts; and if there be any
prouocations, they must be external to the part, or party provoked. And did
you know the principles of learning, or grounds of nature, you would soon
perceive, that as well the will of man, as his desire is led with respect of
somewhat, that is good, or at least seems good, which provoke and draws
both sense, and will to perform her actions. Now though the desire Antecedent,
and delight consequent be inward and inherent, yet the good things which we
affect, and would attain, are then external when we pursue them; and when we
use them or enjoy them, they are but conjoined with us in possession or
opinion, which contenteth both Body and Soul.

As you do not understand what PROVOCATION means; so do you less perccaue
what PLEASVRE is. You mingle Soul and sense, head and heels together to make
some show of opposition; but in the end you bewray your presumptuous ignorance,
and daube it over with your wonted words of PROPER and MERE, which are as much
to this purpose, as salt to make sugar. The PROPER prouocations and pleasures
of sin are often times, you say, not outward at all.] I used not the word
outward; but said, the Conclus. pa. 254. li. 32.
soul took from the body all PROVOCATIONS and PLEASVRES of sin (brought to
effect) and committed all ACTS of sin by her body: you neither mark the
restraint which I made in the beginning of that section, of all sins Ibid.
li.. 20.
brought to effect, neither see the words following in the same sentence, which
express as much, the Ibid. li. 33.
acts of sin committed; but rouing quite from the matter, you ^arle at my
words without judgment or memory. For as you fumble about prouocations, so do
you about pleasure, which you would make to be merely spiritual. But
notwithstanding your toying with terms, that is properly PLEASVRE, which the
soul takes by or from the body. Cicero the father of the Latin tongue
disputing of pleasure, says resolutely: Cicero de finibus bonorum and malorum.
li. 2.
Omnes iucundum motum, quo sensus hilaretur, Graece (...), Latin voluptatem
vocant. All men both in Greek and Latin call that pleasing motion wherewith
the sense is delighted, Pleasure. And again: Ibidem.
In eo voluptas omnium Latin loquentium more ponitur, quum percipitur ea, quae
sensum aliquem move at, iucunditas. That is called pleasure by the use of all
that speak Latin, when any delight is felt which moves some of the senses.
Plato in his Dialogue called Protagoras, refers Plato in Protagor.
(...); gladness to the mind, and pleasure to the b^die. Aristotle, though he
often extend the name of pleasure with some addition to other delights, yet
plainly confesses the word alone signifies bodily pleasure. Ari^. ethie^.
li. 7. ca. 14.
(...). The pleasures of the body have obtained the inheritance of that name.
So Clemens Alexandrinus: (...) ^i. 6.
By bodily spirits a man has SENSE and PLEASVRE. And Athenagoras likewise: De
resurrectione mortuorum.
Desires and pleasures have their motion from the body. Zanchius no mean
Philosopher and Divine, says: Zanchius de operi^us Dei part 3. li 2. ca. 3.
th^s. 8.
Affectuum omnium duo sunt capita, voluptas and dolor. Pleasure and pain are
the two chief heads of all the (sensitive) affections.

And did not the word pleasure alone without addition signify the delights of
the senses, as by these Philosophers and Divines we see it does; yet the soul
takes no delight, which the Scriptures do properly call gladness and joy, but
she does communicate the same to her body; insomuch that the Scriptures
express the delight and joy of the soul by the moving and leaping of the
heart, as it does sorrow by the shrinking and gathering together of the heart.
That the heart is the seat of joy and sorrow, is evident by the word of God.
John 16.
Your heart (says Christ) shall rejoice. Psalm. 4.
Thou have given gladness into mine heart, says David to God. And again:
Psalm. 16.
Wherefore mine heart rejoiced. And that the affection of joy in the soul is
discerned by the motion of the heart, is there as manifest; 1. Sam 2.
Mine heart leaped, that is, rejoiced in the Lord, said Anna, when she had
obtained Samu^l at the hands of the Lord. Pro. 24.
Let not thine heart leap, says Solomon, that is, rejoice not at the fall of
thine enemy. Psalm. 13.
My heart leaped (for joy) in thy salvation, says David. And God promising
comfort and joy to his people, says; Zach. 10.
Their hearts shall be glad, as with wine; yea their heart shall leap (with
joy) in the Lord. Which motion David ascribes to his soul, saying; My Psalm.
35.
soul shall leap (for joy) in the Lord: and the virgin Marie to her spirit,
where she says; My Luc. 1..
spirit has leaped (for joy) in God my Savior: thereby showing that the
spirit and soul of man affected with joy and gladness, does raise and stir
the heart to a sensible kind of dilating and leaping; even as in sorrow she
contracteth and gathers the heart together. I wrote unto you, says Paul, in
much 2. Cor. 2.
compression, (...), and shrinking of the heart, that is, sorrow, which
contracteth and shrinketh the heart together. A better proof, that soul and
body do communicate together in joy and grief, we can not have, than that
life and death thereon do depend. Eccles. 30.
The joy of heart is the life of man, and sorrow has slain many. Which
Solomon confirms, saying; Pro. 17.
A joyful heart preserves (the Chalda^ca paraphr. in Pro. 17.
body) like a medicine, but a grieved spirit dries the bones. So that all
delight of the mind in sin, which you call pleasure, if it affect the soul,
it is communicated to the body: if it be so small, that it pierces not the
soul, nor moves the heart, it deserves none of those names.

In examining the acts of sin, you keep the same course that you do in the
rest; you light on a licentious phrase, and publish that for a proof. For
where I said, all acts of sin the soul commits by her body, by acts
noting deeds, which the soul can not perform without her body; you tell us,
the soul can Defenc. page 61. li. 3.
act many sins merely in itself, without the cooperation of the body. And
though I do not deny, the soul has her kind of action in all sin, which
is actual, whence the name of actual sin reaches to thoughts, words, and
d^eds; yet thoughts are no acts, neither by the rules of Philosophy, nor of
Divinity. Cicero a man no way to seek in the true proprieties of words,
prescribing the manner how histories should be written, says; Cicero d^ Orat.
li. 2.
In rebus magni^ memoriaque dignis consilia primum, deinde acta, postea euentus
expectantur. In reporting of weighty matters and worthy of memory, first the
counsels, then the acts, lastly the events are expected. Where counsels
contain purposes and determinations, and acts, ^.
quid actum aut dictum sit, what was said, and what was done. Aristotle a man
too well learned to miss his terms, says; the ^
end of speculatiue knowledge is truth, (...), and of active knowledge the
work. Damascene noting their difference, says; n (...), (...). We must know,
that an action is one thing, an act is another thing. And though the words be
often used one for another by liberty of speech, ^.
yet in propriety, (...), an act is the performing of the action. I^idem.
(...). For the mind first discussing the event, then works by her body;
and that he defines to be (...), an act. See we not the same confirmed by the
Scriptures? The Acts of the Apostles written by S. Luke, do they declare the
secret thoughts, or open words, and deeds of the Apostles? The Acts likewise of
Councels, as the Acts of the Council of ^phesus, express they what the
Bishops there inwardly thought in their minds, or what they publicly spoke and
decreed? So that the signification of the word ACTS, which I followed, was
neither devised nor abused by me, but ^our new kind of speech, that the soul
ACTS many sins merely in it self, is a vain and idle opposition, since
the soul must work by the body before it can be an Act.

Defenc. pa. 6^. li. 18.
I grant that occasion is often taken from the outward senses. But it is
merely taken by the corrupt and peru^rse mind, not given by the sens^s. Which
though they be otherwi^e corrupt, yet simply in seeing natural things they
sin not.] You be very like to handle a Question well, when you do not so
much as understand the words therein contained. When it comes in question,
whether in all prouocations, pleasures and acts o^ sin, the Soul use her
body or no; you answer, the mind is the principal agent in sin, and not the
body; as if that were any way pe^tinent to this matt^r. Who deu^teth but life,
sense, and motion come from the Soul to the body, and in every of the^ the
Soul is the chiefest agent? in so much that these fail, when the Soul
departs from the body? yet that does not p^ooue, that in all these things
the Soul does no^ use her body. You say, occasion of sin, is not given by
the senses, but taken by the (...).] Then does the world, which only offers
things to the senses, give les^e occa^on to sin; and Saint John had no cause
to say, 1. John. 2.
All that is in the world, the (...) of the flesh, the desire of the eyes, and
pride of life, is not of the Father, but of the world; and (...) whole ^ 1.
John. 5.
world ^eth in evil. For the things, which are in the world, are the good
creatures of God, and by their first institution served to show the bounty of
God, and to p^ouoke man to thankfulness, and expectation of better things,
which shall not pe^ish. But man poisoned with sin abuses them all, and
turns his desire and lo^ from God to transitory and earthly delights. And so
now considering his corruption, they are not only occasions, but prouocations
to induce and intise him to sin. And therefore God knowing upon the fall of
Adam, what snares they would become unto Man, for whose sake they were made,
Romans 8.
subjected them all to vanity, calling Satan (...) Prince and John. 12.
^phes. 16.
Ruler of this world; for that by infecting man with sin, he had altered and
i^uerted the use and end of the whole world. If then the creatures, which in
themselves are senseless and altogether innocent, be now baits to draw men
from God. and so made occasions of sin, how much more are the senses of man
allu^ (...) sin? which not only present these pleasures to the mind, but
inflame the af^ctions to pursue them, and work the will to embrace them? The
corruption, you say, is properly and principally in the mind, which being
first sinful, abuses their operation.] As if all the powers of the Soul
obeying the will, that is evil, were not subject and se^uants to sin, as
well as the mind? Or the senses and affections of man rebelling against the
mind, and incensing the will with their delights and desires, were not sinful
as well as the mind? It is the Soul, that takes her pleasures of sin, as
well by her senses, as by her understanding; and to that end sets her
sensitive powers on work; the natural action of the understanding is no more
sinful in it self, then is the sense; but the corruption of the Soul abuses
them both in their kinds to content her sinful appetites. Though then the
senses be not the very causes of sin, which rests chiefly in the will,
yet since the Soul joins her self unto the powers of sense by them to
embrace and enjoy the pleasures of this life above or against the love of God,
at least they must be occasions of sin, if they be no more.

For Defenc. page 61. l. 28.
you to affirm that the Soul commits all acts of sin by the body, and
that God did not forbid Adam to like or desire that fruit, is more then
strange doctrine.] In you nothing is strange, no not new hels, new heavens, new
deaths of the Soul, and new redemptions of mankind, unknown to the
Scriptures and all the fathers of Christ's Church; but unto you every thing is
strange, that fitteth not your distempered taste. My words, that the soul
commits all acts of sin by her body, what differ they from Cyprians,
which I cited, that the Cypria^ in (...) de (...) Christ^.
spirit by the flesh performs whatsoever it affects? What diversity find
ye betwixt them, save that I say soul for spirit, body for flesh, all for
whatsoever, and acts for things affected? my words being somewhat plainer and
easier than Cyprians, and for ought that I see, having no disagreement? The
other words, that God did not forbid Adam to like the fruit, smell of your own
forge, which reports nothing truly. For to prove, that Adam transgressed
the commandment with more than his mind, I observed, that God did not say to
Adam, Thou shall not like it, which the soul of Adam did, but Thou shall not
eat thereof. Which precept since Adam did wholly violate, it follows, he
sinned with his hand and mouth, and not with his mind alone. You clippe off
that which I concluded; and neglecting the affirmative which I adjoined, you
note the negative, which I did not simply exclude, but augmented with an
addition of another part, that Adam sinned also with his body, and therefore
not with his soul alone, or without his body.

The Defenc. page 61. li. 35.
place of Scripture which Tertullian, as you say, points unto, that out of
the heart come evil thoughts, being considered, will prove the contrari^. For
Christ here means not by heart any part of the body, but merely the mind
and soul of man, and that with opposition to the body in this case of
sinning.] You found in your Note-booke, that the heart of man is taken in the
Scriptures for his will and affection moved with knowledge either from the
understanding or from the sense; but the reason why it is so used, you never
read, or do not remember. For if a man should ask you, why the heart of man
rather then his hand or his heel does import in the Scriptures his knowledge
and will, what answer would you frame? That it is a figure of speech without
all reason or cause? Such indeed are your figures, but the holy Ghost uses no
such. The Scriptures by the parts of man's body express the powers of man's
soul, there seating, and there working: as sight, by the eye; hearing by the
ear; speaking, by the tongue; going, by the feet; doing, by the hand;
lusting, by the raines; and many such. The very same reason causes the heart of
man to be taken in the Scriptures for his will, which is seated in that part,
and by which all his cogitations, affections, and Actions are made good or
evil. So that the use of the heart in the sacred Scriptures well considered,
does first plainly prove, that the chief Seat of the Soul is the heart; and
next that there it works, where it dwells, even in the heart, and on that
part impresseth all her affections and resolutions, when they once grow to be
liked or disliked. And this is so far from opposition to the Body in cause of
sinning, that it does manifestly communicate sin unto the Body.

In Defenc. pa. 62. li. 2.
effect (Christ) says not the Body sins by taking in, but the Soul by
sending out; that is to say, the Soul only properly sins, and not the Body
at all; no not in gross facts, except as the Body is the Instrument, the Soul
being the Agent.] Your exposition of our Saviors words, and your illation upon
them, do well become one the other. Our Savior does not say, the Body sins
not; But Matthew. 15.
that which goes into the mouth, or eating with unwashed hands, defiles not
the man. Now this must be your reason, if hence you make any. Eating or meat
defiles not a man. Ergo the Body sins ^ot. How good this argument is, I
leave to your friends and your self to consider. But you farther infer; That
which comes out of man, defiles man, ergo, the Body sinned not at all, no
not in gross facts, except as an Instrument. This is figurative Logic, to
make the consequent clean contrary to the Antecedent. Out of our Saviors
words, that which comes out of man, defiles man, it rightly follows, that
sin coming from the heart defiles man, to wit, the whole man, and so both
Body and Soul. For man is not this or that part of man, but the person
composed of both. Who then besides you upon these words of Christ, that
murders, adulteries, thefts, lies, and slanders defile a man, would conclude
that these defile not the Body, or else though they defile the Body, yet that
sins not, as if Christ spoke here of any pollution, but of sin? The Body
you say, sins not, except as an Instrument.] How the Body sins we need
not discuss, so long as it is clear by our Saviors voice, that the sin of
the heart defiles the Body, as well as the Soul, that is the whole man; more I
do not affirm, not require. And so much do evil thoughts, no less then
evil deeds by the position of our Savior; even they defile the man, as well
as adulteries, thefts, murders, and such like. Your admitting at last the Body
to be an Instrument of sin, does rather strengthen then weaken mine
Assertion. For since the Body is no dead but a living instrument, and so
capable of pleasure in sin, as also of pain in punishment, it justifies my
Collection, that sin is common both to Body and Soul, and the satisfaction
for sin must likewise be common to both. But yet as I observed, the ancient
Fathers have in this Question comprised in the name of the Body the powers of
life and sense permixed with the Body, as also the sensitive desires and
affections, which sometimes obey, and sometimes rebel against the mind; and
these in man are not only capable of sin, but the causes of sin; and in
that respect the Body with his sensitive powers and desires is more then an
Instrument.

Defenc. pa. 62. li. 13.
That which you add of bo^ly infirmities letting the operation of the Soul,
as in Lethargies, Apoplexies, sleep, frenzy, etc. Peradventure then it
thinks and considers more freely in it self, and by it self, then when
the Body sets it on work otherwise a^ other times.] To let the simpler sort
see that the Soul does not sin in her understanding and will without
conjunction with her Body, and some concurrence of her Body; I specified three
or four cases open to all men's eyes, as sleep, frensies, Lethargies,
Apoplexies, which are often so strong that they leave in man no use of sense,
reason, memory, nor will, whereby he may or does sin. To this you answer,
Peradventure (the Soul) then considers more freely in it self and by it
self, then when the Body sets it on work.] A Resolution without
peradventure agreeable to the rest of your Doctrines; that men deprived of
their senses, wits, and memories, perhaps perceive more, judge righter, and
remember better, then when they were endued with all three. Surely if madness
with you may be sobriety, if Lethargy may be memory, if the ouerwhelming of
sense, reason and remembrance as in strong Apoplexies, may be the increasing of
them, you shall do well to profess this new Physic, with your new
Divinity, that it may show the perfection of your purity. Many such
Conclusions will drive us to think, that your considerations are wiser, when
you sleep, then when you wake. If this conceit be true, you were best
persuade men to run out of their wits, or to desire and procure Lethargies
and Apoplexies as much as they can, that their Souls may be then more
considerate. What it pleases God sometime to reveal or show to men in sleeps
and traunces, we are not to meddle with; they are things to us unknown; the
natural and ordinary course of understanding and remembering appointed by God
for men is that, which we reason of; and that is often so stopped and hindered
by sickness or violence, that neither reason, memory, nor will can rightly
perform their functions. Which is so well known not only to Philosophers and
Physicians acknowledging strong Lethargies and Apoplexies to be the decay, and
sometimes the overthrow of reason and memory, but unto Divines, that with one
consent they grant men oppressed with violent fury, or natural folly not
always to sin in their actions, no not of murder, adultery, theft, and
blasphemy, for want of judgment and memory to direct their wills.

But how comes this sudden change in you now to confess, that the body
sets the soul a work in her thoughts or considerations, good or badde, who
not ten l^nes before utterly denied, that the body sinned at all, no not in
gross facts, otherwise then as an instrument? Does the axe set the hewer on
work? or the saw the drawer? or the pen the writer? The Agent moves the
Instrument, the Instrument sets not the Agent on work. And if the body
sets the soul on work, I hope it is to do evil as well as good, unless
you will defend, that from the body comes nothing but that which is good.
Why then, if the body set the soul on work, when we are waking and well
adui^ed, shall not the body have communion in sin with the soul, which is
the very point you here impugn; and yet here you acknowledge before you be
ware?

Defenc. page 62. li. 17.
It can never be proved, that the soul (in those accidents and infirmities)
utterly cea^h opera^ and c^n do nothing.] If it could not, what is that to
this purpose? The operation of the soul is so hindered by them, that often it
does not sin, and that is sufficient to prove all sin to be common to
soul and body, which is our que^n. Let the soul p^incipally and properly
sin (if in the soul you comprise all the powers of reason, sense, and life,
which proceed from the soul) and the body be only her instrument, yet so long
as the soul can not actually sin, except the body have l^fe and sense, it
is evident that in sin the body must concur with the soul. Now if we
adioyne life and sense to the body, which is the subject of both, though the
cause of neither, as the learned and ancient Fathers do; and the Scriptures
likewise, when they speak of the temptation and rebellion of the body and the
members thereof, containing no more in the soul of man, then the will and
understanding, which they call the mind, or the inward man: then apparently
the body is not only the instrument or occasion of sin by his desires and
pleasures, but the first and last s^at of corruption in this life, and the
continual Agent and Attorney for sin and Satan during th^s life: insomuch,
that infecting and subiecting the soul to the lusts of the flesh, it makes
the soul be called flesh, which she can not be in substance, but in cohe^nce
and obedience to the flesh. August. de fide and symbolo. ca. 10.
Cr^imus carnis resurrectionem, non tant^m quia reparatur anima, quae nunc
propter carnales affectiones caro nominatur, sed haec eti^m visibilis caro,
quae naturaliter caro est, cuius nomen anima non propter naturam, sed propter
affectiones carnales accepit. We believe the resurrection of the flesh, says
Austen, not only because the soul is repaired, which now is called flesh for
her fleshly affections, but even the v^ble flesh which is natural flesh, whose
name the soul takes, not by admitting the nature, but the affections of the
flesh. So Ambrose: Ambros in Epistol. 1. ad Corinth. ca. 5.
Victa anima libidine carnis fit caro. The s^le overcome with the lust of the
flesh, becomes flesh. And again: Ibid. in Psalm. 118. sermon. 4.
Qui secundum corporis app^tentiam viuit, caro est. He that lives according to
the desires of the body, is flesh. For Idem in epist. ad Romans ca 6.
flesh is understood to be sometimes the world, sometimes the body of man, or
the soul it self following bodily vices. Jerome likewise: Hier. li. 3. in
epist. ad Gal. ca. 5.
Anima inter humum and ignem, hoc est inter ca^m spirit^ consistens, quando se
tradiderit carni, caro dicitur, quando spiritui spiritus app^llatur. The soul
consisting in the middle between earth and fire, that is, between the ^sh and
the spirit, when she yields her self to the flesh, she is called flesh, and
when she yields her self to the spirit, she is then termed a spirit. And
showing more largely, that by the flesh is meant the body, he adds; Ibidem.
The flesh fears cold, disliketh hunger, is ^ned with watching, burns with
lusting, mollia quaeque and iucunda desiderat; desires all e^e and pleasure.
So that the delights and desires of the body, which are sensual and c^ll, do
not only draw the soul to sin, but causes the soul to be called flesh, in
that she yields or gives her self to the lusts and pleasures of the flesh.

Yet can it not be proved, you think, that the soul utterly cease her
operation.] So long as the body lives, the soul can not utterly cease all
her operations of reason, sense, and life; for then of force she must depart
her body: but in extreme madness and forgetfulness of all things, as
Lethargies, Apoplexies, and even in sound sleep she utterly cease from
actual operation of sin, for want of understanding and remembering what she
does. The punishment of Nabuchodonosor described in Daniel, is an evident
proof, that all operations of reason and memory may utterly cease in the soul
of man here in this life, though the faculties or powers thereof can never
fail. The Scripture says of him; Let Dan 4 v. 13.
his heart be changed from a man's, and the heart of a beast given him. Which
was performed by the madness and fur^e that Nabuchodonosor fell into* as all
sorts of writers, profane and Christian, do witness. Eusebius cites two
marvelous ancient and profane Historiographers, ^useb. prae^arat. euangeli.
(...). li 9. ^a. 4.
Abidenus and Megasthenes, that Nabuchodonosor was ^useb. prae^arat. euangeli.
(...). li 9. ^a. 4.
fur^re diu^tus captus stricken from heaven with a madn^. Jerome says,
Nabuchodonosor was so Hi^ron. in ca. 4 Danie^.
furious and mad, that he remembered not the good which God promised him for
his restitution. Theodoret says of him, he was ^.
cast from m^n for his disease: who being taken with fury and madness would
have done (...) (...). Beda. Nabuchodonosor the King was Be^n Job. ca. 12.
turned to a bru^shnesse of mind, when by Gods judgment his h^bitation is
written to have been with beasts seven years. Lyra. Nabuchodonosor lost the
^vse of reason by madness, and so became as a beast; and during the time of
his madness abode in the sields with beasts. Munster expounding ^.
the words of Daniel touching Nabuchodonosor says; Let humane reason be taken
from him, and the sense of a b^ast given him. For ^.
growing m^dde with the change of his ^ginatiue power, he carried himself as a
beast. Whether it were with madness or br^shnesse that Nabuchodonosor was
strooken, I greatly force not; it is certain by the words of the Scripture,
that humane reason and sense was taken from him for seven years; and
consequently, the soul of man may utterly cease all operation of reason and
understanding even in this life.

This will not be strange to him that rightly considers the state of men
possessed with devils, and reported even in the Scriptures. The madness of him
whom the Gosp^ll describes in the coast of the Gadarens, that no chains could
hold him, but Mar^. 5.
he lived among the graves, Lu^. 8.
naked, and Mar^. 5.
cried night and day, Mar^. 5.
striking himself with stones, and ^ fiercely assaulting all that passed by
the way, shows that all humane reason Matthew 8.
and memory were quite banished from him by Satan, turning and tossing the
corporal imaginations and affections of the possessed as pleased him, and
distracting the wi^s and subuerting the remembra^e, so that the surious person
in apprehension and operation differed nothing from a raging beast. A learned
and public professor of Physic writes thus of raging frenzy: (...) I (...)
arti^ meden^ li 2. sect. 1. ^a. 9.
Madness is an hurt in the brain corrupting all moral virtues; and first the
imagination it self; (for they imagine those things that are not^:) ^condly,
the very cogitation and r^son of man; for with them there is no distinction
bet^t honest and d^shonest, good and evil, friend and foe: thirdly, it
corrupts memory, so that they pre^ly ^get the thing even then s^ene or
heard. And what marvel to see this p^ormed by di^els and diseases, when the
defects of nature do often leave to men nei^er use of reason nor remembrance?
S. Austen says of natural fools; ^.
Quid^m tantae sunt ^tuitatis vt non multum a pecoribus differant; Some are so
sottish, that they differ not mu^ from brute beasts. Which Galene confirms,
where he says, that the evil affection of the brain is much intended, ^.
(...); when together with the m^morie reason is abolished, as in sottishness.
(...). For both these (reason and memory) are lost in l^thargies, and all
sleepie affections. If the soul have no communion with her body in thinking
and remembering, how can the defects or disten pers of the brain with heat or
cold take away the operation and use of reason and memory; which both
learning and experience do manifest? Yea go no farther then sound sleep, which
is the proper affection and ligation of the sensitive faculties; and if the
soul do freely think and will, when the body sleeps, why should we not as
usually sin in sleep, as when we wake? but that is repugnant to the
principles of truth, as Tertullian well observes; ^.
Et bonafact a gratuita sunt in somnis, and delicta secura: non magis enim ob
stupri visionem damnabimur, quam ob Martyrij coronabimur. Both good deeds are
thankelesse in sleep, and offenses blameless: for we shall be no more
condemned for dreaming of adultery (committed) then we shall be crowned for
dreaming of martyrdom (suffered.) It is evident therefore, that in sin the
sense has such a communion with the soul, that without it the soul does not
sin.

If by natural dreams you would prove the perpetual operation of the soul,
even when the body is at rest, (for celestial dreams come not often, and but
to few;) remember first, that all ages and persons do not dream. Arist. de
(...). ca. 3.
(...). It has happened to some, says Aristotle, that they never dreampt in all
their life. Pliny and Plutarch confirm Pl^nius natural. hist. li. 10. ca. 75.
Plutarch. d^ ora. ul. de^ct.
the same. Arist. ib^d.
To some (says he) dreams happen when they grow in years, who before that
time never dreamed. Next in those that use it, straight upon meat, (whiles
sleep is sound) they dream not, but upon distribution and reuocation of the
natural heat up to the head. Thirdly, in dreams (except they be from God) it
is certain that men's imaginations, which have corporal spirits and seats,
work as well as their mind; and so the operation of the soul in sleep is no
way continual, nor excludes the body, though the outward and common sense be
bound and oppressed with sleep. And even the first ordaining of sleep for man
by God proves, that in meditation and contemplation the spirits of the brain
(which are aeriall, yet corporal) are used by the soul in this life. For with
inward and earnest intension of the mind and understanding those spirits wax
hot and dry, and therefore of necessity must be cooled and tempered with
sleep; otherwise if men lack sleep long, frenzy disturbeth both reason and
remembrance. By the manner of curing Lethargies, Apoplexies, Epilepsies,
Frensies, and such like, Galen resolutely concludes, that the Galenus de l^cis
affect^. li. 3 ca. 5.
discourse of reason and remembrance of sensitive imaginations have their seat
in the body of the brain, (...); and the first instrument of the soul to all
sensible and voluntary operations is the spirit, that is in the hollownesse
(or celles) of the brain. Damascene being a Divine, says as much: The
Damascen. Orthodoxe fidei. li. 2. ca. 20.
power of imagination receiving (the resem^ances of) natural things from the
sense, delivers the same to the cogitation and consultation of the mind,
(for they both are one;) which taking them and judging of them, sends them to
the memory. Ibid. ca. 19.
The instrument (of the cogitatiue and consultiue part (of the soul) (...), is
the middle celle of the brain, and the animal spirit that is there: and the
Ibid. ca. 20.
instrument of the part m^moratiue is the hinder celle of the brain, and the
animal spirit that is in it. Where the instrument is taken for the seat in
which the soul works, and object, from whence the soul receives the
representations of things, on which she works.

If the souls operations hang so necess^rily on the body, the doubt is how
she may be separated from the body.] The power, by which the soul discerns
and judges of things offered by sense, or by revelation, is internal and
essential, so that when she is severed, she is fully possessed of that
faculty as part of her nature. The means, by which she comes to the
knowledge of external and particular things in this life, are naturally her
senses and spirits, by which she works in the body; supernaturally the power
of God, which now and hereafter lightneth the eyes of the soul, and not only
continues her knowledge here obtained, but increases the same, and
represents to the mind and conscience all things good or bad here obscured,
neglected, or forgotten. The separation of the soul from the body, and her
knowledge after this life, depend not upon her natural power and strength, but
upon the word and hand of God, who can Heb. 4.
divide the spirit from the soul even in this life, and either take or give
both sense and reason, from her or to her as pleases him. From Nabuchodonoser
God took all cogitation and operation of humane reason and sense; he does the
same to others, when it likes him. Paul living was rapt 2. Cor. 12.
into the third heaven, whether in the body, or out of the body, he could not
tell; (but either way was easy to God:) as also John, when he was in the
body, was willed to Revel. 4.
ascend up to heaven, and was there in his spirit, his body not dying in the
mean space, whiles his spirit was absent. To children that utterly know
nothing in this life, God will give exact and perfect knowledge of their
States, by revealing unto them either his mercies, or their miseries. In us all
God will 1. Corin. 4.
lighten the secrets of darkness; and as he is truth, so suffer no truth to
lie hid in his presence. We shall not only remember all the works of our
hands, and 1. Corin. 4.
counsels of our hearts, which now we have forgotten, but we shall see each
others deeds and thoughts, which is no way possible for our natural ability,
so far as shall be needful for the declaration of his just judgment. For
Luke 8.
nothing is secret, that shall not be open, neither is there any thing hid,
that shall not be known, and come to light. Therefore never doubt, whether the
soul having left her natural and corporal means of knowledge shall sleep
till the day of resurrection, she shall have an other manner of knowledge,
then here she had, either to her everlasting comfort or confusion. She shall
then perceive and discern the things, which 1. Cor. 2.
eye never saw, nor ear ever heard, nor ever ascended into the heart of man
here on earth. Howbeit neither the separation nor intellection of the soul
pertain directly to this question. I speak not of cogitations, nor of
operations of the soul, except they be sinful, and those cease after this
life, though the knowledge of the soul remain; and in this life when sense,
discretion, or memory do wholly fail, (vnles^e it be by our own fault, as in
gluttony, drunkenness, immoderate passions of love, or anger, and such like)
there also the committing of actual sin fails.

Defenc. page 63. l 9.
Further you commit two grievous faults: 1 Tertullian the principle ground,
which you have for your opinion here, is wonderfully ill used: 2 you are
strangely contrary to your self in your very winding up of the matter. Li.
36.
It seems that Tertullian cited before the reason of the Heretics, holding
that the souls slep^ ^ill the day of judgment, and received no reward at all
in the mean time for want of the society of their flesh; but Page 64. l. 20.
Tertullian answers and renounceth all the same. And so those were the
Heretics words against Tertullian, which you allege out of him in steed of
Catholics.] It is no fault in you to read so loosely and err so grossly,
that you see neither Tertullians intent, method, nor proofs; but wilfully
taking the words that are his own, an^ common to him with the rest of the
ancient and Catholic Fathers, as if they were the words of Heretics, to
blurre him and the rest with the spot of heresy, when they speak a truth
received and believed in the Church of Christ. It seems, you say, Tertullian
cited the reasons of the Heretics houlding the soul slept till the last
judgment.] It is past seeming, that either your eyes were not open, when you
read that place of Tertullian, or your wits so weak, that you could not
understand your Author. Tertullian in that book speaks not one word of the
sleeping or not sleeping of the soul till judgment; he directs his whole
discourse against such as denied the resurrection of the flesh, and therefore
held the soul alone after this life should ever lastingly be rewarded, or
punished without the society of her body. To reprove that heresy, which is
the overthrow of all Christianity, Tertullian divides his Treatise into two
principle parts; the reasons inducing, and the promises in the Scriptures
assuring the resurrection of the body. The reasons inducing it he recalleth to
three chief stemmes. For where the Heretics to discredit the resurrection of
the flesh, opposed the 1 baseness of the flesh unworthy to rise; 2 the
destruction of the flesh by fire, water, devouring, rotting and such like, as
impossible to be restored; 3 the dullness of the flesh, as having neither will,
wisdom, or sense of it self, but being only the vessel of the soul, and
so subject to no punishment, in that it is guilty of no sin: Tertullian to
surprise them in their own principles, produces the number of honors that
God has done to man's flesh in this life, the examples of Gods power reviving
things dead, and restoring things perished, and the rule of Gods justice, which
must not acquit the body, that is partner with the soul in all her actions.
The first part he concludes in these words. Tertull. de resurrectione car^.
cap. 9.
To sum that I have said; the flesh, which God framed with his own hands
after his image, which he quickened with his breath after the similitude of his
life fullness; which he advanced to possess, use, and govern all his works,
which he adorned with his Sacraments and disciplines, whose cleannes he loves,
whose correction he approoueth, whose suffering he holds precious, shall it
not rise again, that so many ways belongs to God? The second part he
binds up in this wise: Tertullianus ibide^. ca. 12.
All things return to the state which they lost; all begin when they cease,
and therefore are ended, that they may be renewed. Nothing perishes, but to be
kept. This whole course of things (in heaven and earth) is a witness of the
Resurrection of the dead. God did first work it, before he did write it; he
declared his power, before he spoke the word. He sent nature to teach thee,
that thou might the more easily believe prophecy, being first the Disciple
of Nature; and not doubt, that God could raise the flesh, whom thou know to
restore all things. And if all things rise again to man, for whom they were
made, and not to man, except to his flesh; what an absurdity is it, that the
flesh should utterly perish, for whose sake, and to whose use nothing perishes?

Before he enters the third part, he makes this preface. Tertullianus ibide^.
ca. 14.
Exorsi sumus ab AVTHORITATE carnis, de hinc prosecuti de POTENTIA dei: velim
etiam de CAVSA requiras: quia subest dicere, and si caro capax restitui, and si
diuinitas idonea restituendi, sed ca^sa restitutionis pr^sse debebit. We began
with the ESTIMATION of the flesh, whether that being perished were meet to be
restored; we then handled the POWER of God, whether that be so great, as uses
to repair things decayed: Now if both those be admitted, I would have you
require the CAUSE, whether there be any so weighty, as to make the
resurrection of the flesh necessary, and every way answerable to reason; for
that we may say, though the flesh be fit to be restored, and God able to
restore it, yet there ought to be a cause why it should be restored. The cause
of resurrection, Tertullian persueth plainly, pithily, purposely in three
whole Chapters; expressly and directly teaching, that the whole man must be
judged, to wit both body and soul, because the whole man lived, and joined in
every action. Ibid. ca. 1^.
This is the whole cause (says he) yea the necessity of the resurrection,
most agreeable to God, the appointing of judgment. For that, which must be
judged, must be raised. The judgment of God we affirm must be believed to be
full and perfect, as it is final, and ever after perpetual; and therefore the
fullness and perfection of judgment not to be without the representing of the
WHOLE MAN. Now the whole man consists in the mixture of two substances, and
so must be presented to judgment in both, since the whole must be judged.
Such then as he li^d. such must he be judged, because he must be judged for
his doings whiles he lived. Descending then to show that the Soul and body
joined in all things good and bad here on earth, and taxing his adversaries the
heretics as absurd, for dividing the body from the Soul in the actions of
this life; he thus chalengeth them in the very next words: Tertullianus
ibidem. 15.
Age iam scindant adversary nostri carnis animaeque contextum prius in vitae
administratione, vt it a audeant scindere illud etiam in vitae remuneratione.
Negent operarum societatem, vt merito possint etiam mercedem negare. Non sit
particeps in sententia caro, si non fuerit and in causa. Go on then, let our
adversaries first sever the ioynture of body and Soul in the administration of
this life, that so they may dare to part the same in the Remuneration of this
life. Let them deny the fellowship of actions, that they may justly de^e the
reward thereof. Let not the flesh be partner in the sentence (of judgment) if
it were not companion in the cause (or desert.) But so far is it, that the
Soul alone did pass this life, that we do not exempt thoughts, though sole,
and not brought to effect, from the communion of the flesh. For in the flesh,
and with the flesh, and by the flesh, is that done of the Soul, which is done
in the heart. This part of the flesh, as the chief castle of the Soul, the
Lord taxes, when he reproves thoughts, (saying) Why think you evil in your
hearts? And again, He that beholds a woman to desire her, has committed
adultery in his heart. So that thought without deed or effect, is the act of
the flesh. Never is the Soul without the flesh, so long as she is in the
flesh. She does every thing with the flesh, without which she is not. Look
then whether thoughts also be administered by the flesh, which are outwardly
perceived by the flesh. Let the soul reuolue any thing (with her self,) the
countenance makes show thereof. Let them deny the fellowship of facts, when
they cannot deny the fellowship of thoughts, (between the Body and the Soul.)
Thus stand Tertullians words. I ask now the simplest Reader that is, whether
the ancient writer ernestly pursue his maine and coherent matter against his
Adversaries the Heretics, or whether he allege their reasons against
himself. The Discourser could not see the wood for trees; but like a babie
mistaketh the full and continual text and proofs of Tertullian for his
Adversaries words, though Tertullian himself expressly avouch the contrary.

His Adversaries reasons if you would feign know, Sir Discourser, you may read
them in the next Chapter, as like yours, as if the one had hatched the other.
Ibidem ca. ^6.
Dicent carnem nihil sapientem, nihil sentientem, per semetipsam, non velle,
non nolle, de suo habentem, vice poti^s vasculi apparere animae, vt
instrumentum, non vt ministerium. Itaque animae soli^ iudicium pr^idere,
qualiter vsa sit vasculo carnis: vasculum vero ipsum non esse sentent^
obnoxi^m. These (Heretics) will say, that the flesh having neither
understanding nor sense of it self, and neither will nor nill of his own, is
added to the Soul as a VESSEL, and INSTRVMENT, not as a SERVANT. And
therefore the Soul alone must answ^re in judgment. how she has used her
vessel; but the vessel it self is in no danger of ^entence. Is not this the
very root of your reason, when you say, Defenc. pa. ^2. li 4.
the body sins not at all no not in gr^sse facts, except as it is the
instrument; Otherwise the body sins not at all? And if the Body be free from
sin, then certainly it is fr^e from condemnation. For neither part of man is
condemned, but for sin. And Tertullians inference is as good against you, as
it was against those Heretics which denied there was any cause ^or the flesh
to rise again to judgment. ^.
Iam ergo innocens caro, ex part qua non reputabu^tur illi operae malae: and
nihil prohibet innocentiae nomine saluam eam ^ieri. Then surely the flesh is
innocent, in as much as evil works shall not be imputed to it, and there is no
let why the flesh should not be saved in respect of his innocence, (though the
Soul be damned.) Wherefore you must bring the Body within the communion of
sin, or cl ere it in justice from all condemnation, and so frustrate the
cause of resurrection. The last is the error, which Tertullian so much
impugned; the first is the thing, which Tertullian and I a^rme, and you would
seem to withstand as exceeding ^urtfull and untrue. Howbeit your under shifts
avoid not Tertullians proofs, much less does your rash censure prejudice his
assertion, that was common to him with the best learned in Christ's Church, as I
have showed. The difference betwixt an instrument, and a servant. Tertullian
forgets not: ^.
Every vessel or instrument is altogether of another matter from the s^bstance
of man. But the flesh, that was at sirst sowed in the womb, framed, and borne
together with the Soul, Etiam in omni operatione mis^tur illi, is joined with
the sam^ in every action. The Body is called by the name of a vessel for that
it receaueth and hold^th the Soul; but it is also m^n by communion of nature,
who has the flesh in his operations not a^ an ^nstrument, but as a servant.
The Apostle knowing this, that the flesh does nothing o^ it sel^ which is not
imputed to the soul, notwithstanding determines the flesh to be sinful,
le^st it should ^e tho^ght to be free from judgment, in that it is lead by the
Soul. Otherwise not so much a^ ^eproofe could agree to the flesh being void
of fault.

But T^rtullian afterward ^.
renounceth, you say, all this same.] If you spoke of your self, I would
easily admit, that you would faulter in your words, and for want of judgment
o^ truth, unsay that which before you said; but Tertullian in this place is
far from it. He ratifieth that which he affirmed from the beginning, it is
only your bluntne^, that rightly conceive him not, as you do nothing else.
For he does not exclude the body from the communion of each sin, to which he
fastened it before, but he notes, that as the Soul when she sins with her
Body, begins with desire, tho^ght and ^ill of her own, BEFORE the Body
y^eldeth service and assistance to accomplish the sin, so it is not repugnant
to justice, that after this life the Soul should BE^IN to suffer, BEFORE the
Body be restored to her. This is not my imagination of Tertullians speech, it
is his own explication and restriction to the words which you bring. ^.
Id^irco pro quo modo egit, pro eo and pat^ur apud Inferos; prior degus^ns
^dicium sicut prior induxit admissum. Therefore the Soul suffers in hell
after the ^me manner, which she observed in sin, first tas^ng judgment, as
she first induced the sin. ^uery child sees, that PRIOR in Tertullians words
applied to the Soul, must have relation to POSTERIOR intended to the flesh,
and consequently that each sin must be common to both; yet so that the soul
first begins it by thought, will, and desire, and the body follows with
subjection and service. This distinction or distribution between the soul and
the body, but still IN THE SAME SINS; Tertullian observed before, when he
said, Ibid. ca. 15.
Etsi anima est quae agit and impellit in omnia, carnis o^equium est. Though
the soul be that which leads and urges to every thing, yet the flesh ^s it
which ye^ldeth service. Ca. 16.
And again: Animae imperium, carni obsequium distribu^s. We assign the rule
and direction (in good and evil) to the soul; the service (or attendance) to
the flesh. So says he in the words which you bring, though mistranslated and
misapplied: Ca. 17.
Quantum ad agendum de suo sufficit, tantum and ad patiendum. How much (the
soul) brought of her o^ne toward the action, so much she brings toward the
su^fering: and notas you translate, Defenc. page 63. li. 1^.
for as much as it suffices by it self to do some^hat. Where you commit two
faults, to make the words sound somewhat to your sense; the first in rendering
Quantum, how much, very doubtfully, as if it were (...), forasmuch as; the
^econd in Englishing de suo, by it self, of purpose to exclude the concurrence
of the body; which Tertullians de suo does not. For in a joint action that is
common to many, men may bring some things de suo, of their own; and yet that
barreth not the others to bring likewise de suo, some things also of t^eir o^ne.

The like course you keep in the rest: for where Tertullian says, Ad agendum
autem (...) de suo s^fficit; h^bet enim de suo, solummodo ^ogitare, velle,
cupere, disponere: ad per^ndum autem operam carnis expectat. To do ought, the
soul of her own is not suf^; for of her own she has only thought, will,
desire, and disposition, but to perform any thing s^e expects or needs the
help of the flesh. You forget, that minus in Latin is a neg^iue, and here
stands to the Verb; which you make a comparatiue, and put to the Gerund; and
so where Tertullian says, the soul is not sufficient of her own to do any
thing (he means perfectly or fully, by which words he after expounds
himself) you make him say, the soul is sufficient by it self to do the
less; for it is able of it self only, to think, to will, to desire, to
dispose. Where the word solummodo, ONLY, which is added to the Verbes
following, you cut from them with a point, and join it to the Pronoune
precedent, saying, it is able of it self only; meaning without the body,
thereby to exclude the body from all communion and impression of the thoughts,
which Tertullian before did impart to the body. And thus by wresting
Tertullians words, you make him c^ntrarie to himself, because he should not
seem contrary to you; which is the course of your unlearned skill, used every
where by you, when any thing stands in your way. Otherwise Tertullians words
are plain enough after his manner, and no way repugnant to that which went
before, but have in them rather an exposition, what service and sub^ction the
body yields to the soul in sin, without which the soul can accomplish no
sin. For though desire, cogitation, and will are in the soul^ as her own,
and come from the soul to begin every sin, yet she can perf^ no sin
without her body.

Likewi^ your col^ection out of Tertullian, that the Defenc. page 63. li. 30.
soul now without the flesh receiu^th i^gement for such actions, as of it
self it was sufficient to do,] has neither any The foretact of judgment in
hell is neith^r full, final, perpetual, nor g^nerall.
truth in it nor concordance with your authors sense or words: for Tertullian
confidently pronounces, that the De resurrect. carnis. ca. 14.
judgment of God must be believed to be FVLL, FINALI, and PERPETVALL; none of
which agree to the judgment that you pretend for the actions of the soul
alone without the body. It is NOT FVLL, because the one half of man is
absent: it is NOT FINAL, because an other judgment and sentence shall follow
after: it is NOT PERPETVALL, because it dureth but till the resurrection, when
both soul and body shall be cast into everlasting fire: it is NOT GENERAL,
because such of the wicked, as live when Christ shall come to judge the quick
and dead, shall not have their souls punished apart from their bodies. This
doctrine therefore is very false, that sins m^erely spiritual, as you term
them, namely, Heresies, Turcisme, and Atheism, shall not be punished in, or
after the last judgment, when the body shall be reunited to the Soul,
because their punishment the soul alone must suffer, since she alone committed
them, as you say, without any consent or communion of her body. Neither does
Tertullian call this punishment of the soul without the body simply or
absolutely IVDGEMENT, but the TASTE or SHOW of judgment. Hilarie says
rightly of it. Hilarious in Psalm. n. 2.
The day of judgment is the repaying of eternal joy or pain. The time of
death in the mean space has every one tied to his state, dum ad iudicium
vnumquemque aut Abraham reseruat, aut poena; Whiles either Paradise, or
punishment keeps every man for judgment. So Tertullian Tertull. de anima.
cap. 58.
Cur non putes animam and puniri and foueri in inferis sub expectatione
vtriusque iudicij in quadam vsurpatione and candida eius? Why should thou
not think the Soul to be comforted and punished below in the earth under the
expectation of either judgment (of eternal happiness or cursednesse) in a
kind of usurping and foreshewing thereof? That Tertullian here calls De
Resurrect. carn^. cap. 17.
degustans iudicium, a foretasting of judgment, but no full final, perpetual
or general sentence, which are the properties of Gods just judgment against
all sins of thoughts, words, or deeds.

Tertullian confesses that the Soul does De anima. cap 58.
not divide all her works with the ministry of the flesh, and that the Divine
censure does pursue the only thoughts and bare Wills of men. And therefore he
says, Ibidem. ca. 40
Sensus delictorum etiam sine affectibus imputari solent anime. The very
purposes (or desires) of sin without their effects are imputed unto the
Soul.] When Tertullian speaks of sin committed by the Soul alone without
the Body or the help thereof, he means without any EXTERNAL PART of the
Body concurring thereto; as in outward facts, when hands, or feet, or other
members of the Body are employed to bring the sin to a sensible act and
effect. Take his own example in both these places. Ibidem. cap. 40. and 58.
Qui viderit ad concupiscendum, iam adulterauit in cord. He that sees a woman
to desire her, has committed adultery in his heart. Is any man so childish as
to think, the Soul can see or desire a woman without corporal sense or
concupiscence? There is then in that case plainly the concurrence of the eyes
and affections, which are bodily; but yet because the Act is not accomplished,
the sin remains in the heart alone, and proceeds not unto the DEED. And
so dividing sins into thoughts, words, and deeds, as Saint Austen and other
Divines do, when words and deeds are forborne, they often say that men sin
in thoughts alone; but this does not exclude the inward conjunction and
communion of the Soul with the Body in sin, which is denied to be corporal,
because it is not open to the sense Notwithstanding the powers of the Soul
used therein are permixed with the spirits of the Body, which are corporal in
comparison of the Soul, though spiritual in respect of the grossenes of the
flesh, in that they are aeriall, and approach the nature and pureness of air, to
which the word spirit is usually applied. So that the diverse taking of the
Body, sometimes for the outward mass of flesh subjected to sense, sometimes
for the inward powers of life and sense tempered with the body, causes this
difference of speech in Tertullian and the rest of the fathers; who all
concur in this, that except the body have life and sense, the Soul can
commit no actual sin. For we must not only be living, but awaked and
advised, before we can voluntarily run into sin. Of sleep, which
bereaueth us of sense, I have spoken before; of death, which takes life from
us, it is also certain that thereby sin cease in us.

Rom 6.
He that is dead is freed from sin, says the Apostle, that is, sins no
more; so Chrysostom expounds it. ^.
(...). He that is dead is delivered from sinning any more. And Ierom. ^.
Mortuus omnino non peccat. The dead does by no means sin. Ambrose. ^.
Impius si moriatur, peccare desinit. The wicked when he dies, cease to
sin. Epiphanius. ^.
In the next world after a man is dead, there is no righteousness, nor
repentance: (...), nor any works of sin. For as Hilarie observes, ^
Decedentes de vita, simul and de iure decedimus voluntatis. When we depart
this life, we are withal cut off from all liberty of Will. Theophylact. The ^.
Apostle speaks thus of every man. For he that is departed from this life, is
justified from sin, to wit, he is loosed and delivered from it. Our new
writers affirm no less. Bullinger. ^
This is a general Rule, the dead does not sin at all; yea, he can not
sin. Peter Martyr upon the same place. ^.
The dead cease from their evil actions, in which before they lived. Calvin.
The ^.
Apostle reasons from the propriety of death, which abolisheth all the
actions of this life; Beza. The ^za, Annotat^. in 6. caput ad Romanos.
Apostle speaks of the effect of death, which makes us when we are dead,
necessarily to cease from the actions of this life, and consequently from
sin. So that leroms conclusion is very true. The Hierony in Ecclesiast. ca. 9.
dead are able to add nothing to that, which they brought with them out of
this life. For neither can they do well, nor sin, neither increase virtues
nor vices. If then the Soul can not sin, except the body have life and
sense, (for neither in death, nor sleep men do sin) without question the
body must concur to the committing of all sin; and the action is common to
both. And if not only life and sense be required in the body, but intelligence
and remembrance to discern good from evil, must remain unperished, before
the Soul can sin, (for otherwise Insants, mad men, and others stricken with
Lethargies, Epilepsies, and Apoplexies, should do nothing but sin, by
continual omitting of good, if not committing of evil) and these natural
infirmities, or violent distempers of the brains come from the body, and
ouerwhelme the actions of reason and memory; how can the body be excluded
from the communion of all sin, whose parts and spirits, if they be inflamed
or obstructed, do excuse men from sin, by hindering the judgment of good
and evil? And where no sin is committed, but that which is either embraced
with love and delight, or else enforced with fear and dislike; and all these
have their sensible impressions and motions in the heart; how should the body
be free from any sin, which has his manifest delectation and contentation
in every sin, be it never so inward and spiritual? Howsoever then your
unlearned and unbridled humor pronounce this Doctrine to be exceeding untrue
and hurtful, and more then strange, and even heretical; it is a fair,
plain, and Christian truth, that all sin in man is common to body and
Soul, and that as both parts do join in the committing of each sin, so
shall both be coupled in the punishment of each sin; though the Soul, as
she first begins, and most affects sin, whether by her sense, or
understanding; so shall she first taste, and most feel the just judgment of
God against sin.

Lastly you contradict your self. For you grant, that the Soul has Defenc.
pa. 64. li. 10.
some sufferings in this life and the next, which come not by the body.] I
grant it indeed; and therefore your impudency is the more, who by adding
(only) to my former words would make me say the contrary. I Ibidem li. 15
suppose you denied before the Souls punishment without the body.] Where and
what are my words that make the denial? You and your friends have skanned them
often, and near enough; show them, or else your supposing will prove by your
leave but a shameless enforcing. The strongest words, that I have sounding
that way, are these; Conclus. page 254. li. ^ima.
The justice of God both temporally and eternally punishes the Soul by the
body. Which words are apparently sound and true; and therefore you could not
falsify them, but by putting (only) of your own unto them, which was no part
of my speech nor intent. Defenc. page 64. li. 19.
Seeing now you grant it, therefore it follows by your own words, that the
wicked sinned merely in and by their Souls.] It is a world to hear a man
conclude so much, and conceive so little. For first though the Soul be
punished without the body, yet is that not the full punishment of sin (which
is and must be eternal) for want of the body; and therefore this reason is
rightly returned on your own head. For if the body (as you say) do not sin
at all, then should the Soul everlastingly be punished without the body. But
that is express heresy, gainesaying the resurrection and condemnation of the
body to everlasting fire. Since then the punishment of the Soul is not full
without the body, it is a necessary point of Christian truth, that the body
did sin as well as the Soul; otherwise it should unjustly be punished
together with the Soul. Again, what if the body before Judgment be not
punished in the same place, nor with the same pain that the Soul is; is that
a consequent, the body is free from all punishment of sin? As though
privation of life, corruption to dust, subjection to the curse, and obligation
to eternal fire were no punishments, which are allotted to the body for the
time, till the day of general resurrection and judgment. Wherefore this
reason also recuyleth upon you. For if the bodies of the wicked, when they be
severed from their Souls, are not exempted from some punishment of sin; that
rather infers the body was partner with the Soul in sin, then utterly
innocent, as you would have it.

How Defenc. pa. 64. li. 23.
sound this is I wot not, where you yield none other real and positive
punishment now to the Damned, but remorse and remembrance of sin only, as it
seems.] What talk you of soundness, till you show your self to have more
sense in matters of Religion? To repeat all the pains, which the damned do
suffer, would trouble your wits; and if I could do it, to what purpose were
it? I said, the Soul severed from her Body was punished in hell with the
Conclus. pa. 257. li. 19.
remembrance of sin, gnawing the conscience; Conclus. pa. 257. li. 19.
loss of Gods favor, afflicting the mind; Conclus. pa. 257. li. 19.
besides the pain of fire, which torment is unspeakable. Your eyes did not
serve you to see those words, besides the pain of fire; You vouch, I yield no
punishment to the damned now but remorse and remembrance of sin ONLY.] Let
your discrete Readeriudge, what dealing this is, and how well you deserve to be
believed upon your word. The fire of hell you will say, is no real nor
positive punishment.] The trial of that will cost you dear, you were best
forbear your dreams, till you bring your proofs. You would have, if I guess
right at your meaning, immediate pain from the hand of God tormenting Souls
in hell: but when you prove, that God is not able as well with means to
punish the Souls of the wicked, as without means; and that the fire of hell
so often threatened in the Scriptures, is but a figure of speech to make us
afraid, we will harken after your new real and positive punishments, which you
so highly esteem, because they are devised by your self.

In saying that Christ was not free from some proper punishments to his Soul,
as sorrow and Pain. proper to the Soul, is not by and by the pains of hell.
fear in his Agony, Defenc. pa 64. li. 26.
If you mean as you speak, then it follows evidently from your own words,
that Christ suffered proper punishment in his Soul from the very wrath of God,
which in a word is the granting of our whole Question.] He that will follow you
in your fancies and follies, shall have some what to do. That sorrow and fear
for what causes soever are punishments of our first sin inflicted on Adam and
all his posterity, whiles here they live, is news to none, but to you. Saint
Austen says, August de verb^domini secundum Iohann^m Ser^o. 42.
Sunt duo tortores animae, Timor and Dolor. There are two tormentors of the
Soul, sorrow and fear. Now torment without sin the Soul should never have
had. Fnding then Mark. 14.
sorrow and Mark. 14.
fear in the Soul of Christ by the witness of the Gospel, though the cause
thereof be not expressed, I resolved that Christ tasted these, which were
punishments of sin by their first institution, as well as other our infirmities
of Soul and Body. What follows hereupon? That Defenc. pa. 64. li. 28.
these were proper punishments inflicted on Christ by Gods very wrath.] Who
says so? You or I? They are your words in deed, but no way mine. It follows,
you say, evidently from my words.] As how? Christ was not free from SORROVV and
fear; and these were punishments of our first offense; ergo, what? Ergo, the
whole Question is granted in a word.] Ergo fools might flee, but for want of
wings. The Question is, whether Christ died the death of the Soul, or suffered
the pain of the damned. You hear me say Christ sorrowed and feared; as also
he hungered in the desert, and thirsted on the Cross, which likewise came into
man's nature as punishments of sin; will it hence follow, that hunger and
thirst are the pains of hell? No more do sorrow and fear infer the whole
Question, except in a mad mood you will avouch, that no man can fear, or
sorrow, unless he suffer the pains of the damned, and death of the Soul. [
But Christ suffered these as a punishment of our sins, you will say.] And so
did he those. For though every thing, which he suffered, did not yield
satisfaction for our sins, because death was required to make the full
payment thereof; yet every infirmity and misery, that he felt consequent to
our condition, were recea^ed in him as punishments for sin fastened to our
nature and state.

Defenc. pa. 64. li. 30.
I fear you mean his holy affections, as devotion to God, and compassion to
men.] Were there any sufferings in Christ, that were unholy? Would you have him
afraid, that he was or should be rejected and condemned of God? Or sorrow for
the loss of Gods grace, and savor in him self? That were unholiness in
deed, to be in any sort so affected, and without heinous blasphemy you can
not suspect that of Christ. But his pain, you think was infinite.] Then was
his patience and obedience the more religious and precious in Gods sight,
wheresoever he felt the pain, either in Soul, or in Body, or in both. And
when you have said what you can, and devised what you will, except you will
weaken Christ's faith, hope and love in God, which without sin can not be, you
must leave fear and sorrow in him to be natural and holy affections, and no
way defiled with our sin. The object or cause of Christ's fear is that you
would speak of, if you could tell what to make of it; but you dare not depart
from your covert of Gods very wrath and proper punishment for sin, least you
should utter as many absurditics as syllables. That fear and sorrow then were
affections in Christ, I think no man doubts besides you; and that they were
in him most holy, you dare not deny, least to folly you should join heresy;
and so notwithstanding your fear what I mean; sorrow and fear in Christ were
most holy affections, whatsoever the occasions of his fear and sorrow were. If
they were affections common to Body and Soul, how then were they punishments
proper to the Sonle.] I use not PROPER, as you do, for that which is peculiar
to the Soul, and not imparted to the Body; for so no fear nor sorrow is proper
to the Soul in this life; and least of all Christ's; whose Body no doubt was
afflicted with the fear of his mind; which as you think astonished and
overwhelmed all the powers of Christ's Soul, and senses of his Body; but I take
proper for that, which first begins in the Soul, though it after offend the
Body. Otherwise the Body feels nothing, which does not affect the Soul,
neither is there any fear or sorrow in the Soul, which is not impressed on
the Body. The sorrow 2. Cor. ^.
of this world works death, says the Apostle, which it could not do but by
changing and decaying the Body; and godly sorrow, for sin, though it make a
deep impression in Soul and Body, yet the pardon of sin, and comfort of
grace do more revive the spirits, then sorrow does quench them; and so that
hurts not man's life, as worldly sorrow does.

But why cite I the Fathers, that Christ did not fear either death or hell?]
Forsooth because you and your friends make that the cause of Christ's fear and
Agony, though now you hide it under the name of Gods proper wrath. And if it
be an absurd, impudent, and impious assertion to say that Christ trembled or
doubted for fear of hell, as due to him, or determined for him, what is it
then to defend, that he did and must suffer the very pains of the damned and
of hell, before we could be redeemed? If he did not fear it, how could he
suffer it, since he was not ignorant what should befall him? A natural fear,
you say, he had of death and hell.] A disliking and declining of hell Christ
might have as well for him self, as for us, that were joined in one Body with
him; but a doubtful fear, what should be the end of him self or his
sufferings, he could not have. The weakness of man's nature might also justly
tremble and shake at the might and power of God provoked with our sins, which
were to be answered and ranfomed by his Body; but other fear Christ could have
none, and these I trust be religious submissions, and not amazed confusions,
such as you put in the Soul of Christ.

You come now to your fortifying of your special reasons, not special for any
more excellency in them, then in the rest, which you may safely swear; but
for that they more specially touched the question, as you say, though you never
offered to come necre it. To the words of Esaias the Prophet by you cited, that
Christ Treat page 34.
bare our iniquities, and sustained our sorrows themselves, I answered shortly:
the words made nothing to your purpose; the text did not express, whether
Christ sustained all or some. What now reply you? Defenc. page 65. l. 13.
I mean all and every whit, so far as possibility will admit.] Keep your
meaning to make sawsigies: as I ask not after it, so I little regard it. How
prove you the Prophet meant so? Not by his words; for they are not general:
what other help you have to come by his meaning, I would gladly hear. Ibid.
li. 17.
The very text expresses (so much) WITH GREAT EMPHASIS: Christ bare our
sorrows themselves.] You show your skill, when you come to your proofs: for
first this is no Emphasis; and were it, how prove you, that an Emphaticall
proposition is all one with a general? The words, if you did rightly translate
them, are not, he bare our sorrows themselves; the affixe cleaves to the Verb
and not to the Noune, but our sorrows he bare them. Where the Pronoune (them)
is a superfluous addition, as the best learned in the Hebrew tongue observe in
the like; and not an emphasis, as you would have it. Foster in his rules before
his Hebrew Lexicon, says, the Hebrews often ^.
put the Noune before, whose case they after repeat by a Pronoune affixed to
the Verb: as in Job. 3. verse. 6. That night, let darkness oppress it: and
in the 90. Psalm, The days of our life, they are seventy. Pagnine likewise
in his Hebrew Institutions teaches, that Pagnin^ Institut. Hebraic ^4 a. 17
many things in the Scriptures are redundant (or superfluous) as touching the
sense, which yet grace the speech: as in Genesis ca. 1. verse. 30. Every
creeping thing, in which is the breath of life in it: and so Exodus ca. 25.
verse. 29. Thou shall make basins, with which to cover with them. Petrus
Martinius in his Hebrew Grammar notes, that ^
Pleonasmus, which is a superfluous addition, is much used in Hebrew: as in the
first Psalm; The wicked are as the chafe, WHICH the wind tosseth it. And
Iunius; ^
There is in the Hebrew tongue a pleonasmus (or superfluity) of the Pronoune
joined with the Verb: as Ierem. 5. verse. 5. I will go, I, to the great men.
Cornelius Bertrame in his table of things worthy to be observed, joined to
Pagnines Hebrew Lexicon newly augmented by Mercer, Ceuallere, and himself,
says, The ^
Relative, and even the affixe are often redundant (or superfluous) in Hebrew.
Whereof the learned Reader may see many examples in the theme Bachar; as, the ^.
city* which I have chosen it, and ^.
David whom I have chosen him, and elsewhere, which I omit for breuities sake.
S. Peter does imitate that phrase in Greek, when he says, ^.
By whose (his) stripes you are healed. Our English tongue admits the same
kind of speech: as if we should say; our days, we waste them in vanity; our
bodies, we weaken them with intemperance; our foes, we flatter them; our
friends, we neglect them; and such like: where the Pronoune following the
Verbs, repeateth only the words, and directs the cases that went before, as
the Hebrew affixe does, but adds no force unto them. Yet grant it were an
emphasis; does not an emphasis stand as well to a singular or particucular
proposition, as to a general? My Redeemer, says Job, Job. 19.
I my self shall see, and mine eyes shall behold, and none other. Here is a
triple emphasis, and yet the proposition singular. Our soul, it is exceedingly
filled with the mockes of the wealthy. Where (...). 123.
there are three more emphaticall veheinencies, and yet no proof, the
proposition should be general.

This we conclude the rather, because the sense of pains and sorrows only was
the ransom ^
ordained by God in Christ, that by them our sins should be satisfied.] This
supposall is not true, and yet were it admitted, it concludes not that which
you undertook to ^.
prove. For there must be more in man's ransom, than the sense of pain and
sorrow only: otherwise every man might have been a Redeemer as well as Christ.
You exclude by your adding of ONLY, the chiefest weight and worth of our
redemption, which was the dignity and innocence of the person that suffered.
For as Gods holiness was infinitely despighted, and displeased with our
disobedience in Adam, and his Justice thereby infinitely provoked; so in the
satisfaction for sin his Holiness was to receive an infinite recompense,
which was the obedience of his own Son; and his Justice to find a
sufficient bar to break off the extremity and perpetuity of vengeance due
to our sins. Both these the Scriptures express in man's ransom, as well as
the pains. A^. 20.
The Church of God, which he purchased with his own blood, says Paul. Where
the person of the Purchaser gives full force to the price that was paid, since
the blood of none but of him that was God and man, could perform so much.
Again, in the very price it self, the innocence of the Sufferer is a part,
as well as the patience. So Peter avouches: ^.
You were redeemed with the precious blood of Christ, as o^ a Lamb vnd filed
and unspotted. It suffices not, that he was a Lamb, he must be unspotted and
undefiled, before he could be accepted for our sins. Wherefore not the
suffering alone, but the Heb 9.
offering himself without spot to God through the eternal spirit, purged our
consciences from dead works. This you are not willing to hear of, who avouch
Christ to be ^reat. fol. 42 li. 20.
sinful, defiled, hateful, and accursed by our sins; but I trust there are
few, that will forget the doctrine of the Holy Ghost, that Christ must be Hebr.
7.
holy, innocent, undefiled, and separate from sinners, (before his sacrifice
could be accepted for us) to give ear to your vain, if not wicked illations.
But admit, that suffering only were the ransom of our sins; what will
follow? Ergo, Christ suffered all the very same punishments that were due to
us, or which the damned do suffer? Who reasons thus, but he that is neither
acquainted with truth nor reason? I speak not how blasphemous and impious
your conclusion is, but I ask how it any way hangs to your antecedent.

Defenc. page 65. li. 22.
What soever in this life might be painful, and was due to mankind generally
for sin, and in it own nature was no sin, that Christ suffered wholly and
altogether for us, even the same which else we should.] This lacks a fair
deal of your general and emphaticall collection, which you would force out of
Esaias, as if Christ had borne (all) our sorrows themselves, that is, all the
same which we should have borne. You of your own head make here three
recantations of that universal proposition, which you go about to prove. And
if your authority stretch so far, I hope I have as good right to put in S.
Peter's limitation, that Christ 1. Pet. 2.
bare our sins himself in his body on the tree: and S. John's; that Christ
was Ioh. 1.
full of grace and truth, of whose fullness we all have received: and S.
Paul's; that Christ was Romans 4.
delivered for our sins ( Mark. 14
into the hands of sinners) to do Act. 4.
whatsoever the hand and counsel of God had before determined to be done. Put
these exceptions to your general assertion, which have as good interest as any
of yours, and better than some of yours, and infer what you can. Your
emphasis will not do you a penie worth of good, nor me a farthing of hurt.
For as the death of Christ's soul does defile him with sin, and exclude him
from God; so the true pains of hell can neither be suffered in this mortal
life, nor at men's hands, nor leave in Christ any spark of grace or truth,
which are absurdities and impieties enough to break the greatest beam that is
in your building. But let us see how handsomely you contriue your exceptions.
Whatsoever in this life might be painful, and was due to mankind generally
for sin, all that and even the same Christ suffered wholly for us.] Due to
mankind in this life for sin, are all and all sorts of corporal griefs and
plagues, as blindness, dumbness, sickness, and such like defects and
distempers of body and mind as natural and extreme folly, frenzy,
lethargy, and many more. Did Christ suffer all and the very same in this life
wholly and altogether, as you avouch he must? DVE perhaps you take for that
which is appointed, and inflicted on all men generally for sin. Is no more
due to any man for sin than he suffers? deals God fully with every man
according to his sins? This is doctrine false enough: but wrest words to
your will, for that is your strength; was all that and the very same which
Christ suffered determined and appointed for all men to suffer? were all men to
be whipped, crowned with thorns, and hanged on a tree as he was? If you use to
flappe men in the mouths with such manifest falsities in stead of your holy
verities, they will think you suffer somewhat that Christ never suffered,
though you would endanger as well his wits as his merits for the time of his
agony.

That which you conclude, is Defenc. page 65. li. 25.
mine own plain confession (you say) page 138. 286.] The Reader by this time
is so much used to your fittens and fancies, that he will trust neither your
collections nor assertions upon my words. I utterly say no such thing, I spoke
indefinitely: that Conclus. pa. 1. 38
smart, pain and grief of body or mind, be it never so great, will commend
the obedience and patience of Christ, so it have no sense of damnation, or
separation from God. And in the next place, when you had objected, the ^ead
(Christ) must suffer what the members do; (where I hope you mean in this
life, for the members of Christ suffer not the pains of hell after this life;
I answered, Conclus. pa. 138.
The punishment of sin which proceeds (in this life) from the justice of
God (upon the members of Christ) and is no sin, that Christ might and did
bear, but in no wise those terrors and fears of conscience, which proceed
from sin, and augment SIN, and sometimes light on the members of Christ for
a season to humble them. What makes either of these places for Christ's
suffering the pains of hell? If you see so much in them, you see more than I
did at the first uttering of them, or yet do upon better reuiewing them. I did
and do grant, that Christ suffered the same punishments which Gods justice
inflictea on all mankind for sin, during the time of this life, and have no
sin nor sinful adherents in them, as doubting, distrusting, and despairing
have; if you urge no more, we shall soon agree. Where then is the death of the
soul, which without sin can not lose her life in God? and where are the true
pains of the damned, which are not inflicted on all mankind, though they were
due to all; nor imposed on any during the time of this life, since this
corruptible flesh and mortal condition of man is not capable of those violent
and terrible judgments which God had reserved for another world, where body
and life shall dure for ever in eternal torments?

Defenc. page 66. li. 3.
All these our due sorrows, and all this our sharpest deserved pain, even Gods
own immediate hand smiting the soul for sin, (which far exceeds and
comprehends all other pain) Christ without any dispensation or qualification
whatsoever endured for us.] If Esaias had said so much, it would make somewhat
for your matter; but since it has no better warrant than you say, you show us
how full you are of idle and vain conceits, and how ready rather to turn
heaven, earth, and hell vpside down, than to fail of your fancies. But to me
and others that rest our faiths not on your sleights, but on the sacred
Scriptures, you multiply monsters in all these your newest devised, and
sharpest supposed pains from the immediate hand of God smiting the soul of
Christ. That all pains here and in hell are ordained and strengthened by the
power of Gods hand, I make no doubt; but that in all temporal or eternal
pains due to the soul for sin, God uses his immediate hand on earth and in
hell, I wholly reject this as a fantastical error of yours, and give it no
place neither in the soul of Christ, neither in the souls of the damned. We
see how easy and usual it is for God, by the body to afflict the soul, and
to make it feel the force and rage of every grief. He likewise makes the
soul afflict her self, as well with fear and sorrow, as with remembrance,
intelligence, and conscience of her sins past, and pains to come. The same
God is able with the same power to make the weakest creature torment and punish
both souls and devils, since he gives strength to men and angels; and takes
it from them, when pleases him. That therefore everlasting fire prepared for
the devil and his angels, into which all the wicked shall be cast, is nothing
but a secret smiting of the soul by the immediate hand of God, I avouch is a
palpable error contrary to the plain words of the Scripture, and to the
whole Church of Christ, as I have formerly showed. And that the soul of Christ
was so smitten in his passion, is a bold and bare presumption of yours, lately
broched to derive your newfound hell to the soul of Christ, without any
truth or show of sacred Scripture. And yet all this being admitted, it will
not prove the pains of hell, nor the proper wrath of God in the soul of
Christ. For put the case, that Christ suffered as much pain in this life as
was possible for man to suffer; so long as he fuffered it patiently, willingly,
with full assistance of grace, and assurance of Gods favor and love toward him
and his, it is evident this is not the pains of the damned, nor properly the
wrath of God. So should all Martyrs and others of the godly, whose souls are
wrested from their bodies with extreme and intolerable torments, be in the
true pains of the damned, which is a falsehood flatly repugnant to the word and
promises of God. And that a final separation from God, confusion, desperation,
and eternal damnation shall torment and afflict the souls of the damned, no
more than a positive pain does the faithful in this life, not exceeding the
strength of man, or ending this life with the sharpness thereof in hope and
comfort of eternal bli^le; this is such a brutish position putting no
difference betwixt comfort and confusion, hope and despair, blessedness and
cursednesse, salvation and damnation, the favor and terror of God, nor giving
any more ease nor joy to the one than to the other, that I think few men
besides you will run on these rocks. First then, that God is not able to
punish the soul severed from the body by means, but himself must be the
immediate and only tormentor of souls in hell, this has no truth in it.
Next, that Christ's soul was thus tormented and pressed with the immediate
hand of God, has no ground besides the giddiness of your head. Lastly, if
both those were received, yet was there great distance between the fear and
sorrow of Christ suffering in perfect affiance, and expectance of eternal joy
and honor from God; and the terrors, griefs and torments of the damned,
rejected and condemned of God to perpetual and insufferable pains; so that
your conceits in this place are weak, false and wicked.

The smiting of the Soul by Gods immediate hand, far exceeds and
comprehends, as it were, all other pain; and that Christ suffered without
any dispensation or qualification whatsoever.] You need no Qualification to
hold as many absurdities, as your pen can heap together; you dispense with
your self. That your new hell, which of your own head you make to be the
smiting of the Soul with Gods immediate hand, far exceeds all other
pains; you speak the words, but where are the proofs and deeds? The true
pains of hell, which God has ordained and denounced in his word, far
exceed the power and patience of men and Angels; neither can they be suffered
in this mortal flesh, and feeble life of ours; which faints under extreme
anguish, and parts the Soul from the body by far lesser pains, then hell
has any. Chrysostom says of them truly, Homil. 49. a^ Populum Antiochenum.
Name fire, sword, devouring beasts, and if any pain be more grievous (in
this life) attamen ne vmbra quidem sunt haec ad illa tormenta, And yet these
are not a shadow to those torments. Now your new made hell, that so far
exceeds and comprehends all other pain (as you pretend,) not only Christ
did suffer with quietness and patience, but the members of Christ, that are no
more then men, and the wicked, that are the worst and the weakest of all men,
in respect of inward strength, endure the same, as you affirm in this life.
Yea, so terrible are your late devised pains and sufferings of Gods wrath,
which as you say Treatis. page 77.
always accompany them that are separated from the grace and love of God,
that they neither end the lives, nor waste the flesh, nor break the sleep of
the wicked. This exceeds, you say, and comprehends all other pain.] But
the pains of hell indeed have an other manner of torment and terror in them,
then to suffer men to eat and sleep. These be your mockeries of Gods wrath,
and not the hell which he threatens. If it comprehend all other pains, that
are mediate, and those as well privative, as positive; how is it then
immediate? Can it both comprehend all pains that have means, and yet be
without all means? But what may not you say, that without any dispensation
take upon you to found a new hell, and subject the Soul of Christ unto it as a
principal part of our Redemption?

Defenc. page 66. l. 8. and 10.
Thus Ierom also expounds this very Text, against whom you may turn your
vain and frivolous insultation for his indefinite speech, to whom it
pertains in this case, as well as to me.] If you could prove, that Ierom
intended a general conclusion, as you do, then were Ieroms indefinite
proposition somewhat too short to declare his meaning; but who says that Ierom
meant so, besides your self? Ieroms proposition therefore to his purpose is
sober, and sound; and yours ouer-reaching the truth of Ieroms Assertion, has
neither verity, nor sobriety in it. Ibid. li. 18.
In learning and reason an indefinite proposition, is to be taken as universal
in a necessary matter.] But if the matter be not plainly necessary, that the
Assertion may be fully general; to conclude a general upon an indefinite, is
inexcusable ignorance, and oftentimes intolerable madness. If it be simply
necessary, then is it as true in all, as in one. But how comes this to be a
matter wholly necessary, that whosoever will redeem or deliver a prisoner,
must suffer all things without exception, which the prisoner should? I troe, if
that were true, few prisoners would be ransomed amongst men; and in Christ it
is not only most untrue, but furious and heinous blasphemy, to say he must,
or did suffer all the same, which was due to us. For so Christ must be
excluded from all grace and glory, and subjected to everlasting confusion and
damnation, as we should have been. And if you make this a matter simply
necessary in Christ, before we could be redeemed, I know not what you may
add to augment this frantic impiety. Ibid. li. 21.
It is a necessary matter, you say, yet but Ibid. li. 21.
so far as known possibility admits, and indeed no farther.] Well fare
your learning, that in one and the same sentence avouch this to be necessary,
and not necessary; and so general, and not general. These be the flowers of
your best digested doctrine. But Sir, if the general Assertion be blasphemous,
then is it no way necessary, except you have a qualification to make blaspemie
a necessary matter. If the Assertion may not be general, least it be
heretical and worse, why labor you so earnestly against the words of the
Text, to fasten the general not on Ierom only, but on Esaias also? Will you
needs make the Prophet a blasphemer for company? But you will delay the
blasphemy with a known possibility.] If there be known impossibilities to
hinder this general Assertion, as indeed there be many, how comes it to be
a matter so necessary, as you make it? Be impossibilities general, and
necessary with you? This is the first rule of reason and Art, that I heard
come from you, since you entered this question; but if your judgment serve you
no better to discern between matters necessary and unnecessary, I would
wish you to keep the rest of your Logic for Loyterers hall. Did you think
Sir Discourser, with a vain brag of a necessary matter to outface the
Reader, where if you could prove it to be necessary, you need not fly for
help to any rules of reason? Your Rule therefore is sensibly false in earthly
Ransomming of prisoners; and much more false and impious in the Son of God,
who would and might taste by his man-hoode the miseries of this life, but in no
wise be partaker of our inward, or everlasting pollution, or confusion.

Though you added (malediction) to Ieroms words, yet that is you say, Defenc.
page 66. l. 31. and 28.
None other but an honest falsifying of your Author, to express his meaning;
and a silly devise of mine to turn off Ierom without an answer.] Your proof
of Ieroms meaning is as weak, as your addition to his words was false. The
words cited by Ierom immediately before, are these, the chasticement of our
peace is upon him; and not as you untruly avouch, (the Apostles words) He was
made a curse for us. That indeed goes before, but before also go the
misiudging, wounding, and hanging of Christ on the Cross. Now the relative
following, (QVOD enim) must either be referred to all that went before, and so
not to malediction apart from the rest, or to that which went next before,
which is the chasticement of our peace. And so either way you were over bold
with your Author, to refer his words whether pleased you. And farther answer
to Ierom there needed none. For to no proof needed no answer. And yet what
better answer could you have, then for Ieroms meaning, since his words are not
general, to have Ieroms conclusion in that very place Conclus. for. 350 li. 4.
brought you, which best serves to show Ieroms intent? Of Christ's hanging on
the Cross Ierom speaks, noting that to be a cursed kind of death out of the
Apostle, which I am far from denying. So does he of digging Christ's hands and
feet out of the Psalm, and of the rest of Christ's wounds and stripes, by
which we were healed, out of the Prophet, whom he expounds; All which Christ
suffered for us, being in deed due to us for our sins. Leave out your
falsifying of Ieroms words and sense, that ( whatsoever curse) was due to us
for our sins, Christ suffered for us, and I see no cause why Ieroms words
should need any answer.

Defenc. page 66. li. 32.
That this place of Esaie, and the whole Doctrine, which I avouch, touching
these fufferings of Christ, may be the better received, let us note that the
public Doctrine appointed by Authority to be taught throughout England
expresses the same; Namely, Nowels Catechism.] Since the Scriptures, which
plentifully and plainly teach us the true price and means of our salvation,
give no warrant of your new found Doctrine, and the whole Army of Ancient and
learned Fathers, who could ill instruct the people committed to their charge,
if they themselves were ignorant of the true meaning of their Creed and
Catechism, never heard nor thought of your late devised Redemption by Christ's
suffering the very pains of hell, and the same which the damned do suffer,
without any dispensation or Qualification, for so it likes you to speak; if
you could produce more new writers of your mind, then you do or can, they must
pardon me for not admitting any Doctrine touching our Redemption, but what I
see grounded on the plain evidence of the Sacred Scriptures; and so received
in the Church of Christ before our Age. I list not to devise or approve a new
Salvation unknown till our time, and if any man be otherwise minded, he shall
go alone for me. God grant me to be a member of that Church, which has
reverently received and faithfully believed the simplicity of the Scriptures
touching our Redemption by the death and blood of Christ Jesus. Howbeit I see
many men speak diversely, that mean nothing less then your late found hell,
inflicted by the immediate hand of God on the Soul of Christ. Where then you
dreampt in your Treatise, (as you still do in your Defense,) that whosoever
named the wrath of God in Christ's sufferings, or called his Cross a cursed
kind of death, was wholly of your side; I did in few lines reprove that folly
of yours, and since you quoted no special words neither out of Master Nowels
Catechism, nor out of the Bible appointed publicly to be read in the Churches
of this Realm, nor out of the Book of Homilies, that were worth the standing
on; there was no cause why I should wast time to hunt after your meaning. If
you would have an answer, it was meet you made your Arguments, and pressed
your Authorities, as well as you could; and then you should soon see what I
said unto them. But as I then foretold, so you now perform; Your buzzing head
no where finds the wrath of God, or horror of Judgment against our sin to
be apprehended by Christ, but you straightway conclude all your conceits from
the first to the last. These words when I read them in any man, offend not me,
as they help not you, except you wrest them after your manner to hide under
them your new found hell, and the rest of your presumptuous and irreligious
humors. Begin with the Catechism, and see what choice you have made thence.

Defenc page 66. l. 37.
There it is thus taught. He paid and suffered the pain due to us, and by this
means deliuerd us from the same. With Christ as our surety God dealt as it
were with extremity of law. Christ therefore suffered, and in suffering
overcame death, the pain appointed by the everliving God for man's offense.]
What of all this? What one word is here sounding toward the death of the
soul, or the death of the damned after this life? The Catechism in the very
same sentence expressly speaks of the painful and reproachful death which
the Jews inflicted on Christ, the manner whereof is orderly described in the
next answer before. These things (says the Catechism) the Jews did unto him
cruelly, maliciously, and wickedly; but Christ willingly of his own accord
suffered ALL THOSE THINGS (from the Jews) to appease with this most sweet
sacrifice his father offended with mankind, vtque paenas nobis debitas
dependeret and persolueret, atque nos ex illis hoc modo eximeret: and to pay
and satisfy the punishments due to us, thereby to exempt us from them. Cum
Christo quasi sponsore, pro nobis sic passo, Deus summo quasiiure egit. God
dealt after a sort severely with Christ as with a surety, suffering thus for
us; but to us, whose sins, deserved punishments, and due pains (transtulit
in Christum) he transferred on Christ, God showed singular mercy and
clemency. All this is plainly referred to the punishments and pains, which
Christ suffered at the hands of the Jews by the secret counsel and
appointment of God, that thereby he might pacify the wrath of his Father, and
deliver us from the shame, pain, and death due to our sins, which God
transferred and removed from us to Christ, that he might suffer them, and we be
freed both here, and hereafter for them. Wherein great favor and mercy were
showed to us; and Christ as it were a Surety subjected for us after a sort to
the rigor of the Law. What hurt is there in these words, if you leave haling
and pulling them from their right sense? The Author of the Catechism warily
forbeareth the general, which you seek after so greedily, and when he
comes to the places that might seem harsh, he qualifieth them with quasi, as
it were, not meaning to press those phrases, as you do, to the uttermost.
Wherefore he says that Christ was, quasi sponsor, a kind of surety suffering
for us, and that God dealt with him, Quasi summo iure, as it were with riger,
in respect of the lenity showed to us. Which speeches if you poison them not
with your bitter conceits, I mislike not, so long as they be stretched no
further, then to, SIC passo pro nobis, Christ THVS suffering for us at the
hands of the Jews; to which the writer of the Catechism wisely restrains
his words of Christ's sufferings in that whole Section. The death therefore,
which he says Christ suffered as the punishment appointed by God for heinous
offenses, or for man's wickedness, and thereby conquered the devil, who had
the rule of death; was the cruel and shameful death, which the Jews put
Christ to on the Cross, which was the death that God either allotted to all
men for sin; or prescribed specially for grievous offenses, as an accursed
kind of death, even in this life, where Christ suffered, though everlasting
death did ensue the wicked in the next world, from which Christ was free.
Neither can the devil be said to be the ruler of the second death, if it be
inflicted as you would have it, by the immediate hand of God, except you make
the devil ruler and governor of Gods immediate hand, which is notorious
blasphemy.

It is there also written, that Christ's Defenc. pa. 67. li. 7.
will was to suffer all extreamitie for us, who had deserved all extreamitie,
and all these things being taken upon him, he destroyed them all.] You sliely
slip your Authors words in the question prefixed, which is the cause of this
answer, and lighting on a Latin phrase, which you scant understand, you
pursue that to the pit of hell. The question proposed in the Catechism is
this. Since Christ had power in himself to choose what kind of death he would,
why would he rather be fastened to the Cross, then suffer any other kind of
punishment? The answer is. Vltima omnia pati voluit pronobis, quia vltima
omnia eramus commeriti. Christ would endure for us in all things the uttermost
(which the Jews could do unto him) because in all things we had deserved the
uttermost. And that the phrase, vltima omnia, the uttermost in all things, is
referred to the Jews, to note the worst they could do unto Christ, appears
by that which is added as a reason of those words. For the Cross (says he)
was of all others a detested and abhorred kind of death, which yet Christ would
chiefly sustain (at the Jews hands) for us, that he might receive on him the
grievous curse, which our sins had fastened to us, and by this means deliver
us from it. All despightes, all reproaches, and punishments (offered him by the
Jews) Christ counted light for our salvation, and endured to be contemned, and
abiected (by them) as the basest (or vilest) of all men. So that the Catechism
had no intent to say, that Christ willingly would suffer the worst that God
could do unto him; that were defiance to Gods power and justice, which was
fardest from Christ's thought, and must be from the Catechizers words, except
you will have him blaspheme: but in deed our Savior did submit himself to
the worst and uttermost, that men could do unto him, which was the determinate
counsel of God for the satisfaction of his justice, and redemption of our
sins; and therefore Christ made choice of the Cross to yield up his life,
that the Jews might to the last breath load him with all manner of despightes,
reproaches, and tortures, which they by Satan's instigation failed not to
perform. Leave then your perverting of other men's words, and subuerting of
their meanings, and I see no one syllable yet cited by you out of the
Catechism, that tends toward your new found hell, or the death of the
damned to be suffered in Christ's soul.

But Christ (you think) could deliver us from no more then he suffered for
us.] You might have learned the contrary to that out of the Catechism; where
you are plainly taught, that Christ's corporal and temporal wrongs, reproaches,
and pains inflicted on him by the Jews, did quit us from all spiritual and
everlasting debts, deaths, fears and pains. Catech smu^ Alexandri Newelli
(...) and greece edit^ Anno. 1573.
Christ in our name and place undertook to his Father to satisfy him for our
sins, and with the most sweet sacrifice of his obedience, to appease his
Fathers wrath conceived against us for our obstinacy, and so to restore us to
favor with God. And therefore Christ the most innocent Lamb of God was bound
with cords to free us, who for our deserts were delivered captives to Satan,
sin, and damnation: Christ, who was utterly without all fault, was accused,
and condemned by the sentence of an earthly Judge, that he might absolve us
before the heavenly Tribunal, who were every way guilty and most worthy of
damnation: Christ with his precious blood shed for us, did wash and cleanse the
spots and filthiness of our sins: Lastly Christ with the reproaches, which he
sustained most undeservedly, and with the most shameful, and most sharp
death, which was inflicted on him, delivered us from the punishment, ignominy,
and death everlasting, which we had most justly merited with our wicked
offenses: and so all our sins were buried in oblivion, and removed far
from the sight of God by Christ. This doctrine if you could brook, you would
not so much disable the sufferings of Christ at the hands of his persecutours,
as you do; not so hastily commit the soul of Christ to the pains of the
damned from the immediate hand of God, before you will acknowledge our
redemption to be perfect by the cross and death of Christ: but as your manner
is, you step by whole leaves that are against you, and stumble at a word,
that happily may be wrested from his right sense; and that you think is strong
enough to bear the weight of all those absurdities, if not impieties, which
you would rear. Defenc. pa. 67. li. 9.
Mark also what doctrine the Law of this Realm consonantly publishes and
commands in the homilies of Christ's passion. The first homily makes Christ's
putting himself between Gods deserved wrath and our sin, the extremest
part of his passion.] You alleged the Catechism rather for your pleasure,
then any profit to your cause; you do the like now with the book of Homilies.
You cite but little thence, and that to little purpose. That Christ put himself
between Gods deserved wrath, and our sin, to appear the just displeasure of
God kindled against us and to auert it from us, I know no man that makes any
doubt thereof; and I marvel to what end you allege it. For what needed a
Redeemer, but to save us from the wrath of God provoked by our wickedness, and
armed with infinite power to take vengeance of man's unrighteousness? Or how
could Christ be a Mediator, if he did not stand between us and the dreadful
anger of God irritated by our iniquities, to quench the same, and to keep us
from everlasting destruction? But the Homily, you say, makes that the
extremest part of Christ's passion, which was a further feeling then the sense
of bodily pain only. And therefore by the Homily he felt Gods proper wrath
spiritually which our sin deserved.] You no sooner hear the name of Gods
wrath, but you run to your old bias, and straightway pitch on your hell pains.
There are no such words in all that Homily, as that Christ's putting him self
between Gods wrath and our sin, was the extremest part of his passion. Gods
wrath against man's sin, was indeed the cause of all that Christ suffered,
and not the extremest part only of his sufferings, by which you would
extenuate the rest, as not extreme enough, till that were added. But the Book
of Homilies teaches you no such Doctrine; that proposes the death of Christ
suffered in his Body on the Cross for the FVLL and ONLY (satisfaction or)
amends of all our sins. Hear the words, that the Reader may see what a
counterfeite pretense you make of public Authority, as if it were consonant
to your new conceited errors, when it plainly impugneth them. The first Sermon
of the Passion. page 5.
So pleasant was this Sacrifice, and oblation of his Sons death, which he so
obediently and innocently suffered: that God would take it for the ONLY and
FVLL AMENDS for all the sins of the world. No Pa^o post. page 6.
tongue surely is able to express the worthiness of this so precious a death.
Yea Ibidem.
there is none other thing that can be named under heaven to save our Souls,
but THIS ONLY WORK of Christ's precious offering of his Body upon the Altar of
the Cross. The death of Christ's Body you think did not manifest the wrath of
God against our sins; the death of the Soul and pains of hell must be added
before the wrath of God will appear in Christ's Cross.] So teach you; but the
Book of Homilies teaches the clean contrary. The second Sermon of the
Passion. page 9.
Christ being the Son of God, and perfect God himself, who never committed
sin, was compelled to come down from heaven, and to give his Body to be
bruised and broken on the Cross for our sins. Was not this a manifest token
of Gods great wrath and displeasure toward sin, that he could be pacified by
NO OTHER MEANS, but ONLY by the sweet and precious blood of his dear Son?
Therefore in the Book of Homilies, as there is no mention, so is their no
intention, that Christ suffered spiritually the proper wrath of God, which our
sins deserved. These are your phrases and fancies added to the book of
Homilies, which neither speaks nor means any such thing, as you idly
infer.

Defenc. page 67. li. 20.
Again, Christ bare all our sins, sores and infirmities upon his own back;
no pain did he refuse to suffer in his own body. But as he felt all this in
his body, so he must feel the greatest part primarily and much more deeply in
his soul: ergo he refused not to suffer all the pains of the wrath of God
both in body and soul.] This kind of ergoing passes mine understanding. To
the first proposition taken out of the book of Homilies, that Christ bare all
our sores and infirmities upon his own back, refusing no pain in his own
body, to deliver us from everlasting pain, you put what pleases you, without
any proof; and then you infer what you list, without any sequel of reason
or truth. For how hangs this geere together? Christ bare all our sores and
infirmities in his own body, ergo he suffered all the pains of Gods wrath
both in body and soul. Are there none other pains of Gods wrath, but the
sores and infirmities of our bodies? And if Christ did suffer all bodily pain
incident to men here on earth, does it therefore follow, that he suffered all
the pains both of body and soul, that Gods wrath here and else where has
provided for sinners? If a man would set himself purposely to cross the book
of homilies, I know not how he might do it more directly then you do, to
conclude expressly the contrary to that which is there delivered. It is no
marvel, that so many writers are of your side, as you say, when you can
enlarge them and interlace them after this sort; but you shall do well to
think, that your Reader now hearkeneth after the public doctrine of this
Realm authorized by the laws thereof in the book of homilies, as you
professed; and not after your secret conceits intercepting and perverting the
truth there taught, by your pernicious and erroneous glozes.

Christ, you say, Defenc. page 67. li. 20.
must feel the greatest part of his bodily pains primarily in his soul.]
Have you not brought us monsters enough in matters of faith, but you must hatch
us more? Must bodily pains (for of those speaks the book of homilies, as
appears by the next words; Christ refused no pain in his own body; and the
first words are; he bare all our sores and infirmities on his own back) must
I say bodily pains be felt primarily in the soul? If you shift all sense to
the soul, then the body bears, that is, feels nothing; and so you refute
the book of homilies, you follow it not. If you allow sense to the body, tell
us I pray you how violence first offered to the body is primarily felt in the
soul. It may be betwixt first in English, and primus in Latin, you have found
some deep difference. The soul, you think, does primarily consider of the
pains of her body, that you mean by feeling.] Then leave you to the body a
second consideration of his own pains; and so you give reason and memory to
the body distinct from the soul, which well becomes a man of your wisdom.
That Christ duly considered of the cause for which he suffered, and of the
Judge by whose appointment he suffered these things in his body from the
Jews, I have often said it, and you have often rejected it as not sufficient
to satisfy the wrath of God against our sins; and therefore you every where
urge the proper punishment, and just reward of sin due to us on the soul of
Christ; and when you come to prove it, you rest on the religious consideration
that Christ had of his sufferings, and call that the wrath of God; as if you
might choppe and change the wrath of God to your best liking, and never be
constant in any thing. Howbeit, the question now is, what the public homilies
teach the people to believe of the work of their salvation; and not how you
can shift and sheere words, to make them sort with your errors. Show
therefore somewhat out of the book of Homilies established by the laws of
this realm, that may clearly confirm, or concur with your doctrine, and
sell us not the verdiuyce of your own devices in stead of good wine allowed by
public authority.

Christ Defenc. page 67. li 24.
took upon him the reward of our sins, the just reward of sin. But the
same homily says, the reward of our sin was the just wrath and indignation
of God, the death both of body and soul. Therefore by the homily Christ
took on him for us the just wrath and indignation of God, the death of the
body and soul.] Your trade of iugling will but shame you, if you can shift
hands no cleanlier, then here you do. Your first and second propositions here
cited out of the Book of Homilies are so curtayled by you, that they seem
nothing less then that they are in their right places. The writer of the
Homilies having taught the people, that Christ The second Sermon of the Passion.
came to save the house of Israel by giving his life for their sins, and
that sin caused the only Son of God to be crucified in the flesh, and to
suffer the most vile and slanderous death of the Cross; and consequently
willed them to The second Sermon of the Passion.
remember how grievously and cruelly Christ was handled of the Jews for our
sins, and to set before their eyes Christ crucified, with his body stretched
on the Cross, his head crowned with sharp thorns, his hands and his feet
pierced with nails, his heart opened with a spear, his flesh rent and torn
with whips, his brows sweating water and bloud^ by this stirs up the
hearers to the The second Sermon of the Passion.
hatred of sin, that was so grievous in the sight of God, that he would not
be pacified, but only with the blood of his own Son. And though there were
a thousand The second Sermon of the Passion.
examples in the Scripture showing how greatly God abhorred sin, yet this one
is of more force then all the rest, that the Son of God was The second Sermon
of the Passion.
compelled to give his body to be bruised and broken on the Cross for our
sins. After these premonitions follow your words, The second Sermon of the
Passion.
Christ has taken upon him the just reward of sin, which was death, not the
whole reward of sin, which is an utter exclusion from all grace and glory,
and the eternal damnation of body and Soul in hell fire, but the death of his
body bruised and broken on the Cross, by the cruel rage of the Jews, which
is particularly and plainly before described. Now the death of the body
inflicted on all mankind for sin is the just, though not the full reward of
sin; and by suffering that, Christ freed us from all condemnation of sin,
which otherwise in us would have been everlasting. And this explication the
same Homily adds to the former words, which you cite, though you purposely
suppress it. The second Sermon of the Passion. page 5.
When all hope of righteousness was past on our part, and we had nothing
whereby we might quench Gods burning wrath, and work the salvation of our
Souls; Then, even then did the Son of God come down from heaven to be
wounded for our sakes, to be reputed with the wicked, to be condemned unto
death, to take upon him the reward of our sins, and to give his body to be
broken on the Cross for our offenses. Here are both the places, which you
patch together; the one noting Death to be the just reward of sin, the other
expressing what kind of death Christ suffered for us as the reward of our
sin, even the breaking of his body on the Cross for our offenses.

In the second proposition you show more deprauing of the public doctrine of
this Realm. For where the second Homily says in express words, that our The
second Sermon of the Passion. page ^
Grandfather Adam, by breaking Gods commandment in eating the Apple forbidden
him in Paradise, purchased not only to himself, but also to his posterity
for ever, the just wrath and indignation of God, who condemned both him and his
to everlasting death both of body and Soul; you transfer this judgment from
Adam to Christ, which the Homily does not; and least you should be taken
tardie with open blasphemy, you leave out the word EVERLASTING, which is
evident in the Homily, and upon those maimed and forged collections you
infer, that by the Homily Christ took on him for us the death both of body
and Soul.] Why say you not, Christ took upon him EVERLASTING death both of
body and Soul, which was the just and due purchase (or wages) of our sin by
the plain words of that Homily? You feared blasphemy, and therefore you
chose rather to falsify the place, then to want some defense for your
Doctrine. Christ you will say, died that death, which was the reward of our
sin, by the Book of Homilies.] To belie public Authority, so grossly, in
so great causes, is a quadruple iniquity. What death Christ died for our
sins, is openly professed and even pictured before our eyes in this very
Homily; the words I repeated in the Section before. What death was the wages
of our sin, if the word everlasting did not fully declare, the same Homily
in the same Section, whence your words are taken, does twice most abundantly
teach. The second Homily of the Passion. li. 24.
Adam took upon him to eat, (of the tree forbidden) and in so doing he died
the death, that is to say, he became mortal, he lost the favor of God, he was
cast out of Paradise, he was no longer a Citizen of heaven, but a fire brand of
hell, and a bond-slaue to the Devil. And six lines after. Ibidem.
So that now neither Adam, nor any of his had any right, or interest at all in
the kingdom of heaven: but were become plain Reprobates and cast-awaies,
being perpetually damned to the everlasting pains of hell fire. It would
fairly fit your new Doctrine to defend that Christ was a Reprobate and a
Castaway, yea a firebrand of hell, and a bond-slaue to the Devil, perpetually
damned to the everlasting pains of hell fire. And though I be persuaded you
detest these devilish impieties, and hellish blasphemies; yet you regard little
your cause, or your conscience, which vouch in Print, that Christ suffered that
reward of sin, which by the Book of Homilies was due to us; all those things
by the same Book in the same place being due to us. You will shift of this
matter, as if these things might be granted in substance, not in circumstance,
and in our countenance, not in his. But such shifts are so shameful and
sinful in this case, that I think your own friends will altogether mislike
your flying to the Book of Homilies for the death of the Soul, or the just
reward of sin in all mankind there mentioned, to be suffered in the Soul of
Christ.

Treat. pa. 80. li. 33.
Also our great Bible appointed by Authority to be read in public Churches
expressly says as much] It is a poor pittance, when you find no help for
your new made hell in the whole Text of the Bible, to run to the Printers
additions set by the sides of the Book, who often annexe things in the Margin
for direction or explication, as they think good, which declare the Printers
or Correctors, but not the Authors nor Translators mind. Your wits I trust be
not so weak, but you can discern between the English translation of the Text
commanded to be publicly read in the Church, and the Marginall notes added by
others without any warrant of public Authority, for ought that I see. And
therefore I take not my self, nor any man else, to be bound to those notes,
farther then they evidently concur with the truth of the Text; though they may
be sometimes profitable for the opening of hard places. That Christ Luke. 22.
verse. 24.
was in an Agony, the Evangelist affirms, and the English Translator has
done his duty in expressing so much; but what the cause was of that Agony,
is beyond the Commission of a Translator to specify, since the Scripture
concealeth it; and so public Authority, which appointed the English
Translation to be openly read in the Church confirms not the Marginall
appositions, which may not be read in the Church, though they may be received
so far as they have manifest coherence with the Text, or consequence from the
Text, in respect rather of their verity then Authority. For these notes at
first were not affixed, and in sundry editions they have been altered, and
increased as the Corrector liked, and even this note which you allege,
somewhat differs from the Geneuian notes, whence this and the most of the
rest were taken. The words of the Geneuian edition upon this place are these:
Annotat. in cap. 22. Luc. verse. 44.
The word (Agony) signifies that horror that Christ had conceived not only
for fear of death, but of his Fathers Judgment and wrath against sin. The
Printer of the great English Bible, or his Corrector, over against those words
of the Text, he was in an Agony, sets this observation in the Margin; In
Lu^. cap. 22. verse. 44.
He felt the horror of Gods wrath and judgment against sin. I refuse not
those words as if they gainsaid the Doctrine, which I defend; but I see no
farther ground in them then guess, when they aim at the cause of Christ's
Agony, which the Scripture suppresseth.

Howbeit let the words stand in their full strength; though by no means I
acknowledge either Authentike or public Authority in them; they rather euert,
then support your opinion. The uttermost here ascribed to Christ is HORROR,
that is, a shaking or trembling fear of Gods Judgment and wrath against
sin, which all the godly find in them selves, when they enter into the
serious cogitation of Gods holiness displeased, and his Justice provoked with
their sins; but this is far from the death or pains of the damned, except
you make the vengeance of the Reprobate all one with the repentance of the
faithful. This therefore is like the rest of your proofs, no way tending to
your purpose. The fear of Gods wrath against sin, which is common to all the
godly in this life, though not at all times, has no fellowship with the fear
of the Reprobate, much less with the torments of the damned. The one is a
religious and godly sorrow for sin, which works salvation, and yet agniseth
with fear and trembling the justness and greatness of Gods wrath against
sin: the other is the beholding of the terrible and eternal destruction of
Body and Soul prepared for them without all hope of ease or end. In Christ
there might be a double cause of this horror conceived or felt by him, as
affections are felt in the Nature of Man; the one touching us, the other
touching himself. Christ might tremble and shake at the terror of Gods
Judgment provided for us, which was everlasting damnation of Body and Soul in
hell fire; and the more tenderly he loved us, the greater was his horror to see
this hang over our heads; even as we naturally tremble to see the desperate
dangers of our dearest friends present before our eyes. And if Paul said
truly of him self, 2. Cor. 5.
we knowing the terror of the Lord, meaning the terror of the Lords Judgment
against sin; how much more then did the Savior of the world know the same?
the clear beholding of which might justly work in him a manifest horror, to
teach us to take heed of that terrible Judgment, at the sight whereof for our
sakes he did tremble in the days of his flesh. An other cause of that horror
might concern himself. For since the wrath and Judgment of God against our
sin was so terrible to behold, that Christ in his humane nature trembled at
it; how could it but raise an horror in him to know, that he must presently
receive in his own Body the burden thereof, and make satisfaction therefore
with his own smart? which how far it would pearce his patience, the weakness
of our flesh in him might well fear and tremble, though his spirit were never
so resolute and ready to endure the most, that man's nature in this life could
sustain with obedience and confidence. So that either the sight of Gods wrath
against sin due to us, or the satisfaction of the same which Christ was to
make, might urge his humane nature to that fear and trembling for the time,
which these notes observe; and yet neither of these come near the fear of the
wicked, or pains of the damned. Besides that religious horror and fear is
nothing less then the pains of hell inflicted on the Soul by the immediate
hand of God, which is the device, that you seek to establish.

Defenc. page 67. li. 28.
Thus my Text of Scripture is also justified, that Christ gave himself the
price of Redemption for us, WHICH ELSE WE SHOULD HAVE PAID.] If wresting,
adding, and altering may be called justifying, then is your sense of that text
justified indeed; otherwise there is nothing yet alleged, that any way
approves that meaning of the text which you would enforce. The price of our
redemption Christ paid; not the Christ paid a price for us which we could not
pay.
same, which else we should have paid, had we not been redeemed; (for so Christ
must have suffered everlasting damnation of body and soul, which was the
payment exacted of us) but he paid a PRICE for us, that more contented his
displeased Father, than our everlasting destruction could have done. You dally
therefore with the doubtfulnesse of the word PAID, which sometimes signifies
the enduring of punishment, sometimes the yielding of recompense. The Price of
our sins which we should have paid, that is, the punishment of our sins,
which we should have sustained, was eternal destruction of body and soul in
hell fire; and other payment we could make none. This payment due to us, or
punishment which we should have paid, the person of Christ could not suffer; it
is most horrible blasphemy so to speak or think; but he paid a price for us,
that is, a SATISFACTION and AMENDS for our sins, which by no means we were
able to pay. And so much the word ANTILYTRON notes, even a Price, Recompense,
or Ransom in exchange of the punishment or imprisonment which the captive
should suffer. This Price, you will say, was himself. I make no doubt, that
Christ gave himself to die, but NOT TO BE DAMNED for our sins, as we should
have been. Neither can the common custom of redeeming captives infer any
more than the giving of a price for the Prisoner. And therefore I did justly
ask, Who told you that the Scripture here speaks after the common use of
redeeming Captives taken in war.

And where you answer, the Defenc. page 67. l. 35.
nature of the word ANTILYTRON imports so much, which is properly used in
such cases; you understand neither the nature of the word, neither the manner of
our redemption rightly. For first the word (...), whence Antilytron comes,
properly signifies a mutual redemption of each other, as Aristotle Arist. Eth.
li. 9. ca. 2.
observes; and so we should redeem Christ, as he redeemed us. Wherefore the
word is here improperly taken, and signifies no more than LYTRON without
composition. Again, the common use of redeeming Captives, is either to free
Prisoner for Prisoner, or to take money for the ransom of liberty; neither of
which took place in our redemption: and therefore the common custom of
redeeming of men taken in war has no likeness with the redeeming of the
world, since God took no money for our ransom as men use to do for their
Prisoners; but the life of his only Son for the liberty of his rebellious
servants, which men use not to do. Neither did Christ offer a price
proportioned to our value or ability, but far excelling our persons, and
exceeding our power. It was therefore a very cold comparison to resemble the
freeing of men's bodies for gold and silver (which Captains esteem more than
they do Prisoners) to the redeeming of their souls by the precious blood of
Christ; and such as S. Peter rejected before me in evident words: 1. Pet. 1.
Ye were not redeemed with corruptible things, as silver and gold, but with
the precious blood of Christ, as of a lamb undefiled and unspotted. And for
you or any man else to say, that Christ suffered no less, nor none other, than
we should have suffered, or paid no more than we should have paid; is to
subject the soul of Christ to our deserved confusion and condemnation, and to
even our persons, who are wretched and sinful men, with his, who is the true
and eternal son of God; either of which is a sensible defacing of his
dignity, innocence, and obedience, wholly requisite to our redemption, and
utterly impossible to our condition.

Defenc. page 67. li 38.
You seem to infer, that I forsooth do hold with your opinion, that Christ
paid the price of our redemption (properly) to the devil, and not to God.] If
you should leave belying and falsifying of other men's speeches, you should
leave one of your chiefest defenses. For when you can take no advantage of my
words, you stick not to strain them to your b^nt; and as though mistaking and
wresting were not wrongs enough, you enlarge them and interlace them not only
with things never intended by me, but with plain contrarieties to that which
is contained in my words. To show how full and perfect our redemption is by the
blood of Christ, in my sermons I say; Sermon pa. 60. and 61.
The blood of Christ does redeem, cleanse, wash, justify and sanctify the
elect; it does pacify and propitiate the Judge; it does seal the covenant of
mercy, grace, and glory, betwixt God and man; it does conclude and bind the
devil. And lest any man should mistake that I said, The price was so
sufficient, that it did not only pacify and propitiate the Judge, but
conclude and bind the devil, that otherwise had a challenge to us as to the
servants of sin and corruption; I added: Sermon. pa. 64. li. 30.
It was an injury to Christ for us to think his blood was shed to satisfy
the devil, but Christ offered his blood as a sacrifice to God his Father, to
satisfy the justice of God provoked with our sins; and yet Satan's extreme
rage against the person of Christ (in conspiring and compassing his death with
all contumely and cruelty) turned to his utter ruin: God raising again the
Lord Jesus from death, and giving him power to spoil the kingdom of the
devil, in recompense of the wrong which he received at Satan's hand. Thus was
the blood of Christ a price most sufficient for all the world; the voluntary
offering whereof by Christ himself, was the sacrifice that appeased the wrath,
satisfied the justice, and purchased the favor of God toward us; and the
wrongful spilling whereof, which Christ with patience endured, did exclude the
devil even by Gods justice, from all the challenge, that otherwise he had unto
us. Does this make the p^ce of our redemption, which was the blood of Christ,
to be paid properly to the devil, and not to God? or rather clean contrary,
that this price was willingly offered, and so properly paid to God for the
satisfaction of his justice, and by no means yielded or paid to satisfy the
devil; but the injurious shedding thereof by the procurement of Satan, did
justly discharge all the members of Christ from the power and challenge of the
devil, who before possessed them by the rule of Gods justice? And to this sense
I did restrain the words of Ambrose, to make him accord with the rest of the
Fathers; who with one voice confess, that God would not use power alone, but
even justice to the devil, in taking man out of his hand; and therefore
ordered the price of our redemption in such sort, that it should not only fully
satisfy and pacify his own wrath by a willing and precious oblation, but
justly exclude all the power and possession of darkness from the elect, by
Satan's malicious and contumelious attempt against the person of the Son of
God.

Neither is this doctrine so strange as you would make it, but only to those
that never waded farther then the mire of their own inventions. Irenaeus that
ancient Father urges this as a r^ason why Christ must be man as well as God;
that the devil might be conquered by justice. Christ therefore, says he,
coupled and united man to God. Ireneus. li. 3. ca^. 20.
Si ^nim homo non vi^isset inimicum hominis, non just victus esset inimicus.
For if a man had not vanquished the enemy of man, the enemy had not been
justly vanquished. So Theodoret: When the Creator saw our nature of it self to
join with that cruel Tyrant q Theodoret. de Prouidentia Sermo. 10.
(the devil) and to fall into the deep pit of wickedness, he wrought our
salvation wisely and ius^ly. For neither would ^e use his POWER alone to free
us, nor arm his MERCY alone against him that had (...) man's (...) under
ser^itude, le^t he should exclaim of this merc^ as v^iust; but God t^oke a
(...) with clemency, and adorned with justice. The effect whereof, (for the
whose discourse is somewhat long) we may perceive by the words which Theodoret
ascribes to the person of Christ: for thus he makes Christ to speak to the
devil: Theodoretus Ibidem.
Because thou, who receiuedst power against sinners, (...) touched my body,
that (...) (...) of no sin forfeit thy power, and cease thy tyranny. I (...)
(...) all ((...)) from death (...) simply using the power of a Lord, but a
righteous power. I (...) (...) the (...) (...) (...) (...) death, I have
suffered death; and not subi^ct to death. I did admit (...). No way guilt^e, I
was reckened with the guilty; and being free from debt, I was numbered (...).
Sustaining therefore an unjust death, I dissolve the death that is deserved;
and imprisoned wrongfully, I free them from prison that were justly detained.
And lest you should say of him, as you do of Ambrose and Austen, that he does
but play with the figure, ^e ^airely preuenteth that idle shift of yours in
these words: Ibidem.
Let no man think, that herein we (dally or) trifle; for by the sacred
Gospels, and doctrines of the Apostles we are taught, that these things are so.
Leo likewise not once or twice publicly teaches that doctrine to the people:
Leo Sermo. 5. de passione D. m.
The just and merciful God did not so use the injury of his will, (those are
his words) that to restore us, he would only show the power of his clemen^ie,
but because it was a consequent, that man committing sin should be the
servant of sin. God so fitted the medicine to the sick, the pardon to the
guilty, and red^mption to the captures, that the just sentence of condemnation
should be dissolved by the just work of the (...). For if only the Godhead
should have opposed it self for (us) sinners, not so much reason as power
should conquer the devil. The Ibidem.
Son of God therefore admitted wicked hands to be laid on him, and what the
rage of the persecutors offered with patient power he suffered. This was that
great mystery of godliness, that Christ was ever laden with injuries, which
if he should have repelled with open power and manifest virtue, he should have
exercised only his divine strength, but not regarded our cause, that were men.
For in all things, which the madness of the people and Priests did
reprochfully and (...) unto him, our sins were wiped away, and our offenses
purged. The devil himself did not understand, that his cruelty against
Christ should overthrow his own kingdom, WHO SHOULD NOT LOOSE THE RIGHT OF
HIS FIRST FRAVD, IF HE COVLD ABSTAIN FROM THE LORDS BLOOD. But greedy with
malice to hurt, whiles he rushe^h on Christ, himself falls; whiles he
takes, he is taken; and persuing him that was mortal, he lighted on him that
was the Savior (of the world.) Jesus Christ being Leo Sermon. 10. de passione
Dom.
lifted up on the tree, returned death upon the Author of death, and strangled
all the principalities and powers that were against him, by obiecting his flesh
that was possible, giving place in himself to the presumption of (our) ancient
enemy, who raging against man's nature, that was subject unto him, durst there
exact his debt, where he could find no sign of sin. Therefore the general
and mortal handwriting, by which we were sold, was torn, and the contract
of our captivity came into the power of the Redeemer. The person of the Son
took^ upon him Leo Sermo. 12. de passione Dom.
properly the reparation of mankind, that whose maker he was, he might be
their restorer; so directing his counsel to effect, that to destroy the
kingdom of the devil, he rather used the righteousness of reason, then the
power of his might. For whiles the devil raged on him, whom he held by no law
of sin, he lost the right of his wicked dominion. I repeat the more, to let
the Reader see, that the Fathers in this case do not play with figures, as
this Discourser dreameth, but they consonantly propose and urge with earnest
and evident words a great point of Christian piety. Gregory teaches the same
lesson: Gregorius mora^m. ^i. 3. cap. 11.
When Satan took Christ's body to crucify it, he lost Christ's elect from
the right of his power. And by Gods speech to Satan concerning Job, Behold he
is in thine hand, but save his life; he thus decla^eth Gods Commission to
Satan touching Christ: Ibidem.
T^ke thou power against his body, and lose the right of thy wicked dominion
over his ^lect. Damascene also notes, that one respect why Christ was made
man, was to stop the devils murmuring, if God should have taken man out of
his hands by the power of his Deity. D^ ascen. Orthodox fidei li. 3. ^ap. 18.
Christ was made man, says he, that that which was conquered, might conquer.
God was not unable, who is able to do all things by his almighty power and
force, to take man from the Tyrant (that hel^ him;) but that would have been a
cause of complaint to the Tyrant that had conquered man, if he were forced by
God. Therefore God who pitied and loved us, willing to make man, that was
fallen, the conqueror of Satan, became man; restoring the like by the like,
that is, man by man. And in this, says Damascene, appears Ibidem. li. 3.
cap. 1.
Gods justice, that man being overthrown, he would have none other (besides
man) to conquer the Tyrant, neither would he by violence take man from death,
but whom death had of old brought into bond^ge by sin, even him would the
gracious and righteous God make conquer again.

What reason then have you to revel at Saint Augustine and Saint Ambrose in
such sort as you do, that Defenc. page 68. (...). 14.
their names are of no waitht to warrant such a Doctrine as those words (of
theirs) pretend; Or what teach they different from the rest of the Fathers, if
their words be rightly taken, and not wrested aside to your crooked concei^s?
That the blood of Christ was so sufficient a price for us, that not only the
voluntary sacrificing thereof, thoroughly satisfied the displeased Justice of
God, and obtained remission of all our sins, but even the wrongful shedding
thereof by Satan's instigation wrought the subversion of Satan's power and right
in all the ^lect; (God by the rule of Justice giving unto Christ's manhood the
spoil of Satan's kingdom ^or the patience which Christ showed whiles Satan by
the mouths and hands of the wicked spoiled Christ's humane nature of honor and
life for the time) what danger is there in this to the Christian Faith, or what
repugnancie to the sacred Scriptures? Esa. ^3.
THEREFORE WILL I give him his part in many things, (^aith God of Christ's
manhood) and he shall divide THE SPOIL of the mighty, (or with the mighty)
because he powered forth his Soul unto death; this the Apostle sh^weth was
executed against the Devils them selves. Christ Coloss ^.
SPOILED Principalities and Powers, and made a show of them openly, triumphing
over them in his own Person. According as God threatened the Serpent upon his
first deceauing the woman; Genes. 3.
I will put enmity between thy se^de and her se^de: he shall bruize thine
head, and thou shall bruize his heel. Where God expresses plainly the
Recompense, that the seed of the woman should have for suffering Satan to
bruize his he^le, even the bruizing of the Serpents head. For nothing is more
equal with God, then to Matthew. 7.
rem^ate the same measure to men, and Angels, that they m^te to others. It was
therefore a thing most just in the sight of God, as he subjected Man to Satan's
power, when by sin he first conquered Man; so he subjected Satan to the will
and power of Christ's manhood, when by righteousness Christ conquered the
devil. And as Christ patiently endured to be wrongfully deprived of his life
by the means and members of Satan, so in requital of that presumption, and
injury, Christ powerfully and justly dep^ed Satan of all his ^ight and
interest to the Elect, for whose sakes Christ gave his life. This excludes not
the voluntary service and sacrifice of Christ's obedience unto death, wherewith
the Justice of God was satisfied and appeased; but this shows, that as God
had chief regard of his own Justice and mercy toward man in giving his own
Son to be the pacification of his wrath, and propitiation of our sins, so
he dealt justly with the devil in causing the spoyler to be spoiled, and for
the wrongful and spiteful invasion, that Satan made against his Lord and
Master, to loose all the Dominion and power, that otherwise he claymed over
Christ's elect. And so the Price of our Redemption whatsoever you trifle to the
contrary, did not only discharge the guilt of our sins, and our debt to
Gods justice by Christ's willing obedience to God even unto death, but the
furious and injurious intermedling of Satan therewith, so closes his mouth,
that he sees and knows our deliverance and his destruction to be just.

Defenc. pa. 68. l. 15.
I am out of doubt that the Fathers do but play with figures; or if they mean
indeed to teach such a Doctrine, we are to learn by their good leaves how to
speak and think more wholesomely (then they do) out of the Scriptures.]
Whether they play with figures or no, I refer it to the Judgment of
indifferent Readers, that will take the pains to peruse the places. It is a
good sign they speak in earnest, when they double it, and treble it in their
open Sermons and writings, and render the causes thereof pith^ly and
plentifully, as Theodoret and Leo do, and chiefly Saint Austen in August. de
Trinitate. li. 13. cap. 12. 13. 14. and 15.
four whole Chapters of his Book de Trinitate; whose learning and judgment
though you set light by, because they sort not with your fancies, I confess I
reverence, for that the whole Church of Christ has done the same before me;
and I see nothing in the word of God repugnant to their Doctrine truly
conceived. But you have learned to speak more wholsomely as you think out of
the Scriptures; I pray you then let us hear your wholesome speech.

Defenc page 68. l. 6. and 10
I urge that the enemy must have a price for his Captive. I pray, who is that
enemy which must be satisfied? the Devil? God forbid. Gods Justice only is
that offended Mat. 5. 25.
Enemy to whom our Ransom was paid, the Devil was but Gods sla^e and
Executioner.] There is no man for ought that I know, which says the Devil
must be satisfied; it is your partial humor that leads you so to surmise; my
Sermons profess it were an Sermon. page 64. li. 30.
Injury to Christ for us to think, his blood was shed to satisfy the Devil;
but the enemy to Christ's elect. (which is the devil and not God) must be
conquered and spoiled, though not satisfied: And that as S. Austen rightly
observes, God would have done first by Justice, and then by power. August. de
Trinitate. li. 13. cap. 13.
Because the Devil by his perverseness was a desirer of power, and a forsaker
and impugner of Justice; and men did so much the more imitate him, how much the
more neglecting or hating Justice, they did study to be mighty; and were
either inflamed with the getting, or delighted with the having thereof: It
pleased God, that for the taking of Man out of the devils power, the devil
should not be conquered by power, but by Justice; and so men imitating Christ
should seek to overcome the devil by Justice, and not with power. Ibidem. ca.
14.
By him that dyed and was so mighty, to us that were mortal and altogether
weak, both Justice was commended and power promised. Of these twain, the one
Christ performed dying, the other rising. For what is more just, then to come
(willingly) to the death of the Cross for righteousness? And what is more
mighty, then to rise from the dead, and ascend up to heaven with the same
flesh, which was slain? First then by righteousness, and after by power
Christ Conquered the devil. Ibidem. ca. 15
It is no hard matter to perceive the devil to be conquered (by power,) when
Christ, who was slain by the devil, rose again: that is harder and deeper to
be understood, that the devil was conquered, when he seemed to himself to be
the Conqueror; to wit, when Christ was slain. For then Christ's blood, because
it was his, that had no sin, was shed for the remission of our sins: that
whom the devil justly detained and tied to the condition of death, as guilty
of sin, those he might justly loose through Christ, whom being guilty of no
sin, he unjustly put to death. With this Justice was the Devil vanquished,
and with this bond was the strong man bound, that his things should be taken
from him; which were with him the vessels of wrath, and be turned to vessels
of mercy.

And after proof made out of the Scriptures, that we are translated from the
power of darkness, and of the devil to the kingdom of God, and of his
beloved, in who^ we have Redemption for remission of sins, then follow the
words which you so highly challenge. Ibidem. ca. 1^.
In this Redemption the blood of Christ was given for us as a Price, QVO
ACCEPTO which being taken, (that is wrongfully pursued and usurped, as the
devils manner is to take things which are not his, and not willingly offered or
lawfully received, as God did accept the same at the hands of his Son) the
devil was not enriched, but fast tied, that we should be loosed from his
bands. The blood of Christ patiently shed unto death was the Price of our
Redemption by the witness of the whole Scriptures, which Christ obediently and
voluntarily offered to his Fathers will for the full remission of our sins,
and our perfect reconciliation with God. This blood could not be justly shed by
any, because it was innocent and holy. They must therefore be iniust and wicked
that should shed the righteous blood of that undefiled Lamb. Wherefore the
secret counsel and justice of God delivered Christ being thereto willing,
into the Mark. 14
hands of sinners, and permitted him to the Luke. 22.
power of darkness with all reproach, shame, and torture to take his life from
him.

This obedience and patience of the Redeemer, in suffering the rage and
violence of Satan and his members, God so highly accepted and recompensed, that
not only his wrath was appeased, and our sins remitted, but all power in
heaven and earth, as well over Satan as over all his kingdom, was given unto
the manhood of Christ, to take from the power and fear of the devil, whom
Christ would, and to adiudge that cru^ll and bloody tyrant with all his
adherents to everlasting destruction. For though the Divine nature of Christ,
in that he was the Son of God, were a rightful and powerful Lord over
Satan and his whole kingdom (sin, death, and hell not excepted) to dispose
thereof at his pleasure; yet the humane nature of Christ had of it self no
such right or prerogative, in respect it was a creature, and so lower and
weaker then the condition of Angels, saving for the personal union thereof
with the Godhead of Christ. And therefore as the wisdom of God thought it no
match nor honor for the divine Majesty of Christ to spoil the devil, that
was but a base and vile servant in comparison of his Almighty power; so the
justice of God would not advance the manhood of Christ to the height of his
kingdom to rule all things in heaven, earth, and hell, till he had humbled
himself to the death of the Cross for remission of our sins, and received
violent wrong from the devil in putting him to death. In revenge and
recompense whereof, as all these fathers confess, God took just cause to make
not the Divine nature, which had that right before and could not loose it, but
man's nature, which Satan had by sin conquered and subjected to himself, to
be in the person of Christ conqueror and Lord over Satan, and all his power, to
take whom he would to make them vessels of mercy; and to reserve the rest as
vessels of wrath unto the terrible judgment of Christ. Wherein these Fathers
do not swerve from the Pophets and Apostles meaning, howsoever they use
different words; that Christ should Esa. 53. v. 12.
divide the spoil of the mighty, because he powered out his Soul unto death;
And that Philip. 2.
therefore God highly exalted, and gave him a name, at which every knee boweth,
in heaven, earth and hell, for that he was obedient unto the death of the
Cross.

Neither does Ambrose, when he speakerh of a Price required by the devil or
yielded to the devil, mean any more then a CAUSE SVFFICIENT why the spoiling
of Satan's kingdom was given unto the manhood of Christ, and all the power of
darkness, sin, death and hell, put under his feet. For a Price does not
always import an honorable condition, or a pleasing satisfaction, as it
signifies when it is referred to God; but as (...) in Greek, which is
properly a Price, notes either Reward, or Revenge; so does pretium in Latin
comprise both, and generally whatsoever is balanced one against the other, to
be exchanged one with the other, is the price of each other. So that it is no
dishonor to the blood of Christ to be so precious, that not only the
voluntary offering thereof did fully satisfy the justice of God displeased
with our sins, but that also the wrongful shedding thereof (which was
necessarily to be committed to Satan and his members, as the only fit
instruments for such an impiety) was a just occasion, why God in requital of
that wrong, made the manhood of Christ the subduer and destroyer of Satan's
kingdom. Not that the devil had any right or command over us, against or
without the will of God; but that he was so blinded by the wonderful wisdom
of God, in revenge of his subuerting the first man, that he was made, by
showing his malice against the manhood of Christ, an Actor in our Redemption,
and the Author of his own subversion, whiles without his knowledge, and
against his meaning, he was Gods instrument for our salvation, and his own
destruction.

This you can not quietly brook, because you make the chiefest point of our
Redemption to be the killing of Christ's Soul with Gods immediate hand; and so
far are you from confessing Christ to be unjustly slain as an innocent, that
you defend him to be sinful, hateful, defiled with our sins, and hanged by
the just sentence of the Law, and the devil to be only a minister and
executioner of Gods judgment against Christ. Yea your similitude, if you stand
to it, of prisoners taken in war, and your ransom yielded to God as to an
enemy for his captives, sets iarres if not wars between the first and
second person in Trinity, by making God the Father an enemy both to the
Redeemer and Prisoner. For among men, whose use and custom you press in this
place, the detainer is always a professed enemy to the redeemer, since
confederates do not use to take or detain each others subjects or servants,
but open enemies. The Ransomer then, and the prisoner have one and the same
enemy; and consequently by your resemblance, God is an enemy as well to Christ
as to us. The proof which you bring, to show God to be an enemy to his elect
out of the fifth of S. Matthew, is impertinent to the cause, and di^erent from
the truth. For besides that the new writers, as In Matthew. cap. 5.
Erasmus in his paraphrase, In Matthew. cap. 5.
Bucer, In Matthew. cap. 5.
Bullinger, In Matthew. cap. 5.
Musculus, In Matthew. cap. 5.
Calvin, In Matthew. cap. 5.
Gualterus in their commentaries upon this chapter; and the old, as
Tertulli^nus de pati^ntia.
Tertullian, In Matthew. cap. 5.
Ierom, In Matthew. cap. 5.
Chrysostom, Hilarie, In Matthew. cap. 5.
Theophylact, In Matthew. cap. 5.
Euthymius and others, with one consent refer this admonition of Christ to
men, that are Adversaries, H^lar. in Matthew. ca. 4.
Judges, and Iaylours here in this life; which is wide from your purpose; your
making of God to be an Adversary in that place, acknowledges a superior
Judge to God to whom the Adversary must by complaint, not by command deliver
us; and your comparing the devil to an obedient minister of the Law, excuses
him from being a rebel to God, and an accuser of men. But if you would speak
or think as the Scriptures lead, which you pretend, but not perform; you
should find in them, though not in this precept, that the devil is by a
special kind of notation, called our ENEMY, as indeed he is the ancient,
eger, and continual supplanter and impugner of man, and that God to his elect
is and ever was a gracious and loving father, when he was most displeased with
their sins; and even then so careful and mindful of their salvation, that
he gave them his own Son, when they were his Enemies to d^e for them, and by
that death to make satisfaction and purgation of all their sins; which was
not the part or work of an Enemy how much soever his holiness then did, and
still does dislike their unrighteousness. And since the punishment of our
sins was laid upon Christ, and we healed by his stripes; if therein God
professed Enmity to his elect, and executed it all on Christ, the devil being
but the Iaylor and Executioner, or as else where you say, an Instrument only,
and by that parable not to be blamed, for doing no more, then he is commanded
by the Judge; your wholesome doctrine commends the devil as an obedient
servant, and makes God an Inferior, and yet an Enemy to the manhood of
Christ. Which if you did not mean, you must temper your words and proofs
better, and learn not so egerly to reject every phrase in an ancient Father,
that pleases not your palate, when your self spoke and wrote so licentiously
and dangerously.

But Defenc. pa. 68. l. 30. and 28.
I fit your similitude, you say, to your desire farther then your self did
express; because I say, the Ransomer is not bound to be Prisoner for his
Redeemed, but may satisfy the enemy by money or otherwise.] You are a happy
man, that every thing fitteth your desire. You positiuely teach, that Christ
our Redeemer must suffer the self same pains of hell, which we should have
suffered. The reason you yield for it, is a poor similitude drawn from the
common use and custom of men in redeeming their captives taken in wars. I
replied, that your similitude proves no such thing, because amongst men the
Ransomers need not, nor do not sustain the same servitude and imprisonment,
which the captives do and must, if they be not redeemed. [Yet the whole price,
you say, must be paid by the Ransomer, which the captive otherwise should.] You
reason from the wills of men, which prefer money before captives, to the
will of God, who regards no money; which kind of reasoning I reject as n^ way
matching our redemption; and yet if it were admitted, exchanges, recompenses,
and conclusions of peace, which are no way in the prisoners powers, are amongst
men as usual as Ransomes. It is therefore no way needful by this similitude,
that our Redeemer should suffer the self same pains, which we should have
suffered. A recompense above our power, and so not possible to us, was easy to
him, that so far exceeded our condition; and that by your own similitude
might more then suffice for the prisoner. For though men will not take less
then the worth of their Captives, as they conceive their abilities or
likelihoodes of service, yet that does not hinder the Son of God to give for
us far more, then our value could, or can reach unto, because he had infinite
riches of holiness, righteousness, and obedience in his power, which we have
not. He might not therefore give less then we were worth, but more he might,
and did give: not by suffering hell pains in a sharper sense and greater
measure, then we can endure, which is your fancy; but because those things,
which he suffered, were of infinite price in his person, which in ours would
amount to no such rate.

From the sorrows which Christ did bear for our sakes, you came in your second
reason to the curse, which he tasted for our sins; and because the Apostle
says, Christ was G^lat. 3.
made a curse for us, in that he hanged on a tree to redeem us from the curse
of the Law; you would thence conclude, that Christ suffered for us the very
pains of hell, and the death of the soul, as part of that curse, which the
Law denounces to all sinners. You were answered by me, that before your
conclusion would any way follow upon your premises, you must make your first
proposition general, that the whole curse of the Law, and all the parts
thereof were suffered by Christ. Now this general assertion, that Christ
suffered the whole curse of the Law and every part thereof, was not only
false, and far from the Apostles words, but so wicked and impious, that
without horrible blasphemy it might not be affirmed of Christ. For the whole
curse of the Law plainly compriseth in it excecation, induration, desperation,
confusion, a final pri^ation of all grace and glory, and everlasting
damnation of body and soul to hell fire; none of which our Savior could
suffer. To this what now reply you? Christ suffered our Defen^ p^. 74. li.
(...).
whole curse only so far, as possibility of things could admit, that is,
with those three limitations, which are before expressed.] You little think the
discreet Reader smileth at your proud and foolish presumption, that in the
Apostles name, and under the Apostles words would canonize your own pelting
conceits, and then blow and suppe with a breath, denying that which you
affirm, and affirming that which you deny. For what have the Apostles words
to do with your three limitations? And if there be no possibility to draw
Paul's speech to the WHOLE CVRSE of the Law, without apparent and palpable
falsitie and impiety; why strive you for the general, that you dare not
stand to without three limitations, which prove the general not to be simply
true? First then in steed of Paul's warrant, you obtrude your own, and imagine
your naked speech to be an armed proof. Next you say Christ suffered the WHOLE
CVRSE of the Law, save three exceptions, which deny the whole; and so in
effect you affirm, Christ suffered the whole curse of the law, and yet not the
whole, but only so far as possibility could admit; that is in plain
terms, or in plain truth, it was not possible Christ should suffer the WHOLE
CVRSE of the Law due to sinners, since by that suffering he could neither save
us, nor be saved himself.

This gappe was so great, that you foresaw every man would eye it, and
therefore you brack it up with an other bush even as good as the former. For in
this wise you seek to prevent that objection. But you will say; [ (...). pa.
74 (...) (...).
Thus we make it not the whole curse of the Law. Yes we call it rightly the
whole curse, for as much as Christ suffered it in his whole manhood even in all
the powers of his spirit, and soul, and body.] Here we see what your wisdom
does and says; but what says the Apostle? Did he speak or think as you do?
His words we have far different from yours; now your proof of his meaning
were worth the hearing. Christ, you say, suffered it in his whole manhood. What
then? Ergo he suffered the whole curse? You must found a new University, where
your Logic must get grace to proceed by it self without control: it is so
repugnant to all rules known to us, that we can not so much as conceive it.
For thus you reason. The whole manhood of Christ suffered the curse, that is
some parts of the curse: Ergo Christ suffered the whole curse. As well you may
reason; the whole man in all Gods servants performs some parts of the Law;
ergo all the servants of God perform the whole law. You would be loath to be
answered your debts, if you have any, with such accounts: for if a man did owe
you ten pounds, and with all his heart and both his hands did bring you ten
pence, your reason here will conclude, he has paid you the whole, though that
I think would scant content you, if you were a Creditour. You be nearly
driven, when such shifts must serve you, or else be taken with a nonplus. What
else is this but a clear confession, that Christ could not suffer the whole
curse of the law, when you dare not otherwise defend it, but that the whole
manhood of Christ suffered some parts of the curse? It was, you say, Defenc.
pa. 70. li. 3.
in nature and verity the true and proper curse of the Law, which Christ was
made for us.] You be safe now you ^e come to your accustomed anchor of PROPER
and VERY: hold you fast there, and you may be sure no man shall hale you out
of this harbor, till you list to tell what you mean by proper and very,
which you will never do. But in the mean time how prove you, that Christ did
suffer the whole curse of the Law due to us; which is a false and wicked
assertion leudly fathered by you upon the Apostles words? And if you recant
that general proposition, what handfast has your conclusion? For if you
reason thus; Christ suffered some parts of the curse which the law threateneth
for sin; ergo he suffered the true pains of hell; your Reader will as soon
infer, ergo you have neither learning nor understanding.

Defenc. pa. 69. li. 15.
There is no color to make the curse which Christ suffered for our sins,
like to the curse which senseless creatures do sometimes bear for man's
cause.] Having made so foul a shipwreck of your own cause, as to be forced
to confess, that Christ did not suffer the whole curse of the Law, which
before you stiffly affirmed; to recover some part of your losses, you spurn at
my speeches, as having neither truth nor color: but report them right and
spare them not; which I doubt you will not do, because you make your entrance
with so false a color. For I no where make the curse which senseless
creatures bear, like to the curse which Christ suffered for us. Let the pages
which you cite, 262, 263, in Gods name be seen; but speaking of Gods curse
against the sin of man, I said, that Conclu^. pa. 26^. li. 33.
not only the bodies and souls of the wicked were cursed and consumed with
plagues, resting in them and on them, but all that they took in hand, and all
that belonged to them, was likewise accursed. And citing the 28. of
Deuteronomie, wherein a Calender of curses is denounced by the law against
sinners, I added, that Chapter perused, would easily show, how Ibidem. page
263. li. 14.
far the curse of God in this life persueth sinners, besides the horrible
torments of the next life kept in store for them. So that I did not there
compare or liken the curse of God on senseless creatures, to the curse which
Christ tasted for us, as your idle imagination apprehends; but I showed how
far the curse of the Law extended, and thence inferred, that if Christ did
not suffer all the things there mentioned, he did not suffer all the parts of
Gods curse in this life; Ibidem. page 263. li. 22.
besides the graund curse, that closes up all, and continues for ever; Depart
from me ye CVRSED into everlasting fire. You close your eyes against the
force of my reason, which is evident, and pry for that which is not there; and
when you find it not, you patch out this point with plain untruth, as if I
made Christ and the senseless creatures like in the curses which they suffered.

Defenc. pa. 69. li. 20.
You make a reason to prove that hanging on a tree mentioned in Moses, is not
all one with this curse of the Law in Paul. Neither did I, nor do I say, that
it was all one. This I said and still say, they were both of one and the same
nature.] You take great pride in pouncing of proper speeches, wherein you would
show your wit by wresting them to what please you. A reason I made, which for
ought I see, you do not understand, howsoever you play your part with my words,
which is neither to confute them, nor conceive them rightly; but all is one
with you, so you say somewhat, you care not how vnlound it be. I observed in my
Pa^. 273. li. 24 and 2^.
Conclusion, that S. Paul in his Epistle to the Galatians, cap. ^. alleged
two kinds of curses out of Moses; the one pertaining to the committing sin;
the other to the suffering punishment for sin. Gal 3. v. 10. Deuteronomy. 27.
Accursed is every one that abides not in all things written in the book of
the Law TO DO THEM. Here is the curse of doing evil, to which all men are
subject immediately upon the fact, not A double cu^se of sin.
ten or twenty years after, when happily God arises to visit their sins,
and therefore this imports not only a desert of future vengeance, but the
present detestation which God has both of the deed which is evil, and of the
doer who is wicked. An other kind of curse the Apostle notes out of Moses,
which is to hang on a tree; Deuter. 21.
Cursed is every one that hangs on a tree. Here is a curse in suffering
evil, whereof the former is the cause: for by Gods law no man should suffer
evil, but he that does evil. You in a iollity to advantage your cause, would
needs pronounce, Treati^. pa^. 35. li. 18.
it were vain and senseless to think the Apostle here spoke of two several
kinds of curses; taxing in your huffe not only Chrysostom, who expressly
teaches, it was another curse, and not the same; but even the Truth it self
to be vain and senseless, which evidently conuinceth the one to be in nature
very much different from the other. For the detestation which God has of sin
as soon as it is committed, whereby he rejects the deed as repugnant to his
holiness, and hates the doer even before punishment, is a plain distinct
thing from the vengeance that is consequent and agreeable to Gods justice. Much
more then does it differ from the judicial punishments of men, whereto Moses
points when he speaks of hanging, which though they have a dependence upon
Gods will and law, so far as they follow the same, yet must they differ as
much as the persons, punishments and powers of God and man do. Cursed, says
Moses, is every one that abides not in all things written in the book of the
Law. This curse is present upon each sin, and general to all the wicked in
the midst of their greatest prosperity and security. The punishment due to
sin is not so; that is deferred till God see his time; and then most
dreadful, when men can not commit new sins, as after this life. Wherefore as
all creatures revenge man's sin, and yet are not all of one nature, though in
that service to God they al^ agree; so the plagues and curses of sin be not
of one nature, notwithstanding they be powered on men to punish their offenses.

Defenc. page 69. li. 24.
I mean they are both of one and the same Nature, that is, true and proper
curses of God. Well crowed yet before your courage come down. Shall all things
that proceed from one cause, or that have one general wherein they agree, be
all of one and the same nature? Then men and mise be of the same nature, for
they are both living creatures. Then angels and andierns, stars and strawes,
and all things created, have the same nature, because they are all the works of
God. Then vices and virtues, and all contraries be of one and the same nature,
in as much as they are inherent in one subject, and destruent each to other. And
to go no farther then your own example; then hunger and hell fire are both of
the same nature, because they both are true and proper curses of God upon the
wicked. Be they great or little, you will say, they are all punishments.] So the
rest are all the works of Gods hands, and yet were it mad-merie Divinity to
say they are all of one and the same nature. Deuteronomy. 28.
The fruit of the body, of the Deuteronomy. 28.
ground of Deuteronomy. 28.
cattle, Deuteronomy. 28.
kine and Deuteronomy. 28.
sheep, are the blessings of God, and promised to the obseruers of his LAw;
and yet I trust they be not of one and the same nature with the joys of
heaven; though little and great, they be promises and rewards of obedience.

Defenc. page 69. li. 25.
One was the whole, the other a part; but both of them the true and proper
curses of God.] The one is the cause, the other is the consequent or effect,
but not a necessary, much less an essential part of the other. For a man may
be truly accursed, and yet not hanged; as also he may be justly hanged, and
yet not truly or properly accursed of God. The penitent thief on the Cross
came deservedly to his death, as himself Luke 23. v. 41.
confessed, and yet was not thereby truly accursed, since he was that day
received into Paradise. His death was an accursed kind of death, as also
Christ's was, though the one did bless, and the other was blessed, even under
that punishment, which Christ did willingly and the thief patiently suffer.

Defenc. page 69. li. 27.
Paul says not as you affirm, that Christ was made that curse, only, that
judicial curse, whereof only Moses speaks.] Much less does Paul say, as
you teach, that Christ suffered the whole proper curse of the law. I measure
Paul's meaning by his proof, you extend it to your fancy. So that, as I say,
Paul proves that he means; as you say, Paul means that he proves not.
Which of our constructions comes nearest the Apostles mind, the Reader will
soon perceive.

Defenc. page 69. li. 31.
Paul handling before generally Gods curse and the punishment of the Law
against sin, and showing we are redeemed from it by Christ's being made the
same for us, he confirms it by applying Moses judicial punishment against
certain transgressors, being it seems a figure of Christ herein.] If you
may add what fancies and falsities you list to the Apostles words, you will
make at length some show of proof, if not from Paul's text, yet out of your
own trifles. There is not one true word in all this Preface of yours to Paul's
proof: for neither does the Apostle in that place handle generally the
punishment of the Law against sin, nor show, that Christ was made the same
for us; neither did Moses appoint (hanging) by any judicial Law against
transgressors, neither were o^enders so punished, a figure of Christ herein.
Paul in that place handles the righteousness of faith in Christ, as bringing
the blessing of Abraham, and freeing from sin, which the law convinced and
accursed. The law threatens a curse upon every breach thereof, but it
inflicteth not actual punishment upon every sinner. And therefore the curse of
the law in Paul's first words is either the DETESTATION, which God has of sin
and sinners, whom in time appointed he means everlastingly to destroy; or the
OBLIGATION to temporal and eternal evil, which sin has in it. Neither of
which Christ was made for us, since he tasted not the same, but another kind
of curse, which was the temporal punishment of sin by the hands of men; and
by that obedience to the will and counsel of God, he freed us from the guilt
and wages of sin, which the law denounced. To note the differences of those
two curses, the Apostle puts the Article to the first for the more
vehemency, and not to the second, saying: Galat. 3.
Christ redeemed us from that curse of the law, being made a curse for us. The
curse then or punishment of sin in the person of Christ, was hanging on a
tree: to which Moses by his judicial law adjudged no man. Deuteronomy. 17.
Worshippers of other Gods, Leuit. 24.
blasphemers, Numb. 15.
breakers of the Sabbath, Deuteronomy. 21.
disobeiers of parents, and 22.
Adulterers were to be stoned to death by the law of Moses. Gene. 9.
Numb. 25.
Murderers were to loose blood for blood, and Deuteronomy. 19.
false witnesses to suffer that they meant to others, whether it were eye for
eye, hand for hand, or life for life. But by no judicial law, that I read,
did Moses appoint any transgressors to be hanged. By the express commandment
of God, who is above the law, Moses took the chief of the people that coupled
themselves with Baal Peor, and Number. 25. verse. 4.
hanged them up before the Lord against the Sun. And Joshua used the same
kind of death in some that were Josh. 8. and 10.
strangers, and not Israelites: otherwise Moses never commanded, but only
permitted the Magistrate to hang transgressors; yet so, that Deuteronomy. 21.
the body should not remain all night upon the tree, but be buried the same
day, because the curse of God was (executed) on him, that was hanged. So that
God not appointing any man by his law to be hanged, but leaving that liberty
to the Magistrate so to revenge malefactors, where the law did not specify
their punishment, they could be no figures of Christ; as well in respect they
were wicked, that must be so used, who were not fit to be figures of that
innocent and undefiled Lamb, as also that men had no power to erect figures of
Christ's death and passion, but must leave that to God to represent the
sufferings of his Son as he saw cause.

Defenc. page 69. li. 36.
They that were hanged by the just sentence of the Law, they were herein
accursed, that is they herein sustained the laws true and deserved
punishment.] But if they were INNOCENTS oppressed by unrighteous judgment,
which is no news among men, as we see by the death of our Savior; or if they
were PENITENTS, though their punishment were never so deserved, neither of
these could be truly accursed before God, and yet might be hanged, and so
subjected to the corporal curse of the Law. For though Moses had no meaning to
have men unjustly hanged, yet had he less purpose to pronounce them damned,
that died for their sins, if they repented: and therefore he commmandeth the
bodies to be buried the same day, because the Curse, that is, the Rigor and
Revenge of the Law was executed on them; and consequently Moses extends not
this curse farther then this life; which makes nothing to the pains or
perpetual curse of the damned. And here the Reader may plainly perceive you to
sincke in the sands of your own subtilties: for here you confess, that
deserved hanging is a TRVE CVRSE and PUNISHMENT, notwithstanding, if the
guilty repent, as the Thief did on the Cross; I hope you will leave him the
child of Gods mercy, whom Christ received into Paradise. And consequently by
your own confession, the pains and afflictions of this life, when they are
deserved, are curses and true punishments of sin to Gods children, though
their souls be blessed by their submission and conversion unto God. Which
overthrows all, that you formerly have said touching the troubles and
vexations of this life, and that you presently mean to conclude of Moses curse
applied to Christ.

Defenc. page 70. l. 1.
By applying this text of Moses in this sense, and in this respect to Christ,
it is well confirmed to be in nature and verity the true and proper curse of
the Law, which Christ was made for us: for such also in deed was the nature of
that judicial curse of Moses.] Moses we see had no meaning to make their
souls accursed, whose bodies were hanged on the tree by the just judgment of
the Magistrate, if the malefactors truly repented their wicked offenses. How
much less then meant he to subject the Son of God to the internal or
eternal curse of the Law, for that he was unjustly and wrongfully hanged on a
tree by the malice and spite of his Enemies. And yet in both as well poenitent
as innocent, hanging is called a curse, that is, a true and corporal
punishment appointed by God for sin, though man's error inflict it on
innocents, or true repentance abolish the rest, that would follow after this
life, if God were not reconciled unto us. In the wicked then, which persist in
their mischievous purposes without repentance, your reason takes place, that
hanging to them is a part of that true and terrible curse, the whole whereof
shall be executed on them for their sins; but in repentants it is stark
false, and in Christ of whom this question rises it is irreligious and impious
to say, that he suffered the whole curse of the Law provided for sin, or the
death of the soul and of the damned, which is properly due to sinners.

Defenc. page 70. li 10.
Now understand Chrysostom thus, as we before have distinguished the
punishment of Christ and of the damned, and then we differ not.] Suppose
Chrysostom to teach falsely, and talk absurdly as you do; and then you may
soon bring him to wear your badge; but leave him at liberty to tell his own
tale, and he is far enough from your follies. Ib. (...). 12.
He says they were d^erse curses in Christ and in the damned, to signify
diverse manners of one and the same curse in Nature.] He speaks not of the
damned at all, he speaks of the whole people of the Jews, which were under
the curse of the Law for sin, till they were thence delivered by Christ,
which the damned never were, nor shall be. His words are: Chrysostom. in 3. cap
epist. ad Galat.
The people were in danger of another curse, which says, Cursed is every one
which abides not in the things written in the book of the Law. For not one of
them had observed the whole Law. Christ then since he was not subject to the
curse of transgression, admitted this curse (to hang on the Cross) in steed
of that, to loose the people from their curse. Chrysostom truly, learnedly,
and consonantly to the rest of the ancient Fathers, distinguishes two kinds
of EVILS or CVRSES incident to men, which are sin, and the punishment of
sin. The one is an unjust action pleasing man, but displeasing God: the other
is a just passion pleasing God, but displeasing man. Tertull. contra Marcion^m.
lib. 2.
Mala dicuntur, and Delicta and Supplicia. The OFFENSE and the REVENGE are both
called ^uils, says Tertullian. August. contra ^tum.
Duo sunt genera malorum, peccatum, and poena peccati: there are two sorts of
Evils, says Austen, Sin, and the punishment of sin. For August. contra
A^mantum c^p. 26.
by Gods providence ruling all things, (as) man does the evil, which he will;
(so) he suffers the Evil which he will not. Then sin is not only evil
before it be punished, but a greater evil, then the punishment is; since it is
an evil in his own nature repugnant to the righteousness of God. Now as God
is all good, and therefore all blessed; so sin forsaking God, falls from
goodness, and so from blessedness; and is consequently more accursed with God
then punishment is, and ought so to be with men, if they be rightly advised, as
being the cause and continuance of their punishment. For accursed signifies as
well detested and deprived of blessedness, as subjected to misery, or devoted
to destruction. So that sin in it self is a curse with God, that is hated
and detested of God, and depriving man of all communion and participation with
the fountain of blessedness, though no punishment did follow. Yet because men
would with neglect and desp^ght of God, abide and rejoice in their wickedness,
if sense of grie^e and pain did not force them to feel their wretchedness;
therefore the wisdom and justice of God pursues such, as dwell and delight
in their sins, with sharp and bitte^ plagues, that loc^ing on their misery,
they may timely repent, or eternally lament their obstinacy.

To these two kinds of curses Chrysostomes words and proofs do lead. The
whole people were not damned, as you devoutly d^eame, but they had sinned, and
so were subjected to the danger of Gods displeasure for sin, and of his
indignation against sin. From this Christ was free, for he did not sin,
(...) was guile found in his m^uth, as Chrysostom concludes out of the
Scriptures. Since then Christ was Chrysostom. in ^. ca ep^st. ad Galat^.
not subject to the curse of Transgression, he admitted ^other Curse, eu^n the
punishment of sin, which is a curse also for sin, though of an other
Nature, then the committing of sin; by one to dissolve the other; that is, by
his own pain to abolish the guilt of our sin. Chrysostomes wo^ds are as
pl^ne as his proofs: Chrysostom. i^id.
The curse of transgressing was another curse, and not the (...) which Christ
suffered. Yea Christ might not be subjected to that curse, to which the people
were for transgressing the law, but changed that for another, and so loos^d
their curse. (...); another, and not the same, be as forci^le wo^ds to show
different natures and persons, as any the Greek tongue has; and your shift of
di^erse degrees in the same nature, is a childish toy, since much and little,
like and unlike s^ew diverse degrees or measures in one nature, but another, and
not the same thing, directly notes the substance or nature to be diverse.

Defenc. page 70. ^. 20.
Austen on whom you triumph, is stretched beyond his meaning, he dea^eth
against a Mainich^e, who denied that Christ had true human flesh. Now he
proves, that Christ truly died, because the Apostle says he was made a curse
for us, in that he hanged on a Tree. I have cause to content my self, that so
lea^ned and religious a Father, as Saint Augustine was, and so highly
reverenced in the Church of God, did more then twelve hundred years since, in
his conflicts with Heretics refute the greatest part of your positions, as
repugnant to the faith of Christ, and the soundness of the Sacred Scriptures.
And I think few men so foolish as in the grounds of our Redemption and
salvation by Christ to reject the Doctrine, which he taught, as false; and
receive your scambling conceits as true. And in my Judgment you were best to
take heed, least if the resolutions, which Saint Austen and other Catholic
Fathers made against Heretics, disprooue your new found faith, you be taken
tardy with bringing Baggage into the Church of Christ, long since condemned and
banished from the Creed of all Christians. What Saint Austen proves; you are
no fit reporter, except you did read more attentively, and judge more
sincerely. For did you ever peruse the words

(...) wrong course in so wise a Father, if he meant purposely to prove
against the Manichees that Christ truly died for us, and not in show only as
they supposed, to ouerskip all the Testimonies and circumstances of Christ's
true death recorded in the Scriptures, as his Matthew. 2^.
Lu^ 23.
giving up the Ghost, Pilates Ma^k. 1^ ^. 44. 45.
examining, and the Centurions Ma^k. 1^ ^. 44. 45.
confessing the truth thereof, as also the Soldiers Io^. 19. v. 33.
perceiving him already dead, and so not breaking his l^gges, but pearcing his
side with a spear, and the* Lu^ 23.
gazing and (...). (...).
watching of his ^nemies, and of the whole multitude over him to see him die,
as likewise his burial by his own followers, the sealing of his Tumbe, and
his lying three dai^s in the grave; to omit I say all these things with
silence, and to produce a word, which the Manichees rejected as odious and
injurious to Christ, and the Christians defended none otherwise then as common
to all men, that die, both good and bad; were no small oversight in so learned
a writer. But this is a ^ite of yours to shift of the truth of his answer, it
is no part of his meaning. He shows against the Manichees, and likewise
against you, since you defend the Contrary, that the death of the Body is in
all men the punishment of sin, and that this death INFLICTED ON MAN'S NATVRE
for sin, which is the MORTALITY OF OUR FLESH, by the Scriptures is called a
Sin, and a Curse even in Christ; not that Christ was properly and truly
accursed with God, as transgressors are, which is your erroneous assertion;
but that he submitted himself to receive the punishment of sin in his own
person by the death of his Body, which was common to him with all men.

If the former words of Saint Austen were not plain enough, he has playner.
August. contra Faust. ^i. 14. cap. 7.
If thou deny Christ was accursed, deny Christ was dead. If thou deny he was
dead, now ^ightest thou not against Moses, but against the Apostles. If thou
confess him to have been dead, confess that he took the punishment of our
sin without sin. Now when thou hear the punishment of sin, believe it
came either from (Gods) blessing or cursing. If the punishment of sin came
from blessing, wish always to be under the punishment. But if thou desire to
be thence delivered; believe, that by the just Judgment of God the punishment
of sin came from the curse. Confess then that Christ took a Curse for us,
when thou confessest him to have been dead for us; Ibidem.
Nec aliud significare voluisse Mosen, cum diceret, maledictus omnis qui in
ligno pepend^rit, nisi, mortalis omnis, and moriens omnis, qui in ligno
pependerit; and that Moses had none other meaning, when he said, Accursed is
every one that hangs on a Tree, then to say, every one that hangs on a
Tree, is Mortal and dies. He might hau^ said, Accursed is every Mortal Man,
or accursed is every one that dies. How think you, would Austen prove that
Christ truly died, because he was truly accursed, or that Christ took upon
him a Curse, because he took upon him the death of the Body, which is the
punishment of sin in all mortal men, and so proceeded from the curse
whereunto all men for sin were subject? He does not defend the Apostle by
Moses, but he expounds Moses by the Apostle, and so resolves in plain
words, that Moses had none other meaning, when he said, accursed is every one
that hangs on a Tree, then if he had said, accursed is every mortal man,
because death came first on all men as a Curse for sin. You acknowledge not
the death, which all men die, to be a punishment or Curse for sin. But all
the wit you have, will not answer Saint Austens reasons. For the death of the
Body, which is common to all mortal men, must of force be a blessing or a
Cursing. If it be a blessing, why do we believe, or hope to be free from a
blessing? but if we detest continuance under it, and desire deliverance from
it, then certainly the death of the Body in all men, even in the Saints of God,
was and still is a punishment and Curse of Sin, till Christ raise us from it.
An other reason Saint Austen urges to the same effect, which is this. August.
ead^m. cap. 6.
Unless God had hated sin, and our Death, he would not have sent his son
to undertake, and abolish the same. What marvel then, if that be accursed to
God, which God hates? God, that is him self all life, and gave us life as his
blessing in this world, must needs hate death, which is privation of life, as
repugnant to his Image, and euerting the work of his hands, wherewith he
joined Soul and Body to participate in life. And though by his Justice he
inflicted death on all men for sin, yet of his mercy he sent his own (...)
and PAINFVLL death, to be that part of the curse which Christ suffered for us.
This I hope is more then shame, though shame and reproach were not the least
parts of Gods curse against sin even in Christ. You would needs in a brauado
set up your bristles, and ask, What, Treatis. page 38. ^i. 20.
nothing but the shame of the world? will any man of common sense affirm, that
this was all the curse that Christ bare for us?] I replied, that shame and
ignominy was an express part of the curse which Christ dying suffered for us,
and that there was no cause you should so much disdain Chrysostom and Austen
for so saying. The Scriptures themselves in that point concurred with them, as
I have fully showed in my Page 267.
Conclusion, and you can not avoid it. Lest therefore your Reader should take
you to be tongue-tied, you clean change the case, and would have men believe,
that I defend and endeavored to prove, that Defenc. page 71 li. 13.
shame was the whole curse which Christ endured. As though I alleged not S.
Austen at Sermon. page 92. and 93.
large, to prove that death in all men, Christ not exempted, was a part of the
curse inflicted on mankind for sin. And therefore when Chrysostom said, the
Conclus. pa. 271.
cross is the only kind of death subject to the curse, I did not set him and
Austen at variance, as if the one did trippe the other, but I thus reconciled
them; that Conclus. pa. 271. li. 11.
not only death, (as in all men) but the ver^e kind of death which Christ
died, was accursed by the very words of the Law in Chrysostomes judgment. This
then is one of your familiar trades and trueths, to set down that in my name,
which I never spoke nor meant; and so by lying, when you can not by reasoning,
to support your cause. Indeed if a man will admit your absurd and false
positions, so much is consequent out of their words. For where you will not
have the death of the body to be any part of the curse inflicted on sin,
except the death, of the damned be coherent with it, as in the reprobate; it
follows from Chrysostomes words, that the corporal death of Christ severed
from all other sorts of death had no part of Gods curse in it besides shame,
which yet is as far from being a true curse, where the cause is good, as
death it self; since neither shame nor death are true and inward curses, when
they are suffered for righteousness, but rather causes and increases of
blessing; not in, nor of themselves, but by Gods goodness accepting, and
recompensing them with all favor and bliss.

Defenc. pa. 71. li. 14.
Again you mislike, that I said Christ's dying simply, as the godly die, may
in no sort be called a Curse or accursed.] I mislike, that you can not or will
not distinguish, what death is in it self even to the godly, and what is
consequent after it by Gods mercy toward his Saints. And herein I say, you
want both truth and judgment: for things are to be named by their natures,
and not by the sequents, which often God sends clean contrary to the
purposes, and practices of Satan, and his members. Tyranny, shall it be no
cruelty, because it makes Martyrs? Sin, shall it not be displeasing to God,
because it humbles the faithful by repentance? The corruption of man's nature,
shall it not be sin, because thereby God exercises his Saints to
watchfulness and prayer? Even so the death of the body, which God at first
inflicted on all his Elect for sin, shall it be no punishment, for that God
does comfort his in death, and reward them after death? Defenc. page 71. li. 16.
[ I affirm, death to the godly is no curse properly.] And I a^irme, that when
you can not tell how to start from the force of truth, you do nothing but lie,
or fly to your phrases of proper and very: which here, as in other places do
you no good. In the fifteenth line of this page, you say the death of of the
godly may IN NO SORT be called a Curse or Accursed. In the sixteenth, whiles
you offer to prove those words, you confess them to be false. Death to the
(...) (...) no Curse properly, you say, but a benefit and advantage; then
improperly death is a curse: and before you said, It may in no sort be called a
Curse to them. If in no ^rt, then neither properly nor improperly. What then is
that Enemy that must be dest^oyed, a cursing or a blessing? Can it be an
enemy to Christ, and yet a blessing to the godly? I cannot better refell your
folly, then S. Austen does in this very case. If death be a ble^ing to the
bodies of the godly, never desire to be delivered from it: what n^ed you
believe, or love the resurrection of the flesh, which is the destruction of
death in the body; it death be a benefit to the body? But if this be
repugnant to Christian religion, then has death in it even a show of Gods
curse on the body for sin, which must be destroyed, before Christ can fully
reign in all his Saints. [ Yet is it to the godly no curse properly.] The
height of your learning hangs on the help of this word PROPERLY; we yet came
to no point in all our defense, but when you see your self pressed, you
straightwayes post to PROPER and VERY; and yet you never define either, nor
take the pains to expound your self, lest you should be taken with open
heresy and blasphemy, in applying one and the same curse properly and truly
to Christ and the damned.

Defenc. page 7^. li. 19.
You say I am to young a Doctor to control Saint Austen herein; and I say you
are a Doctor not old enough to prove Austen contrary to me in this point.]
A far younger then I am will soon discern by that I have said, that S.
Austen is repugnant in this point to your proper and very novelties: for where
you say, Death to the godly may in no sort be called a curse; S. Austen thus
expounds Christ's words to the godly: August con ^a Faustum. li. 14. ca. 12.
Fear not those which kill the body, as if Christ had said, Nolite timere
male dictum mortis corporalis quod temporaliter soluitur. Fear not the CVRSE
of a bodily death, which in time is dissolved. And so when he resolves Moses
had none other meaning in this sentence, Cursed is every one that hangs on a
tree, then if he had said; Mortal is every one that hangs on a tree. Ibid.
ca. 7.
Poterat enim dicere, maledictus omnis mortalis, aut maledictus omnis moriens.
For Moses might have said; Cursed is e^ry mortal man, or cursed is every man
that dies. If Moses might truly have so said, as it is evident by S. Austens
position, then I trust death in some sort may be justly called a Curse, even
to the godly.

But S. Austen says, that the death of the body is good to the good, and
evil to the evil.] That speech S. Austen says, may be tolerated, not in
respect of death it self, which is evil; but of the mercies of God, which
follow the faithful after their deaths. His words, which you skippe (as your
manner is to do when any thing makes against you) are Dici potest: It may be
said. But upon that speech he presently moves this question in the beginning
of the next Chapter. If the death of the body be good to the good, August. de
ciuitate D^ li. 13. ca 3.
quo modo poterit obtineri, quod etiam ipsa sit poena peccati? how may it be
resolved, that it is also the punishment of sin? His resolution you did not
read, or not regard, because it resisted your fancy; but thereby the Reader
may see what credit is to be given to your words, when you crake of Fathers.
August ibid.
We must confess, says Austen, that the first men were so created, that if
they had not sinned, they should have tasted no kind of death; but the very
same, being the first sinners, were so punished with death, that whatsoever
should spring from their root, should be held subject to the same punishment.
And discussing the question proposed more at large, he resolves: August. de
ciuitate Dei. li. ^3 ca. 4.
Sic per ineffabilem Dei misericordiam and ipsa p^na vit^orum transit in arma
virtutis, and fit meritum iusti etiam supplicium peccatoris. So by the
unspeakable mercy of God the punishment of vice becomes the armor of
virtue, and the revenge of a sinner is made the merit of the just. Ibidem.
Non quia mors bonum aliquod facta est, qu^ antea malum fuit, sed tantam Deus
fidei praestitit gratiam, vt mors, quam vitae constat esse contrariam,
instrumentum fieret, per quod transi^ in vitam. NOT THAT DEATH IS BECOME ANY
GOOD, which before was evil, but so great favor God has yielded unto faith,
that death, which most certainly is contrary to life, is made an instrument
(for the good) by which they pass unto life. And to make men the better to
understand the effect of his speech, he brings an example out of the
Scriptures, where the law is called the strength of sin. August. de ciuitate
D^i. ^i. 13. ca. 5.
Why, says he, rehearse ^e this? Because that, as the Law is not evil, when
it increases the lust of sinners, so death is not good, when it augmenteth the
glory of the sufferes: but as the unjust do e^lly use not only evil, but
also good things; so the just do well use not only good, but even things that
be evil. Hence comes it, that the wicked use the Law ill, though the Law be
good, and BONI be^e moriantur, quamuis sit mors malum, and the good die well,
though death be evil.

I have touche^ at large Saint Anstens reasons and resolutions in his own
words, because the Render should the more clearly conceive him, and the
discourser see him contrary to his conceits even in this point, which he so
much denies. The death of the body, which the godly do suffer, is to this day
an evil of it self, and the punishment of sin; but God of his mercy
toward his, has given such grace, not to death, but to their faith, that by
suffering death patiently, they shall be the more plentifully rewarded. But as no
wise man will say the Law is evil, when the wicked abuse it to kindle their
lusts, so may no sober man say, that the death of the faithful is good in it
self, though by Gods goodness it be made to them a trial of their patience,
and a passage to a better life. You say the nature of death is changed, and not
to the faithful any longer an evil or part of the punishment and curse, which
was laid o^ sin. S. Austen says the contrary. It is still an evil as it
was, and the nature thereof is not changed, though the use thereof be changed
by faith, and the consequents altered by Gods goodness. Now things must be
esteemed by their nature, and not by their use, as Austen teaches. For evil
men use good things euilly, yet that makes not good to be evil, because
their use is inuerted; and even so, says Austen, good men have a good use of
death, which is evil, yet that makes not the death, which they suffer, to be
good in it self, or in nature to be such, as by Gods favor it is to them.
When the death therefore of the faithful is said by Saint Austen or any others
to be good, they mean the use, and not the nature thereof; and when they say
it is evil, or a curse, they mean the nature and not the use. For touching
the nature thereof the Apostle, who must be heard, says fully and resolutely;
Death is an 1. Cor. 15. verse. 26.
enemy, that must be destroyed, even in the godly. And touching the use
thereof, the same Apostle says. Philip. 1.
To me Christ is life, and to die is gain. Against this you neither do, nor
can bring ought, besides waste words, and places either not understood of you,
or wrested by you, as spoken of the nature of death, when they mean the use of
death, which the faithful have by Gods abundant blessing.

Defenc. pa. 71. li 26.
Your self do say, The vengeance of the Law once executed on the suertie, can
no more in Gods justice be executed on us.] In the vengeance of the law is
comprised, corporal, spiritual and eternal death. The whole Christ neither
did, nor could taste, and be a Savior. A part he therefore tasted, which was
the death of his body, and thereby freed us from the rest, which was due to our
sins. From the death of the body he has not as yet wholly delivered us, but
he will; and in the mean time he has broken the linckes of death (whereby
those three were coupled together) first in his own person, who suffered the
first kind of death, and neither of the other, and by virtue thereof has done
the like in all his Saints, leaving their bodies for a season unto death, as
his was, that he may raise them after with greater power and glory, then if
they had never died. What does this hinder, but death may truly be called a
Curse, as in Christ, so in his members; and though execution of vengeance be
restrained from us, yet imitation of Christ is not excluded, neither is the
general sentence pronounced against the sin of all mankind, (To dust thou
shall return) revoked but by the resurrection from the dead [ how then was it
vengeance on Christ, if it were due to man's nature?] Death was due to man's
nature for sin, and consequently not due to Christ that had not sinned. When
therefore it was laid on him, that deserved it not, it must be taken as the
wages of our sin in his person; and so was a wound to him, though a medicine
to us, because he Esaias 53.
was wounded for our transgressions, and we were healed by his stripes.

Defenc. pa. 71. li. 28.
Our public doctrine in England set forth by Master Nowel, confirms as
much. To the faithful, death is now not a destruction, but a changing of life,
and a very sure and short passage to heaven.] Every thing that is licensed or
liked, as profitable to be publicly read or taught, is not by and by
authorized in all things, nor made the public doctrine of this Realm. You
would feign oppose Master Nowel to Saint Austen, who if he were living would
give you no thanks therefore. Saint Austens Faith has been allowed and
received by all Synods and Councels since his time, and by the whole Church of
Christ, as fit to guide and lead not only learners, but makers of
Catechismes; and therefore the match, if they were repugnant, is somewhat
unequal: but indeed you have need to be taught, how to understand your
Catechism. That death is a destruction to the godly, can you tell who says
so, except it be your self? That it is a changing of life and short passage
to heaven, if you mean to the souls of the faithful, as the Ca^echisme does,
no man doubts thereof; if you mean to their bodies, that they by death
change life, and so have a short passage to heaven, it is a notable falsitie,
and heresy, gainsaying the very grounds of the Christian faith. For privation
of sense, and corruption to dust, is no life, much less an heaven; except you
will multiply heavens as you do helles, without reason or truth. It is most
true which the Catechisine intends, that death is this to the souls of the
faithful, but not to their bodies as yet till the general day of resurrection;
and then the destruction of death in their bodies shall bring them to the full
possession of heavenly glory, provided both for soul and body: till that
time, their bodies lie under the dominion or power of death, which is not yet
destroyed in every part of us, because of sin dwelling in our bodies, though
it thoroughly be conquered in the person of Christ, and shall be likewise in us
at his appointed time.

As little to the purpose is that, which you cite next out of the Catechism,
that Defenc page 71. li. 35.
Death, which before was a punishment, is now become a vantage.] For he
means, that death before had nothing in it, nor after it but punishment, and
so was wholly and only punishment; which now by Christ is altered, and made an
advantage to us, as well in respect of the manifold miseries and offenses of
this life, from which we are delivered, as in regard of the felicity and
security, which the souls of the Saints dec^ased enjoy: but this is nothing
to their bodies, which lie deprived of life and corrupted to dust till the
final restitution. Neither is this a comparison with our condition before
sin, (in which we were created,) when soul and body should jointly have
been translated to the kingdom of heaven without any sense or touch of death,
if we had stood fast in obedience; but this notes, what death is after sin
committed without Christ, and rightly says, that when once by sin we were
plunged into the depth of all misery, as a punishment for sin, then the
grace of Christ by the death of his body brake off the chains of internal and
eternal death knit to the former by Gods justice, and made the natural death
of our bodies, which without Christ was only a punishment, and the entrance to
all other mischiefs of sin afte^ this life, to become now an advantage to
the soul, which is presently freed from the labors of this life, and invested
and secured with everlasting bliss. But the body is not yet quited from the
burden and corruption laid on it by Gods justice for the punishment of Adams
sin; and the soul in the midst of her comforts, not only feels the want,
but shows her desire to receive her body, as appears by the pra^er of the
souls under the Altar; who desire not now in heaven revenge of their
persecutors, whom they pardoned and prayed for on earth, but woondering at Gods
patience, that is daily provoked and abused, they desire the day of R^uel. 6.
judgment, though that bring with it the destruction of the wicked, because
they shall then receive their bodi^s, and with them the fullness of Gods
promises.

That place of the Catechism does ^ notably contradict you, who call death to
the Defenc pa^. 7 ^i. 3^.
G^dly the gate of hell; a strange and most untrue translation:] The Catechism
speaks of the souls of the godly, who without Christ were assured by death
to enter the bottomles^ pit of hell, and now by Christ do safely pass from
death to heaven; but what is this to their bodies whereof I speak? do the
bodies of the Saints pass straight upon death to heaven, as their souls do?
I trust your Catechism says not so; and therefore no way contradicts me.
[But I translate it so, when I call death the gate of hell, which is s^range
and untrue.] No good Sir, when I translated the text, because the word Sheol
was doubtful and imported all the power and strength o^ hell against body and
soul in this world, and in the next, I retained the very word Sheol; as may
be seen in the page of my Sermons, which you cite, page 150. li. 32. yet what
was meant by ^heol in that place, when I came to examine, I did incline rather
to the word hell, then to the word Grave, since we had in English no more words
to express the power or danger of Satan's kingdom on earth. For neither the
grief, which Ezechias conceived, nor the phrase, which he used, might be
rightly referred to the grave. It was not the grave that Ezechiah did so much
fear, and so much decline, it was the doubt of Gods displeasure, that upon
deliverance of him and his city from the hands of Senacherib, presently
struck the king with sickness, and denounced death unto him, as unworthy to
enjoy that protection, which God had showed from heaven in defense of his
people against their enemies: and therefore in the bitterness of his soul,
which he confessed did Esa. 38. v. 14.
oppres^e him, he said, he should go to the gates of Sheol, that is, to a
dangerous conflict with death, between hope and fear of Gods favor or anger.
Neither does Sheol there import only the grave: for at first Ezechiah resolved
he should die, and so go farther then the gates or entrance of the grave.
Neither does that phrase in other places of Scripture express barely the
burial of the bod^e. Matthew 16.
The gates of hell, says our S^uiour, shall not prevail against my Church, by
which he meaueth nothing less then the grave. Job. 38.
Are the gates of death known to thee, says God to Job, who could not be
ignorant, what the sides and bottom of a grave were? Psalm. 9.
Thou liftest me, says David, from the gates of death, when yet he was sure to
come to his grave. And had Ezechiah from the grief of his heart, under which he
Esa. 38. v. 14.
chattered like a Swallow, and mourned as a Dove, pronounced death to be the
Gate or first invasion, that hell or Satan made one man's Body for sin, what
had you to say against it? Wisdom 2.
By the envy of the Devil, says the wise man, Death entered into the world.
The Apostle says as much, Romans 5.
By sin Death e^red into the world, not as a blessing of God, but on all men
to Condemnation. From this Condemnation the Soul by Christ is presently
released; the Body is also promised, but yet not cleared from that Condemnation
to Death which sin brought with it. And since the Apostle calls it an
Enemy to Christ, and Austen doubts not to name it a corporal Curse, why
should I not number it rather amongst the gates or powers of hell, then of
heaven, since the devil was the Author, and Christ will be the destroyer
thereof.

It offends you that I say, if we will reason what death is in it self, we
must resolve it to be a part of Gods curse; which you say is no answer. For
who ever denied it to be in it self a part of Gods curse for sin? but (your)
express words are, death is to the godly no curse properly.] Do you now find
the foil, how foolishly you have all this while supported an error, that yo^
now come with properly to proppe it up, least it fall on your head? You can now
with shame enough confess, Defenc. pa. 72. li. 33.
WE KNOW AL SHAME AND AFFLICTION TO ALL MEN IS A KIND OF CVRSE. Then death, a
man would think, may rightly be called a kind of corporal curse; since that
is the sharpest and forest of all outward asf^ictions. [ Ibid. li. 32.
A kind of curse, who ever denied that? say you.] Even your wisdom has all
this while denied it. In your Treatise you bleated forth this resolution. Trea.
pa. 45. li. 1.
Therefore Christ's dying simply as the godly die, MAY IN NO SORT HERE BE
CALLED A CVRSE, or accursed. You iterate the very same in your defense. Yea,
it is the maine ground of your second special reason. Defenc. pa. 71. li 15.
Christ, you say, was made a curse sor us or accursed in his death. But to die
simply as the godly do, may in no sort be called a curse or accursed. Christ
therefore endured the curse and wrath of God truly. [Your Defenc. pa. 72. li.
6.
express words, you say, are; Death to the godly is no curse properly, but a
vantage.] Are not the other your express words also that the death of the
godly MAY IN NO SORT BE called a curse or accursed? and does not the force of
your reason wholly depend upon these later words? For had you confessed that
death, shame and pain were to the godly corporal curses; how then conclude
you, that Christ was properly accursed? Because the Apostle says, He was made
a curse? Does the Apostle say, he was made a curse properly? It would empt and
waste all the wit in your head, from the one to conclude the other. Against
your prec^e Negative, that death in the godly might in no sort be called a
curse, I opposed the contrary, that the death of the body was a curse for
sin laid on the bodies even of the elect; and therefore might justly be so
called in us, and much more in Christ, though the force of that curse were
quenched in Christ, and the coherence thereof interrupted.

In floting to and fro you fell to the curse of the Law, and the curse of God,
and there, as your fashion is, you avouched what you listed, without any proof
or witness besides your self; telling us that Paul mentioned Christ's hanging
on the tree as a part of the curse of the Law, thereby impolying the whole to
be executed on Christ. The whole curse of the Law in my conclusion I showed to
be Conclus. pa. 265. li. 26.
external, corporal, internal and eternal plagues and punishments; and
asked you which of these you affirmed of Christ. External and corporal curses
in Christ I did grant; internal and eternal curses of the Law, which are want
of grace, and loss of bliss, with perpetual damnation of body and soul, I
said could not be ascribed to Christ without enormous and heinous blasphemy.
To this when you should answer, you turn with a trice to your world of
words, and say, your question was, Whether death to the godly were a curse
properly or no. But sir remember the reason was yours, which if you do not
fully proo^e, you must wholly loose. You should therefore first define, what a
proper curse is, and then apply the parts thereof, as well to Christ, as to
the godly; and in so doing, we should soon have seen both the sense and
truth of your speech. Now you hold fast to the ambiguitie and uncertainty of
the word proper, as though it were enough for you to deliver Oracles with the
breath of your mouth; you say the word, and then the field is won.

Defenc. page 72. li. 4.
Our question is not, what death is in it self but what death is to the
godly.] You are so wedded to your own words, that you understand no man else,
and scant your self. When I reason what the death of the godly is in it self,
I speak not of the death, which they do no not suffer, that is not their death
at all, which they no way feel; but since they die the death of the body,
that death which they suffer, is to them one thing in his own force, which
they taste and endure, and the consequents after death, by Gods mercy provided
for his servants, are most evidently other things, and he that cannot
distinguish this, is no way worthy to bear the name of a Divine. For the joys
of Gods heavenly kingdom are after death prepared for the godly. Shall we
therefore say, the joys of heaven are death? Besides the smart and anguish
which afflicts the soul when she is driven from her body, death in it self
is the separation of the soul from the body, with privation of sense and life
in the body, and resolution of the same into dust. The joining of the soul
with the body was a most wonderful work of God in his creation, and
consequently Genesis 1. v. 31.
very good, by the plain words of Moses. Then is the dissolution of the soul
from the body repugnant to that which is very good, and of force evil; as
being contrary to good. The making of man's body from Genesis 2. v. 7.
the dust of the ground was likewise very good, by the same witness of Moses.
Then the returning of the body to dust again must be an evil unto man,
destroying that excellent work of God. And if sense, motion and action be
blessings of God on man's body, then the bereauing of these must needs be
curses in their kind. Yea since life was no small favor of God bestowed on
man, when he made him a living soul; and (as all the rest in their degrees)
was very good: then death which is the privation of life, is the taking of
Gods good blessing from man's body, which cannot choose but be a curse. It is
recompensed, you will say, with a better blessing, even with the bliss of
heaven.] The soul is, but not the body, so long as death prevails on it.
And this blessing consquent is no way pertinent to the nature of death, no not
as the godly do suffer it; but it is a fruit of Gods favor reserved for the
faithful in Christ Jesus, who remoueth death from their souls, and will do
the like from their bodies, when the time comes. Without death, you think,
we can not come to Gods presence.] And why is that, but because the corruption
of sin dwells in our bodies, which is not meet for the kingdom of God? 1.
Cor. 15.
Corruption cannot inherit incorruption. And whence came this corruption, but
from sin? and consequently the displeasure of God against sin, both brought
corruption to our bodies, and for corruption keeps our bodies under death,
excluded for the time from his heavenly kingdom.

Yet this is no proper curse to the bodies of the Saints] Had you but once
declared what you meant by proper and true curses, six lines had long since
leuelled this question: but you according to the height of your skill, that
never troubled your self but with a few fond conceits, and some unsettled
sentences, trace to and fro sometimes with no curse in any sort, sometimes with
no true curse, and sometimes with no curse properly, and will not be drawn to
step one foot farther. And though I have no cause to how your timber, that
you leave ragged, yet for their sakes that would see the truth, I am content
to square your work.

Of Gods curse I must say as I did of Gods wrath; (for the wrath and curse of
God are all one in effect) it notes either Gods detestation of sin, or his
commination to sin, or which is most to this case, Gods indignation or
pnnishment provided for sin, or executed on sinners. For as man is said to
bless with his mind, mouth, or hand, when he means, prays, or does good
to any; so is he said to curse by thought, word, or deed, when he desires,
utters, or works evil to any. God is likewise said to curse in soul, when
he detesteth and hates evil; in voice, when he pronounces or threatens
evil; in judgment, when he decrees or inflicteth evil. To show how
execrable sin is to God, the Scripture says, these things God Pro. 6. v. 16.
HATES, and his soul ABHORS them. And so, the way of the wicked is Pro. 15.
ABOMINABLE to the Lord. The threats of God against sin, and his plagues upon
sin, are every where extant in the Law, and chiefiy in the 27. and 28. of
Deuteronomie; where not only the greatest sins are namely and all sins in
the close generally accursed, but the manifold plagues of this life persuing
the states, the bodies, and souls of sinners are numbered. August. contra
Faustu^ Manicheum. li. 14. ca. ^.
Maledictum est omne peccatum, sieve ipsum quodsit, vt sequatur supplicium, sieve
ipsum supplicium, quod al^o modo vocatur peccatum, quia sit ex peccato.
Accursed is all sin, says Austen, as well the deed, which provoke
punishment, as the punishment it self, which in another sense is called sin,
because it comes from sin. The plagues and curses of sin extending as
far as sinners have any parts, of which they consist, as body and soul; or
places, in which they may be, as here so in hell; or pertinents, which they may
have or need for the ease and use of this life; I called in my conclusion,
external, corporal, spiritual and eternal plagues or punishments of sin.

Contrary to cursing is blessing, which is good purposed, promised, o^
performed to obedience, as Cursing is evil intended, threatened, or prepared
for disobedience; and so by the one Contrary we may rightly measure the other:
yea the names of benediction and malediction, which is blessing and cursing,
are derived from bonum and malum, good and evil. And therefore, as we conceive
good and evil, to proceed from the bounty or Justice of God, so must we
reckon his blessings and curses to be. Matthew. 10.
None is good but only God; that is all true goodness is naturally,
supreamely, infinitely, and unchangeably in God, as likewise all true
blessedness is. Neither can any thing have any degree of true goodness or
blessedness, but only by deriuation from God, and by participation with God.
Capable of God, that is of the holiness, and happiness, that is in God, and
comes from God, are no Creatures but men and Angels; since only they have
cognition and fruition of his true goodness and blessedness. To omit the
Elect Angels, that have their measure of heavenly light and power, grace, and
love, righteousness and holiness, joy and security in the continual
presence and service of God; when God decreed to reveal him self to Man, he
gave him a reasonable Soul endued with understanding and will, to discern,
and desire the goodness, that is in God, and by loving and obeying Gods
righteousness, to have Communion with his blessedness. The better to declare
him self to man, God gave him a Body to be quickened by his Soul with Life,
sense, and motion, as a Tabernacle for the Soul to dwell and work therein;
and made heaven and earth, and all the furniture thereof, for the use, delight,
and safeguard of his Body; thereby to assure Man of his exceeding care for man,
and bounty toward Man; which were not only wonderful causes of thanks, but
evident proofs of greater favor, and honor reserved for him in the heavens,
if he loved and served the Author, and giver of these earthly things. The
integrity then, and safety; the sanitie, Actiuitie, and perpetuity of man's
Body free from all dangers, distempers, decases, diseases, and death: The
excellent beauty, plenty, utility, and variety of the Creatures serving
man's use, obeying man's Rule, and increasing man's delight, were all the
marvelous blessings of God on man, not only testifying to him the wisdom,
power, and glory of the Creator by their natures, properties and forces, but
leading him by the eyes, ears, and all other senses to the admiring,
embracing, and honoring of that great and mighty Lord, that by these pledges
proposed himself, with all his spiritual and unspeakable riches, to be the
spouse of man's Soul, and reward of his love. He therefore that denies or
doubts these to have been the blessings of God on man, when he first made
man, and so to remain at this present; is an unthankful and wicked abuser,
and despiser of Gods goodness, and bounty toward him self and all mankind.

The gifts of God on the Soul of Man were far worthier then those corporal
and external blessings. For God gave unto Man reason and understanding, to
behold the greatness, and withal the goodness of God, and free will, to
cleave fast unto him, without preferring any Creature before him, or matching
any thing with him; as likewise affections to inflame the heart with burning and
vnceasing love; Man feeling no defect, nor finding any impediment in that
innocence, tranquillity, facility and consonancie of all the powers and
parts of the Soul and body, to the knowledge, love, and service of God. But
none of the gifts and graces of God, either outwardly provided for man, or
naturally ingraffed in man's Body or Soul, did make Man truly blessed. For had
he been truly blessed by these, he could not so wretchedly have fallen from
these into the Seas of miseries, and heaps of curses, with which he was after
for sin overwhelmed. Wherefore we must resolve, that as God is only truth,
because he is by Nature immutable; and only blessedness, because no evil can
approach him, so no blessing can rightly be called true, but that which is
perpetual; nor full, but that which is free from all misery. Saint Austen
says wisely. August. de Trinitate. li. ^3 cap. 8.
Nullo modo poterit esse vita veraciter beata, nisi fuerit sempiterna. By no
means may any life be TRVELY blessed, except it be EVERLASTING. And again,
August. in Psalm. 123.
Veritas immortalis est, veritas incommutabilis est. Truth is eternal, truth
is unchangeable. And so Ambrose Ambros. de ijs qui mysterijs initiantur.
Creaturae non potest esse veritas, sed species, quae facile soluitur, atque
mutatur. There can be no truth, but a show in the Creature, which is easily
lost, and changed. And therefore Austen expounds August. de Trinitate. li. 13
cap. 9.
beatam vitam stabilem, id est, veram; a steadfast, that is a true blessed life.
For how can that be thought a true blessing, which may end in everlasting
wretchedness? True blessings then there are none, but such as join us to God,
who is the true fountain of all true blessing, that without any separation or
defection from him, we may be partakers of him.

By true blessing we shall best understand what true cursing is: for as EVIL
is no contrary nature to GOOD, but only the defect or privation of good; so
there is no true curse to us, but that which bereaueth us of our true blessing.
August. de Moribus MAnicheorum. cap. 4.
Malum non secundum essentiam, sed secundum priuationem rectissime dicitur.
Evil is most rightly said to be no essence, but the privation of good. To
cleave fast to God, who is only and wholly our good, is the true blessing of
men and angels; and consequently to be severed from God, and to loose all
communion with him, is the true curse of men and angels. The true blessings of
God bestowed on his children, though they be indeed infinite, yet may they be
reduced to these three sums, according to the times wherein they were, are,
and shall be performed: that is, TO THE LOVE of God freely affourded us before
the world, whereby we were elected and adopted in Christ Jesus our Savior; TO
THE LIKENESS of God, which we have in this world, where we are conformed to
the image of his Son by the working of his Spirit, our sins being remitted,
that divided us from God, and our hearts sanctified with the faith and love of
his truth; and to THE IIFE of God, which after this world shall be revealed
and imparted unto us in the heavens, where shall be perfect blessedness without
want of any good, or fear of any evil. The privation of these three blessings
brings three evils, which are maine and true curses to the wicked. F^st, the
dislike of God refusing them, the sting of sin defiling them, the sting of
death excluding them from all joy and peace, r^st and ease of soul and body
for ever.

Apply this to Christ and his members, and we shall presently find by the
rules of our Christian faith, how far they agree to either. No true curse can
be ascribed to Christ, which shall sever him from God, without apparent
impiety: for neither the favor of Gods favor toward his manhood, nor the
fullness of grace and truth in his soul, nor the steadfast and most assured
expectation of everlasting joy and glory set before him, even in his greatest
afflictions and temptations, may be doubted of by any that will retain the
name of a Christian; besides the perpetual and personal union of his manhood
with his Godhead, to which was consequent such a communion with God, and
fruition of God, as no elect man or angel ever had, or can have. Wherefore you
must either defend, that the true curse of God did not sever him from God, but
that one and the same nature in him might be truly blessed, and yet truly
accursed of God at one and the same time; which are monsters meet for your
doctrine; or else you must wholly forbear to aff^rme any true curse of Christ,
that shall separa^e him from God; and what other true curses you will attribute
to him, I would gladly hear. The like, though in far less measure, I yield
to the membe^s of Christ: for since they were before all worlds beloved,
elected, and Ephesians 1.
blessed with all spiritual blessings in Christ, and the 2 Timothy 2.
foundation of God stands sure, having this Seal, the Lord knows who are
his; yea the Romans 11.
gifts and calling of God are without rep^ntance. And the Apostle is fully
persuaded, that Romans 8.
neither death, nor life, nor angels, ^r principalities, nor things present,
nor things future, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature shall be able
to separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus; but that, whom
God did Romans 8.
predestinate, those he called; and whom he called, those he justified; and
whom he justified, those he glorified: I see no true curse, no not sin it
self, that can fasten on Christ's members to their destruction; but howsoever
Ephesians. 2.
by nature they were the children of (Gods) wrath, as well as others, yet by
grace they are saved. and Romans 8.
all things shall wo^ for the best to them that love God, and are loved of him.
They may want the^e g^ft, and graces for a time, and so not feel the fruits of
Gods election and voc^tion, but with God they are truly blessed, because they
are surely settled in hi^ favor, and fore-appointed to be heirs of Salvation,
though they lie cens^ed (...) (...) for a while in the mass of Adams
condemnation. The love and (...) then of God is the original of all true
blessing, and since that is vnmouea^le toward the ^lect, how much soever they
be sometimes plunged by sin and Satan into fears and doubts of their
salvation, all that is to humble them, and not to destroy them; and with God,
who is truth it self, they are truly blessed, as being adopted in Christ,
though in man's judgment, and even to themselves, they seem never so much
accursed.

What curses, you ask then, may be on the godly?] Gods love, which is the
ground of all true blessing, can not vary toward them; it is everlasting and
immutable like himself. All other blessings, save this, they may want for a
season in this world, as before they are lightened and called to the knowledge
of God, they have no blessing in them more then the very Reprobate have. After
they are engrassed in Christ, they may be tos^ed and turmoyled with the very
same e^ernall and corporal plagues and punishments that the wicked are, and
often times with greater and tha^-per; but then they are supported with inward
grace and comfort, which others are not; and when by ignorance, fear, or
infirmity they fall, they shall not perish. Where then in the Curses of God
inflicted on the wicked in this world and the next, three things must be
marked; their D^PRIVANCE of his bles^ings of all sorts, their COHERENCE
together, and CONTINVANCE for ever; the godly communicate with the wicked in
some part of the first, that is, they may be sequestered from such external and
corporal blessings as this life requires, but of spiritual they can not
utterly be dep^ued, because they must be John. 3.
regenerated, and Coloss. 3.
renewed in the inward man to the Image of God, and Ephesians. 1.
sealed by the holy spirit of promise, that they may be partakers of Christ
here in this world, Ephesians. 1.
in whom they have Redemption, even the Remission of sins according to the
riches of his grace. In the rest they may not communicate with the wicked. For
where the Curses of God do FOLLOVV one another upon the Reprobate, and abide
for ever in the highest degree, from this the godly are wholly free, as Galat. 1.
DELIVERED by the mercies of God in Christ from this present evil world, and
1 Thessalonians. 1.
from the wrath to come. If then we be saved from these things by Christ, how
much more must Christ him self be saved from them, before he could save
others? So that Christ, as I said at first, by submitting him self to a part
of the curse of the Law, which depriueth us of all earthly and bodily
blessings, and of life it self, quenched the whole Curse of the Law, and by
his shameful, wrongful, and painful death quited us from everlasting death,
which was the just reward of our sins.

You say if by the Resurrection of Christ, Defenc. page 72. li. 11.
the Nature of death were changed, then till Christ was risen, death was a
punishment to the faithful themselves. I wonder what meaning there is in this
Argument. As well you may say that none were saved till Christ was risen.]
Wonder then at your own conceits reasons and Authorities. For if the nature of
Death were changed, as you suppose it was, since it was first inflicted on
Adam, I asked you how and when? before the change you do not doubt, but it was
a punishment, you must grant, to the godly; for Christ never changed the
Nature of Death to the wicked. Then if the change were made by Christ's dying
and rising from the dead; how think you does it not follow upon this
confession, that death, BEFORE it was changed in the godly by Christ's
Resurrection, was a punishment even to the godly? And to this end you bring the
Catechism in this very Section. Death which BEFORE was a punishment is now by
Christ become a vantage.] If death were never but a vantage to the godly, even
when it was first inflicted, then the change, that you dream to be made of
death in the Godly, is but a fancy. If NOW it be so, which BEFORE it was not;
then BEFORE, what else could it be to the godly, but a punishment of sin? My
Resolution was and is, that Christ was first promised by Gods own mouth,
Genes. 3.
to bruize the Serpents head, before death was inflicted on Adam and his
offspring. And therefore the punishment of man's sin following could extend no
farther in the Elect, then to the death of the Body; unless you will make Gods
punishment repugnant to his promise of Christ made before to his Elect; which
were to charge God with Inconstancy. And therefore either the death of the
Body was never any punishment of sin in Adam, which is repugnant to the
Scriptures, and the full consent of all Divines, old and new, or else it
rests still the same to the Elect, which it was at first, when it was
inflicted on them in the person of their first Father. Indeed the promise of
Christ to the faithful brake of the sequence of eternal death, which in the
wicked is coherent to the death of their Bodies; and that made God in his
Judicial sentence pronounced against Adams sin to comprise no more, but
Adams return to dust, for that he meant no more to his Elect, though he would
suffer death to have his full force against the Bodies and Souls of the wicked
both in this world and in the next for ever.

As for the Salvation of the faithful before Christ's coming in the flesh, I
see not which way that should be endangered by their afflictions in this life.
It is written of Lazarus dying before Christ, that Luke. 16.
in his life time he received evil, and therefore after death, he was
comforted. So that their chasticement in this life, which was a moderate and
fatherly correction and punishment of their sins, could be no impediment to
their salvation, but work rather in them, that were patient in their troubles,
as it does in us, an 2. Cor. 4.
excellent and eternal weight of glory. For in that the Judgment of God
began here in this life with them, their humbling themselves under the mighty
hand of God with true Repentance of their sins and full assurance by faith
that in the promised Seed their sins should be pardoned, caused God of his
mercy to Iam. 4.
turn their ^eauinesse into joy, and in 1. Pet. 5.
due time to exalt them.

Defenc. pa. 72. li. 30.
Further you except against me touching Innocents and Martyrs executions, who I
say are most blessed.] If you mean their Souls are most blessed, I said as
much before you: if you respect their patience and love in laying down their
lives for the truth, I make no doubt the death of Gods Saints is precious in
his sight. But if the suffering of death were a blessing and advantage, as you
would have it, it were no such thanks with God to taste of his blessings for
his name sake. The greatness of their reward shows the sha^pnesse of their
conflict with the sting and smart of death; which because they refuse not for
Christ's cause, their patience is the more precious in Gods sight: but this
does not prove the corruption of their bodies turned to dust to be any
blessing; but rather an enemy, that must be destroyed, before their bodies
shall enjoy the true blessing of immortal glory, that is reserved for them.
Defenc. page 72. li 36.
The holy men are in truth most glorious and blessed in them.] If you speak
of their bodi^s, you speak falsely and directly against the Scripture, which
expres^ely says, They are 1. Cor. 15.
sow^n in corruption and dishonor, but they shall be raised in incorruption
and dishonor; and what can be more repugnant to the truth, or more
reproachful to the resurrection from the dead, then to say, that corruption in
the bodies of the Saints is most glorious and blessed.

Defenc. page 72. li., 8.
The Saints and Martyrs can not be properly cursed, and properly bl^ssed too in
any measure.] Can you see that in the members of Christ, and can you not see so
much in Christ himself? You defend with might and maine, that Christ was
properly and truly accursed; and that he was also truly and properly blessed,
except you will be wor^e then a Turk, you may not deny. For even his manhood
was personally joined with his Godhead, and more abundantly blessed then any
Martyr can be, as having in him the fullness of blessing for him self, and us
all. How hangs then this not only monstrous, but impious Assertion of yours
together, that the Soul of Christ was truly and properly most abundantly
blessed, and most properly cursed at one and the same instant? You will come in
with your two countenances and conditions, his own and ours; but in vain do
you salve a manifest contrariety and impictie with countenances. Christ was
truly accursed in no condition or countenance, since he was most blessed in
himself, and the spring of all blessing to us.

Defenc. page 73. l. 1.
The Souls of the Martyrs are not blessed, unless their bodies be blessed
also, and free from the true cur^ although you seem to den^e this point.] Of
the TRVE curse ^aide on the bodies of Martyrs, I spoke never a word, and
therefore that is no uncouth Assertion of mine, as your phrase is, but an
impudent fiction of yours, that think best to bel^e the truth, when you
cannot otherwise prevail against it. I said not a wo^d mo^e then Saint Austen
said before me. August. contra ^austum Man^h. li. 14. cap. 12.
Maledictus omnis moriens. Accursed is every one that dies. And when the
godly are so straightened, that they must either commit Idolatry, or suffer
Martyrdom, even in that case of Martyrs, Saint Austen says. El^gendum est
maledictum in corpori^ morte, quo maledicto and ipsum corpus in Resurrectione
liberabitur, deuit andum autem maledictum in animae morte, ne cum suo corpore
in aeterno igne damnetur. A Christian, when these two are proposed, must choose
the curse of a bodily death, from which curse the body shall be freed in the
Resurrection, and he must shun the curse of the death of the Soul, least
that be together with the body condemned to everlasting fire. And to prove
this to be, non Anicularis mal^dictio, an old wifes curse, as the Manichees
called it, but a prophetical prediction, he gives sound reasons to all, that
list not to monk and elude the truth as you do. Contra Paustum li. 14. ca. ^.
Morsipsa ex maledic^o. Death it self came from the curse, that was laid on
all mankind for sin. Ibidem.
Maledictum est omne peccatum, si^e ipsum quod sit, vt sequatur supplicium,
si^c ipsum supplicium, quod al^o modo vocatur peccatum, qu^a fit ex peccato.
Accursed is all sin, whether it b^e the fact deserving punishment, or the
punishment it self, which is after a sort called sin, because it is cau^d by
sin. Which words though you afterward idly abuse, yet are they sound and
consonant to the Scriptures. Of sin there is no question, but that is in it
self truly accursed (as being the root and cause of all Gods curses upon men
and Angels) where it is not remitted; and howsoever of mercy God does pa^don
it unto his Elect, yet he hates their sins in such sort, that either sin
must die in them by true and hearty repentance, or they must perish with it.
For to the impenitent no sins are pardoned; Luke. 13.
Except ye repent, says our Savior, ye shall all perish likewise

As sin is accursed, so all punishment of sin, says Austen, is accursed;
meaning till it be released, and no longer a punishment of sin. Which he
avouches not of the wicked only, whose punishment is perpetual, and
therefore truly and properly a curse, but of all the godly, when they suffer
for their sins. August. de Trinitate. li. 4. cap. 12.
We, says Austen, came to death by sin, Christ by righteousness: and
therefore where our death is the punishment of sin, his death is the
sacrifice for sin. And that the death of our bodies is hateful to God, even
as our sin is, he resolves in these words. August. contra Faustum. li. 14.
cap. 6.
Nisi Deus odisset peccatum, and mortem nostram, non ad eam suscipiendam atque
delendam filium suum mitteret. Except God had hated sin, and also death in
us, he would never have sent his Son t^ undertake, and destroy our death. For
so much the more willingly God gives us immortality (of our bodies) which
shall be revealed with Christ's coming, how much the more mercifully he hates
our death, which hung on the cross, when Christ died. Here you may learn that
the bodies of Martyrs are so acceptable to God, that he hates death, which
detaineth them in dust; and that the love, which he bears to the one, is the
cause why he will destroy the other, as an enemy to them, whom he loves, and
therefore justly hated of him: but in the mean time, how false is this reason,
which you so much stand on? God in his secret and everlasting counsel loves
the souls and bodies of his Saints, as being the 1. Cor. 6.
members of Christ, and 1. Cor. 6.
temples of his holy spirit: therefore he hates neither sin in their
souls, nor death in their bodies. Nay rather the more he loves the one, the
more he hates the other, and sent his Son to destroy both sin and death in
his elect, as the Enemies, that hinder and defer the true bliss promised to
his servants.

Defenc. pa. 73. li. 7.
You say we must call things by those names which God first allotted them. That
I deny, if God since evidently has altered them. My rule had more reason in
it, then you do comprehend. For if it be written of Adam in his innocence,
that God Genesis 2. v. 19.
brought (all living creatures) unto man to see how he could call them, and
how soever the man named the living creature, so was the n^me thereof; how much
more shall it be verified of Gods wisdom, Ia^. 1.
With whom is no change, that he Acts. 15.
knew all his works from the beginning of the world, and therefore 1. Pet 1.
the word of the Lord abides for ever, that he may be Rom 3.
justified in whatsoever he says? [but God, you say, has made the alteration
himself.] or else your conceit deceives you. For God has not revoked the
general judgment, which he gave upon all men for sin, Ge^es. 3.
Dust thou art and to dust thou shall return, but he has performed his
promise made before he inflicted this punishment, that the Seed of the woman
should bruize the Serpents head. And therefore there is no change made by God,
as you imagine, but he qualified his sentence at the first pronouncing of it on
all his elect, even as it stands to this day. And were there that addition
since made by God, which you untruly dream of, Yet Saint Austen G^d wor^th
good by ^uill.
tells you, that alters not the name of punishment first imposed on all,
but shows Gods goodness toward his own. August. de c^uitate D^i. li. 13.
cap. 6.
Whatsoever it is in those that die, which with bitter pain takes away sense,
by religious and faithful enduring it, it increases the mer^te of patience,
Non aufert vocabulum poenae, it takes not away the name of punishment. His
firm resolution is. Ibidem.
Wherefore as touching the death of the body, that is, the separation of the
soul from the body, when such as die suffer it, Nulli bona est, it is good to
no man. And noting the use, that God makes thereof in crowning his Saints,
with as ample words, as you have any; he resolutely concludes. Ibidem. li. 13.
cap. 7.
Mors ergo non ideo bonum videri debet, quia in tantam vtilitatem non vi sua,
sed diuina opitulatione conuersa est. Death the^ OUGHT NOT TO BE THOUGHT GOOD,
because by Gods mercy, and not by any force of his own, it is turned to so
great utility. And this assertion you and your adherents must yield unto,
least you rather convince your selves, then that worthy pillour of Christ's
church to be in an error. For the ground that he stands on, is sure. God
turns evil to a good use, and will you therefore deny evil to be evil,
because God uses it well? to how many good and blessed purposes does God use
the devil? and shall the devil by your doctrine now cease to be a devil?
what excellent effects does God work by the sins of the faithful? shall we
therefore not call them, nor account them sins? you be clean out of your
byas good Sir, when you come in with your changes made by God, to alter the
names or natures of things that be evil.

Defenc. page 73. li. 10.
Afflictions and death, which originally and Naturally were punishments for
sin, and so are still in the wicked, the same to the godly are since changed,
and now not punishments nor curses.] To wise men there is enough said; to
bablers, who will still talk they know not what, nothing is enough. The
Scriptures and Fathers may not be set aside to give way to your follies.
Daniell confessing the sins of himself, and of his people Israel, plainly
says. Dan. 9.
Therefore the Curse is powered upon us, written in the Law of Moses the servant
of God, because we have sinned against him. Baruc made the same Barue. 1. and 3.
confession during the Captivity. Saint John in his Revelation, of the City
of God now brought to the presence of the Lamb says, Revel. 22.
There shall be no more Curse; meaning amongst the faithful, as there was
before. For the wicked then shall be most deeply accursed. Saint Austen
learnedly and largely writing of the miseries of man's life says. Augu^t. de
ciuitate D^i. li. 22 ca. 22.
Quot and quantis poenis agitetur genus humanum, quae non ad malitiam
nequitiamque iniquorum, sed ad conditionem pertinent miseriamque communem, quis
vllo sermon digerit, quis vlla cogitatione comprehendit? With how many and how
great punishments mankind is persued, which pertain not to the malice and
lewdness of the wicked, but to the common condition and calamity of man, what
tongue c^n express, what heart can comprehend? And repeating many particulars,
which there may be seen, he concludes: Ibidem.
Satis apparet humanum genus ad luendas miseriarum poenas esse damnatum. It
appears sufficiently, that mank^de is condemned to endure the punishments of
miseries. And lest you should fly to your shift of improper speeches, as your
manner is, S. Austen exquisitly discusseth and resolves this question that
these miseries and afflictions come from the just judgment of God for the
punishment of sin, though withal God mean to recall his own from sin.
August. in expositione epistolae ad Romanos inc^ata.
So great is the constancy of Gods justice, that when SPIRITVALL and ETERNAL
punishment is released to the penitent, yet CORPORAL afflictions and torments,
with which we have known many Martyrs to be exercised, and lastly DEATH it
self, which our nature d s^rued by si^, is remitted to none. Quod ^nim iusti
homines and pi^ tamen exsoluunt ista supplicia, de i^sto Dei iudicio venire
credendum est. And that even just and godly men do abide these punishments, we
must believe it to proceed from the just judgment of God. S. Peter plainly
shows, that even those v^rie sufferings which the righteous endure, pertain^
to the judgment of God. Neither was S. Au^ten ignorant of Gods good purpose in
afflicting his Saints, but he therein avouches as I do, that justice is
tempered with mercy. August. de vera re^igione ca. 15.
Iustitiae pulchritudo est cum benignitatis gratia concordans, vt quoniam
bonorum inferiorum dulcedine decepti sumus, amaritudine poenarum ^rudiamur. It
is the beauty of Gods justice conjoined with the grace of his clemency, that
because we were deceived with the sweetness of our inferior pleasures, we
should be chastened with the bitterness of punishments. Which he specifieth in
the body of man: that the Ibidem.
body of man, which before sin was in his kind most excellent, after sin
became weak and sub^cted to death, though this were the just revenge of sin,
yet it shows more of Gods mercy, than of his severity. Consult all your
Consorts in this Realm, and send for help beyond the seas, as you did in
making your Defense, and you shall never be able to overthrow this position of
S. Austens, which is the very point, that at first I maintained.

And because you are so pert with the public doctrine of this Realm, look
not in your Catechism provided for boys, which yet you had need more exactly
to learn, but in the book of Common prayer advisedly considered of by the
whole Clergy, and confirmed by the full authority of Prince and Parliament to
be used in all the Churches of this Realm, and you shall there see the same
confession made by the mouths and hearts of all the godly in this land, since
the profession of true religion here e^tablished. The Church of England in her
public prayers to God, where she may neither faulter nor dissemble, thus
makes he^ humble, but true petitions unto God: Lord we beseech thee, that we
which are justly punished for our offenses, may be ^
m^rcifully del^ered by thy goodness. So again: The f^rth Sunday after th.
(...).
God which know etc. grant to us the ^e. l^h of b^die and soul, that al^
those things which we suffer for sin, by thy help m^ may well overcome. And
amongst the prayers after the Letanie in time of dearth and famine: Grant, that
the scarsitie and dearth (WHICH WE IVSTIY SVFFER FOR OUR INIQVITIE) may
through thy goodness be turned into cheapnesse and plenty. And likewise there
for fair weather: We humbly beseech thee, that although we for our iniquities
have worthily deserved this plague of rain and waters, yet upon our true
repentance thou will send us such weather, whereby we may receive the fruits of
the earth in due season, and learn both by thy punishment TO AMEND OUR ^IVES,
and for thy clemency to give thee praise. See you here the faith and
confession of the Church of England: That we are justly PVNISHED for our
offenses, with extern^ll and temporal afflictions. And by those punishments we
should learn to repent and amend our lives, that God of his goodness may
release us of the Plagues which we have worthily d^erued for our iniquities,
and justly suffer for our sins. Gods purpose is to amend us you will say, and
not to punish us.] The Church of England ^eleeueth that God does both. He does
pun^sh even his own for example of his just i^gement yet not to destruction,
as he does the wicked, but to rep^ntance, that is, to the acknowledging and
amending our mi^deeds. [This you think is not properly pun^shment.] It is not
properly vengeance, because the measure is tolerable, and the purpose is
favorable. [Only Christ, you say, suffered the whole proper punishment of our
sins. In Christ the measu^e of puni^hment was tolerable, not exceeding his
strength and patience; and the purpose of God in punishing him was ^arre more
honorable; to wit, for the full satisfa^tion of Gods justice by the innocence
and dignity of Christ's person for the clensing and saving our souls and
bodies, for the dest^oying of Sa^ans power and force by the rule of
righteousness, and for the exalting of Christ's manhood to be the Lord in
heaven and earth over quick and dead. So that pun^shment in the wicked is to
de^ruction, in the godly to Correction and E^endation, in Christ to
satisfaction and humil^ation, before the glory of Gods kingdom was laid on
his shoulders.

You must remember, Defenc. page 7^. li 20.
your own place of A^sten: Mal^dictum est omne peccatum. The c^rse all sin,
which is two s^ld, either that which we commit against Gods la^, or else the
very punishment of that sin.] You should remember to vnde^stand first S.
Aust^ns Latin, and then S. Austens meaning. MALEDICTVM is not ^eere a
Substantive, as you mistake it, but an Adiect^e, as appears by S. Austens
using in this very sentence, but the line before, the Masculine gender
Maledictus, to which this is joined with a Conjunction Copulative; and his
al^ering the case with a Preposition, the very word before, where he uses the
Substantive: for thus stand his words; August. contra ^ustum (...). li. 14. ca.
4.
Hoc est enim mortuus est, quod maledictus, quoniam mors ipsa ex maledicto est,
and maledictum est omne peccatum. D^ad is all one with accursed, because death
comes from the curse, and a^cursed is all sin; and not as you say, The
curse is all sin. The words next before contradict it: for death, which is
the punishment of sin, S. Austen says proceeds from the curse; and by that
concludes it to be accursed, but not the curse it self, whence death comes:
for that which comes, and that whence it comes, must be different. Neither
does S. Austen mean, that the act of sin committed by man is the curse of
God, since that must be ^omewhat in God, besides the punishment which
proceeds from God; but sin committed by man is hated and d^tested by Gods
holiness, and that hatred and reiection of sin, which is in God, is the
first curse of sin. And so S. Austen expounds himself: Ibid ca. 6.
Quid ergo mirum, si maledictum est Deo, quod Deus od^? What marvel then, if
that be accursed to God, which God hates? So that the hatred and detestation,
which God in his holiness has of sin, and of the person for sin, whereby
his justice decrees vengeance on the sinner, is the curs^ that is consequent
to sin: and so the word EXECRABLE signifies one detested, hated, and
re^ected. Accursed is sometimes taken for worthy of the curse, and deserving
the same, and so may the godly be said to be accursed in themselves, that is,
provoking and deserving the curse, though in mercy God spare them, and hold
them blessed in Christ, who are beloved for Christ^s sake. The punishment of
sin, which is most just with God, is a curse to the sufferer, that is,
g^ieuous and hateful to him, as sin was hateful to God when it was
committed. And so much the word MAIVM, whence maledictus comes, signifies in
the Scriptures, that is, evil, or displeasing to God or man. For as sin,
which man commits, is displeasing, that is, evil in the eye of God, though
the doer delight therein; so punishment, which man suffers for sin, is
g^ieuous, that is, evil to the sense of the sufferer, though it be most
righteous with God, that is the Inflicter.

Defenc. page 7^. li. 22.
Now your Testimonies Page 96. do mean Christ was not made a Curse or sin
the first way, that is he was not in himself sinful nor hated; they deny not
the second, that he was How Christ was made a Curse for us.
made the proper punishment, or Sacrifice for sin.] You reach beyond your
strength, when you come to interpret Fathers. And no marvel, for you that
understand not your Catechism rightly, how should you intermeddle with
expounding those, whom you never read, nor regarded? and that will well appear
by your exposition in this place. What Christ was naturally and continually in
himself, he can not be said to be made that for us. To be MADE imports a
change, which was not before, and FOR US excludes the respect of himself, and
notes as much as for our good, or for our sakes. So Christ when he was true
God, and with his Father from everlasting, was John. 1.
made flesh, not for himself, but for us, Esaias. 9.
unto us, says the Prophet, a child is borne, and unto us a Son is given.
Even so, when Christ 2. Cor. 5.
knew no Sin, he was made sin for us; and when he was the promised Seed,
in which Galat. 3.
all Nations should be blessed, he was made a Curse for us. When then the
Scriptures or Fathers observe, what Christ was made for us, they imply that
before, and of himself he was otherwise. Now of Saint Paul's words, Christ was
made a Curse for us, Cyrill and Epiphanius bring two different expositions. The
one, which is Cyrils, that Christ was Cyrill. in Defensio. 1. Anathematis. ad
Ori^ntales.
not truly accursed, but reputed amongst the unrighteous, being indeed just;
and as his Condemnation by men did acquit us with God, so his being reputed
and esteemed by men amongst the wicked and accursed, did clear us from the
Curse before God. The other, which Epiphanius follows, that as God promised
by his Prophet, saying, Ose. 13.
o Death, I will be thy Death, o hell, I will be thy destruction: So Christ was
Epiphanius contra Marci^: here is. 42.
made a Curse to the Curse, that is a dissoluing of the Curse, and a blessing
to all that believed in him. To both these you answer, Christ was not made
sin in himself.] As much to the purpose, as Charing Cross to Cheap side.
For they do not only say, that he was just and blessed in himself, but they
show how Saint Paul's words must be understood, that he was made a Curse amongst
men, that is rejected and condemned as a wicked Malefactor; or that he became a
Curse to the Curse, that is a Destroyer of the Curse due to us. Neither of
these can you refute, and therefore your Reason drawn from these words of the
Apostle, is not worth a rotten rush to conclude any thing for your purpose; and
either of their expositions having two parts; a Negative, and an affirmative,
you clean miss their meaning in both, and say they deny not, but Christ was
made a Defenc. page 73. li. 25.
Sacrifice for sin.

Now if you remember Saint Austens words, on which you would seem to stand,
you shall see two Conclusions directly drawn against two points of your new
found Doctrine. For if nothing can be truly accursed in Man but the committing
of sin, and just suffering for sin, as you concea^e Austens words, then
Christ could neither way be truly accursed. For first Esa. 53. 1. Pet. 2^
he did no sin; and committing none, he could not be accur^ed by the guilt of
our sin, as you teach he was. Secondly, the punishment of sin is not truly
accu^sed, till it be justly deserved. But Christ was just and holy, as the
Scriptures avouch, even when he suffered for us. He 1. Pet. 3.
suffered the just for the unjust; and Act. 3.
ye denied the holy one and Just. Therefore Christ was not truly accursed by
his suffering for sin. And you your self before you be ware, confess thus
much, whiles you would avoid these Fathers, and uphold the Apostles words as
pertinent to your purpose. For you grant the Apostles meaning to be, that
Christ was made a Sacrifice for sin; and consequently that he could neither
be defiled with our sin, nor accursed for our sin. For a Sacrifice though
it be slain, and bear the sin of others; yet is it not only clear from
sin, but holy to God, and accepted for sin. If the Sacrifices, which were
but figures of the true Sacrifice, were neither defiled nor accursed, though
they were slain for sin, how much more then shall the death of the true
Sacrifice be in deed undefiled and blessed with God, for which all our sins
are remitted, and our Curses abolished.

And this iustineth both Cyrils and Epiphanius exposition. Christ was ^.
not in truth a curse, or sin, says Cyrill; but he was called by those
names, that he might abolish the cur^e and sin. For so are Sacrifices in the
Scriptures called sin, which abolish sin, and the curse for sin. The same
reason may serve for Epiphanius words. Christ ^.
took away the curse for our sin, when he fastened himself to the Cross, as
a voluntary Sacrifice for sin: and so much Ambrose expresses. God Ambros.
in (...). ed Galat. cap. 3.
delivering Christ, that was there to willing, unto death for those, who were
under the curse of the Law, made him a curse after the same manner, that a
sacrifice offered for sin, is in the Law called sin. Thus whiles you would
undertake to answer these Fathers, you have confes^ed, that not only they
refused your hateful exposition of the Apostles words, but even refute your
sinful doctrine, that Christ was truly defiled with our sins, and truly
accursed for our sins, when they acknowledge Christ to be the true sacrifice
for sin, and thereby to purge our sins, and abolish our curse, being made
of God a death to death, and a destruction to hell. Nazianzene says, Nazianz
super illud quum consumm^sset Jesus hoss^me.
Christ not only received on him all absurd and odious names, but that, which
is most absurd of all others, he was called sin it self, and THE CVRSE IT
SELF, though he were not so. For how should he be sin, that freed us from
sin? or how should he be a curse (indeed) that Redeemed us from the curse of
the Law? Nazianzene admireth Christ's patience and humilite, that endured to
have himself accounted, called, and abused by men as a sinful and accursed
wretch; and says, Christ was content so to be made a curse for us, when indeed
he was none, by the wrong, which he suffered at men's hands, to free us from the
just desert of our sins with God. Which exposition I bring to let the Reader
see, how much the learned and godly Fathers detested your proper and true
curses in the whole manhood of Christ.

But we shall have fresh proof, Defenc. pa. 73.
That your speech was sound, your reason evident, and that I openly perverted
your words.] You were never brought up belike, but where will went for reason,
and speech for proose; you tell us so often of sound and evident reasons, when
you bring nothing besides your naked and absurd fancies. Your speech, you say,
was sound that li. 26.
Christ's dying simply, but as the godly die, might in no sort here be called
a curse.] Take home your As, that you set running abroad to breed a brabble,
and your speech has neither soundness nor sense in it. That Christ died the
same kind of death, which the godly die, I mean the death of the body, (and
not of the soul, nor of the damned) is a plain position of the Scriptures.
Co^inth 4.
We are afflicted, persecuted, and dejected, says Paul; Co^inth 4.
euerte where we bear about in our bodies the dying of the Lord Jesus: and
again, Phil. 3.
I count all things loss, that I may be CONFORMED to his death. Christ laid
down his life for us, says Saint John, and 1. Ioh. 3.
we ought to lay down (our) lives for (our) brethren. Aug^st. in (...). 70.
Ibi mortuus est Christus, vbi tues moriturus: there (or in that part) Christ
died, in which thou shall die. ^.
Hactenus morerentur ad Christi gratiam pertinentes, quatenus pro illis ipse
mortuus est Christus, carnis tantum morte, non SPIRITVS. We are Redeemed, that
such as pertain to Christ's grace should so far forth die, how far forth
Christ himself died for them, that is only the death of the body, and not of
the SPIRIT. So that the godly are conformed and matched with Christ, as
touching the kind of death, which must be common to both; and that being a
punishment and curse on our nature for sin, why is it not truly said of
Saint Austen, that Christ received our curse, that is a bodily death, to free
us from everlasting death, which is the true curse of body and soul?

Defenc. pa. 73. i. 28.
The reason is evident, because the text here does speak and treat of the
curse of the Law against sin: such therefore was Christ's curse, which he
sustained.] The text speaks of the curse of the Law pronounced against us for
violating the Law. That curse the Apostle does not apply to Christ, as you
do; but brings another text of the Law, where the violent and shameful
punishment of hanging on a tree is called a curse. To which since Christ
submitted himself for our ^akes, and so suffering a curse of punishment, he
discharged us from the whole curse of the Law due to us for transgressing.
Wherefore your leaping from the one curse to the other, and from a part to the
whole, is no evident reason, but an evident falsehood, which Chrysostom,
Augustine, Ambrose, Nazianzene, Epiphanius and Cyrill do mightily impugn, and
your self in the end do yield, Christ may be rightly called sin and so a
curse, in that he was a sacrifice for sin and for the curse, which is as
clean contrary to your Assertion here, as holiness and righteousness is to
uncleanness and wickedness.

You Def^nc. page 73. li 36.
openly pervert my words, affirming that I say death here, (that is Christ's
death noted, Galat. 3. verse. 13.) may in no sort be called a curse, when I
expressly even there, and every where say the contrary.] You are very jealous,
that I go about to clear you from your absurd and false conceits without your
consent; but your fear is needless, as your quarrel is causeless. I applied
not HERE to Christ's death, as you most fondly mistake, and inuert my report of
your words, but I refer HERE to the curse there mentioned, observing in you,
that you defended Death (which all the godly have common with Christ, as
touching their bodies,) Conclus. pa. 268 li. 17.
might in no sort here be called a curse, that is the curse, which the Apostle
here names. I am so far from envying your glory in this point, though I pity
your folly, that where you make Christ's Defenc. page 52. li. 1.
Afflictions every one, both small and great, (from the day of his birth to
the hour of his death) to be proper punishments and so true curses and
effects of Gods very wrath in him for our sin; I will add, if you will, that
Christ's hunger, weariness, weeping and growning in spirit (for these are
afflictions brought into man's nature by sin) are likewise defended by you to
be true curses in Christ. Howbeit you shall do well, in all these miseries and
infirmities of our life and nature, to find out Christ's most blessed
humility and charity, not refusing them for our comforts, and leave the
proper and true curses of God for the devil, and his associates.

D^fenc. page 74 li. 1.
Your greatest exception is, that this curse laid on Christ, cannot b^e
understood of the whole curse of God, or of the law.] The exception is such,
that withal the wits and shifts you have, you shall never avoid it. For where
the whole curse of the Law has in it corporal, spiritual, and eternal death
well deserved by sin, and most justly inflicted on sinners, as we see in the
wicked and reprobate, who for sin are subjected to these three deaths or
curses; the two last, which are spiritual and eternal death, you can not
offer to Christ without heretical and diabolical blasphemy; and to draw the
Apostle into that society, were arrogant and impudent impiety. Since then
there are so notorious impediments, why Christ neither did, nor could suffer
the whole curse of the Law denounced to sin, and provided for sin, with
what face and conscience you shift and shuffle this geere, let the Reader
judge, if he have either godly wisdom, to which you appeal; or but humane
sense, from which I do not appeal. Your conueiance is as weak, as your cause
is wicked. Christ, you say, suffered the whole curse of the Law, save what you
excepted thence, Defenc. page 74 li. 19.
only so far as possibility of things could admit, that is which you saw
was impossible he should suffer. And so we have here your own confession,
that possibility of things could not permit Christ to suffer the whole curse
of the Law, and yet you make the Apostle to mean all these impossibilities.
For he makes none of your exceptions. But look somewhat nearer, and you shall
see greater bars to that total assertion then impossibilities, even horrible
impiety and blasphemy; which if they bar not you from your boldness, they
terrify me and all good Christians to come within the sound of them. This
shift being shame^l, you slide to another as absurd and impertinent to your
purpose, as the former. For were it granted, which yet is no way proved, that
Christ suffered some parts of the curse in his whole manhood, will you thence
infer, that he suffered the whole curse? By what hold-fast hangs this
together, but by your headynesse, that will say any thing? If a man should thus
reason: Paul with his whole manhood wrote part of the Scriptures: Ergo, he
wrote the whole Scriptures: or Nymrod and his company labored with all their
might and skill to build part of the Tower of Babel: Ergo, they built the whole
tower of Babel, notwithstanding God skattered them; would you not deride these
reasons? Yours is as ridiculous.

Defenc. page 74. li. 31.
In other respects, this suffering of Christ may ^ell be called the whole curse
or punishment of sin.] Your other respects since you think them not worth
the repeating, I think them less worth the refuting. If you have said ought
before touching this matter, I have not left it vnsifted; and as you send me
to pry after your proofs, I send you to toote after my answers. Only this
is worth the noting that where you refer your self to your eleventh page
among others; I find nothing there to this purpose, but that you say namely of
Page 11. li. 25. and 27.
Reiection, malediction, and dereliction; o In Christ could utterly be none of
these: and here you say, the whole Malediction of sin and of the Law was
truly and properly suffered by Christ. Such graces you have to declare your
meaning by plain Contradictions.

Defenc. pa. 74. li. 23.
Mark if our public Doctrine be not the same. Diram execrationem suscepit.] I
mark well enough how you wrest and wrong the Catechism, to force it to your
error. The Chatechisme says; that kind of death was above all others execrable
and detestable, which yet Christ chiefly would suffer for us, that he might
receive that grievous Curse, which our sins had deserved, on him self, and
so quite us from it. That kind of Death, which all men justly detested and
abhorred, Christ would chiefly choose, that thereby he might receive on himself
the grievous Curse, that was due to us, and so quench it. The Catechism then
grants, this was all the kinds of Death that Christ suffered for us, which
because it was full of shame and pain, he calls a grievous Curse or
punishment. What is this to the whole Curse of the Law, in which the death of
the Soul by want of grace, and the death of the damned, which is the second
death, are comprised? You would feign have all men of your mind, and that
makes you think every man speaks in your sense; otherwise the Catechism,
if you pervert it not, is clear enough from your conceits of hell inflicted by
Gods immediate hand on the Soul of Christ, though it talk sometimes of things
not altogether so fit for Childrens understanding. And had the Catechism gone
farther to mention other degrees of our Curse, yet so long as, in se suscepit,
is not precisely to suffer the same, but to undertake and to discharge all,
that is due to us, Christ might well, and did take upon him in his Body to pay
the Price and amends of our whole Curse, but not to suffer all the parts
thereof, which were spiritual and eternal death, though he gave Recompense
and satisfaction even for those, when he quited us from them.

Defenc. pa. 74. li 33.
After this you think it strange, that I say, Christ suffered and dyed justly,
and was hanged on the Tree by the just sentence of the Law; and that so he was
by imputation of our State and Condition unto him, sinful, defiled,
hateful, and Accursed.] You coin so many fresh and false presumptions and
positions, that I think nothing strange in you; so you may fly to a Phrase, or
cast a countenance on the matter at the last. Howbeit I take indeed these two
positions of yours to be very contumelious and injurious to the person and
death of Christ, and no way justifiable by the sacred Scriptures. And therefore
you had need look to your proofs, that they be sound; a needless reproach to
the Son of God is some sin, I can tell you. Ibid. li. 36.
[ All which I avouch, because he undertook by Gods ordinance as our Surety,
to receive our condemnation upon him so far as his own^ nature and condition
could possibly admit.] If vouching were proouing, this matter were at an end;
but it will cost more then hoate liquor before all this be rightly concluded
out of the Scriptures. You soake it out from a poor similitude of a Surety
jointly bound with the Debtor to pay the whole and the v^ry same, in which the
Debtor is condemned; but the word of God will allow you no such Thraldom in
Christ's Suertiship, much less our whole Condemnation to be any way possible in
his person. He discharged he whole from us, that is as well spiritual as
eternal death, and satisfied for both by a just exchange; but he suffered
neither of them, because the Son of God by no rule of Gods Justice could be
void of grace, nor condemned to everlasting fire, as we most justly were. You
did well therefore to bind your own Similitude to a Post, least it should fall
on the Rocks of open heresy and blasphemy; but your restraining of it, least
it should be both false and wicked, shows the ^tude to have no just ground in
the word of God, though some Resemblance thereof may be tolerated, so long as
i^ is not urged to conclude any more then the Scriptures confess. For
similitudes in Gods causes are so far al^owed, as they are expr^ applied by
the spirit of t^h, and no ^arder; otherwise by pretense of a Parable we may
prove what we list: but you were best divide your Assertions, and so we shall
the sooner dispatch them.

Defenc. page 75. li. 4.
Ag^st my Ass^on yo^ say, by no sent^nce of the Law Christ hanged on a Tree.] I
say so still. For the sentence of the Law pe^mitting or prescribing men to ^e
hanged, touched no man besides the offender; and not him, but upon desert
justly proved before them, that had the ex^on of the Law in charge. ^hus
Christ was not hanged, but most injuriously overwhelmed with the out^ies and
tumult of the people, when the Judge professed him innocent, as indeed he was
before God and Man. Ibidem. li. 7.
[ I answer, to d^e for sin, was a necessary part of the general Curs^
upon all sinners.] And I reply, you know not what you answ^e. The Law of Moses
appointed death to no Man by the course of nature, but by the violent hands of
others, that were Magistrates. The Natural death, which follows all men, was
inflicted by Gods own voice on Adam in Paradi^e as a punishment of sin, and
is irreuocably inherited by all Adams Children, not by the sentence of Moses
Law, which came more then two thousand yee^es after Adams fall but by the order
of Gods Creation, which derived from the Parents to the Children the branches
as well of obedience, as disobedience. The sentence of Moses Law Decreed not
death against all offenses, though it pronounced the Curse upon all; but
against Idolaters, blasphemers, disobeyers of Parents, Murderers, Adulterers,
and such like; to whom there were no Sacrifices prescribed, but death awarded.
These two deaths then, a Natural by the hand of God on all men, and a violent
by the hands of the Magistrate on some certain offenders, have difference
enough a man would think; so that when the one is proposed, for you to run
to the other, is a manifest fail in your answer, and a flat confession, that
you can not prove, Christ was justly hanged by the sentence of the Law. And
yet you mistake your self even in that, to which you fly for help. For
Christ was not subject by Nature, but only by will, to the death of the Body,
because he was clear from actual and original sin by which death first
entered into the world, and invaded all men. Now in the violent death which
Christ received from public Authority by the sentence of Pilate, the Judge
perceived, and not once nor twice pronounced him faultles, and when he could
not otherwise appease the rage of the People, but by condemn^ng Christ to
death; Pilate Mat^h. 27.
took Water, and washed his hands before the Multitude, saying; I am innocent
of the blood of this Just Man, look you to it. With what face then can you
being a Christian avouch, that Christ was justly hanged by the sentence of the
Law, when God so provided, that he, which gave the sentence, should often and
earnestly witness the Contrary.

Defenc. page 75. i. 8.
What say you then to Christ's death? did he die justly? if he died by the rule
of Gods justice, then he died justly.] I say the longer you reason, the farther
you straie from the Christ was ^st and Innocent in his death.
Question and yet conclude nothing. God has a double rule of his punishing
Justice, the one r^aled, by which we must be governed; the other reserved to
himself, which we must reverence, because it cannot be but just in him, though
it be hid from us. The sentence of the Law is the revealed will of Gods
revenging Justice, by that I utterly deny, that Christ any way deserved to be
hanged. And thus much Saint Peter affirms, when he says, 1. Pet. 3.
Christ suffered; the just for the unjust, that he might present us to God. If
Christ by Gods revealed will suffered justly, then Christ himself must be
unjust. But if he were just, even when and as he suffered, then were his
sufferings undeserved even by the sentence of the Law, which is the will of God
prescribed us, that we must follow. Otherwise who can suffer as Martyrs or
innocents, if we speak of Gods secret Justice, since he has cause enough to
deliver all men for their due deserts to death, when pleases him; though he be
graciously content, that his servants shall die most innocently in respect of
his will revealed, that is not for any offense, which their persuers can justly
challenge; and most gloriously, when they give testimony to his truth with
their blood, who yet in his sight may not, nor can not justify themselves.
This therefore is another leap of yours, to start from the sentence of the Law
to the secrets of Gods counsel; and most untruly and injuriously to pronounce
men, that are sinners before God, to be innocents in their deaths; and Christ,
that was truly innocent before God and man, to be justly hanged by the
sentence of the Law.

As you miss the Rule, so do you the Justice of Gods will; and that which you
would make to be the curtain of your cause, I take to be the very puddle of
your error. For where you would insinuate, that either Christ was justly put to
death, or else God did unjustly deliver him to death, your ignorant abusing, or
advised inuerting the name of Gods Justice breadeth in you this sensible
oversight. The Scriptures most truly confess, that Psa. 145. v. 17
God is just in all his ways; not in punishing only men's offenses, but in
giving grace, forgiving sin, promising and performing life eternal; and
generally whatsoever he does, in him is just and holy. There is as great
justice, that God should do Matthew. 20.
with his own what he will, as that he should repay men their deserts. For if
we ascribe no justice to God, but in rewarding our works, then was he unjust in
creating us of nothing, when we could deserve nothing: then is he unjust in
saving us, when he condemns others, since we deserved no better then others.
Accursed be that mouth, and mind, which calls or counts the favor and
love of God, wherewith he embraces his; the grace and mercy, which he
affoordeth his; the glory and bliss, which he will give to his, to be unjust.
Yet were none of these things deserved by us, though he be most just in giving
what, and where pleases him. 2. Th^ss. 1.
It is a righteous thing (says Paul) to recompense rest to you, which are
troubled, and yet no way deserved. If ^. John 1.
we confess our sins he is faithful and just (says John) to forgine us our
sins. We need not wonder at this, how God is just in punishing sin, and
also just in forgiving sin; he uses his right in the one, as master of his
own, and repaieth men their deserts in the other, which is their due. ^.
Since all the wa^es of ^he Lord (says Austen) are mercy and truth, neither
can his grace be vn^, nor his Justice be cruel.

Can we then find how God is just in giving us good things, which we never
me^d, and do we stagger how he might be just in delivering Christ to corporal
and ^.
external pains and death, which he never deserved? [ It is no wrong (you
say) for the L^w to lay the penalty on the suertie.] Much less was it unjust
with God, to receau^ recompense for our sins at the hands of his own Son,
who was willing and able to make it, when we were not. [But he must be guilty
of our sins, before he could be justly punis^d for our sins.] Who told you
so? Your similitude of a Surety bound to see the debt discharged? Keep your
bonds to hang abont your heels. A man may discharge another debts, and bear
another burden, as well willingly and freely, as urged and arrested by the
law. What justice has man's law to accept the surety for the debtour, but the
will of the offerer? How much more then was it a righteous thing with God to
accept a satisfaction for our sins at the hands of his own Son, not
because he was thereto bound, or any way guilty with us, but only because he
was able and willing to bear our burden when we were weak; and rebate the
rigor of Gods vengeance by the innocence and dignity of his person, which
was far above our power? For if amongst ^en it be an honorable justice for
the stronger to help the weaker, and the richer to relieve the poorer; and the
less we be bound, as to our Enemies; the more willing, the more righteous: who
that has but one spa^ of Christian sense, will doubt whether it were most just
with God, to admit the ransom which his own Son most willingly offered for
us, when we were his Enemies; or will conclude that Christ must justly des^e
death, because he did willingly die for us? You see now what I say to Christ's
death; he died most justly to God, because most willingly for us, and yet most
undeservedly, because most innocently.

Defenc. page 75. li. 11.
If Christ died not by Gods justice, then woe and thrice woe to us: for it can
not be, but Gods justice must be executed.] If Gods justice against us were not
satisfied by his Son, and so appeased, woe were it with us; but if any man be
so mad headed, that either the Son of God, or himself must be
everlastingly damned for the full execution of Gods justice against sin, then
woe indeed to that hellish infidelity; and blessed for ever be Gods love and
mercy toward us, that accepted the death of his Son for our sins, which
Christ willingly off^red as the price of our redemption, when he could by no
sentence of the law be thereto bound. John 10.
Therefore my Father loves me (says Christ) because I lay down my life (for
my sheep). None takes it from me, but I lay it down of mine own self. And
so the Prophet foretold of him. Es^. 53.
If he will (or shall) lay down his soul (or life) for sin, he shall see
his seed, prolong his days, and the will of the Lord shall prosper in his
hands.

Defenc. page 75. li. 17.
What if (hanging on a tree) were no necessary part of the g^erall curse? it
was nevertheless just from God upon him, as well as his death.] Neither ^th,
nor hanging, nor any part of Christ's punishment was just from God, as deserved
by Christ, either in respect of his nature, or of his office, but all was most
just with God even on Christ in respect of Christ's own free willingness, to
reconcile us to God with his death, rather then we should perish. And if both
these were just in Gods secret Counsel, by reason of Christ's good liking so to
ransom man, what is that to the sentence of the Law, which Judges every man
according to his works, and punishes only the transgressour, out of which
number Christ is excepted by the continual Caueats of the holy Scriptures.
Defenc. page 25. li. 26.
[ Still I mean justly in respect of God alone.] And still I say justly in
respect of Christ's willingness only, which is nothing to the sentence of the
Law. For the law respects the evil desert of the Transgressour, and not the
good will of the Redeemer or Surety.

Defenc. page 75. li. ^0.
You mislike that Christ should suffer justly, because he suffered willingly
for us; which hinders not at all.] Since that was most just with God in his
secret counsel, whereto his Son was most willing; I utterly misliked, as
the whole Church of Christ before me did, that the Son of God should be
thought to be bound to death, who must be most free; or deserving death by the
sentence of the Law punishing sinners, because he was willing to bear our
burden. And if you look well about you, you shall find the second person in
Trinity undertook to ransom us from our sins, long before his manhood was
borne, even from the foundation of the world; and to lay any band upon the
Son of God, besides his own good will and pleasure, advise The second person
in Trinity could not be bound but by his love to us ward.
you whether it tends. And since God would not have the death of Christ's
manhood, but as a sacrifice most freely and willingly offered unto him for
sin, least there should appear any constraint or necessity laid on the
person of Christ; let the Reader judge, with what truth you not only bind the
second person in Trinity to be subject to the sentence of the Law, but taint
the soul of Christ with the uncleanness of our sin because he suffered the
punishment thereof in our steedes. Defenc. page 75. li 32.
[ The voluntary suertie bears his penalty justly, when he sustaineth that,
which the Debtour by Law should sustain.] It is a penalty to patience to
hear you talk so unwisely and unjustly of Justice. Shall mercy and charity
in Christians, that ease other men's shoulders, or pay other men's debts, be
taken now with you for the just desert of a penalty? How much less then may
the love and favor of God redeeming us with his own blood, and ^aling us with
his own strip^s, be called a ^ust and well deserved punishment? Man's law may
exact the debt, where the Suertie stands bound to the ^aw to see it
satisfied. From one freely offering to pay another man's debts, the Law may
justly receive it, because he is willing, but the Law cannot exact it, because
he is at liberty; which is the true difference betwixt a Suertie bound, and a
free Ransommer; and yet neither is guilty of the prisoners offenses.

Defenc. pa. 75. li. 33.
You say, no Law; you are sure, not Gods law allows a murderer or like
offender to be shared, and another that is willing, to be hanged in his
steed.] You have all this while dallied with Gods justice, you now begin to
play with Gods Law, that where truth faith you, you may yet at least make some
show with words, as all wranglers do, when they be driven to the wall;
whereof the discreet Reader may take a sensible observation in this place. You
have been spuddling here, and spending more then two leaves to proo^e that
Christ bare the true curse of the Law, which was due to us for sin, and that
the Apostle speaking thereof (Galat. 3.) could have none other meaning; and
therefore you resolved that Christ was hanged by the just sentence of the Law,
which otherwise must light on us if it were not laid on him. What Law meant you
all this while, or what Law does Paul dispute of in that place? Not of that Law
which accurieth and punishes sin? That Law, I said, admitted no Suerties,
but revenged the malefactors themselves, and therefore by the sentence of that
Law Christ could not be justly accursed, or hanged in our steedes. Against this
when you can say nothing, you get you to the Gospel of Christ, which proposes
glad tidings of our Redemption from the burden of our sins and from the curse
of the Law by the most willing and innocent death of the Son of God for our
sakes, and by that Law you say Christ might, and did die for us as our
Suertie. I ask the indifferent Reader, whether this be not a plain running
from the question and a resigning of all that you have said before, touching
the ^es accursing of Christ as our Suerti^? For the Gospel I trust does not
pronounce Christ to be either accursed for our sins, or defiled with our
sins, but showed him to be the blessed Seed, that bruized the S^pents head;
and the undefiled and unspotted Lamb, that took away the sin of the world,
with his most innocent and precious blood. This shifting therefore, which is so
usual with you, that as long as you can wrench a word, you will not yield to
the truth, will break the neck of your cause in the end with all considerate
Readers, howsoever it may content you for the time. But let us hear the rest.

Defenc. page 75 li. 38.
I answer it is not true, which you say, That Gods Law allows no Suerti^s.
Understanding here by Gods revealed will, and his most holy and gracious
ordinance for us. Though indeed this is not his Law properly, but his
Gospel.] You lack here English as well as truth, except it be the Printers
fault, and not yours Understanding here in your words has nothing to follow
it, I think you would say, Understanding h^ by Gods Law, Gods The Gospel
differs much from the Law.
revealed will, etc. I never made doubt whether the Gospel proposed the
wonderful love, mercy, good will, and favor of God the Son toward us in
offering himself to make the purgation of our sins in his own person; and
likewise the wisdom, power, justice, clemency, grace and goodness of the
whole Trinity in accepting that offer for our salvation; but such I said was
the infinite dignity of the person, being true God, that he could by no Law be
bound, but only led by his own good will and pleasure, as a voluntary and
free Savior. Which liberty the justice of God so far tendered and preserved
in the humane nature of Christ, that he could not in rigor exact death, as a
debt from a Suertie, but receive it, as a voluntary sacrifice from a willing
and free Redeemer: for which cause, neither the desert of our Christ's death not
eracted as a de^t, but rece^ue: as a voluntary sac^ce.
punishment, nor the filth of our sinn^s, nor the truth of our curse could
cleave unto him: but his death was innocent and altogether undeserved though he
died justly to God as well in ^espect of us, for whom he suffered, who deserved
far worse; as in regard of his own will and offer, who refused not the smart
of death, thereby to break the chains of death, and to deliver us from the
power of darkness. For the name of the law in general, how far that word
might be stretched, I did not question, since you spoke directly of that law
which accurseth and punishes sin, as the Apostle does, alleging in plain
words both the curse and punishment of Moses law. Otherwise, I knew the
Apostles words in this very Epistle: Galat. 6.
Bear ye one another burden, and so fulfill the law of Christ, which is, in
liberty and Galat. 5.
love to serve one an other, as Christ did us.

Defenc. page 7^. li. 7.
No similitude (you say) can prove Christ in taking our person on him to be
sinful, defiled, hateful and accursed. I deny this saying utterly.] I like
your wit well, that when you should go to prove your affirmatiues, you fall to
deny my negatiues. This is a short way to shun all pains and proofs, for
you to say what you list, and when you deny the contrary, the matter is fully
proved. But Sir you forget that my assertion has in it the plain words of the
Holy Ghost, and the maine grounds of Christian religion, that Christ as well in
his nature and actions as in his sufferings and sacrifice, was Hebr. 7.
holy, harmless, severed from sinners and undefiled. This you utterly deny.
If you make no more bones in denying the words of God, your Reader will as
easily deny you to be a Christian, whatsoever I do. [ Defenc. page 76. li. 26.
In his own nature, and in respect merely thereof, he suffered both at the
Jews hands and before God, the just for the unjust.] A fair gloze, and full
against the text. When Christ died, was it for himself, or for us, that he
suffered? He suffered not in any respect of or for himself, no not before God,
and yet he 1. Pet. 3.
suffered the just for the unjust, says Peter. Which words Peter could not
speak in respect of the Jews, who killed Christ, for they took Christ to be
most unjust, and they had no meaning, nor power to put him to death for the
redemption of the world; but Peter speaks this of Christ, who knowing
himself to be just and innocent in the sight of God, was yet patient and
willing, when he suffered for the unjust. By this example Peter often exhorts
the godly to follow Christ's 1. Pet. 2.
steps, and to suffer wrong patiently, when they do well. For that is more
acceptable to God, then when they are buffeted for their faults; because they
are 1. Pet. 3.
blessed, that suffer for righteousness sake, as Christ did. You turn the
text clean contrary, and would have men believe, that Christ was not only
sinful, accursed, and defiled with our sins, but the greatest sinner and
most unjust person, that ever suffered, as guilty before God of all their
sins for whom he died.

Defenc. page 76. li. 20.
Yet this is not inherently, but by imputation, the Lord translating by his
ordinance the sin of men upon him.] Before we enter to speak farther of the
filthiness or guiltiness of sin inherent or imputed, and the malediction on
either; I think it fit for the Reader How sin makes men unclean.
to know what is contained in those terms, lest the Defender carry his
conceits in a cloud, as his meaning and manner is to do. In sin, besides the
auerting of the will from God by defection, and hardening of the heart against
God by rebellion, the love and affections of the soul, which should be
inflamed with sincerity and purity of Gods holiness and goodness, are
wholly dejected, and egerly fastened upon base, vile, vain and unclean
things; and thereby the soul growing like to that which it loves, (for love
causes a society and similitude with the things loved) b^ommeth base, vile
and unclean in all her delights, desires, parts and powers. Which impurenesse
and pollution of the inward man, when God beholds, he rejects, hates, and
detesteth, as well this corruption inherent in the soul, as the deeds and acts
of sin past with us, but present still with him, and accusing us in his
sight, by the witness of our own conscience, which we can not avoid. This
when God sets before the eyes of the wicked, letting them see what they have
refused, and what they have embraced, and how deformed and defiled they are in
comparison of his beauty and sanctity; as also what they have done against
the light and leading of their own conscience, they fall ashamed of their
uncleanness, and confounded with their guiltiness, finding the just vengeance
of God to hang over their heads with a desperate and most dreadful expectation
thereof. These things are not doubted by any good Divines, and therefore it
shall suffice shortly to touch some places teaching no less then I have said.
Tit. 1.
To the unclean and unbelieving (says Paul) nothing is cl^, but even their
minds and consciences are defiled. Of evil thoughts and deeds proceeding from
the heart our Sauiour-generally pronounces; These are Math. 15.
the things which defile a man. S. Peter says of the wicked: They are led with
2. Peter. 2. v. 12
sensuality, as bruit beasts, perishing in their corruption; and are not only
spots and stains, but after they had escaped 2. Peter. 2. v. 13.
from the 2. Peter. 2. v. 20.
filthiness of the world, 2. Peter. 2. v. 22.
turn again as swine to wallowing in the mire. This is the uncleanness of
sin as well inherited from Adam, as increased by continual transgressing,
which defiles the sinner, and cleaves to the soul, till she be washed with
the blood, and renewed by the spirit of Christ.

The guiltiness of sin is double; in regard either of the sin committed,
or of the punishment prepared. The Romans 2.
witness of our conscience privy to our doings, when our cogitations accuse
us, and 1. John 3.
our hearts condemn us, this is the conviction that God does and will use in
Judgment; himself as greater then our hearts, not only knowing, but revealing
the things 1. Cor. 4.
hid in Darkness, and 1. Cor. 4.
manifesting the Counsels of each man's heart. The guiltiness of punishment
notes the just deserving thereof by us, or the fast binding of us thereto by
the rule of Justice. Gen 43.
If I bring not back thy Son unto thee, said Judah to Jacob his Father, I
will sin unto thee every day; not meaning he would every day offer new
offenses to his Father, but that he would be guilty of that sin for ever.
Whosoever shall eat this Bread, says Paul, or drink this Cup of the Lord 1
Cor. 11.
unworthily shall be guilty of the Body and blood of the Lord; that is,
guilty of sinning against the Body and blood of the Lord. Now the workman is
worthy of his reward, whether it be in good or evil; and therefore punishment
is the wages of sin worthily deserved, or certainly reserved for sinners by
the Judgment of God. When the high Priest asked the Council touching Christ,
Matthew 26.
behold ye heard his blasphemy, what think ye? They answered he is guilty of
death, that is worthy to die, and so they Mark. 14.
condemned him as WORTHY to die. Sometimes (...) is obliged, and assured of
punishment, as Mark. 3.
he that blasphemeth against the holy Ghost, shall never be pardoned, but
guilty (that is assured) of everlasting condemnation.

So likewise the true malediction of sin is triple. For as the true blessings
of God The Curse for s^nne is triple.
have three degrees; First, his love, which is the root of all our happiness,
then his grace, which is the mean of having that, which is fit for this life,
and of hoping for the rest; and lastly, his glory, which is the full fruition
of the reward for his in the heavens: so the true Curse of sin, which is the
deprivation of all true blessing, has the same degrees; I mean, the loss of
Gods love, which is his hatred and detestation of sin; the lack of his
grace, to know, like, or imitate his goodness in this life; and lastly the
repulse from his kingdom with the terrible judgment, and eternal misery
provided for the wicked.

Come now to your Terms of sinful, defiled, and accursed; and see how well
they Christ not defile with our sins.
agree to Christ. First, if the holiness of God were so great in his Person,
as to purge our uncleanness, much more was it able to resist our Corruption,
and to keep him from being defiled with our sins, from which he cleansed us.
Again, if he were any way defiled with our sins, he must needs offer
Sacrifice first for himself, and then for us. But this is quite repugnant to
the Apostles Doctrine; who says, Christ Heb. 7. v. 27.
needed not to offer up (any such) Sacrifice for himself. Thirdly, if he were
defiled by our sins, his office must defile him; his nature, nor Actions
could not. That which was borne of the Virgin, was Luke. 1. v. 35
HOLY, his life was innocent and just; 1. Pet. 2
he did no sin, nor 2. ^or. 5.
knew no sin; his office was more holy then either of these. For these
resisted sin, but his office cleansed sin. Now to cleanse others from sin,
required more holiness, then to keep himself from sin. The one is the
holiness of the Creature, the other of the Creator. And how should the
Priesthood defile him, when the Sacrifice was holy, and undefiled? Christ Heb.
9.
offered himself without spot to God, says the Apostle directly speaking of
his Sacrifice. And Peter calls him the 1. Pet. 1.
Lamb unspotted and undefiled, which must be in respect of his Sacrifice. For
he was the Lamb of God, John. 1.
which took away the sins of the world. Else how could he be a Ep^. 5.
Sacrifice of a sweet smelling savor unto God, whose Habac. 1.
eyes are pure, and can not behold wickedness, if he were any way unclean with
his own, or with our sins? and if our sins could then defile him, or make
him unclean, he is at this day sitting in the heavens, defiled and unclean.
For we have the very same conjunction with him now that we had then, being
members of his Body, as then we were, and he our head; and he still presents
us to God, as then he did, and even by the virtue of those sufferings, which he
sustained here on earth for us. So that his mediation is now by the power of
that Passion, which he then endured, and if his assuming Sinners into his Body,
or being the propitiation for our sins, could then touch him with any
uncleanness, he can not be free from it at this present. But his Priesthood
was holy then and undefiled, and so remains still both pure and perpetual.
And if in the figurative Sacrifices of the Law, neither the P^st, nor the
Sacrifice were defiled with the sins of the People, but were sanctified and
accepted, when the one did offer, the other was offered for sin; what ground
of truth can it have, that the true, most holy, and acceptable Sacrifice for
sin, which indeed purged the sins of the world, should defile either the
Person of Christ, or his office, or his action in that oblation. Lastly since
all pollution of Soul is inherent, which you grant was not in Christ, how
should he be defiled, that had nothing in him, but holiness and
righteousness, which I trust are not defiled? If Christ were not defiled with
our sins, then was he not sinful. One sin defiles, how much more then does
the fullness of sin make Christ unclean, which is your devotion to the Son
of God.

I mean not inherently, but by imputation. [You mean he was defiled and
sinful, not truly, but falsely. Did you speak of men, who err in their
judgments, it might be borne; but when you speak of God, there is no
imputation with him, but in truth; unless you will change the Apostles
doctrine, Romans 3.
Let God be true, and every man a liar; and say, God must be a liar, before you
can speak truth in this behalf. God does impute righteousness to us that be
sinners, by pardoning our offenses, and accepting us for Christ's sake, when of
our selves we are most unworthy; but uncleanness he does not impute, where
none is found, because he gives freely by mercy, and condemns justly by
desert. The punishment of our sins Christ did willingly bear in his body,
the guilt of our sins he did not, and that made his sufferings the more
righteous, as being without desert or guilt. [Did God then wrong his Son in
afflicting him?] he laid the burden of our iniquities on the body of Christ,
who was willing to redeem our danger with his own death, and by the infinite
dignity of his person able to support the one, and abolish the other: and that
the rather because every part of Christ's manhood was holy and undefiled, and
so by the rule of Gods justice no part of him could be pressed with spiritual
and eternal death. Which is a plain proof, that the guilt of our sins
took not hold on him. For then as well spiritual as eternal death, which
both are due to sin, must have fastened on Christ, which we see to be false:
yea the death of the body could not wrest his soul from him, but he must lay
it down of himself. And if the desert of a corporal death did not bind him,
how should the guilt of eternal death be due to him, which was the ^ust wages
of our sin, but no way due to his person, since he did assume our sins to
clear us from them, and not to subject himself to the guilt, or filth of our
sin, though he were content to make full satisfaction for them, but not to
defile himself with any pollution of them?

Defenc. page 76. li. 9.
How could he be by God properly and truly punished and cursed for sin, but
that he was sinful and hateful? Nay how could he either cleanse us, or
reconcile us to God, if he were Christ could not cleanse v^, of he were defiled
by us.
sinful, and hateful to God as well as we? As we had Christ for our Redeemer,
because we we^e hated of God for sin, so if you bring Christ within the same
danger and displeasure with God, he must have another to mediate to God for
him. God respects not those whom he hates; nor hears any that is sinful,
without some other to propi^e for him. And where you quote Scriptures to uphold
your wicked follies and phrases, they prove the clean contrary. Ezech. 18.
verse. 20.
The soul that sins, the same shall dic, says God by Ezechiel. But
Christ's soul did not die, either by want of grace, or loss of glory, which
are the deaths proper to sinners. Christ's soul therefore by the very place
which you cite, was not sinful. Genes. 18. verse. 25
Shail not the Judge of all the world do right? said Abraham to God. What
right is there meant, but that God will not destroy the righteous ^ Verse. 23.
with the wicked, as Abraham's words before import? Since then Christ was not
destro^ed either in soul or body, but by death made conqueror of death, and a
Savior to all his what a venomous mouth have you to match him with the wicked,
or to make th^s destruction? And here the Reader may observe how religiously
you wrest the Scriptures to reproach the Son of God; and where you can by no
sufficient testimony prove Christ to have been sinful or hateful to God,
as you d^fend, when he died for our sins; you sort him with the reprobate and
damned, and then ^ge the Scriptures against him, that directly speak of them.
I wish you to leave this lewd devotion, and not to think to shift off all this
with a pretended imputation. Our sins God did impute, that is, impose on
Christ, for ^e b^re them in his body on the ^ee; but this was right with God,
because Christ was both willing and able to bear them; and an honor to the
humane nature of Christ, to be made l ord over all his enemies for the short
affliction, which he suffered at their hands; and Savior of all believers for
the submission and obedience, which he performed on the cross; in which Gods
exceeding mercy toward us, and love toward him did most manifestly appear.

Did not God then hate our sins, when he punished his own Son for them?]
The love of God to hi^ ^onne ouer^d his h^red against ^r sinn^.
If that ground of Christian religion could have contented you, that God
thoroughly hated our sins, which Christ assumed, and yet so loved the person
assuming them, that the favor he bare to the one, ouer-rul^d his anger due to
the other; and therefore after sharp chastisement on the person, least we
should think our transgressions to be lightly regarded with God, (and yet
such, as the sufferer willingly re^ued to maintain the justice of his Father)
exalted him with infinite honor, and gave him all power in earth and heaven,
and made him only Lord over all both men and Angels: If this confession of
true Religion had pleased you, you never needed to have defiled your pen with
these sinful, hateful, and accurs^d terms. But ha^ing itching ears, and
humorous heads, you measure the greatest mysteries of our salvation, by the
similitude and proportion of humane reason and actions, and thence de^iue
according to your fantasies, that which Scriptures and Fathers do utterly
disclaim.

Defenc. pa^. 76. li. 11.
It is written, God sent his Son in the likeness of sinful flesh for sin,
and condemned sin in (his) flesh, in which likeness he stood before God.
The Scripture teaches, that Christ was made Heb. 2.
like to his brethren in all things, and did partake with them in flesh and
blood, but the same Scripture adds Heb. 4.
without sin. So that the likeness of sinful flesh excludes all touch or
taint of our sin, though it admit the likeness of our flesh in Christ. And
indeed between his and ours, there was no difference, save the corruption of
sin, which dwells in ours, and did not in his. You do therefore learnedly
collect out of the Apostles words, that where he says, Christ was sent in the
likeness of sinful flesh, for that he had true flesh, and no sin; you make
Christ to be defiled and accursed with sin, for having the likeness of our
flesh. But the Syriacke translation says, God condemned sin in (Christ's)
flesh.] The condemning of sin in the flesh of Christ, was the cleansing and
abolishing of sin by the body of Christ, which the Apostle calls Heb. 9.
ve^. ^6. ^ 28.
(...), the destroying and taking away of sin Heb. 9. ve^. ^6. ^ 28.
by the sacrifice of himself. The text does notsay, that God condemned Christ
for sin, but contrary, that God condemned sin; that is, pardoned the guilt,
weakened the power, removed the sting, and abandoned the memorial of all our
sins for the obedience and patience, which Christ showed in his flesh. So
that it is you, and not the Apostle, nor the Syriacke translator, which would
feign bring Christ within the compass of condemnation for sin, where they
say quite otherwise, that not he, but sin was condemned, that is destroyed
in or by his flesh. Chrysostom says rightly; Chrysostom. Ho^. 13 ^n Epist. ad
Roman^.
Thou see sin every where condemned, not the flesh, which was crouned, and
obtained judgment against sin. And Austen takes liberty to expound the
Text against your Syriacke translation. Contra (...). l^ ^. cap. 2.
By the similitude of sinful flesh, (says he) which was Christ's, God
condemned sin in the flesh of sin, which was ours.

Defenc. page 76. li. 14.
God made him sin for us, that we might be made the rightcousnesse of God in
him.] Other men read the Scriptures, to learn thence all thanks, submission,
and service to the Son of God, for his unspeakable love and mercy toward
us, in taking the burden of our sins, and laying it on his own shoulders.
You thresh and winnow the Scriptures to catch up chafe to cast in his face.
And though there be never so many old and new writers, that would lead you to
the true sen^e of these words, you leave them all, and will needs by wilful
abusing the Scriptures have Christ to be sinful and defiled, hateful and
accursed even to God, for taking upon him to purge us from our sins. I showed
you the judgment of Austen and Ambrose in my conclusion for the right
understanding of these words, but you satisfied with nothing, save with your
own sense, pas^e surly by them, and the rest as Defenc. pa. 76. li. 37.
multitudes of men, and prefer the proud conceit you have of your self,
before them all. Yet for the Readers sake that he may settle his judgment with
truth and sobriety; he shall see the consent of all ages and writers, how
Christ was made sin for us, and how he condemned sin in the flesh. Origin,
Origin. li. ^. in 8. cap. epist. ad Romanos.
that Christ was made the sacrifice for sin, and offered for the clensing of
sins, all the Scriptures witness: touching this sacrifice of his flesh, it
is said, he condemned sin in the flesh, as the same Apostle else where says,
he appeared in the later times to destroy sin. By this sacrifice then of his
flesh, which was offered for sin, he condemned sin, that is, he chased
sin away, and abolished it: Cyrill, Cyrill. epist. ad (...) d^ ^pro (...).
Christ is therefore made according to the Scriptures a sacrifice for sin.
For this cause we say, he is called sin at self: for so Paul writes: Him
that knew no sin, God the Father made sin for us. We do not say, that
Christ was made a sinner, God forbid: but being just, yea Justice it self, the
Father made him a sacrifice for the sins of this world. Ierom, Hiero. in 2.
ad Corinth. cap. 5.
the Father made Christ, who knew not sin, to be sin for us; that is, as
the sacrifice offered for sin, is called sin in the Law. In Leuiticus it is
written. He shall lay his hand on the head of his sin; So Christ being
offered for our sins, took the name of sin. Augustine, August ^tra (...)
li. 2. ca. 2.
Christ then did no sin, but God made him sin for us: that is as I have
said, a sacrifice for sin. For if thou remember, or wilt read, thou shall
find in the books of the old Testament, the sacrifice for sin to be called
sin. Again, God then Id^m contra Pelag. and (...) de p^cato origi^. li. 2.
ca. 32.
made Christ sin for us, that is a sacrifice by which our sins should be
remitted, because sacrifices for sin are called sin. And so in the
questions upon Numbers. It is said (he shall offer a Lamb) for a sin,
because that which was offered for sin was called sin. Whence it is, that
the Apostle says of the Lord Christ; him that knew no sin, God the Father
made sin for us, that is a sacrifice for sin. He that will see this more at
large repeated and confirmed, let him read at his leisure Saint Austen 120.
Epistle cap. 30. the third book, and 6. Chapter, against the two Epistles of
the Pelagians: his Enchiridion, cap. 41. besides the seventh Sermon De verbis
Apostoli, and the 48. Sermon, De verbis Domini secundum Ioannem, which I
formerly alleged. Oecumenius, the sacrifice, which is offered for sin, is
called sin, as the Prophet says, they eat the sins of my people, that is
the sacrifices for sin. So the Father made the Son a sacrifice to be
offered for sins. Primasius likewise, Pri^ i^^ 5 cap. 2. ad Corinth.
the sacrifice for sin is in the Law called sin, though it did not sin;
as it is written; and he shall lay his hands on the head of his sin. So
Christ being offered for our sins, took the name of sin. Sedulius i^ (...)
loc^.
Sedulius observes the same words. Beda ^eda in 8. ca. epist. ad Romans.
Our Redeemer was made sin, that we might be the righteousness of God in
him. How? In the Law the sacrifices, which were offered for sin, are called
sin. When the offering was brought for sin, the Law says, the Priests
shall put their hands upon the sin, that is upon the sacrifice for sin. And
what else was this, but Christ the (true) sacrifice for sin? Behold by what
sin he condemned sin; by the sacrifice, which he made for sin, even
thereby he condemned sin. To skip Haymo, Lyra and others, the eleventh
Council of Toledo in the confession of their faith. Concili^ Tolet. 11. i^
confess. (...).
Christ in the form of man, which he assumed, is according to the truth of
the Gospel believed to have been borne without sin, and to have died
without sin; who alo^ was made sin for us, that is the sacrifice for our
^innes.

The new writers bear even with the old: To omit, Erasmus, Bullinger, Peter
Martyr, Musculus, Gualter, Vitus Theodorus, and others, who do follow the same
steps; Aretius upon these words God by sin condemned sin in the flesh, that
is says he: (...). 8. epist. ad Romanos.
All our sin in our flesh, God condemned by or for sin, to wit by or for
the Sacrifice appointed for sin. Now Christ is the Lamb of God, which takes
away the sin of the world; this Lamb is called sin, because in the Law the
sacrifices are called the sin for which they are offered. Hence is it that
Christ, who knew no sin, was made sin by his Father. Beza in his notes on
the New Testament, and on those words: Him that knew no sin, God made sin;
says: Paul Beza in ^. ca. 2. epist. ad (...).
calls sin in this latter place, the sacrifice for sin, after a manner of
speech proper to the Hebrews, with whom the word Ascham is so taken as
Leuiticus 7. 2. Tremelius the publisher and interpreter of your Syriack
Testament, observes the like upon the same place: Him that knew no sin, he
made sin for you: that is, a Tr^melij obser^ it in 2 ad Corinth. 5. v. 21.
sacrifice for sin, which every where in the bible is called Chattath; by
which name sin also is called: The book of Homilies authorized in this
Realm holds so fast to this exposition, that it sets it down in the
Apostles name, as the Apostles true meaning. S. Paul likewise says: The second
Se^mo^ of the Passi^n. p^. 5.
God made him a sacrifice for our sin, which knew no sin, that we should be
made the righteousness of God in him.

Defenc page 76. li. 18.
The Apostle farther says, the second time Christ shall appear without sin,
meaning that the first time he appeared with sin.] Put the Apostles words
uttered in the same place, touching Christ's first appearing with sin, to
these which you cite, and the sense is plain and easy of it self. Heb 9 v 26.
In the end of the world Christ appeared once, to put away sin by the
sacrifice of himself, and Ibid. v. 28.
unto them that look for him, he shall appear the second time without sin
unto salvation. Christ's first appearing was with sin; that is, either with
an offering for sin, or with the infirmity, tentation, mi^erie and
mortality How Christ shall the second time appear without sin.
of sin (for such was the time of his humility, when he came to purge sin
by the oblation of his body): the next time of his appearing shall be in
glory, that is, without either sacrifice for sin, or any other infirmity of
sinners. For sin applied to Christ in the Scriptures may receive a triple
interpretation, as Austen observes; and yet none of them makes Christ
sinful, hateful, or defiled, which is your unclean doctrine. August. c^ntra
duas Epist. Pelag. li. 3. ca. 2
We affirm (says Austen) that Christ had no sin neither in soul nor flesh,
and yet in taking flesh after the liken^sse of sinful flesh, by sin he
condemned sin. Which being somewhat obscur^ly spoken by the Apostle, may be
two ways opened: either because the similitudes of things use to be called by
the names of the things themselves; and in that respect the Apostle would call
the similitude of sinful flesh, Sin: or else because the sacrifices for
sins in the Law were called sins; all which were the figures of Christ's
flesh, the true and only sacrifice for sin. A third way is, that the
punishment of sin is August. contra (...). li. ^4. ca 4.
after a sort called sin, as being a consequent to sin, which S. Austen
before testified; and in that respect, as well mortality, as all other
miseries and infirmit^s, that invaded man's nature for sin, may be called
sin, that is, the effects of sin. The wrongful and shameful death of
Christ, Chrysostom, Theodoret, Theophylact, and others, take to be the
punishment of our sins in the flesh of Christ, and in that regard they think
Christ was made sin, that is, punished as a sinner, though he were innocent
and righteous. Chrysostom. in 5. ca. 2. Epist. ad Corinth.
Him that was righteousness it self, God made sin, that is, he suffered him
to be condemned as a sinner, and to die as one accursed; for accursed was he
that hung on a tree. Christ, says Theodoret, Theodor. in 8 ca. E^ist. ad
Romanos.
when he had fulfilled all righteousness, and not admitted any blemish of
sin, and yet as a sinner sustained the death of sinners, he reproved the
injustice of sin, that delivered his body to death no way deserving it, and
dissolved both sin and death. Theophylact, as his manner is, follows
Chrysostom almost word for word: Theophylact. in 5. ca. 2. Ep^st. ad Corinth.
The Son who knew no sin, and was righteousness it self, the Father made
to die for us, as if he had been a sinner and malefactor. S. Austen joins
with them: August. de verb^ Apost. ^rm. 14.
Christ had the similitude of sinful flesh, because his flesh was mortal,
sin^ vllo omnino peccato, but utterly without any sin, that by sin for
similitude, he might condemn the sin that is in (our) flesh, through true
iniquity. True iniquity in Christ there was none, mortality there was.
Peccatum non suscepit, sed poenam peccati suscepit. Suscipiend^ sin^ culp^
poenam, and poenam sa^it, and culpam. Christ took not (our) sin unto him, he
took the punishment of (our) sin. And taking the punishment without any
fault, he healed both the punishment and the fault. I leave the Reader to his
choice, which of these he will embrace, or whether he will conioyne them all
together; (for the one impugneth not the other) they all impugn the Defenders
false collections, and lewd surmises out of these places, that Christ, when he
is called sin, is intended by the Scriptures to be defiled with our sins,
and hateful to God, and accursed of him for our sins, which the Church of
Christ did never endure to hear.

Defenc. page 76. li. 16.
Master Calvin warily enough says, Vt personam nostram suscepit, peccator
erat, and maledictionis reus. As Christ took upon him our person, he was a
(...) and guilty of the curse.] I had rather you had commended Master Caluins
wisdom to join with the whole Church of God in giving Christ his due, then
his wariness in going a by-way, without all the learned and Catholic fathers,
to hemme Christ within the guilt of our sin and curse. Master Calvin truly I
honor for his great gifts, and pains in the Church of God; but I may not take
him for the first founder of Christian religion, and therefore where he
dissenteth from the worthy Pillars of Christ's Church in matters of Doctrine, I
dissent from him. And I more commend his wariness elsewhere, and think it
fit, that when his speech sounds somewhat hard, or offensive Hard speeches
should rather be qualified then strained to the highest.
to the Godly, it should be expounded by other places of his writings, least
you make him in so weighty points, as these are, very inconstant, or very
inconsiderate. This therefore, which you bring, I interpret by none other then
himself, using the very same words, of the very same matter, in his
Commentaries upon the very next Epistle of Saint Paul before this, which you
quote. You shall have it in Latin, because you shall see how he qualifieth
these very words, which you would press to your advantage. Caluinus in 5. cap.
2. epist. ad Corinth.
PERSONAM nostram QVODAMMODO suscepit, vt reus nostro nomine fieret, and
tanquam peccator iudicaretur, non proprijs sed alienis delictis: quum purus
foret ipse, and immunis ab omni culpa, paenamque s^biret nobis, non sibi
debitam. Christ took unto him our Person AFTER A SORT, that he might be
accused (or Judged) in our Name, and condemned as it were for a Sinner, not for
any of his own offenses, but other men's, since he himself was pure, and FREE
FROM ALL FAVLT (or guilt,) and suffered the punishment due to us, not to him.
Take these mitigations from Master Caluins own mouth, and then your labor is
lost in putting his words to the Rack; and these are far truer, then your
whirlegigges set running by the business of your Brain. Christ was AFTER A
SORT A SINNER, (Says Calvin) that is Christ presented the Persons and
procured the cause of us ^at were sinners, and was guilty, that is, accused,
condemned, or punished in our steedes. Re^ does not always import an offender,
if you know what Latin means, it notes one ^uius res agitur, whose cause is
handled, or brought into Judgment, whether he be guilty, or innocent. And
when it goes farther then judicial inquisition, it may be applied either to
the fault which is convinced; or to the Judgment, which is decreed; or to the
punishment, which is deserved, or appointed. And so the word (...) in Greek
(which the new Testament uses for guilty, or worthy of, or subjected to
punishment,) is as much as fast held either by the Crime committed, or by the
sentence pronounced, or by the punishment prepared and assured. Thus you see
Caluins words limited by himself, make nothing for you, and howsoever you rack
the word Reus, you may not thereby bring Christ to be defiled, or hateful with
our sins, except mercy, humility, and charity by your learning defile the
Son of God, and make him hateful to his Father.

Even Defenc. page 76. li. 22.
as by Gods true and real imputation, not by any i^hesion, we now in this life
are just, holy, and blameless before God; so was he sinful and defiled by
Imputation, not inherently.] This is neither the Apostles speech, nor sense; it
is your soone-come and soone-gone gathering from the Apostles words. The one is
the cause of the other, but the one is not in all points proportioned to the
other. God made him Sin for us, that we might be made the righteousness of
God in him; Thus speaks the Apostle. Omit Christ's Sacrifice for sin,
whereby our sins were pardoned and purged, that we might be made the
righteousness of God in him, by the remitting of all our sins, and the
restoring us to the favor of God; and grant these words, that our sins were
imputed to him, that his righteousness might be imputed to us, which yet are
not the Apostles words; where is the proportion you so confidently speak of,
that as we are made his righteousness, so he was made our sin? This
comparison unlimited it notor^ously false; and were it true, it euerteth all
your frame. The full and everlasting The Apostle makes the a consequent, not ^
comparison.
reward of his righteousness is allotted to us. Was the wages of our sins so
imposed on hi^? His righteousness is now imputed to us, because it shall be
perfectly inherent in us, and is presently sealed unto us by the spirit of
adoption, whereby our hearts are inherently sanctified. Were our sins so
imputed to him, that they should afterward perfectly possess him? To us God
imputes Christ's righteousness without our consents, and often without our
knowledge, as in children baptized. Were out sins imputed to Christ without
his understanding or will? In us God hates out sins, and ioueth our persons
for Christ's sake. To keep this comparison, will you say that God hated the
righteousness of Christ, and loved the sin imputed to him for our sakes? And
were there not so many differences in the manner of Christ's having our sins,
and our having his righteousness, as there are; yet are you no whit the
nearer. For as we no way deserve to be his righteousness, so he no way
deserved to be our sin. And though God forget all our sins, and puts
them utterly out of his sight, when he washes us from them; yet God did not
wholly cast Christ's righteousness out of his remembrance, when he did punish
him for our sins. Christ therefore took our sins from us, and laid them
on himself; but he does not take his righteousness from himself to give it
to us, but does impart it to us, as having enough for himself and for us,
because he is God as well as man. So that all our sins were imputed to him to
make us just; yet all his righteousness is not imputed to us to make him a
finner, as you would have him; but he bare the punishment of our sins, which
the Apostle calls sin, that we might receive the reward of his
righteousness, not in cogitation or computation only, but in deed and
execution. For even in this life, where we a^e continual sinners, we have no
righteousness, but what is joined with the real remission of our sins
pardoned for Christ's sake, and with the grace of Gods spirit purifying our
hearts by faith, and inflaming them with the love of Gods goodness and mercy
toward us. Our righteousness then in Christ has more then imputation, though
imputation be also needful; it has the seal of Gods spirit possessing our
hearts, and the inherent graces of faith and love, which God accepts at our
hands, and thereby makes us partakers of Christ's righteousness, for that we
believe in the name of his only Son.

Defenc. page 76. li. 29.
Whereas you say the Fathers have two good senses of the Apostles words,
(Christ was made sin for us) the one, That God made Christ a sacrifice for
sin, the other, That God used him, As he does sinners, what is there in both
these, which we acknowledge not? Yea what is this later, but the very same
point, which we urge?] You admit both, and yet understand neither, as you ought
to do. If you acknowledge the death and ^.
blood of Christ to be the true and only sacrifice for sin, then must you
acknowledge these three things in it: that it was pleasing to God, vndefiling
the Priest, and elensing the sinner. If as well the oblation, as the offerer
were holy and acceptable to God, why do you defend, that Christ was sinful
and hateful in his sufferings for sin, which was the sacrifice, that he
offered for sin? If it cleansed the offender, how could it de^ile the
sacrificer, who was the Mediator to God for abolishing sin? you will have one
and the same sacrifice to be holy, acceptable, and available for sin; and
yet to be defiled, hateful, and accursed with sin; you may call Esaias 5.
ligh^ darkness, and good evil, and think the prophet denouneeth no woe to
you, because your inventions are privileged. But to mine understanding, and I
think to your Readers, these plain contrarieties of holy and defiled,
acceptable and hateful, righteous and sinful, in one and the same sacrifice
and sufferer, at one and the same time will not stand together, but you must be
colted or cursed in your warbling con^its.

Defenc. pa. 76. li. 33.
It is nothing else in all this Question that we held, but that God used Christ
our Redeemer and Suertie, As he does sinners, so far As possibility
admits.] You never want an As, to help you at need. You hear the Fathers
say, (for of their sense you speak) that God permitted the wicked to reproach
his Son, and to put him to a shameful and cruel death, as if he had been
the vilest malefactor amongst the multitude; thence you collect that God
punished Christ, As he does sinners, that is with the greatest and sorest
torments of death and damnation, that are in this life or in hell. But this As
does rather plunge you into the mire, then pluck you out of it, and therefore
you add so far as possibility admits. Now how far that is, by whom
shall we be tried? by the Scriptures and Fathers, or by your shallow conceits
and fancies? you have been told often enough, that where the Scriptures make
three kinds of death due to sinners, and for sin; the death of the body, the
death of the soul, and the second death, which is the everlasting torment of
body and soul in hell fire; and all the learned and Catholic Fathers hold
the same confession; the two last deaths spiritual and eternal, are not only
impossibilities, but horrible blasphemies to be ascribed to the person of
Christ; and to either of these, you would not yet speak one word, but by
stealth. Now you have gotten hold of a double As, saying that God used Christ,
As he does sinners, so far As possibility admits, you think your self
safe: and out of this As, you will frame us new deaths of the soul, a new
Hell, and all the same, which the damned do suffer in substance, not in
circumstance. But we have long looked for your proofs, and till they come, tie
up your As to serve you for another turn.

Defenc. page 76 li. 35.
For this the Fathers are not silent, if I were so ambitious as you in
producing multitudes of men. Only Cyprian, and Athanasius and Austen shall
content me in this.] Whether my care to teach nothing touching matters of
Faith, but what I see confirmed by the You would no^ fa^e to cit^ Fathers, if
yo^ had the^.
Scriptures, and confessed by the writings of the Ancient Fathers, may be
called Ambition, I leave it to the Reader: my pains have been the more
therein, which if any condemn, I refer the Cause to him, that judges
Justly. But if it be Ambiti^, to let the Reader see, that I follow the steps of
so learned and approved Teachers, what is it for you, being I trust no more
then a Man, to devise a new Salvation and a new Redemption, which neither
Scriptures nor Fathers either professed or published? howbeit if these three
Fathers, whom you name and mean to cite, make any way for your n^w found
fancies, they shall content me also, so you do not piece out their Texts with
your untruths, for then you allege not them, but your self under their
shadows.

Defenc. page 66. li. 38.
The first (who is Cyprian) says; Christ sustained and suffered him self to
be called sin and a curse by Moses and the Apostle, because he had the like
punishment, as we should have had b^t not the like fault.] Cyprians words we
have already once heard, and once answered; there the Reader shall find them
more at large; they make nothing for you, but rather against you. For first it
is evident by Cyprians sentence, that Christ was called sin, and a curse by
Moses and the Apostle, not for any guilt or fault derived from us, but only by
reason of the likeness of punishment with those, that were sinners and
accursed. Then was not Christ defiled or sinful by sustaining our person o^
cause, for so much as he had no likeness, nor communion with our sin, but
only with our punishment. Now the punishment which Christ suffered could not
defile him, but rather commend his obedience, patience, and charity toward
God and man. [But he had the like punishment, as we should have had.] Likeness
as well consists in the part, as in the whole; and if it were but like, then
was it not the same; except you have forgotten as well the rules of reason, as
of truth. Nullum simile est id^m. Nothing is like to it self. If then it were
like, it was not the same. What get yo^ now by Cyprians words, or what do I
loose by them? [ Defenc. page 77. li. 3.
Your slight answer, that it was like in part, not in all, salu^th not the
matter.] It pleases not your affection, but it fully remooueth your objection;
and the truth of it is most manifest. For if Christ's punishment were in all
points like, as we should have had for our sins, you know well enough by this
the, how lewd and false that Assertion is, which you would sow unto Cyprian.
And therefore as likeness in part i^ su^cient to verify Cyprians words, so does
it justify his speech to be sober and sound, which you would have to be ^ous
and impious. Cyprian Ibidem. li. 4.
means Christ's punishment was so like ours, as wa^ possible.] We talk of
Cyprians words, which are extant, not of his meaning, which you know not, and
would fa^ne force to be like to yours. This is a poor reply, when you can say
nothing out of Cyprians words against mine exposition of them, for which I
yield so just ground; to fly to your own imagination of Cyprians meaning,
which yet is false and foolish. For it was possible (if we respect nothing but
possibility, omitting Gods Counsel and Decree) for Christ to have suffered
longer time, and other sorts of bodily pains, as fire, fleaing, and such like
at the Jews hands; so that your possibility was no part of Cyprians meaning,
but a waterish device of your own to frame Cyprians words to your fancy.

Defenc. page 77. ^. 6.
Al^ by this your we^ke answer you are contrary to your self, in that you
acknowl^dge God used Christ, as he does sinners. Well you may devoutly dream
of Contrarieties, but your eyes dasle too much, to see them truly. Does every
Aduerbe of Similitude with you make a full and perfect Resemblance in all
points? Matthew. 10.
I send yo^ says Christ, as sheep among W^lues. Will you put horns and hair
upon Christ's Disciples to make them as sheep? Psalm. 19.
The Sun, says David, comes forth as a Brid^groome out of his Chamber,
and rejoices, as a migh^e Man to run his Course. Will you build a Chamber
for the Sun, and allow him two feet and ten toes, that he may leap and
run his race, like a man? 1. Pet. 2.
As newborn babes, says Peter, d^ire the sincere m^ke of the word. Will you
bring men back to their Cradles, swaddling clo^ts, and the teats of their
Mothers, that you may verify this simil^tude in them? There can nothing be
more senseless, absurd, and false, then to require every Similitude or
Comparison to be full and per^ct in all points. Throughout the Scriptures, any
one thing, that is common to many, or any resemblance of that, which an other
has, ^rueth to frame thence a Comparison or similitude. So that any one
pun^shment inflicted on Christ, which Gods Law threatens to sinners, was
suff^cient to make good my words, that God used Christ, as he does sinners. How
then do you conclude from my speech; that Christ was used in all things, as
sinners are both here, and in hell? or that God laid on him punishment so l^ke
to that, which we should have had, as was possible? The it is, though not by
any force of my words alleged by you, that God by his secr^te o^dinance l^id
on his Son not only the common Infirmities of man's Nature, and miseries of
man's life, but also shame, reproach, pain and death, which are by his Law
rese^ued, and threatened to sinners; but touching the death of the Soul, or
true pains of hell, which all this while you fish for, you find nothing in my
words, nor in any of these Fathers, whose names you abuse.

Defenc. page 77. li. 8.
Athanasius says, Ipseper se sententiam soluit s^b specie condemnati: He
himself satisfied and (...) the sentence of the Law, under the ^.
appearance of a DAMN^D MAN. Did not God then use him, as he does sinners, in
all extremity of punishment so far as was possible?] You do wisely not to be
(...) in producing multitudes of Men. as you call them: for you do but shame
your self, and sincke your cause, when you come to show the grounds of your
Doctrine by the test^monies of ancient Fathers. As they say nothing for you, so
you understand nothing in them, no not the coherence, or force of their words,
or sentences. It is no small matter, that here you undertake out of Athanasius,
to prove in Christ the appearance of a DA^D MAN, which by and by you interpret
to be all extremity of punishment used by God to sinners, so far as was
possible, the pains of the damned not excepted I would gladly ask you,
whether you purpose to cite places as you find them, to seek out the truth, or
only profess to pick out here and there a word to make you avail to hide
your head for shame. You marvel what I mean, I will soon tell you. You
allege but four words out of Athanasius, besides Prepositions and Pronouns,
and in them you commit five notable faults, and three of them gross, wilful,
and wicked corruptions. Sententiam, you call, the sentence of the Law; Where
Athanasius expressly notes the sentence, which God gave against Adam for eating
of the forbidden fruit: Soluit, you interpret, he satisfied; where the word is,
he loosed or dissolved it: (...), you translate under the appearance;
Athanasius meaning the substance of man's soul and body, which he calls the
form of man: (...), you render, of a Damned man, applying it to Christ for
some countenance to your cause, in laying the pains of the damned on the soul
of Christ; where Athanasius speaks that word of Adam, that was condemned for
sin, in whose substance or form Christ appeared, that is a true man, to
dissolve the sentence given against Adam, when he was first condemned. And that
which is most intolerable, where Athanasius in the same sentence the very next
words, expressly adds, that Christ was altogether untouched either with
condemnation, or with sin, to show that he meant Adam in the former word of
condemnation, you purposely skippe and neglect that which should lead you to
the truth of his speech, and directly against his plain and manifest words,
you refer Damnation to Christ, as if in spite of Athanasius, though he
earnestly and openly profess the contrary, you would wrest his words to
dishonor and belie Christ, and make the Reader believe, that some before you
had ascribed damnation unto Christ. But be ashamed of these monstrous
falsifications if you have any shame in you; or if not, your Reader will soon
perceive, what cause it is you have in hand, that must be vpheld with such
hateful forgeries.

Athanasius doctrine is very sound and good, though you will not acknowledge
it, What Athanasius speaks of Adam, the Defender refers to Christ.
that Christ in his own person, taking our humane nature unto him, dissolved
the sentence, that he gave against Adam, when he condemned him for
transgressing: and by his body dead and laid in the grave, he freed our bodies
from the power of corruption, and with his soul descending into hell, he
quited our souls from all the right and power, that hell had over us by sin.
This whiles Athanasius minds to express, he says; He that examined (Adams)
disobedience, and gave judgment; comprised a double punishment in his
sentence; saying to the earthly (part) earth thou art, and to earth thoushalt
return; and to the soul, thou shall die the death; and thereupon man is
divided in twain, and condemned to go unto two places; (to wit, his body to
the grave, and his soul to hell.) Athanasius de Incarnation^ Christi.
It was therefore needful, that the pronouncer (of that sentence) should
himself, by himself dissolve his own sentence, (...), appearing in the form
(or substance) of him, that was condemned, but yet without either condemnation
or sin, that the freedom of the whole man might be (wrought) by man in the
newness of the image of the Son (of God). I shall not need to prove, that
Philip. 2. v. 6. and 7.
(...) is the substantial form as well of God, as of man; the Apostle
applies it to both; and Athanasius in this very place says. Athanas. vt
supra.
(...). The form of his own soul vnsubiected to the bands of death, Christ
sent present before them; and so again Christ Athanas. vt supra.
delivering us, (...), in his own perfect and true form^ (or substance)
answerable to ours. This could you not choose but see, if either you perused
Athanasius himself, or the very Defenc. page 17. ^d marg. li. 8.
page 181. of my conclusion, which you cite, and whence you took this
authority; where it is evident by the full words of Athanasius in the same
sentence, that Christ was clear from sin and uncondemned, and that man was
the person condemned for sin; which you could not miss without infinite
negligence, or inexcusable blindness.

Defenc. page 77. l. 15.
Austen we saw a little before.] We saw his name, as now we do, but we saw no
words of his, that any way made to your purpose. He says; Accursed is all
sin, whether it be the deed (deserving) or the punishment (deserved) which is
called sin, because it comes (by or) from sin. And likewise that Christ
received our punishment without sin, that thereby he might dissolve our
sin, and end our punishment. Truly accursed is sin, and the punishment
inflicted on the of^ender for sin abiding without remission or repentance;
otherwise punishment after sin remitted, as in the godly; or without desert
of sin, as in Christ; is not a true curse separating from God, not from the
true blessings of God, which make us certainly and everlastingly happy: but it
is a curse depriving us of external and corporal blessings, which God of his
bounty first bestowed on the life of man, and often recalleth for trial of
obedience, and chastising of disobedience, as also for preventing occasions of
sin, and avoiding of greater vengeance, if we should be suffered to walk
secure and careless in the ways of our hearts. Christ then received a curse
for us, which in him was the chastisement or punishment of our sin; yet as he
no way deserved it, so was it not destruction, which lights on the wicked for
their wilful persisting in sin, but a proof of his obedience, and a full
satisfaction for our offenses, respecting his person that suffered it, who was
God and Man, and is by Saint Austen called our Punishment, as well for the
cause, which was wholly ours, as for the likeness it had with the punishments
provided for us in this life, where Christ suffered; and not in hell, where
Christ could not suffer. Dio^i. de Diuin^ Nom^nibus. cap. 4.
It is no evil (in it self) to be punished, but to deserve punishment. And so
Basil. P^sal. H^mil. 9. quod Deus non sit Author (...).
The true evil is sin, whose end is destruction; that which seems evil
with afflicting (or greeuing) the sense, has the force of good in it.

Defenc. ^ag. 77. li. 17.
Your former sense that Christ was a sacrifice for sin, how differs it from
your second, that he was punished for our sins?] With you it may be a
question, with me it is none. For though they were both joined in Christ's
sufferings, yet that is no reason to take away their difference. In the
sacrifice, which Christ of^ered unto God for the sins of the world, himself
was the Priest and the Offerer, and by his willing obedience, In his Sacrifice
to God, Christ was a willing offerer: in his Martyrdom from men he was a
patient sufferer.
submitting himself to his Fathers will, made a recompense for our sin,
which we could not do. In his Martyrdom, he was a patient sufferer of that,
which the Jews with cruel and wicked rage wrongfully laid on him, when he was
delivered by Gods determinate counsel into their hands. Now between his
patient suffering from men, and willing offering to God, there is some
difference, if you could see it, though they were both coupled in his death. [
they both prove directly and necessarily, that he must be indeed sinful by
imputation.] The one proves that he bare our sins in his body on the tree,
but by no means, that he was guilty of them: the other shows, that he
cleansed our sins, and so was no way defiled with them. [ How could he be
truly punished for sin by God, but that he was sinful by imputation?]
Because he was most willing and able to make recompense to God for our sins
by the dignity and innocence of his person, which we could not. And who but
you concludes a Mediator A Mediator ^ot g^iltie of the sin for which he ^th
mediat.
and Redeemer to be guilty of their sins, for whom he makes mediation and
Redemption? If a man entreat pardon for a thief or a traitor, upon repentance,
and satisfaction for the wrong; shall he by your Divinity be a thief and a
traitor, as well as the prisoner? If it were not lawful for Princes to
pardon, then were it unlawful for others to ask it: but in af^oording mercy,
where repentance is promised, and none wronged, Princes show the power and
right of their swords in Gods steed, as well to accept the penitent, where
they please, as to revenge the obstinate. Shall it not then be much more just
with God, in whose only will and hand is the supreme power of all things, to
release his wrath, and pardon his prisoner upon repentance, and recompense
offered to his justice?

How can any suffer at Gods hand, except he be reputed sinful?] For such as
were his own, Christ might suffer, and be no way touched with any guilt of
their sin, but rather accepted with God, and honored with men for the
greatness of his mercy and charity. And if he be no good shepherd, that
flies to save his own life, and leaves his flock to the woolfe; but the
goodness of a shepherd is tried, as our Savior says, by ventring his life
for his sheep; how comes it into your brains, to make Christ a sinful
and hateful shepherd for giving his life for his sheep? 1. John. 3.
We ought, says Saint John, to lay down our lives for (our) brethren. Shall
that wrappe us us within the guilt of other men's sins, or rather commend our
obedience to God, when we venture our lives, our duties so requiring, to
prevent other men's harms? [But God himself, you will say, does not punish in
this case; and therefore he holds us not guilty.] As though an hair of our
heads could fall without Gods appointment and decree? or he would accept it as
his service, if it made us sinful? What rude and lewd ignorance is it, to make
that sinful in Christ, which is commended to us by his example, and commanded
us for his love, and the good of others?

Defenc. page 77. li. 23.
The Jews sacrifices, the express figures of Christ do most lively set out
this thing. When they were brought unto God, the people must lay on their hands
upon the heads of the beasts: showing thereby, that their Leu^t. 16. 21.
sins were put upon the sacrifice, and that God so accounted them indeed to
be.] As your doctrine is most unsavory, so your proofs be most unsound; your
fancies are so fraighted with falsehood, that you can not almost speak a
truth. To what end the bringers of Sacrifices did lay their hands on the heads
thereof, is not expressed in the Scripture, though you boldly avouched it by
the example of the Scapegoat, on which the high Priest alone imposed his
hands. In Leuit. 3 v. 2. 8. 13.
peace offerings of thanksgiving, where was no mention of sin, as well as in
burnt offerings and sin offerings, the people Leuit. 3 v. 2. 8. 13.
laid their hands on the heads of Why the People la^d their han^s on the heads
of their Sacrifices.
their sacrifices; and in sinne-offerings the laying on of their hands might be
a confession of the fault which they were guilty of; or of their desert, that
they were worthy to die; or of their faith in looking to be saved from their
sins by the blood of the true Sacrifice, which should purge them from all
their uncleanness. The Scapegoat, which you make a president for all other
Sacrifices, but very falsely, was not slain at all, and had no hands laid on
him, save the high Priests alone, and living carried away the sins of the
people into a land not inhabited. What resemblance has this with the bloody
sacrifice of Christ for sin, or what comparison can you make between them
but by contrarieties? The other bloody Sacrifices, which undoubtedly were
figures of Christ, teach no such thing, as you imagine, but rather plainly
confute it. For as in nature they were not capable of the guilt, but only of
the pain of sin, which is death; so in use they were holy, and in their
reference to the true sacrifice, accepted for the sins of men. And because
you now admit them to be express and lively figures of Christ, which in the
beginning you denied, resolve your Reader, whether they were defiled and
hateful to God or no. The Scripture says of them, they were most Leuit. 7 v.
^. 6. and 10. v ^7
holy, and Leuit. 1. v. 4.
accepted as offerings of a 13. 17.
sweet savor unto God. And if the figurative Sacrifices, when they did bear
the sins of transgressors, were not defiled therewith, but most holy and
accepted to God; what true Christian will endure your unclean thoughts and
words, that the Son of God was defiled with our sins, and hateful to God
for them, when he assumed them, to abolish them by the shedding of his blood,
and to purge us from all pollution of flesh and spirit? Neither trust to your
terms of imputation, to save you from impiety of heart and mouth, our sins
were imputed to Christ to bear the burden of them in his body, that is to be
chasti^ed for them, but not to be defiled with them, or guilty of them, much
less to be hateful to God and truly accursed for them.

Defenc. page 77. li. 30.
The comparison of Christ with a Surety, is neither a simple similitude, as
you simply Christ no way ^ound to be our Surety.
call it neither is it unclean, but a ^olie and sit representation of Christ's
paying our debt for us.] Christ's undertaking our cause, and paying our debts
in far more ample and pleasing manner to God then we were able, I no way
reject or reprove; (it is the ank^r and hold of our salvation) but that you
bound him thereto by a single similitude of a Surety, who could not be bound
farther then his own love and liking did lead him, I did and do mislike; and
say, if you take not heed thereto, it breeds a pe^tilent and perni^ious
heresy. For it is most certain, that long before the manhood of Christ was
conceived, the second person in Trinity undertook our redemption; and in that
respect the true and eternal God even from the beginning professed himself to
be our Redeemer. Job. 19.
I am sure, says Job, that my Redeemer lives. Psalm. 30.
Thou have redeemed me, o Lord God of truth, says David. Of the Israelites he
likewise says: Psalm. 78.
When he slew them, they sought him, and remembered that God was their strength,
and the most high God their Redeemer. Esa. 44.
He that made thee, (says Esaias) thine husband (whose name is the Lord of
hosts) and thy Redeemer, the holy one of Israel, shall be called the God of the
whole world. And again: Es^. 63.
Thou o Lord art our Father, our Redeemer, thy Name is for ever and ever. And
lest any should divert this to the deliverance out of Egypt, which was a figure
of their true redemption from sin and Satan; David says. Psalm. 34.
The Lord redeemeth the Souls of his servants, and none that trust in him,
shall perish; yea Psalm. 130.
He shall redeem Israel from all his Iniquities. And so God in his own
person speaks by his Prophet. O^e. 14.
I will Redeem them from the hand of hell, I will Redeem them from death;
Repentance is hid from mine eyes. Here is he, that first undertook out cause,
and professed and promised to be our Redeemer, ^uen the Son of God, Hebr. 1.
who being the brightness of glory, and the Character of his (Fathers)
substance, (or lively Image of his Person) supporting all things with the word
of his power, made the purgation of our sins by himself; that is, in his
own Person. Now if you being a Christian, have any bands to tie God withal,
besides his love and his truth, you were best show them forth; we shall
otherwise take you, if you stand upon it, for little better then an Arian, to
lay subjection or servitude on any of the Persons in the most glorious Trinity.

Defenc. page 77. li. 34.
The word is used in the Scripture it self, he was made a Surety of a better
covenant. Is not this sufficient to warrant the goodness and aptness of the
similitude against your undutiful reproves of it?] It is not written in the
Scriptures, that Christ was made our Surety to God, much less that he was a
Surety bound to the Law to pay our debts for us. Our debt was euerl^ting
damnation of Body and Soul, which either Christ or we must pay or suffer, if
your profane urging of this Similitude take place. The Scripture says, Hebr.
7.
He was made a Surety of a better Testament; proouing expressly by Hebr. 7.
Christ a Surety to us of the new Testament.
the Comparison of two Testaments, a former and a weaker, which was the Law; a
later and a better, which was the Gospel; that Christ was not a Surety of the
Law, nor to the Law, as you falsely conceive, but of a better Testament, then
the Law; that is, he was Gods assurance to us, that all his promises of ^ercie,
grace, and glory should stand fast, notwithstanding our iniquity, indignity,
and Infirmity were never so unmeet and unworthy thereof. This Suretiship of
Christ, to establish with his blood the new covenant, which God made with us,
not we with him, without all respect of our merits to pardon our offenses, and
to make us heirs of his heavenly kingdom; the Scripture mentions, which is
no more like to your Suretiship, then freedom is to bondage. I therefore
reproved not the word, which my self also did use, I reproved your servile
applying the word to bring Christ from love and liberty, which led him to be
our Redeemer, unto thraldom and debt, to make him thereby sinful and defiled
with our uncleanness. And is it not worthy of reproof, when a word is used
in the Scriptures to one purpose, for you to take upon you to draw it as you
list to your devices? It is plainly written in the Gospel; Matthew. 20.
The Son of man came no^ to be served, but to serve. Will you hence presume
your self to be Christ's Master, and take him bound to fulfill your
Commandment, as servants must their Masters? He says of himself Psalm. 22.
I am a worm and not a man. Will you trample on him, as you do on worms? God
has given us his Spirit as Ephesians. 1.
the pledge of our inheritance. Shall we claim power over Gods spirit, as we
do over pledges, that are in our possession? What wickedness may not be
bolstered, if we stretch Similitudes used in the Scriptures, farther then they
were intended, and we authorized?

Defenc. page 78. li. 1.
You say Christ was not as a Surety bound to the Law, but of a better covenant
even of grace. Verily a Surety to us of both.] Verily if you say, that Christ
was bound to us, or to the Law, in both; that is, as well to bear our sins,
as to give us grace, you broch two apparent blasphemies. If you shift with
saying, Christ does assure us he has done both for us, you slide from your
former Assertion. For that both these are done by Christ, we bothagree, only
you would have him, when he bare our sins, to be thereto bound, and in that
respect worthily Trea pa. 93. li. 6. and 9.
condemned by the just sentence of the Law, which lays the Penalty on the
Surety, when the Debtor cannot discharge it. I told you, that not only we
were in our selves to wicked and hateful, as being Enemies, to have any love
or favor due to us from God, but also the Person of the Redeemer was so full
of might and majesty, that no bands could be laid on him by the Law, because
he was before the Law, and above the Law, that undertook our Redemption. To
this what reply yon? [ He was a Surety to us of both.] But was he bound to us,
or It is a most hain^us error to subject God to any bondage.
to the Law in either? Why speak you not to that, which is in Question? It
would well become the rest of your conceits, to say that Christ was bound to
redeem us being his Enemies, and that the Son of God was bound to bear our
burdens for us. [ He promised so to do.] Then the Love of God which began it;
the Will, which published it; and the Truth, which performed it; are the more
to be magnified by us in the Son of God; who could owe us no duty; nor be
bound to us, nor to the Law. [ Those are the greatest bands that God can
enter.] If Gods Counsels, purposes, and Promises be bands to bar the freedom
of his favor, grace, and mercy; and in all these to impose on him a
necessity, then is there in God no freedom, but only bondage; which God
forbid should come within any Christians heart. He is most constant in all his
thoughts, words, and ways; which we may not think, much less call debts to
us, or bands to him, without evident and extreme impiety; but as he gives
all things to all, and owes nothing to any, which the Scripture calls his
Grace, whereof he is a giver, and not a Debtor; so he cannot repent or change,
as men do; which we must ascribe to the infallible steadfastness of his most
wise and glorious will; the only Rule of all his gifts and works. No band then,
if you know what a band means, can be fastened on God, since that has in it a
debt, which must of necessity be yielded, whereto the party may be compelled
and forced by the right of the Law, which chalenges in Gods promises are most
profane and heathenish Blasphemies.

Defenc. page 78. li. 11.
It is written that Christ was made, Hyponomon, subject to the Law, or under
the Law, which you mightily deny against express Scripture.] You are so well
acquainted with corrupting and deprauing other men's words, that you make no
care to do the like to mine. That Christ was under the Law, I never denied, no
more then that he was Christ made himself under the law by love, when he was
free from the Law, and Lord of the Law.
under death; but I said he was not bound to the Law, no more then he was bound
to death, though he willingly for our sakes subjected himself to the rudiments
of the Law, (for of those the Apostle speaks) to live under them for a time,
and to taste of death, that he might in the end abolish them both. For as
Christ would be Circumcised, and Baptized, though there was nothing in him
needful to be pared or washed away, but rather that fulfilling all
righteousness, he might commend both the one and the other with his person and
presence: so would he observe the ceremonies of the Law, not tied like a
Servant unto them, but content to use them, as Lord over them, till he saw his
time, which he did not stick to profess of himself, when occasion was
offered. The Matthew 12. verse. 8.
Son of man (says he of himself) is Lord even of the Sabbath: And so
likewise, Matthew 12. verse. 6.
I say unto you, that here is one greater then the temple. By which words of
his it is evident, that he was not bound to the Law, who called himself, as he
was the Son of Man, Lord of the Sabbath, and so of all the Law; but as he
laid down his life, when the Law could not take it from him, and was obedient
unto death, though death were in his power; so would he subject himself to the
carnal commandments of the Law, though he were free from them, as being the
truth and end of the Law. For the Law was our Schole-master to Christ, to whom
when we were come by faith, which made us the Galat. 3.
Sons of God, we were no longer under a Schoolmasters. How much less then
could Christ himself, who freed all, that believed in him, from observing the
Law, be bound or of necessity subject to the Law; which need not lead him to
himself, nor could not force him, that was personally the Son of God, to be
a servant under the types and figures of the Law, farther then his own will
induced him.

I made a reason that Suerties bound to the law to pay other men's debts, might
not look to have all referred to their liking and power. as Christ had to his,
but to answer the penalties of the law, to which they were obliged. Defenc.
page 78. li. 15.
^es forsooth, such a Suertie, as he was, might worthily be a gracious
Mediator: he was no ordinary Sucrtie.] You labor to bind Christ to the
thraldom of condemnation by the similitude of humane laws, which subject the
Suertie to the ^arre condition, that they do the debtour: and now when you see
that resemblance to fail, you exempt him from the servitude of Suerties,
because he was no ordinary Suertie. Do you now find, there Thou^h Christ ^ay
be called a voluntary Sureti^, yet was he truly a merciful Redeemer.
is great difference betwixt a Suertie and a Redeemer, and howsoever the speech
may be true, that Christ was a kind of Suertie for us, yet may we not make him
a servant obliged to us, or with us, but a willing and free Redeemer. For after
our transgression committed, and judgment given upon Adam and all his
posterity by Gods own mouth, a Suertie comes to late, a Redeemer is not too
late before execution; and therefore the Scriptures do every where give us a
Redeen er, to note that we were condemned, and reserved under fear and danger
of everlasting punishment, till the Redeemer interposed himself, and offered
such ransom and restitution, as should more content and satisfy the holiness
and justice of God, then out condemnation could do. The person that undertook
our redemption, was not Christ's humane nature, which as then was not, but the
Son of God in his own person assumed on him to make full satisfaction for our
disobedience; not by suffering everlasting death, which was due to us, but by
giving a better and more precious recompense, then we were worth. And this he
would do by submitting himself to obey and serve in our nature, and in our
steed, and so offer the most acceptable Sacrifice of humility and obedience
unto death, that Gods holiness might be honored, which we d^spised; and his
justice satisfied, which we provoked. Let all men therefore advise themselves,
how they bind the person of the Son of God to their obligation or
condemnation; it was he, and none other that undertook for us, and by whose
favor, power, dignity, sanctity and humility joined in one person with our
weak and frail nature, the work of our redemption was performed.

Defenc. pa. 78. li. 23.
You say he could not be bound to the Law, because he was above the Law. He was
above the Law in his Godhead, but in his manhood he became for us under the
Law. If you speak of Christ's manhood apart from his Godhead, you utterly
overthrow all our salvation. For set aside the personal union of man with God
in Christ Jesus, and his humane nature could do us no good. Since therefore his
Godhead was from everlasting, and a perfect and distinct person in the T^initie
before his manhood was created, which had never any existence by it self, but
in conjunction with his Deity from the first instant of his conception; when
we speak of the person of Christ, we Christ vnder^ to be our Redeemer 4^0
years before he was made man.
must speak either of his Godhead, which was before his incarnation, or
jointly of both after his assumption of man into God. Then either we had no
Surctie for our redemption the four thousand years that Christ's flesh was
unmade of his mother, or else the Son of God in his own person was our
Surety. So that our Surety for four thousand years could not be bound to
the Law by your confession: and when the same Son of God took unto him our
humane nature into the unity of his perfon; HE, that is, the Person could be no
more bound to the Law then he was before. For the Godhead was of more power to
free the manhood of Christ in that Person from the Law, then our flesh in
Christ was to subject the Godhead under the Law. Wherefore the person remained
free and unbound, yet would he submit himself to observe the signs and
sacraments of the Law, as he did humble himself to the death of the Cross, to
neither of which the person was bound by any legal servitude, but only by
voluntary submission, that his obedience being no way tied, might be the more
precious in Gods sight. For as the 1. Cor. 2.
Lord of glory was crucified, and we are ^om 5.
reconciled to God by the death of his Son, so God sent his Son Ga^at. 4.
m^de of a woman, and made under the Law, to redeem us and give us the
ad^ption of children: but as he was made flesh by no compulsion nor obligation,
no more was he subi^ct to the Law by any other means, then by his own love
and liking for us.

Neither does the Scripture bind the manhood of Christ unto the Law. For 1.
Tim 1.
the Law was not given to the righteous, says the Apostle. Which if it were
possible to be true in any, it was most true in the manhood of Christ, who had
neither in birth, life, nor death any taint of sin. Galat. 5.
If ye be led by the spirit, says Paul, ye are not under the Law: for against
such there is no law. Whether you think the manhood of Christ was endued and
guided with the spirit, I refer it to your own conscience. If it were, then
against him was no law, though in love to us, which was the fulfilling of the
law, he would humble himself, not under the law only, but under the worst of
men, to be the Psalm. 22.
contempt of men, and reproach of the people. Ioh. 8.
If the Son shall make you free, you shall be free inde^d, says our Savior.
For the servant abides not in the house for ever, but the Son abides for
ever. If then, when we are made the sons of God by faith, we can be no longer
servants to the law, because the law ingendreth bondage, which is repugnant to
the libert^e wherewith Christ has made us free; how much less could the
manhood of Christ, which not only freeth us, but was personally borne the Son
of God, be a servant and in bondage to the law, sau^ only because he would
humble himsel^e to serve in our steads? This Paul learned of his master, and
followed in his ma^ter, when he said: 1. Cor. 9.
Though I be free from all men, yet have I made my self servant unto all men,
and am made all things to all men, that I might by all means save some. So
that by your leave it is a plain error in you, because Christ submitted
himself willingly to the l^w, to conclude his manhood was bound to the law.

(...) (...) not of ^m else in his manhood bound to the law for us, but freely
and voluntarily (...) (...) (...) Gods gracious eternal decree appointing him,
so he became bound to the Defenc. page 78. li. 26.
(...). The ^eader will find in the end, that your greatest strength is the
mistaking o^ other men's words and abusing of your own. For when you have
wrangled four leaves to ^e Christ to the true curse of the law, and to hang
him by the just sentence of the same law, because he stood bound with us as a
Surety to pay our debts; now at last long lingering, you say, he did freely
and voluntarily undertake to redeem us, yet loath to let go. you add, and so
became bound to the law. Sir, you should tell us, W^o did ^ely and voluntarily
undertake our redemption, and WHEN. For if it were undertaken by the Son of
God long before Christ's manhood was borne, (...) (...) you the Son of God to
the law, which before you disclaimed. And did ^od, think you, eternally decree
and appoint his Son to be bound to the Law? (...) of (...), if you appoint
any of the persons in Trinity to be one bound (...) th^n another with any
manner of bondage or service. Then as the Son co^ld not ^e bo^nd, because he
was God; No more would the Father bind the S^nne, whose love to us led him
to undertake our Redemption; and to bind him that was willing, was to distrust
him, which suspicion I hope you will not impure to the Father against the
Son. The Father therefore in the same love to us, wherewith The willing offer
of the Son to be our Redeemer did induce the decree of the whole Trinity.
his Son offered to be the person, that should redeem us, accepted the offer
of his Son, and graciously decreed with one consent of the whole Trinity, as
well the manner, as the mean of our redemption; which decree did not bind,
but accept and approve the love of the Redeemer. And when the time came, that
the Son of God would execute this decree made as well by himself, as the
other persons in Trinity, he took an undefiled humane body and soul into
the person of his Godhead, which he so reple^ished with the wonderful light,
and supported with the infall^le strength of his spirit, that it most willingly
embraced, and most earnestly affe^ted the same submission and obedience, which
the divine nature of Christ was ple^sed to yield for our redemption. So that
the manhood of Christ never having any subsistence by it self apart from the
Godhead of the Son, it never had any humane action or pas^ion in birth, life,
or death, which pertained not to the whole person consisting of God and man.
And in that respect the Scriptures say, Ga^at. 4.
God sent his Sonn^ man of a wom^n, and made under the Law, and we are Romans 5.
reconciled to God by the death of hi^ Son; the (...) 1. Cor. 2.
crucified the Lord of glory, and God Act. 20.
purchased his church with his own blood. Which speeches could have no truth
in them, as likewise our salvation no certainty, if the manhood of Christ
could have had any action or passion asunder from the Godhead. The person
therefore of God and man after his incarnation, was subject to the Law, and
even the same person, that from the beginning undertook our redemption, and so
not the manhood of Christ, as you would shift the matter off, but the person of
God and man must be bound to the Law, if our Suertie were bound.

May not God be bound by his promise?] Then must you say, that God is bound to
give us grace, mercy, and glory, because he has promised every one of
these, Gods promise ^ust not ^e called ^on ^age
and has sworn to perform them; and so you turn the whole Scriptures vpside
down, and put your self in Gods place, and make him your attendant and
servant, because by an immutable decree he has promised to hear us, when we
call; and help us in time of need. By this Divinity like to the rest of your
devices, the love, favor, compassion, bounty, mercy, truth, and majesty of
God shall be not only a necessity, but even a bondage unto him, which
blasphemy no Christian ears I hope will endu^e. God therefore is a most
merciful promiser, a most gracious giver, and a most faithful performer; his
promises are assurances that he will give, what he says; but they are no
bands, that he must yield, what he owes; because we have neither means to
deserve them, nor ^ight to challenge them, nor power to exact them; but only
need to receive them, prayer to entreat them, and thanks to acknowledge them.
He is content to make himself our debtour by promise, to let us see, how much
we are bound to him, that deserving nothing, we are yet by his mercy assured of
all things.

De^nc. pa^ ^8. li 29.
Though he who ordinarily Redeemeth a prisoner from the Enemy, be not bound,
but content so to do, yet a Suertie being content becomes bound, and so
Christ our Redeemer became bound, as a Suertie to pay our debt for us.] Though
the Scriptures every where calling Christ a Redeemer, and no where a Suertie
to God for us to pay our debts, (but Gods Suertie or assurance to us) do by
the very name give us to understand, that God must needs be less bound then
men, which are not bound but content to redeem others from their enemies; yet
you will have your will in spite of Scriptures and Fathers, and make Christ no
Redeemer indeed, by taking his freedom from him, but bi^de him with your
similitudes to do that in thraldom, which in love and me^cie he was content
to do for us. And where Gods decrees and promises, which a^e most faithful
and firm assurances, can not be called bonds in him without blasphe^ie, yet
you will have him bound to save us, because he promised to deliver us. And our
debt being eternal damnation of body and soul to hell fire, you will tie
Christ to pay our debts without dispensation or qualification; except it
please you with your possi^ilities to relieve him. And the law, to which you
will have him bound, was first that, which inflicted penalties on us for sin;
then it was the Gospel, which showed us our salvation in Christ; and now it is
the eternal dec^e of God, whereby Christ was appointed to be our Savior. And
all this impiety and inconstancy you build neither on Scripture nor Father,
but upon the similitude of a Suertie taken from Westminster Hall, where men
mistrusting each others words and wills, take bands with Sureties to have their
due paid them. But know you good Sir, that God had no distrust of his Sons
will and love to us, nor doubt of his abil^ty to perform our redemption, and
therefore bound him not, as you desperately dr^ame, when he offered to be our
Redeemer; but accepted his love, which could not fail; and his will, which
could not change; making no decree for the manner of our redemption, but what
the Son himself with the rest of the persons in Trinity liked for the
preserving of his own divine justice, and showing of his own exceeding love
toward us.

Then as it is certain by the Christian faith the Son of God could not be
bound to help or redeem us being his enemies, nor to humble himself to the
form of a servant, but only was thereto led with the love of his Fathers
glory, and of our safety: so it is evident, that the same person, after he
had assumed our nature unto him, could not be forced with any necessity, nor
urged with any commandment against The person of Christ could not be bound,
but his humane will was gu^ded by his divine will.
his will, but the humane will of Christ was so guided and directed by his
divine will and power, that it readily and gladly submitted it self in all
things to the will and pleasure of his Father, which indeed was also the will
of his own divine nature; for so much as the three persons in Trinity have all
one and the same glory and majesty, will and work. And therefore as well the
Scriptures, as the Fathers do plainly testify, that even Christ's manhood had
power enough given it to withstand all that was offered him by men or devils,
but that for our sakes the person would submit himself to the servitude,
infirmity, misery, and mortality of our condition; therein to comfort us,
thereby to redeem us, and therefrom to deliver us; which he could not do but
in his humane nature, since his Godhead was impassible.

This fredome and power not to be bound, nor compelled to any of his
sufferings, we must reserve to the person of Christ, that his obedience might
be meritorious and voluntary, not only at his first consenting thereto, which
is this Defenders drift, but in his continual persisting therein, and final
performing thereof; that is, in all and every part of those things which the
wisdom of God thought requisite for our redemption. Luc. 17.
When you have done all those things, says our Savior, which were appointed
you, say. We are unprofitable servants; we have done that which was our bounden
duty to d^e. Will you bring Christ within the compass of an unprofitable
servant, by doing that he was appointed and bound to do? Ad Phil^mon. v. 14.
Without thy liking (says Paul to Philemon) I would do nothing, that thy good
should not be as it were of necessity, but willingly. If God so much respect
the willingness of the heart, that he will not have men tied with necessity
to do good, shall we think, that he would bind his own Son to the
obedience of a servant, and not suffer his submission to be voluntary, that it
might be acceptable and thanks worthy to God? And to what purpose lay you these
bands on Christ? If he were willing, there needed no bands besides the Os^. 11.
v. 4.
bands of love, which is the surest hold that God requires of us. If he were
not willing, his undertaking our cause, was neither love to us nor obedience to
God, (who loves a cheerful giver) but a compulsion or exaction, which
overthrows the very groundwork of Christ's submission and our salvation.

To prevent all lewd and wicked surmises of bonds, duty, or necessity to be
laid There was no necessity in our Redemption, but Christ's will, power, and
liberty.
on the Son of God in redeeming us, the Scriptures exactly say, that Ephesians. 5.
v. 25.
Christ loved his Church, and gave himself for her; that is, he was led by
love, and by no compulsion no^ commandment, to give himself for her, which
otherwise by no means could be exacted of the Son of God. And therefore he
Phili^. 2.
EMPTIED HIMSELF, taking the form of a servant, and HVMBLED HIMSELF,
becoming obedient unto death, even the death of the Cross; to assure us it
was love, that caused him to give himself; that is, at first to offer, and
after to yield himself for us, which otherwise could by no decree nor band be
imposed on him, nor required of him. And this liberty to do and suffer of his
own accord every thing, which he in his divine wisdom, together with the
Father and the Holy Ghost, thought meet for man's salvation, the person of
Christ kept untouched even to his death, in his death, and after his death;
himself most plainly professing so much of himself in the laying down of his
soul, that John. 10.
none took it from him, but he laid it down of himself; and John. 2.
would in three days raise up again the temple of his body, by taking his
soul unto him. And this was the charg^ and appointment that he received of his
Father, to do and suffer these things of himself, that is, without any band,
force, or necessity, but only of his own accord and voluntary obedience to
that which was his Fathers will, because it was first his own good will and
offer, and so accepted and decreed to the whole Trinity, as a most sufficient
amends for man's disobedience, and a most just and full desert of man's adoption
and salvation by the means and merits of Christ Jesus. For which cause the
Scripture resolves us, that Christ Ephesians. 5 v 2.
loved us, and gave himself for us, to be an offering and a sacrifice of a
sweet savor unto God, that is, a most willing, free, and acceptable service,
and satisfaction to God for all our sins.

The Catholic Fathers were very careful to continue this Doctrine in Christ's
Church. August. d^fi de contra Manu^eo. cap. 26.
Nos Dominum verum hominem suscepisse credimus, and in ipso visibiliter
inuisibilem apparuisse, in ipso inter homines conuersatum fuisse, in ipso ab
hominibus humana pertulisse. Totum autem hoc nulla fecit necessitate. We
(Christians) says Austen believe that the Lord took upon him the true Nature
of Man, and therein did visibly appear to men, when he was before invisible,
and in his Manhood conuer^ed amongst men, and in the same s^ffered the t^ings,
which men may offer to men. All this did ^e with no necessity. To show what
Christ suffered from men; Austen adds. The word was made flesh by his own
power, and was borne, and suffered, and died, and rose again, Nulla sua
necessitate, sed voluntate and potestaue; By no nec^ssitie laid on him, but of
his own will and power. And so: Idem in Psalm. 87.
H^s humane infi^mitatis affec^us si^t ip^m carnem Infirmitatis hum^nae, a^
mortem carnis human^ Dominus Ie^us non conditionis necessitate, sed mi^ationis
voluntate suscep^t. These affections of ma^s Infi^mitie, as al^o the flesh of
man's we^kenesse, and the death of man's flesh, the Lord Jesus took upon him not
by any necesstie of Condition, but by the good will of ^is mercy. As else
where. Ostendit Domi^us volunt^e se pati, non necessitate. Idem ^n Iohannem.
tracta. 1^.
Ergo quod p^ssus est, misericordia fuit. The Lord shows that he s^ffered by
his own will, and by no ne^essitie. It was therefore mercy that made him
suffer. ^uery where Saint Austen is resolute, that Christ suffered, and died, ^.
when he would, as he would, and because he would. Ath^asius. Christ seeing the
goodness of his F^ther, and his own suffciencie, and po^er, (...); was ^.
moue^ with ^ue toward man, and pittiyng our infirmity, he put on the same,
and having Com^assion on our mortality, he clothed himself therewith: (...).
(...); and willingly took up the Cross to him^e, and ^ent to his death
uncompelled. Chrysostom. ^.
Sei^sum tradidit, vt indicet quod volunta^ p^ssionem suscepit, and non
necessitate, neque vt, sed volens and spente. Christ gave himsel^e, to show
that he undertook his Passion wil^ngly, and not by any nec^ssitie or exaction,
but of his own will and accord. ^.
Passus est quia voluit, resurrexit quia potuit. Christ suffered because he
would, and rose because he could. And so ^
By his deeds Christ (...) (...) that ^e w^nt to hi^ P^ssion by no force nor
necessity, but of his own accord. Ambr^e. (...) ^as no ^eruant to death, but
free among the dead. For he was free that had ^.
power (...) death. I^em de fide (...). 2 cap 1
By the power of his Du^nitie ^e laid down his Soul, and took (...). T^ou
sec^ his goodn^sse in that he laid it down of his own accord: thou see his
power in that ^e to^ke it again. Idem. ^i. (...). (...). 1^.
At the ^ime when plea^ed him, the Lord Jesus emptied himsel^e and (...)
suffered when he would. Ierom. ^ Death came not upon Christ, but Christ cam^
(...); ^or Death in him found no way for his power. ^ He was no Debtor to Death
and sin, b^t he was offered, because he himself would. For ^.
he ^ustained not tbe Cross ^.
by any ne^essitie, but willingly, otherwise if he h^d not been off^red by his
own good will, he ^.
mig^t have de^lined those that were sent to (take) him, whom he met without
fear, and of his o^ne accord off^red himself to them. ^


Grego^ie. In carne veni^ns Dominus non culpam nostr^m ex vitio, non poenam ex
necessit^te (...); nulla enim labe peccati pollutus, reatus nostriteneri
condition non potuit: atque id^o m^rtem nostra^ omni necessitate c^lcata, cum
voluit, sp^nte suscepit. The Lord commi^g ^
in, flesh, neit^er took on ^im our fault by any infection, nor our punishment
by any coacti^n, for being ^filed with no st^ine of sin, he could not be held
by any condition of our guilti^, (...) and therefor ^reading all necessity
under his feet, of his own accord, when he would, ^e admitted o^r death. ^
Nos omnes cum nolumus morimur; quia ad solu^ndae penae debitum ^.
(...) (...) condition coarc^armur. Ille autem quia nulli admixtus est culpae,
nulli ex nec^e (...) (...). Sed quia culpam n^stram dominando subdidit, poenam
nostram mi^ando suscepit. We all die against our wills, because we are tied by
the condition of our sin to the debt of ^nduring punishment. But he that was
entangled with no fault, could not be b^und to any pe^ltie by nec^ssitie. Yet
because he subdued our sin by reigning over it, in (...) and piti^ (to us) he
undertook our punishment, as he himself says: I have power to (...) (...) my
(...), no man takes it from me, but I lay it down of my self. Beda. ^.
Jesus hungered, it (...) true, but because he would. He slept, it is true, but
because he would. He sorrowed, it is true, but because he would. He died, it is
true, but because he would. I^em in Psalm. 87.
It was in his power to be so or so affected, or not. These affections of man's
infirmity, Non condition necessitatis, sed voluntate miserationis suscepit,
si^ut and carnem and ipsam etiam mortem; Christ took unto him not by any b^nd
of necessity, but by the good pleasure of his mercy, as he did flesh, and
death it self. Wherefore his death was truly free, not forced; because he had
power to lay down his soul, and take it again. Idem Q^st 13. de (...)
Arbitri^.
He that dies of necessity, can not rise of himself. Christ then, who wanted
all fault, was not tied to the necessity of death. Therefore Christ's death
was voluntary, not necessary; and so he might rise of himself. Damascene,
Damas^ Orth^doxa fide^ li. 3. ca. 20.
Natural things (affections and passions) in Christ did not prevent his will,
there was nothing forced in Christ, but all voluntary. At his own will he
hungered, at his own will he thirsted, at his own will he feared, at his own
will he died. Bernard. Bernard. fer^a ^ (...) paenosae.
Not only Christ was willing, and was offered, but he was offered because he
was willing. ^
Christ being equal with God emptied himself by taking the form of a servant,
and being rich became poor for us, and of great was made little; of high, low;
of strong, weak; and hungered, and thirsted, and was wearied in his journey,
and the rest, which he suffered of his own accord and not by any necessity.
Idem ibid.
He was voluntarily incarnate, he voluntarily suffered, and was voluntarily
crucified. Idemotid.
For had he not died voluntarily, that death had not been meritorious. How
much more unworthily he died who deserved not death, so much the more justly
(man) lives, for whom he died. What justice, thou will ask, is this, that an
innocent should die for a malefac^our? NON EST IVSTITIA, SED MISERICORDIA. Si
iustitia esset, iam non gratis, sed ex debito moreretur. It is no justice, it
is mercy. If it were justice, then should he not die fre^ly, but endebted
thereto; and if endebted, then he indeed should die, but the other, for whom he
died, should not live. Yet though it be not justice, it is not against justice;
otherwise he could not be both just, and merciful.

The very Catechism, on which you seem so much to stand, diligently teaches
and urges the same doctrine, howsoever you be slipped to some Sc^ueners shop
to draw Indentures to bind Christ to the penalty of the Law, as your Suertie.
Catechis. an^ 1574. edit, fo. 66.
Laquet ipsum debit as hominum sceleri, sibi indebit as paenas sua voluntate
inse suscepisse, subijsse, and nostrorum flagitiorum maculas morte voluntaria,
and suo innocente sanguine luisse, atque eluisse. It is evident, that Christ
admitted, received, and suffered of his own good will the pains due to man's
wickedness, but not due to him, and with a voluntary death, and his own
innocent blood did wash, and cleanse the spots of our filthiness, And again.
Fol. 67.
It is evident, the Jews had not in their power these things, or times; sed
sua ipsum voluntate, nulla v^ coactum, harc mortem pro nostra salute
oppetijsse; but of his own accord, without any c^action, Christ died this
death for our salvation. Where also this is set down as a true position; that,
F^l. 67.
eligendae mortis optio penes ipsum fi^t; the election and direction of his
death was left to his own power and choice; which the whole Church of Christ
has hitherto ascribed to the power and will, love and mercy of the Son of
God, rejecting your bands and obligations lately devised to bar the freedom,
and abridge the power of the Savior of the world, because you would tie him
to the pains of hell.

You see not, you will say, how these Fathers make against you.] None otherwise
but that they directly deny, that which you affirm. Christ, you say, though
of good The Fathers disclaim all necessity in the death of Christ.
will he was at first content so to do, yet after became bound to the Law to
pay our debts. Now he that is bound must needs obey; and so you lay on Christ
not only a necessity, but also a duty. These Fathers with one consent
disclaim al necessity in the death of Christ, and consequently they confes^e,
he was free from all bands and debts, but in love and mercy, as a free
Redeemer, he would give himself for us, which was a far greater price, then
we were worth, or could owe. And these multitudes of men, as you call them,
though they be not of equal strength with the word of God, which is the
touchstone of all truth, yet do they plainly prove, that you innouate the
faith of Christ's Church, which in their several ages they all believed and
professed: and for their faith they have the manifest words of our Savior,
that none took his soul from him, but he laid it down of himself; and the
witness of the Apostle, that Christ for love gave himself for us: which
argues, that he was urged thereto with no violence, necessity, nor duty,
much less was thereto bound: and you for your device have the curiosity of
creditours, and the discredit of debtours, of whom men require Suerties with
bands, because they trust not their words and promises; much lesle their wills
and dispositions. But this jealousy in the Son of God, is heinous
blasphemy; and therefore there could be no cause to bind him, as there could be
no distrust of him, since our misery, and his mercy were motives enough to
incline, and continue his love, though we leave him at his full liberty
without all servitude or necessirie.

^ph. 5.
Gods decree and his own good will was, that he should satisfy and pay none
otherwise ^ Defenc. page 78. li. 34.
for us, then so as he did.] There can be no question, but in creating,
condemning, and redeeming man; the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost had
one and the same will and decree, yet except with the Arian heretics you make
an inequallitie of the persons in the most blessed Trinity, you can impose no
service, nor suffering on the Son of God by any decree, but what must come
from his own good pleasure, offer, and perfourmance. And that the Scriptures
every where imply, when they say; Gal^t. 2.
Christ loved us, and gave himself for us; that is, he FIRST of love toward
us OFFERED to serve and suffer in our places, and AFTER of the same love
submitted himself to perform his purpose and promise of our salvation. So
that Gods decree was no iniunction, nor ordinance, that his Son should do
it, but an ACCEPTANCE of his Sons love and mercy toward us, and an
APPROEATION, that it was a most sufficient recompense for all the
transgressions of men. And the Father is said Romans 8.
to give his Son for us, not that he loved us better then he did his Son,
whom he infinitely loves, as himself, and for whose sake only he accepts
us; not that he used any authority or power over his Son, to appoint him to
this service; but that knowing the strength and sufficiency of his Son, to
be as his own, and seeing his love and mercy toward us, which was common to
him with the rest of the persons in that most glorious Trinity; the Father out
of the same love toward us thought it fitter to accept the offer of his Son,
then that we should perish. And therefore though the Father loved his Son as
himself, yet he was content his Son should bear our burden, which we could
not without everlasting destruction, and his Son could with exceeding honor,
and admiration of his mercy, humility, obedience, and patience. If you slide
from the Godhead of Christ to his manhood, to bind that, because it was a
Creature, and not the Creator, by dividing the person of Christ you run into
the heresy of Nestorius condemned in the general Counsel of ^phesus; and yet
releive not your self. For the person, and not this or that part of his
nature, must be the Redeemer, since neither man could save us, unless he were
also God, nor God could die for us, unless he were also man, and so did suf^er
death in his humane nature. So that the Suertie, as you call him, that
undertook our salvation, not only from the beginning, but before the world,
was precisely the person of the Son of God, and not the humane nature of
Christ, and therefore you must either bind the Godhead of Christ as our
Suertie, or free his manhood from all bands. Neither could any of Christ's
sufferings be of infinite price and merit for us, except we as^ibe them to the
voluntary obedience of the person, since the death of a just man could not be
the redemption of the world, but the death of that person, which was more
worth then all the world. If then Christ's sufferings take their force and
value from the person, they must likewise have their freedom and election from
the person.

Defenc. page 78. li 36.
Those sentences of your Authors Gregory, Austen, and Ambrose, if they be
spoken simply, seem very harsh, where they say, that Christ could have saved
us otherways then by suffering and dying for us. For herein they oppose Gods
absolute omnipotency against his express and revealed will; which how it may
be liked in Divinity I know not.] Yours is more harsh, that reprove them,
before you understand them; and challenge that as false, which is most
apparently true by the maine grounds of Christian Religion. For if you avouch
Gods power to extend no farther then his works, as if God could do no more,
then he has done, or will do; is a manifest denying of Gods omnipotency,
which is larger then either his will, or his works; and though his works must
always be measured by his will, yet must his power be limited to neither,
because God is able to do many things, which he never did, nor will do. And
in his works, if you bind him with any necessity, to do as he did, and leave
him not at liberty to do all things according to his own wisdom and will,
you revive the accursed error of the Manichees, against whom Saint Austen fully
resolves. A^gust de ^de contr^ Manichees. cap. (...)
Nullam ergo necessitatem patitur Deus, neque necessitate facit, quae facit,
sed summa and ineffabili voluntate ac potestate. God then suffers no
necessity, neither does he the things, which he does, with any necessitte, but
with a supreme and unspeakable will and power. So that the words of Gregory,
Austen, and Ambrose are most true, that God had other means in his power to
save us, then by the death of his own Son; but a BETTER or more convenient
way to demonstrate his love, and mercy toward us, and to manifest his
wisdom, power, and justice against sin, death, and Satan, he had not; for
no Question God chose the best. And why these words should offend any Christian
man I see no cause, since they be both sound and sober.

They oppose Gods power against his express and revealed will.] You were told,
it is an error to restrain Gods power to his will, as if he could not do
more, or otherwise, then he has done; but in this you conceive them not. For
they do not say, God had means to change his will, or to alter his promise
once published, but when he first decreed this way to save man, it was in his
power to have appointed an other way, if it had pleased him. So that God was
not tied to determine this way by any necessity, as if the power of evil
prevailed against him, or choice of other means failed him; but this in the
wisdom of God, common to all three persons in that most holy Trinity, was
allowed as the most honorable and acceptable way to God, and most favorable and
comfortable to man. And this confession, which you so much control, has been
used by Divines of all ages, howsoever you know not what to make of it in your
new Divinity. Cyprian before their time. Cypria^ de Passion^ Chr^sti.
Et sine hoc holocausto poterat Deus tantum condonasse peccatum, sed facilitas
veniae laxaret habenas peccatis effrenibus, quae etiam Christi vix cohibent
passiones. God was able to have pardoned so great sin without this Sacrifice,
but the facility of forgiveness would loose the raynes to unbridled sins,
which even the sufferings of Christ do skant repress. Nazianzene even with e
Naz^z 1. Epist. ad Cl^donium.
the eldest of them. It was possible for God (to save man) without taking flesh
by his only will, as he did, and does work all things without the help of a
Body. Damascene after them. Damasc^. Or. thod^. fidei. li. 3. cap. 8.
He was not unable, that can do all things, by his Almighty power and
strength to take man from the Tyrant, (that possessed him.) Bernard likewise.
Bernard. s^per Cantic. Serm^. 11.
Was not the Creator able to restore his work without this difficulty? He was
able, but he chose rather to wrong himself then the most lewd and hateful
vice of unthankfulness should have any color in man. Zanchius resolves the
same. Zanchiu^ in 2. cap. ad Philip.
Could not mankind be delivered by any other means (then by Christ's death?)
who can doubt it? Solo nutu and iussu ac voluntate diuina poterat. It might
have been delivered by the only beck Commandment and will of God. Master
Calvin, whose wariness you so much commend, where he makes any thing for you,
doubts not in this Assertion to join with Ambrose, Austen, and Gregory
against you. Caluinus i^ cap. 15. Ioannis. verse. 13.
Poterat nos Dominus verbo, aut nutu redimere, nisi aliter nostra causa visum
esset. The Lord might have Redeemed us with a word, or a beck (of his,) but
that for our sakes he thought good otherwise to do it. The Book of Homilies,
on which you would seem so much to depend, goes farther then either Ambrose or
Austen, and says; The second Sermon of the Passion. pa. 11.
Was not this a sure pledge of Gods love to give us his own Son from heaven?
he might have given us an Angel, if he would, or some other Creature; and yet
should his love have been far above our deserts.

Defenc. page 79. li. 4.
All these Similitudes of Mediator, Redeemer, and Surety may stand very well
together in the office of Christ, though you would persuade us the contrary,
yea rather they confirm each other.] The names of Mediator and Redeemer are
exactly affirmed of Christ, and often authorized in the Scriptures; the name of
Surety to God for us is not; he is called Gods Surety to us of a better
Testament, then the Law; because God in him, and by him has assured us of his
mercy and grace in this life, and of his heavenly kingdom in the life to
come. And if you will needs urge the Similitude of Sureties from the course and
custom of humane Laws, which appoint and admit Sureties, they utterly
exclude us in the case that we were in, from having any Sureties. For neither
in Panorm^tan. r^brs. de fide ^ussoribus.
Capital crimes, nor in D^gest. li. 2. Tit. 11. si quis cauti^nibus. leg^
q^tiens.
Corporal pains does man's Law allow any Sureties. Again no D^gest. li. 2.
Tit. 11. si quis cauti^nibus. leg^ q^tiens.
Surety stands bound for a servant, much less for a condemned, and dead
person. Since then we were not only the servants of sin; but for heinous
offenses condemned, Soul and Body, to ever lasting perdition, and already dead
in Soul by sin; no course of Law allowed us Sureties. Moreover, the Prince
who is the Lord over the Law, may be no Surety, because he is not chalengable
by the Law. how then will you bind the King of Kings to be our Surety, as if
the most Sovereign were most subjected to the Law? besides, Christ freed us by
giving himself, and his life for us. What Sureties do so? Christ bought us
with a Price to be his servants. Do Sureties buy their debtors to serve them?
Christ gave infinitely more then we were worth. Is that possible for Sureties?
Christ did change our punishment in his person from eternal death to the death
of the Cross. Have Sureties that liberty, or authority? We rested on Gods
promise for our Redemption, before it was performed. Know you not that a bare
promise, by man's Law, does not bind, though God be fa^thfull in all his words?
Albeit then Christ recompensed our debt, and voluntarily by his own death
discharged our danger, being no way thereto bound, yet since he observed none
other conditions of a Surety, and no right or Law did allow us Sureties; I see
no cause, why you should change the honor of a free Redeemer, so much mentioned
in the Scriptures, into the Thraldom of a Surety bound with us, as you say to
pay our debt, which was everlasting destruction of Body and Soul.

Defenc. p^g. 79. h. 10.
Our public Churches Doctrine also avouches that ^e was our Surety.] Our
Church allows that Catechism to be taught in Schools to Children, with whom
it may be you se^ke to be sorted, because you never waded any farther, unless
in one or two new writers, that fit your fancy. It does approve likewise, and
appoint Erasmus Pa^aphrase to l^e openly in the Church for every man, that
doubts of any thing in the n^we Testament, to read for his instruction; and
yet you will not take every word in Erasmus Paraphrase for the public Doctrine
of the Church of England. For so you should ^oone exclude the most of your new
conceits. But what says the Catechism, that Christ was bound to suffer for
us, or did endure the same damnation which we d^serued? It says, that Christ
was our Surety.] The Catechism goes not so far, but says, God dealt cum
Christo quasi sponsore, with Christ as it were with a Surety. Christ then did
voluntarily assume some similitude, but not the strict and exact condition of a
Surety, even by the tenor of the words which you cite; though you guilefully
translate them, as if Christ had been our Surety. It is one thing to hold,
Christ was our Surety, and jointly bound with us by law to pay our debts,
which is your error; and another thing to say, Christ was as it were a
Surety, or did of his own accord discharge our debts for us. The Catechism
in this very section precisely notes, that he was not bound as Sureties be,
but of his own will suffered for us the cruel and wicked rage of the Jews,
in putting him to death. Fol. 64.
Haec quidem illi in eum crudeliter, malitiose, at^ impie perpetrarant: verum
ip^e sua s^onte, ac volens haec omnia perpe^s, at^ perfunctus est. These things
(before described) the Jews did cruelly, malitio^ly and impiou^ against him;
but he OF HIS OWN ACCORD and good will, (not bound) suffered all these
things. And before he comes to your words, he says, but it i^ not unusual
amongst men, that one should undertake and suffer for another. By which he does
not mean, that by right or law one man may be bound to suffer or die for
another, but by liking or love, men are sometimes thereto led. Otherwise the
law both of God and man is directly against all such suffering. ^.
Sancimus ibiesse poena^, (...) est. Peccata suos teneant authors, nec
vlterius progrediatur metus, quam reperia^r delicium. We appoint (say the
Emperors Arcadius and Honorius) that punishment shall be there where the fault
is. Let offenses bind their committers, and let no fear of punishment extend
farther than to such as be guilty of the crime. Gods law does ratify the
same. The wickedness of the wicked shallbe upon himself. The son shall not
bear e Ezech. 18. verse. 20.
the (...) of the father, neither shall the father bear the iniquity of the
son; but the same soul that sins, shall die. Wherefore the Catechism, if
he understood what he said, as I truly think he right-well did, could not
derive Christ's bodily sufferings from any band or Suertiship allowed amongst
men by Law, but only from Christ's love and will, which is above all law, by
which indeed he humbled and emptied himself to the death of the cross for our
sakes, when there was neither law, nor band to compel him to it.

Defenc. page 79 li. 22.
Also Cyprians words are plain, and can not bear any other sense than I make
of them, that Christ was a very Surety for his people, and suffered such a
forsaking of God touching sense of pain, and want of present feeling of
comfort in his pains, as the damned do.] I did well to say, you neither
understood, nor liked the meaning of Cyprian: for where there is nothing in
Cyprians words, that bolstereth your error, you have made such a construction
of them, or rather such a contradiction to them, that few men besides you could
devise the like. For by them you bring the person of the Son of God in his
humane nature, that was always full of grace and truth, To have no MORE SENSE
NOR COMFORT OF GOD for the time, THAN THE DAMNED HAVE. From which p^stilent
position, though you kiss your hand in it, I wish all the godly to bless
themselves. But let us first see, on which words of Cyprian you graffe this
golden fruit; and then, how true it is, and agre^able to the faith. Your
foundation ^s, because Cyprian says of Christ; Thou did show, Cy^rian. d^
Pass. Christi.
anxietates illius querimoniae verba esse dil^ctorum tuorum, quorum personam
and causam assumpseras; the pensiveness of that complaint (My God, my God, why
have thou forsaken me?) to be the words of thy beloved, whose person and cause
thou had assumed. What is this to your purpose? or how does this patronize
your violent and wicked assertion? The dolors of Christ's complaint on the
Cross, that he was forsaken, were the words of his beloved: that is, Christ
spoke those words in the name and behalf of his Elect, that they were forsaken
of God; not of his own person: as Austen says of the same; August. in Psalm.
21.
That was the voice of Christ's members, not of the head. And Leo: Leo de
Passi^. Domin. Serm^. 16.
Sub redemptorum suorum voce clamabat. Christ cried (those words) under the
voice of his Redeemed. Now this being Cyp^ans plain speech, that those were
the words of his Elect finding themselves for their sins worthy to be
forsaken of God; how come you to turn Christ into his beloved, that is, the
head into the members, and his beloved into the damned? and then to conclude of
Christ, that he had no more sense nor comfort of God in his pains, than the
damned have? Such another leap will easily bring you and your followers from
faith to infidelity, and if you take not heed the sooner, from the number of
the Elect to the rank of the Reprobate, which take so light occasion to draw
Christ into the same desperation for the time with the damned.

Cypri^ns words (you say) can not bear any other sense.] It is not enough for
you shamefully to pervert Cyprians words, but you must proudly proclaim in
print, that they can have none other sense than you list to like of; when his
speech expressly does import the contrary. If you had avouched so much of
Christ's words, we would desire no better interpreter then Cyprian, who says,
those were the words of Christ's beloved; and so that forsaking had no direct
application to Christ's person, but a merciful relation to his members, who
might often inwardly feel, that they were forsaken of Gods favor and
assistance for the time, though not as the damned are.] ME, you think, in
Christ's words must signify his person, and not his members.] But Cyprian is
expressly opposite to you in that point, and says; ME there, is as much as MY
BELOVED, or chosen members. And for this exposition Cyprian has the manifest
precedence of the sacred Scriptures, in which Christ often speaks of his
members, as of himself, by the very same words. Saul, Acts. 9.
Saul, why persecutest thou me; that is, my members, whom I love and esteem
as my self? and this is no cauilling evasion; the Judge at the last day shall
award heaven and hell with the warrant of this speech. Matthew 25.
I was hungry, and ye gave me meat; I thirsted, and ye gave me drink; I
was a stranger, and ye lodged me; I was naked, and ye clothed me; I was sick,
and ye visited me; I was in prison, and ye came unto me; and so forth; where
in one Chapter Christ calls his members by the name of himself 27. times.
All which are most false of Christ's person, for he then reigned in glory at the
right hand of his Father, and endured none of those miseries; but yet they are
most true in his members, whom he calls by the name of himself, because he
loved them as himself, and more then himself, since for their sakes he
humbled, and emptied himself. And this reason of his words, himself will give
before men and Angels. ^ In as much as you did it unto one of the least of my
brethren you did it unto me. The same is very usual in the Scriptures. Luke.
10.
He that hears you, hears me; and he that despises you, despises me.
Matthew. 10.
He that receaueth you, receaueth me. 1 Samuel 8.
They have not rejected thee, said God to Samuel, they have rejected me.
Zachar. 2.
He that touches you, touches the apple of his eye. Where a most loving
acceptance is showed of the sufferings and services of men for Christ's sake,
but no proper attributton verified of Christ.

This Damascene expresses by making Damasc. Or^ae sides. li. 3. cap. 25.
two kinds of appropriation unto Christ in the Scriptures; one natural and
substantial, the other personal and habitual. Natural, as when the Lord in
Nature and truth being made a man, had experience of things incident to our
Nature. Personal and habitual, (as) when one puts on the person of
another, for pity or love, and uses speech (in his name and for him) NOTHING
APPERTAINING TO (the speaker) HIMSELF. According to which, Christ appropriated
the curse and dereliction due to us; not himself being made those things, but
assuming our person, and reckoning himself with us. Ibidem. li. 4. cap. 19.
For neither as God, nor as man, was he ever forsaken of his Father; neither
was he made sin, nor a curse. Assuming therefore our person, and reckoning
himself with us, (as the head for the members) he spoke these things. For we^
were guilty of sin, and malediction, as incredulous and disobedient, and for
that cause were forsaken. Which are Cyprians plain words also. Cyprian^ de
Passione.
Quod pro eis voluisti intelligi, qui deseri a Deo propter peccata meruerant.
Thy complaint of forsaking, thou would have understood (as spoken) for them,
who had deserved to be forsaken of God in regard of their sins. Then by
Cyprians judgment Christ spoke those words neither for himself, nor of
himself, but for those, and of those, that deserved to be forsaken of God,
whom he calls by the name of himself, as he does oftentimes elsewhere in the
Scriptures, because they were members of his body, and as dear to him, as
himself.

If this be all that Cyprians words imply, how come you to make that false and
The Def^nder ^pareth Christ ^n want of comfort with the da^ed.
profane collection out of Cyprian, that Christ suffered such a forsaking of
God touching sense of pain and want of present seeling of comfort in his
pains AS THE DAMNED DO? You would feign set your infernal imaginations to
sale under the names of some of the ancient Fathers, to inure your Reader with
the name of the DAMNED, lest he should detest your irreligious presumption, if
you should proferre these pedegrees in your own name. But a man may know the
foul by the feather; and your devices show themselves by the very utterance
of them. For expressing two points in Christ's sufferings, the one is sensibly
absurd, the other apparently false and wicked. The pain of Christ's soul, you
every where defend, was inflicted by the immediate hand of God, and was the
self same, which the damned do suffer. Then how could this be called a
forsaking in Christ, when it was rather a plain persuing of him by Gods own
hand? Does a man depart from an other, when he persueth him, or forsake him
whom he follows with the stroke of his hand? If therefore Christ's suffering
in soul came from the immediate hand of God, as you dream; Christ should have
said, my God, my God, why persuest thou me? or why does thine hand oppress me?
and not, why do thou forsake me, and leave me in the hands of mine enemies
without any show, that thou regardest or respectest me?

The second point is far worse. For if Christ had no more comfort in his
pain the^ the damned have; then Christ for the time of his suffering had
neither faith, hope, grace nor love of God, nor any favor with God, nor
^xpectation that he himself should be saved, much less that he should save
others; from all which the damned are clean cut off. Indeed this was the
conceit, that the devil by the mouths of the wicked did urge against Christ, to
vpbraid him with his case as desperate, and to pursue him as forsaken of God;
and therefore this resolution, that Christ was thus indeed forsaken, or felt no
more present comfort then the damned do, is plainly the devils Divinity, and
makes as flat a contradiction to all the Scriptures, as any the damned
themselves could devise. For David led by the spirit of God, says exactly of
Christ's sufferings in the person of Christ, Psalm. 16.
I set the Lord always before me, he is at my right hand, that I shall no^
slide. Therefore my heart is glad, and my tongue reioiceth; my flesh also does
rest in hope. And the Apostle says, that Heb. 12.
Jesus for the joy that was set before him, endured the cross, and despised
the shame. And he that against these express Scriptures avouches, that Christ
had no more feeling of any comfort in his pains, then the damned have in
theirs, I see no cause why the whole Church of Christ should not hold him
mad, or worse. But you mean no present comfort.] As if faith, hope, and
grace, the assured favor, and promise of God, yea personal conjunction with
God, and his own certain knowledge that he should rise again the third day
Lord of the quick and dead, and Savior of the whole world, did not yield him
present comfort in the midst of his greatest pain; insomuch that the Apostle
says, Christ endured the cross, (he means with patience) and des^ised the
shame thereof. So great was the joy proposed, and comfort conceived, even in
the sharpest of his sufferings. [By present comfort you mean present
deliverance.] Mean what you will, your meaning is lewd and wicked, to broche
the doctrine of devils under parables and paraphrases of abused words, and
sl^e comparisons with the damned. For if Christ h^d hope, then had he comfort;
because hope confounds not. If he had no hope, then did he despair; and so
must you admit in Christ either consolation, which you den^e, or desperation
for the time, which must be joined with infidelity, f^r that he could not want
hope, but by lack of faith, since Gods promises, and his own knowledge did
assure him, that he was ordained and anointed of God to be the Savior of the
world. I omit, that dere^iction is one of the properties of the damned, of
which before you said, Defenc. page 11. li. 25. and 27.
there could v^terly be none of these in Christ. Now belike upon some new
inspiration from the father of lies, you have found, that Christ suffered such
a forsoking of God, as the damned do^. With such mysteries of impiety and
contrariety, you da^ be up your new redemption by the pa^nes of hell and of
the damned. But the Apostle teaches us, that 2. Cor. 1.
as the sufferings of Christ abound, (in his members) so their consolation
abo^ndeth through Christ. And if we Romans ^.
rejoice in trouble, knowing that 2. Tim 2.
suffering (with him) we shall reign with him: how could patience, that
breeds hope in us, and makes us perfect, exclude him from all comfort, whom
God did Heb. 2.
consum^ate with affliction, and Heb. 5.
made the Author of eternal sal^ation to all, that obey him?

Def^nc page 79 li 28.
I add unto all this last of all your own grant, where you fully yield, that
Christ was our Suertie to the Law, and that he did suffer justly, or in Gods
justice. The vengeance of the Law say you. once executed in our Suertie can no
more in Gods justice be exacted on v^. I mislike not the na^, but the bondage
of a Surety in Christ
The name of a Suertie is not it that I mislike, but your concluding from the
similitude thereof, that Christ Conclus. ^a. 279. li. 34.
was bound to suffer hell pains in our steed, and was defil^d and hateful to
God by our sins. So much resemblance Christ had with a Suertie, as suffering
in our steedes and for our sakes, to clear and acquit us by his sufferings;
but that he was thereto bound, or therewith defiled, these were the two points,
that I misliked to be drawn from the similitude of a Suertie; and herein I
said the Scriptures rather make him a Mediator and Redeemer, them a Suertie. I
say the same still, but that you do not, or will not perceive it, least you
should want somewhat to quarrel with. ( Defenc. page 79. li. 35.
But I overthrow mine own chief exception which I make that Christ was not
our Suertie to the Law to pay our debts.] When I say, Christ died for us,
Con^lus. pa. 279. li. 28.
NOT AS A SVERTIE BOUND TO THE LAW, you put BOUND in your pocket, to serve you
an other banquet against you be disposed; where if you did love truth, as well
as you do talk, you would farely report, though you did not fully understand
my words. I said, it was not written in the Scriptures, that Christ Ibid. li.
25.
was a Suertie to the Law to pay our debts; If you have found where it is so
written, show the place, and take the prize: you will prove it out of my
words, you say; at least if you could; and yet between my words and the
Scriptures, when you list, you can put difference enough. But let us see how
you deduce it out of my words, that Christ was bound to the Law to pay our
debts for us. That he did submit himself to the curse of the Law, to discharge
us from all our debts to the Law, I never denied; the Apostle says, Galat. 3.
Christ redeemed us from the curse of the Law, being made a curse for us, that
is in our steeds, or to our use. The Question is whether he did this willingly,
freely, and of his own accord, as I with the whole Church of Christ affirm he
did; or whether he were bound to the Law so to do, which is your new found
faith to defile Christ with our sins, and to hang him justly by the sentence
of the Law. You have labored a long while in vain, saying much and proouing
nothing; what now conclude you out of my words?

The vengeance of the Law was executed on him as our Suertie.] The vengeance of
the Law due to us was executed on him, that of his own fice-will put himself
in our places, by his suffering (who was an innocent, and the Son of God) to
overthrow the curse of the Law, which we could never have done, but rather by
our punishment have confirmed it. How prove you now, that he was bound thus to
do, or that the Law did allow us Suerties? You have my words, make your best
of them. [He was our Suertie.] May not a man as well freely, when he sees his
time, discharge A man may a^scharge an others dobt and not be bound thereto.
an others debts, as if he were bound? must every man, that will show mercy,
be thereto tied with bands? was not the love, which the Son of God bare unto
us, as good an assurance, as all the bands you have brought in, to make him a
servant under the Law, that was Lord over the Law? [Those are not properly
Suerties.] Amongst Banckrowts and Usurers they are not, but honest and able men
do most desire such. How much less then ought we to bind the Son of God, as
if his credit were crazed, or have him in suspicion, except he will enter an
obligation to redeem us? [ The debt can not now by Gods justice be exacted on
us.] And why? because The rule of Justice suffers the stronger to bear the
burden of the weaker.
God in his mercy toward us, liked rather to accept the obedience of his
Son for us, then to execute his vengeance on us. Which since he did no way
owe for himself, being not only a most innocent man, but the most excellent
Lord of heaven and earth, his sufferings were in vain, if they prevailed not
for us. [For us then they were just.] Far worse were well deserved by us,
and reserved for us, if the Lord of glory had not interposed himself: but his
willing admitting the punishment due to us in his own body did not make him
guilty of our sins, nor worthy of our punishment. [If Christ's sufferings
were just in him, how was he an innocent?] Because God is as well righteous in
his favor, as in his anger; and no less just in saving his elect, then in
condemning his enemies. Wherefore Christ's sufferings were not due to him by
Gods revenging justice; but in his righteous mercy toward us, he laid our
burden on him, who was well able to bear it, and of his own good will desired
it. And this suffering as an innocent, with his undeserved death to relieve
others, was more righteous and glorious in the sight of God by infinite
degrees, then if he had patiently suffered, and deserved it. It was therefore
exceeding mercy in the Son to offer it, and marvelous clemency in the
Father to accept it; and in both most admirable love to perform it, which is
never unjust with God. And this though you for a shift call Law, the Scriptures
call grace by faith in Christ, which is not of the Law, nor by the Law, that
increases sin and causes anger. John. 1.
For the Law was given by Moses, but grace and truth by Jesus Christ. But
hereof I have spoken enough before, I may not repeat it for your pleasure.

Defenc. pa. 80. li. 7.
Your Similitude of a Kings Son entreating for his Fathers Rebels is very
weak, and overthrows, if it were good, a confessed point of Christ's
Redemption.] Because you coin new Principles of Religion, you think your
self Authorized to make new Rules for Similitudes. In the Scriptures it is
not required, that Similitudes made of Similitudes are not always of things
lawful.
God, or of Christ his Son, should be lawful in every part of the
Comparison, but only that they be possible, and so propose the thing which the
holy Ghost would intimate. 1 Thessalonians. 5.
The day of the Lord shall come even as a Theife in the night. Will you
justify night Robbers because Christ's coming is resembled to theirs? Christ
draws. a comparison from the Luke 18.
unrighteous Judge, to God; and takes likewise a Similitude from Matthew. 25.
Usurers and Extortioners to teach that God will have his gifts carefully
employed. Will you by that Parable make it lawful to lend money for advantage?
Or for men to reap, where they did not sow, because these things are
proportioned to Gods graces? Christ brings the Similitude of an unfaithful
Steward, that wasted his Masters goods, and abated his Masters debts; and
says, the Lord (and Master) Luke. 16.
commended the unjust Steward, that he had done wisely. Will you hence uphold
prodigality and infidelity in servants, which cosen their Masters, rather
then they will work or want? Similitudes we see of things most unlawful are
made and referred to Gods Actions by Christ himself, and therefore it is no
weakening to my Similitude (whatsoever you say,) that no King has power by Gods
Law to lay bodily death on his Innocent Son. I do not by that resemblance
make any thing lawful or unlawful; but show how evil it becomes Prisoners
and Captives to twite or vpbraid their Redeemers and deliuerers, as if they
were defiled, and guilty of their Sins, for whom they mediate and entreat.
Of bodily death I spoke never a word, that is your Idle conceit added to my
comparison.

But the Similitude fitteth not Christ's sufferings in our Redemption.] No more
does any Similitude, that man can make. I say of Christ's death, as Saint Austen
says of his birth. August. Epist. 3. ad Vo^us.
If you seek for areason, it shall not be wonderful; if you ask for an
example, it shall not be singular. The Acts of men may in some sort resemble or
imitate, they cannot match or even the works of God. But why are you so curious
in other men's Similitudes, that are so careless of your own? Does your example
of a Surety fit the bodily sufferings of Christ? I hope humane laws have no
power, nor practice to take men's lives away for Suretiship; nay they allow no
Sureties for any corporal pains, as we saw before, because no man is Master
of his own Body to engage the whole, or any part thereof to be mangled or
maimed, unless he will be an homicide of himself, which Gods Law does not
permit, nor man's Law accept. How much less then does your Surety resemble the
pains of the damned suffered in the Soul of Christ, as you say, from the
immediate hand of God? If men have no power to pawn their own Souls, nor to
kill other men's; your similitude of a Surety bound to the Law to pay an other
man's debts, is as wide from Christ's sufferings, as mine and far wider. For
he must be Surety not only life for life, but Soul for Soul, which Man's Law
does not meddle with. And yet your own example of a Surety serves my turn
to declare your Doctrine to be false, as well as any other. For if a Man fined
by a Court for ryots, contempts, or other misdemeanures, and committed to
prison till he pay the same, find friends that to purchase his liberty, will
make present payment of his fine; have you any reason or conscience to charge
them as guilty, or partakers of those Riots, or other offenses done by him
whom they deliver? If men may be Sureties, Mediators, and ransomers of others,
and yet not deserve to be blamed for other men's Crimes; why could not the Son
of God take upon him the punishment of our sins, and yet be most free from
the fault and guilt thereof? [Because God did punish Christ, you will say, with
his immediate hand, which he would not do, if Christ were Innocent.] Soft Sir,
that is no way proved, but barely pretended by you, that God was the Tormentor
of Christ's Soul with his immediate hand: The Scriptures teach the contrary,
that God Mark. 14.
delivered him into the hands of sinners, Acts. 4.
to do what soever Gods hand and counsel had determined before to be done.
And though the wicked be Esa. 10.
the Rod of Gods wrath; and the staff in their hands is his Indignation; Yet
serve they their malice in afflicting the faithful, when God has an other
end, which is most just and holy, to put his Saints to the trial of their
obedience, and patience, in suffering for righteousness sake, that he may be
glorified in them, and they exalted and crowned by him. In the cruel and
wrongful death of his Son, to which Christ willingly submitted himself, God
had far greater and waightier causes and works, even the Redemption of the
world, and the demonstration of his Divine power and wisdom, and such like,
which I have often mentioned, and therefore do presently pass them with
silence.

Defenc. page 80. li. 28.
An other Reason of mine you impugn with marvelous skorne and detestation.
That seeing Christ on the Cross spoiled powers and Principalities, and made a
show of them openly triumphing over them; Therefore I collected that Christ
selt (the devils) as the very instruments, that wrought the very effects of
Gods wrath upon him. I grant I took it to be not a ridiculous, but impious
jest rather then a tolerable reason, for you to conclude, that because Christ
triumphed over devils, therefore devils tormented his Soul with the very
effects of Gods wrath; which every where you make to be the pains of the
damned. And surely as yet, why I should conceive better of it, I see nothing
either proved or produced by you. First you assume, that these words of the
Apostle were spoken of Christ hanging on the Cross; but what Scripture
assures that besides your self? you peremptorily put it into the Text by
saying, Trea. pa. 45 li. 9.
Christ on the Cross spoiled Principalities, but your additions are no good
illations with me. The place, if you take the pains to turn to it, does
rather show the Contrary. To prove that the faithful are tied neither to the
Rites and shadows of the Law, nor to any submission or service of Angels, the
Apostle brings Christ's death for the one, where the handwriting of
Ceremonies, that kept us in bondage, was fastened to the Cross, and so
cancelled, and we freed from it; and for the other he brings Christ's
Resurrection, by which all contrary powers were openly spoiled, triumphed, and
subjected to Christ, as to the head of all power and principality. (Ye were)
Co'oss. 2. 12.
buried with him in Baptism, (says Paul) with whom ye were also raised; and
(when ye were) Verse. 13.
dead in sins, and in uncircumcision of your flesh, he quickened (you)
together with him, forgiving your sins, (and) 14.
cancelling the hanauriting of ordinances that was against us: (and) 15.
spoiling powers and principalities, he made an open show of them, triumphing
over them in himself. Ye died and were buried with Christ, who fastened the
handwriting of ordinances to the Cross, that he might abolish it, from having
any right to tie or yoke his members. Ye likewise were quickened, and raised
together with Christ, who rising spoiled powers and principalities, and
triumphed over them in his own Person, that he alone might be Lord of quick
and dead, of Men and Angels: so that these words, (spoiling powers and
Principalities, and triumphing over them,) are not referred to the Cross, for
any thing that appears in the Text, but to Christ's Resurrection, and take
their truth and force from his subiecting all power in heaven and earth under
him by his rising again from the dead. This triumph over Satan and all his
kingdom the same Apostle to the Ephesians sets down as a consequent to
Christ's death, and pertinent to his Resurrection. Ephesians. 4.
Ascending on high he led Captivity Captive; and this, he ascended, what
means it, but that he descended first into the lower parts of the earth? So
that ascending from the lower parts of the earth, he led Captivity Captive,
which is all one with, he triumphed over powers and Principalities.

The Syriack translation of the New Testament, together with the ancientest of
the Latin Fathers, does not only so interpret the place, but it does express
so much in the very text; that Christ had this conquest after his death. The
Syriack translation says: Syriaca translat in verse. 15. cap. 2. ad Co. ^ss
By the dispoiling (or putting off) his body (Christ) made ^ show of
principalitics and powers, and confounded them openly, (backnumch) in his own
person. For kenumah, whence backnumch is framed, in that tongue properly
signifies a Person. The translations which the eldest Fathers of the Latin
church either made or followed, contained as much. (...) de Trinitate ^. 1^.
Apostolus de Christo refers vt exutus carnem potestates dehonestauit palam
triumphatis illis in semetipso. The Apostle reports of Christ (says
Nouatian) how putting off his flesh, he disgraced powers, openly triumphing
over them in his own person. Neither does he idly propose him putting off
(his) flesh, but because he would have him conceived in his resurrection to
put it on again. Hilarie sometimes translated it: Hilarious de Trin tate. li. 1.
Exutus carne, and sometimes Idem. de Trinitate. li. 1^.
Spolians se carne, and Principatus and potestates tradux it cum fiducia
triumphans cos in semetipso. Christ putting off, or stripping himself of
flesh, led powers and principalities (captives) with boldness, triumphing over
them in his on ne person. Both which he repeateth in his ninth book, showing
how they may stand together, and adding; Idem. li 9.
Spoliata enim caro Christus est mortuus; The flesh put off was Christ now
dead. So Ambrose alleges this place: Ambros. de (...). li. 3. ca. 2.
Carnem se exuit; Christ put of his flesh. And Pacianus: Pacta^. sermon. de
Baptism^.
Exuens se carnem traduxit potestates libere triumphans eas in semetipso.
Christ putting off his flesh, carried powers (as Captives) freely triumphing
over them in his own person. S. Austen Epist. 5^. and de Agone Christi. ca. 2.
often cites the same place, interpreting the word (...), (as the rest do)
Exuens se carnem or carne; and thereby noting Christ's laying aside of
mortality. August. contra Faustum. li. 16. ca. 19.
Apostolus dicit, exuens se carnem, principatus and potestates exemplauit,
fiducialiter triumphans eos in semetipso. The Apostle says, Christ putting off
flesh, made an example of principalities and powers, and confidently triumphed
over them in his own person. Where he says, Christ douested himself of
flesh, by flesh in this place we understand the mortality of flesh for which
the body is properly called flesh. Zanchius a learned and advised Reader and
weigher of antiquity, not only follows this exposition himself, saying,
Zanchius de operibus Deo part 1. li. ^. ca. 13.
Resurgendo de inferis triumphauit, principatusque, and potestates expoliat as
in triumphum captiuas abduxit, vt est ad Coloss. 2. By rising from the lower
parts, Christ triumphed and spoiled principalities and powers, carrying them
captive in manner of a triumph, as is in the second to the Colossians: but he
also gives his testimony of it. Therefore nothing hinders, but what Paul
here writes, we may interpret, as the words do sound, of a real triumph of
Christ's soul (severed from his body) in the sight of God only, and of the
blessed spirits, specially since the Fathers for the most part do so expound
it, and of our writers not a few, nor the meanest. Bethink your self now, how
wide you range from the Apostles meaning by the exposition of so many learned
and ancient writers. Christ rose Conqueror of death and hell. Ergo, say you,
the devils tormented Christ's soul before he died, with the very pains of the
damned. If any man be so patient to like this Logic, and not to laugh at it,
I much marvel, seeing the Conclusion so mere a stranger to the Antecedent,
which has no coherence with it.

But some, you will say, expound it of the Cross.] That is more repugnant to
The diue^ tormented not Christ's Soul on the Cross.
your purpose than the former: for if not only after, but even on the Cross,
Christ had that apparent and glorious triumph over Satan and all his power,
which the Apostle speaks of; then was Satan far from tormenting Christ's
soul with the pains of hell, as you imagine. [There was a conflict, you
think, before the conquest.] A conflict argues a resistance for the time, but
no preualence. Revel. 12.
There was a battle in heaven (says S. John) Michael and his Angels fought
against the dragon, and the dragon fought, and his Angels, but they prevailed
not. And the great dragon, called the Devil and Satan, was cast out into the
earth. Shall we say, that the dragon and his angels, even the Devil and his
assistants, prevailed against Christ, because they resisted and encountered
him? If this please you not, take the Similitude which our Savior himself
uses of his own doings toward the Devil. Luke 11.
When a strong man armed keeps his house, the things that he possesses are
in peace: but when a stronger then he enters upon him, and over comes him,
he takes away all his armor wherein he trusted, and divides his spoils.
M^k. 3.
And no man can enter into a strong man's house, and take away his goods, except
he first bind that strong man, and then spoil his house. If Christ then did
enter on Satan, and bind him, and disarme him, and so spoil him, that he
might make an open show of him, and of all his power; what necessity is there,
that Christ being the stronger, should be endangered or oppressed by Satan,
farther then he himself would? The conquest was bloody; for so much as in
ouercomming Satan, Christ lost his life. He lost it not, he laid it down to
put the devil to greater confusion: for when he was, not only weak and
wounded unto death, but past all help and hope, as Satan in his pride
presumed, then Christ raised himself from the dead, and overthrew the whole
kingdom and strength of Satan, spoiling him of all his force, and leading him
captive with a most glorious triumph in the sight of God and his Angels. And
though you can not digest it, yet I make no doubt, but Leo de Passione Demi^.
Sermon. 14.
the omnipotency of the Son of God, by which he is equal to his Father in
the same essence, was able by the only command of his will to have taken
mankind from the dominion of the Devil: but the submission and humility of
the Son of God unto death was so unknown and unlooked for to Satan, that his
confusion was the greater, when he saw with his own eagerness he had been
the instrument of man's redemption, and his own destruction.

Defenc. page 80. li. 35.
Does not the very manner of speech import some mighty contention and violent
opposition, where yet at length an absolute and most glorious triumphant
victory was obtained?] The words import a glorious conquest, but what
contention or opposition could there be between the Son of God and the
devil, farther than pleased Christ himself to permit and admit? I hope you
will give the devil no power nor ability to resist God against his will. It
was Gods will, and Christ's good liking, that the Genes. 3.
serpents head should be crushed by biting the heel of the promised seed; for
so the Scripture expresses the contention and opposition, that Satan should be
suffered to have against Christ. Grant then Christ suffered the devil, by the
violent hands and tongues of the Jews to doc his worst (which may be proved by
other places of Scripture, though not by this that you bring) what thence
infer you? [ Defenc. page 81. li. 1.
This must be conceived and felt by Christ.] What must Christ conceive and
feel? The question is not whether Christ wanted sense, but what the devil did
against him. [ Page 81. li 2.
These could be none other effects, but only of Gods proper wrath, severity,
and indignation against the sin of the world. We are no whit the wiser for
this answer, though this be plainly repugnant to your former principles, which
make the souls proper suffering in Christ to be from the immediate hand of
God, and that the devil, I trust, is not. If it be truth that you teach, why
speak you not more directly and particularly, what it was that Christ suffered
from the devil? Are your mysteries so bottomless, that they can not; or so
truethlesse, that they may not be specified? [ Defenc. page 81 li. 4.
It could not be the revealing of any glory or comfort, which such instruments
procured unto him, and wrought upon him.] Make you the devil the author of
Revelations unto Christ? It may be he is the founder of your fancies; but
Christ needed no such Reuealers. Or do you reason, that because the devil
revealed no comfort to Christ, therefore he tormented the soul of Christ?
These are some new found Revelations, they are no conclusions in any divine or
humane learning. [ Against this you bring not a word.] I need not bring any
thing against it, till you bring somewhat for it; but you be far from proving
it, that can not, or dare not express it.

(...).
Defenc. page 81. li. 9.
What if no tongue can express the manner, as neither have I once endeavored to
express it: shall not therefore the testimony of the Holy Ghost be true, that
on the Cross Christ had such a conflict as I have observed?] Few men besides
you conclude that which they can not express; but your manner is to prate of
your observations, as if they were some revelations, which yet you neither
understand, nor can declare. The testimony of the Holy Ghost is as true as
yours is false, and has no more concordance with your conceits than light has
with darkness. [ A conquest, you say, implies first a conflict;] But a
conquest extends farther than the conflict: for not only the persons and
weapons of the resistants are in the Conquerers power, but all the goods,
rights and dominions, that any way belong to the vanquished. It is therefore
true, that Christ subduing Satan, subdued sin, hell, eternal malediction,
confusion, desperation, and damnation: but these things did not inwardly
assault Christ, howsoever by the minds and mouths of the wicked Christ was
reputed and reproched as a reprobate. The Scriptures then describe the outward
tentations and afflictions, that Christ suffered from the malicious thoughts,
tongues, and deeds of the Iewcs fired and inflamed by Satan to this mischief;
but of your mystical, internal, and Satanicall prouocations and torments the
holy Ghost speaks not a word. I gave you occasion enough to speak of these
things, when I told you the devil had nothing to do with the souls of men,
but either to tempt them, or torment them, which words you report; but you
after your loose manner lead your Reader by by-ways and crosse-paths, to eye
other things, and then you glance at my exceptions, forgetting still, that the
reason which you made, remains both weak and idle, for ought that you have
brought, first or last.

Defenc. page 81. li. 17.
Before I answer you directly, this we may consider: Christ might, and no doubt
he did in his soul discern, conceive, and apply to himself, all the rage,
malice, and violence of the Jews tormenting him to death, as set on fire by
Satan himself, and by all the powers of hell.] You were to prove, the devil
himself did work on the Soul of Christ without any means of men, whom he
makes his Instruments for his wicked purposes; and now you tell us that Satan
did set the Jews hands and tongues on work, to reproach the Soul, and torment
the Body of Christ. This that you last say, is most true, and overthrows all
that you would say. For if Christ discerned and felt no work nor force of
Satan, but by the mouths and hands of the Jews, then certainly Satan had no
such inward and spiritual conflict with Christ, as you imagine; much less had
Satan any power to possess and torment the Soul of Christ, which is the thing
you must prove, before your hell pains will be haled out of Christ's triumph. [
Defenc. page 81. li. 22.
These (powers of hell) also were set on work by the Justice and severe wrath
of God now purposety laying punishment on his Son, thereby to take
Satisfaction for all our sins.] If you mean that God by his secret Counsel
and Justice losed the raines to Satan to show his malice against Christ by the
mouths and hands of the wicked, as he does in the afflictions of all his
Saints, for purposes to him known and by him liked; I see not how this should
any thing help your Cause: but if by this you would, that Satan was Gods
Instrument inwardly to torment the Soul of Christ, or that the devil had any
special Commission to invade the manhood of Christ, otherwise then by the
violent hands and virulent tongues of the Jews; as it is most false, that you
ashrme, so is it most wicked, that you intend.

Defenc. page 81. li. 24.
Now this feeling and suffering in the Soul of Christ made an other kind of
impression in him, and was infinitely more grecuous and doleful as touching
the present sense, then otherwise the mere outward stripes and wounds of men
were or could be.] Sir you have cast out your nets all night, and caught just
nothing. We know the devil can not touch any hair of our heads till he
receive power from God so to do. This our discerning and acknowledging the
hand of God in setting the wicked on work, as you call it; in giving them
leave to sift his Saints, as I say, and to exercise his graces in them, does
breed no such fear nor torment of conscience, as you talk of in Christ, so
long as we are persuaded, that God loves us, and does all things for the best,
and that the sharpest trial in this life is the speediest way to his kingdom.
If we that be sinful, and frail, subjected indeed to the just remorse of our
consciences, can yet apprehend and discern the rage of Satan, and of the
wicked, armed with power from above to make trial of our Faith and Patience,
and not be dismayed nor tormented in mind, in any such sort as you speak of:
what shall we think the Soul of Christ, full of grace, and of the holy Ghost,
inseparably joined with his Godhead in one and the same person, could conceive
of these his sufferings, or Satan's incensing the Jews against him, but as the
truth was, that he well liked, and God approved and anointed him to be the
Savior of the world, and the destroyer of Satan's kingdom for this obedience
and patience, which he should show in admitting the Jews to execute Satan's
furious rage against his Body? You would have Christ to conceive, that he was
sinful, defiled, hateful and accursed of God, and in that respect God was
become an Enemy to him, and had forsaken him; but these mysteries of iniquity
and Infidelity were far from that holy, undefiled, and acceptable Sacrifice,
which the unspotted I amb of God did offer for the sins of the world. But why
shrink you, and shift you thus from pillar to post; and make sometimes the
immediate hand of God to be cause of Christ's suffering in Soul, sometimes the
working or conflicting of Satan with him, and sometimes Christ's own
apprehension that the Jews and the devil were set on work by the secret
wrath of God; and all this while you do not once endeavor you say, to express
the manner of it? where in deed you do nothing but wave to and fro, not
knowing where to stand, or what to hold, but only to requoile to your
accustomed couerts of Gods proper wrath and indignation against sin, from
which you think you may frame what fancies you will.

Defenc. page 81. li. 33.
In your Book you speak directly against the maine ground of it; affirming
that God himself did nothing to Christ; that is he did not PROPERLY punish
him.] Indeed I do defend, that God with his immediate hand or power did not
torment the Soul of Christ; otherwise that God gave power to the Prince of
darkness to come against him; and Matthew. 27.
delivered him into the hands of sinners, to do (unto him) Acts. 4.
whatsoever the counsel of God had determined before to be done; that I every
where confess and anouch. Himself says, his John. 18.
Father gave him the Cup, which he did drink; to show as well the Fatherly
moderation, as the righteous permission of his sufferings; more then which no
Scripture does enforce, though it call that Gods hand or deed, which God by
his love did approve and ordain, and by his wisdom and power direct and
order for the performance of our Salvation. [ Defenc. page 82. (...). 2.
The very truth and Gods nord it self is flat contrary to you. Your fancies
perhaps be very strong against me, but as for the Scriptures, you use to crake
a great deal more of them then you have cause. He that can tell the meaning of
Jobs words, when he said, Job. (...).
the Lord has given, and the Lord has taken, though the Sabeans and Chaldeans
took his Oxen and Camels from him; and Job. 19.
the hand of God has touched me; when yet Satan Job 2
smote him with sore Boyles from the sole of his foot unto his Crown; shall
soon disperse the mists, that you would make out of the word of God.

(...) is written, God made him sin for us: Yea he made his Soul sin.
Which is nothing Defenc. page 82. (...)
else but the Lord laid upon him the iniquity of us all. You show your skill
and understanding in the Scriptures. To prove that God with his immediate hand
did afflict and torment the Soul of Christ, you note that God did appoint him
to be the Sacrifice for sin, and that Christ accordingly did offer up his
Soul, (or life) to be disposed at Gods pleasure. What is meant by sin in
those words of the Apostle, God made him sins for us, I have largely showed
before; whence you may conclude, that God did appoint and approve Christ to be
the Lamb, that should take away the sins of the world, because he was
undefiled, and accepted of God as a most sufficient exchange or recompense for
the sins of men: but torment from the immediate hand of God these words do
not touch, and therefore you might have as well saved your Paper, as lost your
pains. The next words, that Christ made his (own) Soul, (or life) an
offering for sin, to what purpose you bring it I can not guess, except it be
to let your Reader see, that you do not understand whereabout you go. For how
does Christ's giving of his life for many, prove that his Soul was afflicted by
the very hand of God? Had Gods immediate hand tormented his Soul, when he
commended his Spirit into his Fathers hands, by your Doctrine he commended it
not to rest, but to Torment. [ This is nothing else, you say, but the Lord laid
upon him the iniquity of vt all. Then none of these three Texts come any thing
near your intention, that God with his own hand laid the punishment of our
sins on Christ, since the last word, by which you expound the rest, infers
no more, but that God caused or made our sins to come against him. In which
words, as in all the rest implying any such thing, the Prophet means; God was
the Supreme Cause and Author of all Christ's sufferings, which I no way deny;
but not the immediate executioner with his own hand, as you have lately
devised, and now would prove, if you could tell how.

This Phrase in the Scriptures, that God DID these or these things, concludes
not that he did them with his immediate hand, but that he was the Decreer,
director, and disposer of those things by his just Judgment to punish sin,
or by his wisdom to make trial of his Saints; God using for his Ministers and
executioners, Men or Angels, good or bad, as seemed best to his heavenly will
and Counsel. Amos 3.
Is there any evil in the City, and the Lord has not done it? says Amos.
Where he does not ascribe all evil of punishment to the immediate hand of God,
but to the Sovereign Judgment and power of God appointing and ordering what
shall be done. Esa. 45.
I am the Lord, there is none other; making Peace, and creating evil. In both
God had and has his Instruments, though in both his will and power did and
does prevail. When David had sinned by killing Vriah, and taking his wife, God
thus threatened him by Nathan the prophet. 2. Sam. 12.
I will raise up evil against thee out of thine own bouse, and will take
thymiues before thine cies, and give them to thy neighbor, and he shall lie
with thy wives in the sight of this Sun. For thou did it secretly: but I
will do this thing before all Israel and the Sun. Shall we attribute
Absolons unnatural rebellion against his father, and his most shameless incest
to Gods immediate hand, and so make God the only author of so horrible sin,
which is the height of all wickedness? Or did God by his just judgment give
liberty to Satan to lead Absolon, that ambitious murderer of his eldest
brother, by the wicked counsel of Achitophell to this impudent villainy? So
when Job says, The Lord has given, and the Lord has taken it; did he mean
that God took it with his immediate hand? or that God by his righteous
judgment did enlarge the devil, and those wicked robbers to make trial of
him by the loss of his goods and children? Job. 2.
Stretch out thine hand, and touch his bones and his flesh, said Satan to God,
when he desired leave to strike Jobs body. Whereupon Saint Austen says.
August. ad Simplicianum. li. 2. Epist. 1.
Manum Domini appellabat permissam a Domino manum suam, id est, ipsam
potestatem quam volebat accipere. The hand of the Lord (Satan) calls his own
hand permitted by God, that is, the power and leave which he would receive. God
himself thus speaks of the Assyrians, that oppressed his people. Esa. 10.
O Ashur, the rod of my wrath; the staff in their hands is mine indignation.
God then uses the wicked both men and Angels, to execute his judgments, and
exercise his servants, though they have no such knowledge or purpose; and their
rage and deeds he calls his anger and acts, because he gives them power and
leave, without which they could not stir to hurt any of his creatures, much
less any of his servants. Which Christ signified to Pilate, when he said;
John. 19.
Thou could have no power at all against me, except it were given thee from
above.

Defenc. page 82. li. 7.
The Prophet says, the Lord delighted to bruize him, and afflicted him, or
slew him.] In points of faith undoubted, men may dally with diversity of
significations, and do no hurt; but if you will erect new religions, and then
justify your inventions with What the Prophets fore tol ^e of Christ's
sufferings, that the (...) firm was verified.
new translations to your liking, you bring us now not the word of God, but the
humor of your own head. If I may be allowed the like liberty, I can soon
cool the fire of your words, by the same rules that you kindle them. For the
words may signify; The Lord would humble him and made him expectant, (or
patient.) The proper significations of the words, you will say, must be
preferred. But none of them can be verified of Christ's sufferings, at the least
if we believe your Lexicon. For dacha, with you, is to bruise or beat to
powder, and ch^l properly notes the labor of Women in childbirth, as chalah
does to be painefully sick; which things agree not properly to the Passion of
Christ. Since then we must be forced to the consequent or adherent
significations of the words, mine have as good right to be received as yours.
How beit to direct the Reader the safest way in this case; Neither you, nor I
must intrude our devices upon the words of God, but what the Evangelists
describe in Christ's sufferings, that without Question the Prophets foresaw, and
foretold in their Predictions. The words then of the Prophets must not infer
any new fancies of yours, nowhere confirmed in the Evangelists; but what the
Gospel witnesses Christ did suffer, that Esaias foresaid Christ should susfer.
The immediate hand of God tormenting the Soul of his Son, is no where
testified in the Gospel: It was therefore no where foreshewed in the Prophets.
But the true and accustomed translation may stand for good; the Lord would
bruise him or humble him, and made him weak. And where you catch hold of the
word khaphets, as if it were Gods own action, because he took pleasure and
delight therein, besides that the word signifies to be willing and content as
well as to desire and delight, that part of your exposition refuteth the rest.
For God takes no pleasure in punishing, as the Prophet confesses of him,
Lament. 3. verse. 33.
He does not punish with the heart; and as he witnesses of him self, Azech
1^. verse. 32.
I take no pleasure in the death of him that dies. Where you must either
translate the words, that God took pleasure to humble and weaken his Son to
try his obedience and patience; or else that for our sakes rather then we
should perish, God was content, or would bruize him with stripes and wounds due
to us, and made him taste of our Infirmities; yet neither way conuinceth, that
God did this with his own hand. For Psalm. 116.
The death of his Saints is precious (which is as much as pleasant) in his
sight; and then most precious, when with Faith and Patience they despise for
Gods cause, all that their pursuers can do unto them.

Defenc. pa. 82. li. 8.
The Apostles do acknowledge that both the counsel and hand of God was in
Christ's punishment.] The place which you bring, Acts 4. verse 28, does clearly
confute your erroneous conceit, and answer all that hitherto you have cited to
the contrary. Acts. 4.
Against thine holy Son Jesus both Herod and Pontius Pilate, with the
Gentiles and the people of Israel, gathered themselves together, to doc what
soever thy hand and counsel had determined before to be done. Let the simplest
that is, here judge, whether the Apostles in this their prayer acknowledge any
thing done to Christ in his sufferings by Gods own hand without all means, as
you imagine; or whether they do not expressly avouch, that both rulers and
people of Jews and Gentiles were Gods means to do that, which his hand and
counsel had before determined to be done. So that Christ was not left to the
will and power of his enemies, to doc with him what they would, but to do that
unto him, which Gods wisdom determined, and hand guided to be done. Here
apparently is the hand of God named and confessed, but mediate; that is,
ordering and disposing the Jews rage and violence according to Gods foresetled
counsel. Wherein the goodness of your judgment and cause appears, that
when you should prove any thing, you produce places that evidently impugn
your purpose. With like discretion you cite that which follows. For what if
God condemned (that is, abolished) sin in the flesh, (of which words I have
spoken enough before) does that imply, that God punished Christ's Soul or
body with his immediate hand? Small store of proofs you have for your vpstart
doctrine of God tormenting Christ's soul with his immediate hand, when you
turn aside to texts, that no way mention any such matter, and prate in your
pride, that the word of God is flat contrary to me.

Defenc. pa. 82. li. 12.
Gods own hand then did smite Christ, and inflicted on him whatsoever he
suffered, as the condemnation of sin. Well leapt; From Gods hand using the
Jews and Gentiles as his means to do to Christ whatsoever his counsel had
determined, you step to Gods own hand, excluding all means; directly against
the profession of the Apostles, and the whole Church with them, and against the
tenor of the new Testament, which sharply rebukes the rage and wickedness of
the Jews, that put Christ to death. Were you not carried with the spirit of
slumber and giddiness, could you thus loosely conclude so weighty causes, not
only without, but against the Scriptures? [ Ibid. li. 16.
The punishment ordained for sin by the justice of God, and inflicted by the
hand of God (whatsoever mean it pleases him to use) is called the wrath of
God, as you acknowledge.] My words make as much for you, as the Apostles did
even now, when they expressly contradicted you; but such as your cause is, such
is your conscience; you duck and diue, you care not where nor whether, so you
may have a general Phrase to bear you above water, when you are out of
breath. You set your self to prove that God with his immediate hand afflicted
the Soul of Christ; and when your proofs fail you, you catch up my words
auouching Conclus. pa. 245. li. 31.
the punishment ordained for sin by Gods Justice, or inflicted on us by Gods
hand (WHATSOEVER MEAN HE VS^) is called the wrath of God. Would you hence
infer, that because God uses means, therefore he uses no means, but
inflicteth all punishment of sin with his immediate hand? Or because all
punishments great and small on us, or on whomsoever, come from the Souera gne
power and hand of God, therefore God uses no means? Or what other absurd
conceit would you collect out of my words? I speak not here of the Reprobate,
I speak of all mankind, though you leave out my words (inflicted ON US) of
purpose to serve your own sense. Neither do I say it is Gods eternal or
spiritual wrath, but all afflictions imposed on us for sin, by what means
soever, are in the Scriptures called the wrath of God, as I have else where
showed, albeit they tend not to damnation, nor destruction. What is this to
Gods immediate hand punishing the Soul of Christ? Or which way recall you this
to the Conquest, that Christ had over Satan and all his power, wherewith you
began?

Defenc. page 82. li ^8.
Then how may we think Gods infinite justice and power punished Christ?] You
must go by thoughts indeed, and neither by warrant, nor word of holy
Scripture. How Christ bare our sins in his body on the tree, and gave the
same to be Matthew. 26.
broken for us, and 1. Pet. 2.
his blood to be shed for many, for the remission of sins; we shall need no
thoughts nor concerts of yours: the description of his sufferings is so
particularly and precisely set down in the Scriptures, that no man doubts
thereof besides you, that respect moreyour secret sansies, then the public
histories of the Evangelists. Defenc. page 82. li. 21.
In his spirit certain^ ^e suffered spiritual and incomprehensible punishments
being no sins such as men's souls are subject unto, as from God.] Though by
no learning you can truly derive any such thing from the Scriptures, touching
the tormenting of Christ's soul by the immediate hand of God, yet your conceit
is so strong, that you CERTAINLY avouch any thing. For in these few words you
presume more then you will prove whiles you live; to make God with his
immediate hand to afflict the soul of Christ with the same pains, that the
damned are tormented; and other reason for it you have none, but because all
power in heaven, earth, and hell is from God; and called the hand of God. By
which the Scriptures do not imply the immediate hand of God, but his power
working by means appointed and established by him. In the Scriptures God is
every where proclaimed to be THE LORD OF HOSTS, and therefore as there is no
power in Angels, Devils, Men or other creatures, that comes not from him, so
they are not idle armies, nor lookers on, but are endued with power from God as
well to protect, as to punish where, when, how, and whom they shall be
appointed. Which the wisdom and power of God has ordained and settled, not to
shorten his arm nor to weaken his strength as needing assistants, but by
constituting Servants and Ministers under him, to let men and Angels, good and
badde, continually behold how mighty and wise, righteous and glorious he is,
that wants no means to execute his will, and yet directs all things by his
wisdom. Is not God able to prefer and keep his Saints by his word or his
will without aid of others? who doubts it? And yet Psalm. 91.
He gives his Angels charge over thee, to keep thee in all thy ways. And
Psalm. 34.
the Angel of the Lord pitcheth round about them, that fear him and
delivers them Is he not able also to punish with his own hand, and to revenge
his enemies without help of his creatures? Who denies it, that knows what
belongs to a God? And yet David prayed thus against his enemies. Psalm. 35.
Let them be as chafe besore the and, and the Angel of the Lord scatter them.
Let their way be dark and slippery, and the angel of the Lord persecute them.
And the Psalmist, describing the plagues powered out on Psalm. 78.
Egypt, says; God rest upon the the fierceness of his anger, indignation
wrath, and vexation; (...) the sen^ing in of evil angels (amongst them.) God
then in this life uses men and angels to per^orme his judgments, and chiefly
the devil is used againstsinners, as we may see by the Apostles ^peech and
course, who delivered heinous offenders unto Satan, as unto the public
tormentor appointed by God to execute vengeance; wherein though he were to have
power and leave from God, yet execution was allotted to him.

The ancient Fathers have duly observed so much out of the Scriptures.
August. ad. Simpli. ^anum. li. 2. quaest. 1.
V^itur Deus ministres eitam malis (...) ad vindictam malorum, vel ad bonorum
probatio^m. God uses as his ministers evil spirits, says Austen, to revenge
the wicked, and to try the good. Saint Ierom. Hierony. in Io^l. cap. 2.
Non solum homines ministri s^t, and vltores ira eius, sed etiam contrariae
fortitudines, quae appellantur furor and ira Dei. Not only men are Gods
ministers, and reuen^ of his wrath, but also the contrary powers (which are
devils) are called the wrath and displeasure of God. For (...).
as the Babilo^ans punishing Jerusalem are called Gods armies so wicked angels
are called Gods hosts and camps, whiles they execute the Lords will. I (...) s^
Basile. Basil. ^ Psalm. 3^.
Evil spirits which execute punishment on the wicked and the powers that serve
(...) in that sort) are called the Anger and wrath (of God.) And that this was
a received opinion amongst Christians, Ierom gives testimony, where he says.
Hierony in (...) cap. 30.
Pl^rique (...) (...) ^am ^uroris Domini Diabolum interpretantur, cui tradimur
ad puniendum. The most of our men interpret the wrath of Gods fury to be the
devil, to whom we are delivered to be punished. And to that end this office is
assigned the devil and his angels. Idem. in (...) cap. 30.
(...) (...) to mentis praepositi sunt. Wicked angels are appointed to inflict
or execute torments. Wherefore this resolution is learnedly, and truly made by
Zanchius. ^.
Du^ ad summam sunt officia ad qua Damones omnes sunt a Deo destinati. There
are summar^ly two offices, to which all the devils are appointed of God. One
that by their tentations the godly elect may be exercised in patience and
humility, and so their salvation more and more ^urdered: the other, that God
by them, as his ministers and executioners, (...) spiritual and corporal
punishments on the wicked reprobate. Ibidem.
Id quod maxim (...) (...) fine seculi etc. Which shall most be seen in the
end of the world, when God shall perform that the devils shall be tormented
themselves, and torment others in the place of eternal punishments. You take
the devils office from him, and impose it on God himself, making him the
tormentor of damned souls, with his immediate hand, to which incomprehensible
punishments as you call them, you subject the soul of Christ on the cross,
without ground or grant of holy Scripture; and as if this were not desperate
impre^ enough, with obstinate impudency you say, CERTAINLY it was so.

^.
Some, God himself immediately inflicted, some he inflicted by means and
instruments, but (...) his hand principally, which did whatsoever was done unto
him.] You told us not twelve lines before, that Gods own hand inflicted on
Christ whatsoever he suffered; now you tell us, some God himself immediately
inflicted, some by means and instruments, ^.
but (...) (...) (...) (...). The first is a notorious and presumptuous
untruth, no way (...) by any Scripture; the next is a trifling cavil, or a
pestilent blasphemy: for (...) you mean no more, then that God was the
principal (...) and Appointer how in (...) and his (...) (...) should have
power over Christ's body; so God is the principal Agent not only in all the
^usterings of Martyrs and Innocents, but the supreme and (...) Director and
Disposer of all things done by angels, men, or devils. A thought can not rise
in the heart, a word can not proceed out of the mouth, the hand can perfor^
(...) act, without the power and will of the Creator. In Acts. ^7.
him (...), move, and (...) ^ur being; and so have the Angels, all whose power
comes from him, and (...) him. But if you mean, that God by his revealed
will, or public ordinance s^t the Jews and the devil on work to kill his
Son, then you must either excuse them by Gods authority, or charge God with
the same iniquity.

Defenc. pa^. 82. li. 27.
You can not say, that Christ's punishment was Gods mere and bare permission
only.] What you mean by mere and bare permission, I know not; it proceeded,
I say, from the (...) kind of will and power in God, whence all the trials of
his saints and deaths of his (...) come, though this were of more moment then
all theirs; in that it touched a greater person, and tended to a greater honor
then men might have. Ibid. li. 2^.
Nay (...) punishment was God: written and revealed will his express and
public ordinance, and most (...) appointment from the beginning of the world.
God in his written and unwritten decrees, in his public and private
ordinances, is equally wise, just and holy; that is, he is always like
himself. Wherefore this far set Preface has in it no strength to (...) the
whole (...) of Christ's sufferings to Gods immediate hand. Did not God expressly
by his Prophet denounce to David, what he would do against (...), (...) (...)
wise, and devouring him with the sword? And yet I trust you will not impute
(...) ambition, rebellion and incest to Gods immediate action. What Matthew. 24.
affliction and tribulation the Church shall suffer toward the end, what 2 Thessalonians 2.
strange illusions and lying wond^rs shall lead them to believe lies, that
receive not the love of Gods truth; what ^. Tim 4.
heresy and 2. Tim. 3.
iniquity shall abound in the latter days; the written and revealed will of
God, his express and public ordinance, does appoint, foretell and assure.
Shall we therefore ascribe all these persecutions, delusions, and
transgressions to Gods immediate action? Except you be mad, you will be of
another mind. In decreeing, ordering, and effecting all these, God is most
just pure and holy; and yet these actions in their immediate authors,
perswaders, and approuers, are most unjust, impure, and unholy. Wherefore this
prating of Gods mere and bare permission will nothing help your false and
wicked collection. [ But God, you say, appointed Christ's sufferings from the
beginning of the world.] As if any thing were new and lately remembered with
God. From the beginning of the world all his works were known to him; little
or great, all are alike decreed, appointed, and settled with him.

Defenc. page 82. li. 33.
The whole suffering of Christ was Gods own and most proper action.] Most
proper is that which is more PROPER then all other, or at least as proper as
any. If these words of yours be true, then all that Christ suffered in body,
was as properly Gods action, as the creation of the world, the renouation of
man's mind, the infusion of grace, the mission of the Holy Ghost, and
glorification of his Elect. And consequently Christ suffered nothing at the
hands of men, but all that is reported in the Scriptures of his outward
sufferings, is fabulous and false, which is blasphemy in the highest degree. [
Defenc. page 82. li. 34.
The wicked I^es and Devils were only instruments to do that which he set them
on work to do, though they thought not so.] If God had the wicked Jews and
Devils ^or his instruments in afflicting Christ, then was the whole suffering
of Christ not so properly Gods action, as those things which God does by the
immediate working of his spirit, and power of his will, without all means or
instruments used by him. And when all this flourish is faded away, tell us why
the crucifying and wounding of Christ's body and shedding of his blood by the
rage of the Jews, was more properly Gods action, then the beheading of John
Baptist, or stoning of Steven, or the violent death of any Martyr; in which God
decrees, directs, and appoints what shall be done, though the wicked
unawares perform Gods con^ll by satisfying their bloody rage and fury. If you
answer, that absolutely and immediately God works all in all, then refer you
all the wickedness in the world both of men and devils to Gods immediate
action; which is not an heap, but an hell of blasphemies. If you mean, that
God works all the good which is in every action, but not the malicious and
furious desires of the devil and his members, then are you no whit the nearer
to make the whole suffering of Christ to be Gods most proper action. For not in
Christ's sufferings only, but in the trials and afflictions of all his Saints,
as in all the punishments of the Reprobate God has his most righteous
judgments, and most holy purposes, which the devil does execute, not knowing
Gods counsels, and hating Gods servants, as he does God himself; and so by
Gods secret wisdom and almighty power is made an instrument by his eger
malice to serve their good, and promote Gods glory, whiles he labors their
destruction and Gods dishonor. Of this S. Austen wisely and soberly says:
August. de (...). li. 4. ca. 13.
Nescit Diabolus quomodo illo and insidian^ and ^rente v^tur ad salutem
sidelium suorum excellentissima Dei sapientia. The devil does not know how the
most excellent wisdom of God uses his lying in wait, and raging, to the
salvation of the faithful.

Defenc. pa. 82. li 36.
Now we come to answer you more directly touching the text i^ hand. Where you
would intimate, that Christ on the Cross was not tempted by the powers of
hell, because Christ could not be tempted by Satan's inward suggestion, but only
by the ear receiving an outward voice; this I suppose also is a singular
conceit of your own, without any title of Scripture to prove it by. I can not
call your conceits singular, they are so void of all reason and judgment;
private they are to your self, and deprived of all truth, and testimony
either of Scripture, save such as you most ignorantly abuse, or of the Church
of Christ before you, which you regard not, as drowned in the depth of your
selfe-pleasing paradoxes. Whether I have grounds of Scripture, and the consent
of Christ's Church, for that which I defend in this and other points refused by
your curious conceitfull head, the Reader shall see before we depart. But in
the mean while you forget, Sir Defensor, that you should prove this to be the
Apostles meaning in those words produced by you, Christ spoiled powers and
principalities, which you never offer to do. You deny that I affirm, and
without any farther process you presume your fancy to be the Apostles sense;
which is your common course throughout your writings. Could you desorce mine
exceptions, as you can not, that makes not your exposition the truer, nor your
argument the stronger, till you have justly proved this, which you pretend to
be the Apostles purpose.

Defenc. page 83. li. 4.
What reason can you give, that where the mind conceiueth any temptation,
there of necessity must be concupiscence, and corruption of the flesh? etc. In
us men it is so you say; I grant it is so: but that of necessity in nature it
must be so, I see no reason in the world.] The conceiving and discerning of a
tentation is not the point we speak of, but the profering and suggesting it;
and why that can not inwardly be done by the mind of man without corruption of
sin, the reason is evident in the Scriptures. For a tentation to sin is not
a cogitation or imagination, but a provocation and motion to sin, which is
sinful in the Tempter, since it is no less evil di ectly and purposely to
provoke to sin, then to consent or commit sin. For which cause the
Scriptures ascribe that office namely to the devil, to be the Tempter unto
evil; and S. James Acts 5. v 3. Matthew ^. v 3.
expressly and truly demeth it of God, as from whom being good, comes nothing
but that which is good. And consequently, as James. 1.
God can not be tempted with evil, so neither g These. 3 v. 5.
tempts he any man (to evil) says James; thereby teaching us, that he must
first be tempted, or filled with evil, that tempts and leads another
thereto. Since then Man in his first Creation was made after the Image of God,
that was very good, and void of all evil; though he might be outwardly
tempted, because he was mutable, yet could ^e not inwardly be tempted by his
own heart, because he was innocent: for that which was right and good, as
every part within man was, could not persuade or provoke man to evil, but like
must lead the like. And this is the reason of that general rule in Saint
James touching inward tentation, where he says: Every one is tempted, when he
is drawn and enticed by his own concupiscence. The Apostle speaks not this
of outward tentations, but of inward; sending men to the corruption of their
own hearts and lusts, by which Satan secretly provoke them to sin, without
external speech and presence, which all the godly would soon detest and
abhor; but baiting them with their own desires and delights by means of
that concupiscence which naturally dwells in them, and not only serves the
devil as an instrument to farther his wicked suggestions, but of it self
lusts after evil, and strives against the Spirit of grace. If this were not
in Adam before his fall, then could the devil work in him by no inward motion
of infidelity or iniquity, since the parts and powers of the soul that
should suggest either, must be infected and inclined to either, before they
could provoke and allure the rest to consent. Howbeit, the question is of
Christ, whether he could inwardly be tempted to evil by the cogitations or
thoughts of his own heart, though neither consent, nor act did follow; and
herein I think you will show your self to have a fountain of folly, if not
worse, springing out of that unquiet brain of yours.

Defenc. page 8, li. 11.
I suppose you have no reason to affirm (as you do) that Christ in the
wilderness was tempted by Satan by outward voice only.] The discreet Reader,
when he has well considered your vanities in this place, will the less
wonder at, and the sooner discover your novelties in other things. Have I no
reason to affirm, that Christ was tempted in the wilderness by the outward
voice of Satan, when the Scriptures directly record the words and deeds of the
Devil to Christ, as also Satan's presence before him, and departure from him?
Does not the Scripture expressly say, that the devil took him Matthew. 4.
up into the holy city, and set him on the pinnacle of the Temple: and again
took him into a very high hill, and showed him all the kingdoms of the world,
and the glory thereof? Are not the devils words to Christ in three several
temptations likewise set down by the Evangelists, Luke and Matthew, whereby he
tempted Christ; first to make (the) stones, (that lay in sight) bread; then to
cast himself from the pinuacle of the Temple; and lastly, to fall down before
the devil, and to worship him? [It was a temptation, you will say.] The words
and deeds of Satan were, So says the Scripture; but not that Christ imagined
these things, or that the devil moved Christ's heart thus to think. It is a
narration of things done and spoken, not a vision or cogitation what might be
proffered by Satan's suggestion; the Devil said to Christ, Luke 4.
If thou will bow thy knee (...), (before me or) in my presence, all this
(glory of the world, which I have showed thee) shall be thine. To whom Christ
replied with just indignation; (...), Get thee behind me Satan. Matthew. 4.
It is written, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him alone shall thou
serve. And so the Devil left him, and lo, the angels came, and ministered unto
him. Why may not the rest of the Histories in the Gospel be thoughts and
imaginations as well as this, since they have no plainer words nor deeds then
this?

Defenc. page 83. li. 13.
It seems rather to be manifest, that (Christ's) temptation was merely in
cogitation, and in the thoughts of his heart, so moved by the spiritual
suggestion of the devil.] Besides your manifest gaine-saying the words of the
Evangelists, that the devil did and spoke thus to Christ, as the Gospel
reports, and carried him to the temple, and to the mountain; you make the
thoughts and cogitations of Christ's heart to be inwardly moved with
Infidelity, presumption, idolatry and blasphemy. For such in effect were the
persuasions, that Satan proffered Christ by word of mouth; which if you think
Christ's heart suggested to himself in Satan's steed, and by Satan's means, then
bring you worse then corruption into the soul of Christ. For a Prou. 24.
foolish thought as sin, says Solomon; and Prou. 5.
an euili thought is an abomination to the Lord. What then are perfidious,
presumptuous, mendacious, and blasphemous thoughts, I say thoughts suggesting
and persuading these heinous sins, though consent or act do not follow? and
yet if you look well to them, you shall see false and wicked asseuerations in
Satan's words, which if any man's heart suggest unto him in the same form, that
Satan uttered them, he is guilty of the same impiety with Satan. To show his
pride and vaunt his power, Satan said; Luke 4.
all (the authority and glory of earthly kingdoms) is committed to me, and I
give it to whom I will. If any man's heart or thought do but say, or suggest the
same to it self after Satan, does not his heart affirm a lie to Gods great
dishonor, as Satan's mouth did? You therefore and your hobler, that would rain
help you out of this quake mire, by setting his censure in the margin, may do
well to beware of maintaining such spiritual cogitations in Christ as
proceeded from the devils mouth by the witness of holy Scripture, and are meet
for none but for him and his members: and to tread rather in the plain path of
the Holy Ghost, that Satan's voice uttered those blasphemies, which Christ's
heart so detested, that he could no longer endure the devils speech, when he
brake out to such open impiety, that he put himself in Gods stead, but
commanded him away.

And when you next suffer any man to reuise your doings, entreat him not to
cross you and himself so fondly as this Corrector does. For where you say it
is manifest, that Christ's temptation was merely (that is only) in
cogitation, your own ouerseer controleth that as an error, and says, Defenc.
page 83. ad margin h. 15.
OR ELSE by some such outward objects, which might work that spiritual
cogitation in Christ, as Satan might well know how. What these means were or
might be, this Huckster knows no more then you do, but it suffices some of
your sort never to hold their tongues nor pens, though they know not what
you say or write. Outward objects to work any such cogitation in Christ, must
be by the ear or by the eye. The ear in Christ you deny to have been the
instrument that received this temptation; though the Scripture by plain
consequent avouch so much. What object of the eye could lead Christ to think,
that Satan was the Disposer of earthly power and glory; and that the Devil
would afford him all, if he would bow his knee in the devils presence to
acknowledge the giver, can you tell? In us, since the soul was weakened,
corrupted, and divided against it self by sin, the devil can (when he is
permitted so to do) stir the imaginations of men either sleeping or waking,
and move their affections; otherwise he can impresse no cogitation in the
soul, but must proferre the suggestion by some speech of his own or others.
In Christ he could do nothing, farther than Christ was willing to permit; the
words of our Savior are very plain: John 14.
The Prince of this world comes, but in me he has nothing, that is, no
power, place, nor work. So much the devils themselves confessed. Luke. 4.
What have we to do with thee, thou Jesus of Nazaret? And since he was
stronger than the devil, and took his armor from him, and bound him, and
cast him out of others, neither could he so much as enter hogs without
Christ's leave, how was it possible the devil should work any cogitation in
Christ, but what Christ was willing he should? Now, will, that Satan should
impresse these impious cogitations in his heart, Christ had none, nor could
have any; since with disdain he put the devil to silence upon the hearing of
that blasphemous and idolatrous suggestion. Wherefore it is evident, that these
things were spoken and done by Satan, even as the Scriptures describe them; and
we may not for our pleasures make them imaginations, not actions; cogitations,
not speeches.

Of this opinion with me, have been the best learned of all Ages in the Church
of Christ. Ignatius. ^.
How wast thou not afraid, (says he) o thou the worst of all wicked spirits,
(...), to utter such a voice against the Lord, if thou will fall down on
earth, and worship me? Irenaeus citing the words of Christ, Depart Satan,
says: Irenaeus lib. 5. ca. 18.
The Angel, that fell from God, is destroyed by that voice, detected who he
is, and conquered by the Son of Man. Tertullian makes the devil to brag
of this tentation in this sort. Tertullianus aduersus Pra^eam.
Ego ad ipsum Deum accessi, ipsum cominus tentaui. I came to God himself, and
tempted him hand to hand. Athanasius. The Lord convicted the devil first in
the Mountain, pulling from him the folds (or couerts) of his breast, and
showing, that he was the devil, reproouing ^.
him to be none of the Saints, but Satan the Tempter, in saying, go behind me
Satan. Vincentius Lirinensis. Vincentius de Haeresibus c^. 37.
Sicut tunc caput capiti, ita nunc quoque membra membris loquuntur. As then (in
the Wilderness) the head spoke to the head, so now the members (of the devil)
speak to the members (of Christ.) Ambrose. Ambros. in ^ucam ^i. 4. de 2
tentatione Christ.
Christus, quia fortior, facie ad faciem tentatur. Christ, as the stronger, was
tempted face to face. Austen. August. de consens. Euang. li 2 ca. 6.
Incertum quid prius factum sit, nihil tamen ad rem, dum omnia facta esse
manifestum sit. It is uncertain, which (of the two last Tentations) was first
done, but that skilleth not, so long as it is manifest, they were all done.
Gregory. Gregorius in Euangel. hom^ 16.
Omnis Diabolica illa tentatio foris, non intus fuit. All that Tentation (of
Christ) by the devil was without, not within. (Christ.) And so again.
Moralium in Io^. 3. ca. 11.
Sic dignatus est haec exterius cuncta suscipere, vt men's eius interius
inconcussa maneret. So the Lord vouchsafed to receive all these tentations
outwardly, that his mind inwardly stood unshaken. Beda follows Gregory.
Beda in 4 ca. Matthew.
All that Temptation of the devil (says he) was not inward, but outward.
Damascene. Damasce. (...) fi^es li 3 ca. 20.
Christ was tempted, and did overcome. (...). The wicked spirit then suggested
from without as he did unto Adam, not by thoughts. For Adams Tentation was not
by thoughts, but by the Serpent. Theophylact. Theophylact. in Matthew ca. 4.
(...). The devil appeared to Christ (in the Wilderness) by some sensible
shape. For Thoughts the Lord would not admit. God forbid, (we should so
think.) Sensibly therefore the devil showed (Christ) on the Hill all the
kingdoms, proposing them before his eyes by some show, or appearance. The very
ordinary Gloze could say. (...) ordina^ in Matt. ca 4.
Nota, haec omnia corporeis sensibus esse completa. Nec mirum si se permiserit
circumferri, qui permisit se crucifigi. Note that all these tentations were
accomplished to the senses of the Body. Neither is it a marvel that Christ
suffered himself to be carried about (of the devil,) when he suffered himself
to be crucified (by him.)

The best learned of the new Writers dissent not from these; though in one
point Christ not tempte^ by his own heart.
some make a doubt, whether that were done by inspection, or vision. Zanchius.
Christ (...) in ^ ca. ^ Philip.
Was not tempted by provocation of flesh (within) as we are; which Tentation is
not without some sin for so much as Concupiscence is sin. This Christ had
not. Sed tentatus a tentatore externo, hoc est a Satana, But he was tempted by
an external Tempter who was Satan, WHICH MIGHT BE VVITHOVT SIN. Calvin
says, it is no absurdity that Christ should be tempted of Satan, Caluini
har^, in Matthew. 4.
Modo ne intus, hoc est, in mente and anima quic quam putemus passum fuisse; so
as we do not think, that Christ suffered any thing within the mind, or Soul.
Gualter. Gualter^s in Lucae. 4 hom. 38.
Neque aliquis putare debet illum cogitationibus eiusmodi, quae, etsi nihil
aliud accedat, per se peccati nomine censentur, vel momento indulsisse.
Externis tamen sensibus ista obiecit Satan. No Man ought to think, that Christ
suffered (or admitted) these cogitations, not a moment; because, though nothing
else be added besides thought, yet of themselves they are within the compass
of sin. HOWBEIT SATAN proposed these things to Christ's senses. Yea, of the
sight of all the kingdoms of the world in a point of time, which some think
was a vision, he says; Ibidem.
Non nuda modo imaginatione factum existimo. Ista enim simplici narratione, vt
rem veram gestam, Euangelistae exponunt, and tam diligens loci at que temporis
notatio id omnino innuere videtur. I do not think, that this was done by
imagination only. For the Evangelists report these things with a simple
narration, as a matter of fact; and their exact noting of place and time
seems utterly to confirm the same. Vitus Theodorus. Vitus Theodorus in Matt.
ca. 4.
Historia est, quomodo Jesus post baptismum a Diabolo tentatus sit. It is an
History (and neither Vision nor Cogitation) how Jesus after Baptism was
tempted of the devil. Aretius. Aretius in c^. 4. Matthew.
Manifestum est presentem corporali specie cum Christo egisse. Nam incessum
illi tribuit, and congressum cum Christo pronomen (...) emphatice declarat;
preterea sermonem habet, loquitur, proponit, cit at Scripturam, quae corporalem
praesentiam Satanae arguunt. It is evident, that the devil tempted Christ in
some corporal shape. For the Scripture gives him an access to Christ, and
the Pronoune (to him) declares emphatically his congresse with Christ; besides
he talks, and utters words, proposes, and cites the Scriptures, which
argue the corporal presence of Satan. In Erasmus, Bullinger, Musculus, and
others, it likewise appears that this Tentation was external, which for
length I omit. Yea the Reasons, which lead you to make it an Imagination and
spiritual Cogitation of Christ's, are so childish, that they will rather euert,
then any way establish your conceit.

Defenc. page 83 li. 18.
Christ fasted but forty days and forty nights, and so long he was in the
Wilderness. Seeing then Christ was in the Wilderness all the while that he
was tempted, how could he be Really and Actually on a Pinnacle of the Temple at
Jerusalem?] Learn first to understand Christ was tempted after forty da^es.
the Scriptures, before you charge them with Contradictions. Saint Mark, whom
you would oppose to the rest, omitting the particular circumstances of Christ's
temptation, says in general words, that Christ was in the Wilderness forty
days, (and was) tempted of Satan. Hence you would infer, that after these
forty days Christ was not tempted; but which way? can you tell? The
Evangelist, whose words you pretend, deuideth these two, which you join
together, as the point between them in all our Greek Copies does clearly
convince. And were they not divided, thence perhaps you might prove, that
during the time of forty days he was in some sort tempted, but that he was
not tempted after the end of forty days, those words do no way imply.
Besides you take foolish and irreligious pains to conclude by a lame
consequent out of one Evangelist, that which two others directly and expressly
refute, as if you would trippe the holy Ghost in his Tale. Saint Matthew says,
Matt. 4. v. 2.
Christ fasting forty days and forty nights, (...) afterward began to be
hungry. S. Luke is plainer: Luke 4. v. 2.
Forty days (says he) was Christ tempted of the devil, and he did not eat
any thing in those days. (...), and those (forty) days ended, afterward he
began to hunger. So that apparently Christ fasted forty days eating nothing,
and at the end thereof began to be hungry; which occasion the devil took
first to tempt him openly, and so spite of your cauilling conceits, Christ was
tempted after the end of forty days, whatsoever he was before. Now those
words in Saint Lukes text, ( Forty days tempted of the Devil) Eusebius and
Cyrill, two ancient Greek Fathers, o Cyril. de recta fide ad Regin^. li. 2. de
Sacerd. Christi.
read disioyned, referring the forty days to Christ's being in the
wilderness. Eusebius. demonst. Euang. li. 3 cap. 2.
He was led of the Spirit in the wilderness forty days, (where the text
which they allege makes a point;) being tempted of the devil. How beit, it
is not material to me, whether we say, that Christ abode those forty days in
the Wilderness, or he was tempted those forty days in the Wilderness, since
it is plain, that Saint Luke speaks of other Temptations during those forty
days, then those three, which himself and Matthew exactly note, begun after
the end of those forty days. Euthymius observes, that Mark and Luke do say,
Euthymius in 4. ca. Matthew.
Christ was also tempted in the forti^ days: so that it is manifest the Devil
tempted him in those days a far off, by sleep, sloth, heaviness, and such
like. But after he knew him once to be hungry, then he set upon him, prope and
manifest, nearly and openly.

Defenc page ^3. li 23.
Chiefly when the Diu^ showed him all the kingdoms of the world, and the
glory of them, and that in the twinkling of an eye, how could that possibly
be done really, actually, and externally?] The two things, that stumble you,
are the shortness of the Time, and the largeness of the world, all whose
kingdoms were showed to Christ; which you suppose could neither be viewed in
one place, nor in the twinkling of an eye. For the Time; Saint Lukes words
are, (...), Eras^i An^ot. in ca. 4. Luc^.
by which Prouerbiall speech, says Erasmus, the Graecians express a short
time. The Syr^ack Translation imports as much. For that says; Satan showed
him all the kingdoms of the earth in a small time. Neither does the word
(...), which S. Lukevseth, necessarily signify an indivisible time, but a
short time As where Plutarch says, ^.
(...). our whole life is but a touch or small stay of time. And likewise
Phauorinus: Phauorinus in verbo (...).
(...). In a point is a good pause or time to breathe. The Apostle uses the
word Gal. 6. v. 17.
(...) for the spots and scarres of the stripes which he received in his body
for the Gospel of Christ. Howbe^t, let the word have his full strength, it can
signify but that part or point of Time, in which we may see, or speak, as
punctum does in Latin. Philip. 2.
Hoc punctum temporis, quo loquor. This point of time wherein I speak, says
Cicero. And Lucretius: Lucret. li. 4.
Temporis in punct^ rerum simulachra feruntur. In an instant of time the
resemblances of things are carried to the eyes. So that (...) does not enforce
such an insensible time as you pretend; though the devil took no long time to
show those things, and Christ took less to behold them; for he knew better
then the devil did, the vanity of that worldly glory which Satan so much
magnified; and since for our salvation Christ had laid aside the brightness
of his divine Majesty, during the time of his humility; I verily think he
would not vouchsafe all earthly pomp any longer view then the turning of an
eye to it, and from it; not that he doubted any temptation in it, but that he
despised it as not worthy of his sight, who was Lord of all heavenly power.

The manner also how those things were showed to Christ, may seem to have some
question; yet that does not prove it an imagination, because the ways were
many, by which it might be truly performed. Some think the word (...), (Satan
showed him all the kingdoms of the world) includes no particular inspection
of every place, but a general direction to the coasts and parts of the earth,
where those kingdoms lay, the rest being supplied by speech, and not by sight.
So the author of the exposition upon Matthew under Chrysostoms name. Ho^l. 5.
in 4. ^a. Matthew.
Satan showed those things, not so that Christ saw the kingdoms themselves, or
the cities, people, gold and silver in them; but the parts of the earth, in
which every kingdom, and the chief city thereof stood. For Satan Ibid^.
might most directly point with his finger to every place, and in words
express the state, and honor of every kingdom. So Euthymius. Euthymius in 4.
ca. Matthew.
Satan in a moment of time, as Luke says, that is, in a small time pointed
with his ^inger to the parts of the earth, in which the kingdoms of the world
were. This exposition Musculus in 4. ca. Matthew.
Musculus a man of no mean learning amongst our new writers follows.

Satan also might show, and Christ might see the places themselves, and the
pomp thereof: for Satan being an Angel, had another manner of sight, even in
the body which he assumed, then we have: and Christ, when pleased him, could
see whither, and what he would. That the Angels of God hear and see the
particular words and actions of all men here on earth, S. Paul is a witness,
where he says: 1. Tim. 5.
I charge thee in the presence of God, and of the Lord Jesus Christ, and of the
elect Angels, that thou observe these things without prejudice or partia^tie.
And again, we are made a ^ Cor. 4.
spectacle to the world, to angels, and to men. And likewise: s The woman ought
to have power on her head, because of the Angels; that is, she ought to cover
her head in sign of subjection to the power of the man, because the Angels
behold this, as all other actions of men, either in the Church or in the
world. From this power to hear and see what is said and done on the face of
the earth, even in the secret and dark places thereof, the devil is not
excluded, in that he is an Angel, though fallen from heaven, and cast unto the
earth, yet an Revel. 12.
accuser, and so a beholder of good, whom he impugneth, and of badde, over whom
he rules. And what marvel, that Angels, who by their creation excel (us) in
power and might have this incident to their condition, when as men, God opening
their eyes, can see things done in heaven and earth, which naturally they can
by no means see? When Dothan was besieged by the Aramites to apprehend
Elizeus, and his servant was afraid at the sight of them, the Prophet
encouraging his servant, said: 2. Kings 5.
Fear not, for they that be with us, are more then they that be with them: and
prayed God to open his servants eyes, which the Lord did; and 2. Kings 5.
he looked, and behold, the mountain was full of ^ierie charets and horses,
round about Elizeus. Mark. 1.
As Soon as John was come out of the water, where he baptized Jesus in Jordan,
John saw the heavens cleave asunder, and the Holy Ghost descending on (Christ)
like a Dove. Steven likewise not only had his face changed in the Council,
Acts 7.
as the face of an Angel, but looking steadfastly into heaven, saw the glory of
God, and Jesus standing at the right hand of God. Which though the incredulous
Jews did no ways believe, but stopped their ears when they heard him so say,
and ran upon him all at once, and cast him out of the city, and stoned him
as a blasphemous liar, yet can he be no Christian, Christ might see what he
would.
that doubts whether Steven saw this with his bodily eyes or no; the
Scripture being so resolute for it, how impossible soever it be to our eyes.
This power to behold things far distant, notwithstanding all impediments
interiected, not only Christ had when he would, as appears by his words to
Nathaniel; Ioh. 1. v. 48.
Before Philip called thee, being under the fig tree I saw thee (for which
Nathaniel acknowledged him to be the Son of God;) but he promised his, that
they should see greater things. Verse. 50.
Because I said to thee, I saw thee under the fig tree, beleeuest thou? Thou
shall see greater things then these. Verse. 51.
Verily, verily, I say unto you, henceforth you shall see the heavens open, and
the Angels of God ascending and descending upon the Son of man. Since then
Christ could and Luke 10. verse. 18.
did see Satan, like lightning, fall down from heaven; I make no doubt, but he
could open his own eyes to see the remote parts of the earth, when it pleased
him, though usually he did it not, by reason he needed it not: for he knew all
things, and even what was in man, which the Angels do not; and therefore
needed not any such use of his eyes, but when he saw his time; which in this
case he might like, lest the d^uell should despise him, as having greater power
and cleerer sight then Christ did or could show himself to have. For which
cause also Christ would stand on the pinnacle of the Temple without the devils
help, to let him know, that he wanted not power to do greater things then the
devil urged him unto; but only that he would take his own time, and do
nothing at the devils instigation or motion, nor repugnant to the will and
pleasure of God.

A third way the devil had, if Christ would permit it, to set these things
before our Saviors eyes. Satan is able not only to assume, what shapes he
will, and to transform himself into an Angel of light, but also to make
specters and shows of any thing in the air, and to deceive the eyes of men,
when he is suffered by God so to do: which not only experience of all ages,
but the Scriptures themselves confirm; wherein all 2 Thessalonians. 2.
false woonders and signs are ascribed to the operation of Satan. By this
means Simon the Sorcerer so bewitched the whole city of Samaria, that Acts 8.
they all from the least to the greatest gave heed unto him, and said; This man
is the great power of God. The Sorcerers of Pharaoh Exodus 7.
turned their rods into serpents, and changed the rivers into Exodus 7.
blood, and brought Exodus 8.
frogs upon the land of Egypt, as Moses and Aaron did; and other miracles could
the devil have done, as we see by killing of Jobs Job. 1.
sheep and servants with fire from heaven, and the Job. 2.
smiting of Jobs body with sore boiles, had not the hand of the Almighty
stopped him, and thereby made the Sorcerers confess, that Exodus 8. v 19
there was the finger of God. It was therefore no hard thing for Satan to frame
the appearances of kingdoms and cities, and show the similitudes of them from
every part of the earth, since they are but the figures and semblances of
things that we see with our eyes, which Angels good and badde have in their
power, when they are sent of God to do his will. Howbeit, Satan could not
delude the eyes of Christ without his knowledge and leave, though Satan did not
so think. And therefore all these ways being possible, yet I think the
second most agreeable to the words, and see no cause why we should measure
Christ's sight, (when pleased him) by man's reason, when as he did so many things
here on earth above all humane power and reason. For he often Mark 4.
walked on the sea; and John 20.
came, and stood in the midst of his disciples, when the doors were shut; and
made the ship that received him in the sea of Tiberias, John 6.
to be by and by at the land, whither they went; besides many thousand
miracles, which he wrought with his word and hand, whiles he conuersed amongst
men. Of which, if no Christian may make any question, why fly you to
imaginations or visions, so long as Christ had power enough with his eyes to
behold whatsoever Satan could show him.

It was Satan's act, you will say, to show them, and not Christ's. Satan as an
angel might see them, and show them; and Christ must either confess, that he
could not see so far, which would argue him to be feebler and weaker in power
then the Tempter, and so not the Son of God; or else be pleased to see
whatsoever Satan could show, which was easier for him to see, that was God and
man, then for Satan to show, that was but a reprobate angel, and could do
nothing, saving what was permitted. Whatsoever the means were, by which Christ
did see that which was showed Histories are not Visions.
him, it is evident, that the Scripture directs us to a sensible view taken
of earthly things and places, and not to a vision, much less to a cogitation.
For to what end was Christ carried to an exceeding high mountain, if he did
behold those things but in thought, and by a vision? Cogitations and visions
need no hills, and therefore that circumstance expressed by the Evangelists,
refuteth your dream of spiritual cogitations. And so does the danger, whereto
Satan persuaded our Savior to put himself, by falling from the pinnacle of
the Temple, to see whether the Angels would bear him up from dashing his foot
against a stone. What danger of dashing his feet against the stones could there
be in a cogitation without an action? And as for visions, besides that the
Scriptures use to distinguish dreams and visions from histories and actions,
what visions could the devil show Christ, except they were delusions? And that
Christ would suffer him to delude his spirit, is far more incredible, than that
he would be content to see what Satan could show. But though the manner may be
dark unto us, yet is the matter evident, that Satan with the show of earthly
glory would have allured Christ to accept the kingdom of the earth at his
hands. Now the eyes were the greatest prouocations that Satan could use in that
case, since all Christ's cogitations were righteous and holy, despising all
carthly honor and pomp, as vain and transitory; and if the eye could not be
affected therewith, the mind of Christ was farther from embracing it.

D^fenc. page 83. li 26.
I must needs think, that as Satan was a subtle spirit, so he could and did
sometime spiritually suggest temptations into Christ's heart, and yet utterly
without all sin: which we at no hand can do, because we are all naturally
apt and inclining to evil, as Christ was not.] Satan could impresse no evil
in Christ's heart.
And I must needs think, that you neither understand what a temptation is, nor
what detestation of sin was in the Soul of Christ, that you make him willingly
subject his heart to the motions and suggestions of Satan unto evil. For a
thinking upon evil to detest it or dissuade it, was common to Christ's humane
soul with the best saints of God, and even with the elect Angels, and was the
work of Gods spirit; but an inward temptation to evil, that is, a persuasion
or motion of the heart to sin, Christ needed not admit without his own
consent, (since the Prince of this John 14.
world had nothing in him) and could not give way to any such provocation
without corruption of sin. In that you attribute more to Satan's subtlety,
than to Christ's power and integrity, being both God and man, and in his
humane soul endued with the fullness of the Holy Ghost, you show your self a
good Proctor for the Devil, that give him ability to invade the soul of
Christ, and to impresse in him most sinful and wicked cogitations, which you
call spiritual, because they proceeded from the spirit of error and
infidelity; not remembering, or not believing that Christ was Lord over Satan,
and displaced him from such as he formerly possessed, and preserved his
Disciples as well from the subtlety as fury of Satan, that in the end they
might tread him under their feet. If then Christ could, and did 1. John 3.
dissolve the works of the Devil, and Acts 10.
heal all that were oppressed of the Devil; because he was anointed with the
Holy Ghost, and with power: how could the devil at his pleasure instill
perfidious, presumptuous, and blasphemous thoughts into the heart of Christ?
Which if Christ were willing to admit, they could not but infect him with
sin; if he were unwilling, and yet forced to endure them, that infirnitie and
misery subiecting him to the perpetual motion of sin in his own he^rt,
nothing differs from our natural corruption, when we diss^nt from the
^nticements thereof by the guiding of Gods spirit.

Defenc. page 83. li. 30.
Yea the Text to the Hebrews seems to prove it also: Christ was tempted in
all things like us without sin. Then was he tempted both outwardly and also
merely within: for so ^re we. A light show of Sc^ipture will serve you to make
a flourish for your fancies. In the beginning of this very Page, Li. 6.
You granted in us, that where the mind conceived any Temptation, there of
necessiti^ must be concupiscence and corruption of the flesh; which in Christ
might not ^e. Now you turn round, and will have Christ outwardly and inwardly
Tempted in all things like to us; and do not see, that if this Temptation be
in all points l^ke to ours, then mus^ Christ have concupiscence and corruption
of the flesh by this consequent of yours, even as we have. Or if you confess
therein a difference betwixt us and Christ, because inward Temptations in us
(though we by grace di^ent from them) are sinnfull, as proceeding from the
corruption of our hearts, which in Christ, can not be: then do you falsely and
against your own knowledge urge this place of Scripture to prove that Christ
was tempted merely within, as we are. Where^ore the words of the Apostle are
very true, that Christ was tempted in all things, that is, tried with all kinds
of external a^ictions and vnsinfull affections as we are; but as for the
internal motion and provocation of the heart to sin, which is in us, that
could not be in Christ, because the Apostle in express words excepteth from
Christ all commun^on of sin with us.

Defenc. page 83. li. 33.
This was merely by conceauing and considering of Satan's wicked spiritual
motion in his spirit, which it was p^ssible he might d^e without any yielding
thereto.] The conceauing The heart suggesting evil sins.
and considering of Satan's motion to sin, is no sin; but for our hearts to
suggest wicked motions and persuasions to sin either of themselves, or as
Satan's Instruments, when our spi^ts di^ent, that is the natural and sinful
corruption of our flesh, which we can not avoid; and yet is it sin
nevertheless in us, though it be inborne and inuoluntary. What then was it for
Christ, when Satan had no power over him, nor right in him, to make his heart of
his own accord the devils Instrument to suggest wicked cogitations and
persuasions unto him, as you defend in this place he did, but to give place to
the devil to fill his heart with wicked spiritual motions, as you call them?
which God forbid, should come within any Christian man's heart. And therefore if
ignorance carry you to th^s conceit, recall it in time; if Pride, for my part
I must needs de^st ^t as much as I do any point in all your Defense.

Defen^. page 83. li. 37.
Thus t^en it was possi^le, and most likely it is also, that Christ was
assaulted and wrastl^ withal by the devils spiritual suggestions now when in
his most bitter Agony he hanged on the Cross. In steed^ of full and
infallible proofs to justify your strange conceits, you pretend possibilities
and probabilities, which to me are nothing else but ignorant, and absurd
imp^eties. For you labor tooth and nail to show the holiness of your cause,
by drawing the Son of God within the limits of our sins, not only a^
^earing them on the Cross in his Body, which the Scriptures affirm; but as
desi^ with them, and hateful to God for them, and guilty of them, not by
Imputation alone, where you first began; but by the violent and inward
impression thereof in Christ's heart, and on Christ's Spirit, through the working
of Satan. And the sins, wherewith you would have Christ's own heart by Satan's
Instigation assault him in the Wilderness, were no less then distrust in God,
presumption to tempt God, and blasphemous adoring of the devil, besides a
manifest and malicious dishonor to God, that Satan gave all the kingdoms of
the earth to whom he would. And on the Cross you ascribe to Christ in like
manner the spiritual and inward cogitations of reprobation, dereliction,
malediction, confusion, desperation and damnation, wherewith his own heart
tempted him, as you would have it, by the devils spiritual suggestions: since
this is the inward conflict, which you dream Christ had with the powers of
hell not outwardly filling his ears with these reproaches from the mouths of
his bla^phemous Persecutors, as the Scriptures witness; but the devil
inwardly so distracting and dividing Christ's thoughts, that his own cogitations
by your ungodly resolutions prompted and suggested these things unto him, as
thereto stirred and incensed by Satan.

Defenc. pa. 84. li. 5.
You say he was tempted of Sat^n all the time of his abode here on earth.] I
have no doubt, but Satan did what he could as well by flatteries, as by
contumelies to sift the soul of Christ all the time of his abode here on
earth: but he did not this with his own voice, save only in the wilderness;
by others he did it, and sometimes by such as were near about Christ; as when
Peter Matthew. 16.
took him aside, and said, Master spare thy self, this shall not be unto
thee. To whom Christ replied, Get thee behind me Satan, thou art an offense
unto me, because thou sauourest not the things that are of God, b^t of m^n.
Where Christ sharply rebuked Peter's counsel and love as stirred by Satan,
under show of good will to hinder him in his purpose of man's Redemption. But I
never said, as you allege my words, that Christ was tempted by Satan all the
time of his ^ode on earth; by which you would have men believe, that I confess
Satan inwardly tempted Christ all his life long. My words are, He Con^lus. pa.
283. li. ^4.
was tempted in the desert by Satan himself, and by Satan's members all the
time of his abode on earth. [ Defenc. page 84. li. 6.
Then you deny not, but now even on the cross Christ was tempted and ass^lted
by Satan, that is by Satan's instruments moved and enraged by him. That men may
be the devils instrumens in persuading or persuing others, both which are
called temptations, there is no cause why any man should doubt; and if these
external temptations could have sufficed your humorous head, you needed not to
have plunged your self so dangerously, as you have done, into the spiritual
cogitations of Christ's heart leading and moving him to sin in Satan's steed.
Yea rather you would have seen, that as men cannot be Satan's willing
instruments in this case, but they must be partakers of Satan's wickednes^e, so
the heart and thoughts of Christ could not be Satan's means to suggest any
sin to Christ in Satan's place, because every part and thought of Christ was
holy and undefiled. God himself conceaueth and considers of all men's
wickednes^, when he reprooueth or punishes the sins of men. To conceive
therefore or consider, what Satan by his own voice, or by the mouths of his
members said unto Christ, was no way unfit for Christ's humane integrity, and
purity; but that Christ's heart or inward thoughts should suggest or persuade
the same unto him, which Satan and his members did, if you know what you say,
you cannot avoid either heinous impiety, or monstrous stupiditie.

Defenc. page 84 li. 9.
This is none other indeed but that which in the entrance of this Question here
I observed: which as I have before showed, suffices to prove Christ's
combating as it were, and wrestling with the powers of ^ell on the cross. Meant
you no more all this while, but that in tormenting and reuiling Christ on the
cross the Jews were Satan's instruments? What needed then so many foolish and
lewd speeches of Satan's Defenc page 83. li. ^. 14. 27. ^7.
inward and spiritual motions, and ^mptations spiritually suggested into the
heart of Christ? And what proof is this of Gods proper wrath and indignation
laid on the soul of Christ, that the wicked derided him, as they do God
himself? Or is this all the spoil and triumph that Christ had over hell and
Satan, that he endured whatsoever mockes and pains they could devise? This no
doubt he did, and so did frustrate all the force of hell with his patience, and
confidence in God his Father, but he had an other manner of triumph and
recompense for the wrong, which he suffered at Satan's hand, except you list to
deface his glory, as you do his innocence. Howbeit the Reader may here
perceive on what conceits and conjectures your new redemption by the pains of
hell is founded, even on your own dreams and devices, which you cannot
express, and da^e not specify for fear of hateful absurdities and impieties.

Defenc. page 8^. li. 12.
But you object against this, that outward temptation by the mouths and hands
of the wicked is no effect of Gods wrath. No is? Here you are clean contrary
to your self and the truth.] Were it news to see you wander either from the
truth or from your own positions, here a man might take a full view of your
idle and forgetful rouing and snatching at every thing, where not taking the
pains to pe^use the whole reason, or to look four lines farther to the
knitting of the conclusion, or to weigh the words themselves, which you bring,
you foolishly mistake my words grounded on your assertion, as if they were mine
own intention; and press them as contrarieties in me, which are absurdities
in you. Out of these words of the Apostle, Christ spoiled powers and
principalities, triumphing over them, you would needs conclude in your Treatise
after your dissolute and distempered manner: Trea pa. 45. li. 11. 20. 22.
These principalities are the devils, therefore it is certain he felt them,
the very instruments, that wrought the very effects of Gods severity and
wrath upon him. By the very effects of Gods wrath upon Christ in this place,
you meant Conclus. pa. 284 li. 14.
the force of Gods proper and immediate wrath upon the soul of Christ, as I
admonished in that sentence, part whereof you cite to make me contrar^e to my
self. Since then the devils, if they wrought any thing on the soul of Christ,
must either Il id. p^g. 283. li 21.
tempt or torment his soul; (as I first observed) pa. 284. li. 8.
and inward temptation by the heart Christ could have none, (because that
proceeds from concupiscence and corruption of sin, from which Christ was
most free) and li 9.
outward temptation by the mouths and hands of the wicked is no (such) effect
of Gods wrath, (as you mentioned in those words;) li. 15.
but rather a trial of Gods gifts and graces bestowed on us: It rested, I
said, by your own words, (as a consequent from them) that Christ felt the
devils tormenting his soul. Out of this illation from your conce^ts you catch
the middle words, wherein I said, that outward temptation was no effect of
Gods wrath (by you intended in this place) and will needs have it in me a
contradiction to my self and to the truth; not seeing that I presently in the
same sentence show, what wrath of God you mean, and to what part of Christ you
fasten it in this collection; and in my conclusion note, that by the true
construction of your own words these things follow upon your own supposals.

Notwithstanding all this let the words lie, as they do; and Gods wrath there
not be taken in your sense, nor depend on your principles (which yet in all
men's eyes save yours, will be plain enough, considering the reason is a
collection from the true intent of your own words, as I admonished the Reader
in that very place) what fault now find you with the words themselves,
imagining they were mine own, and not drawn out of your vessel? Defenc. page
84 li. 15.
Elsewhere you truly acknowledge that all outward crosses and ^fflictions,
small or great, are in their nature punishments of sin, and effects of Gods
wrath. Now those doubtless are temptations.] But you impugn that saying, when
you please, and will have all af^ictions in us (of whom I speak) changed into
blessings; and when the Scripture calls them wrath, that speech you say is
most improper: and now for an advantage you creep to the contrary. For if you
mark my words in this place, I speak of the temptations of the godly, which
come from the mouths and hands of the wicked, and a^e trials of Gods gifts and
graces bestowed on us, which are not imparted to the wicked. And therefore if
now I cross the truth, when I say (as you suppose) that the temptations and
a^ctions of the godly are no effects of Gods wrath, then have you all this
while mainely and mightily resisted the truth, in making this one of the
chiefest strengths of your cause, that no crosses or afflictions in the godly
are signs or effects of Gods wrath against sin. Howbeit you leave my words
and make consequents of them full like your own, that is, without top or
tail, when you come to oppose my speeches one against the other. For where
tentation in the Scriptures is sometimes taken for persecution and affliction,
sometimes for persuasion and allurement to evil, and sometimes for probation
or trial, what a man will do; you take hold of the ambiguitie of the word,
and where one place speaks of persuasion to evil, the other of affliction,
you iumble them together, and make the one repugnant to the other. Now though
afflictions may be called temptations, yet all temptations are not afflictions,
nor effects of Gods wrath: otherwise Adam could never have bin tempted in
Paradise before sin; and friendship, favor, and flattery do more often and
more properly tempt or provoke, then affliction, which does more violently
prove the obedience and patience, that is in men. What temptation might well
be meant in this place, appears by the word of torment opposed to it, when I
said the devil does either tempt, or torment: where temptation, if you will
needs take the words themselves, must note that which is no torment, and
consequently be taken for persuasion by fair and friendly words or means, by
which the devil tempts as dangerously, as by force and violence. And so
neither way you hit the truth, nor can conclude any contrariety in me, though
indeed I spoke those words out of your sense of Gods wrath, which is pregnant
enough against you, knowing that in your reason, which I refute, you made the
devils to be the very instruments of Gods proper and spiritual wrath against
the soul of Christ.

Defenc. page 84. li. 21.
You say outward temptation is rather a trial of Gods gifts and graces
bestowed on us. And is not inward temptation in the godly so to? I pray you
what odds is this that you make between inward and outward temptations?] If
you know no odds between outward Difference of outward and inward temptations.
and inward temptations, you be deeply seen in Divinity. Saint James tells
you, that Iam. 1. v. 14.
every man is tempted, when he is drawn away, and intised by his own
concupiscence, which of it self naturally lusts against the spirit, and much
more when it is inflamed by Satan's suggestions and motions. This kind of
temptation rises from the corruption of our sinful nature, and is the
poison of sin dwelling in us, the very motion whereof is forbidden by the
law of God, Thou shall not lust; though it be pardoned in the elect for
Christ's sake, as all their sins are. Outward temptations have no such
necessary condition. It is no sin to be tempted externally; otherwise Adam
had sin before his fall, and Christ himself was subject to sin, for they
both were outwardly tempted, though not inwardly, as I teach, and the Church of
Christ before me taught the same, howsoever you take a pride in departing from
the full consent of all learned and religious antiquity to maintain your
vpstart and most absurd no^elties, that with figures and fancies you may seem
wise in your own conceit.

Defenc. page 84. li. 29. 33. 36.
Further, Satan might spiritually and extraordinarily work together with these
his Instruments outwardly afflicting Christ's body, and Christ likewise
extraordinarily might apprehend the same; And thus might Christ suffer most
strange Temptations, and incomprehensible sorrows from the furious rage of
Satan, and malice of wicked men.] Here are many mights, rashly and falsely
supposed of Christ, but not a mite of Salt, or truth in them. Is it lawful for
you, Sir Defender, to dream what you list of Christ's sufferings, and when you
are required proof thereof, to say; It might be so extraordinarily? What
absurdities and heresies may not thus be maintained, if every addle brain
shall frame to himself new Passions and strange Temptations in Christ, and all
on this ground, forsooth it might be so? Their ears must exceedingly itche,
that will leave the writings of the Evangelists and Apostles, and listen to
your extraordinary might be. But what might be? Might Christ upon all this
spiritual fury and subtilitie of Satan, or concurrence and cooperation of the
Jews, have his Faith, hope or love of, and in God fail, or decrease? could he
mistrust or doubt, that he might perish, and neither save himself, no^ us? why
Role you thus with Roperick Terms, and frights of frantic men, when you
speak of Christ's Temptations, as if hell or Satan were to strong for the
Spirit and grace of God in Christ, or could sever the union made with the
mighty hand of God of Christ's humane nature into one Person with his Divine?
It may be your strange fancies do often put you to such plunges; but he that
steadfastly believes in the Son of God, and knows the truth and force of
his Masters words, when ready to go to his Passion he said to his Disciples;
John. 16.
(...), be bold ( or consident) I have overcome, the world; will never doubt
such dangers as you dream of. For in the world which Christ overcame, is the
Prince thereof comprised, even the devil; whom before Christ pronounced to
have nothing, that is no part nor place in him. And to me that am assured, the
devil could do nothing against Christ, but what Christ himself would, and
that the Savior of the world had power enough not only to resist, but also to
repress the fur^e and subtilitie of Satan with his word or beck, save what
him self would permit, to let the devil see his violence endured, his
as^aults repelled, his temptations rejected, and his whole kingdom despised
and trodden under foot; these Tragical Terms of yours are but blusterings of
a busy Brain and blastes of an unstayed Tongue, that would say somewhat, and
can not tell what; and therefore hides his ^isformed fancies under the visard
of strange and incomprehensible conceits.

Defenc. page 85. li. 1.
Here now we may see how unjustly you conclude, that Satan could no other way
assault Christ, as an Instrument of Gods wrath, but only by executing torments
on his Soul, even in such wise as he tormenteth damned S^ules in hell.] We see
you have opened your pack of strange wares, and wastfull words; and otherwise
besides your own liking, you have brought nothing for all this pel^e and
Trash, that you have uttered. My words that are short, but expressing the same,
(which you with many circumductions fetch about to cover the presumption of
your cause,) you much mislike; and yet if you weigh them well, you shall see
they contain the very sum of your devices. To be tempted with suggestions of
malediction, reiection, confusion, desperation and damnation, (so they take no
place, no^ find no harbor in the heart of man) can have no such
incomprehensible sorrows, nor hellish Torments, as you talk of. The Heart by
Faith presently and thoroughly resisting quenches all those fiery Darts of
Satan, as flax under foot. And therefore you must either take from Christ
present and perfect resistance, by de^reasing his faith, and s^aggering his
hope, or else you can never sinck him into such sorrows, as you suppose. You
give him Trea pa. 45. li. 25.
a glorious conquest at the last; but in the mean while you leau^ him not
only fearing and fainting, but even overwhelmed, and all con^ounded with these
strange temptations and incomprehensible sorrows; which sometimes, you say
come from Ibid li. 24.
the immediate hand of God, and sometimes from the devils, Defenc page 15. ^i
^8.
as Gods Instruments working the very effects of Gods wrath upon him. And these
pains, you say, were not only as sharp as any are in hell, but even the same
which the damned do suffer: Now wherein have I wronged you except with too
much sparing you? What, in saying you defend, that Satan executed Torments on
Christ's Soul, such as he does on the demned? Your words import no less. The
devils you say, were Gods Instruments to work on Christ the very effects of his
wrath. Now what are the effects of Gods wrath Defenc page 15. ^i ^8.
equal to all the pains of hell, and Page 12. li. ^0.
the same which are in ^ell, but the torments of the damned Souls in hell?
[But you would have Christ as well inwardly tempted, as Tormented by the
devil; and where you defend both, I reported but one.] Pardon me that wrong; I
would have hid your folly, but you will not suffer me. Howbeit I refuted the
one, and left the other, as worthy none other answer, then that, where in the
Scriptures the devils confess Christ's word and presence did torment them, you
without Scripture have found the devils tormented Christ.

Defenc. page 85. li. 4.
That can be, say you, no other way then by Satan's very poss^ssing of those
souls. Which gross and infernal speculations of yours, (for trueths you can
not make them) I utterly leave to your own discussing. Are your fancies become
so fine, that what the Scriptures teach of Satan's possessing men's souls or
bodies, must be gross; and your inventions without wit or reason, must be
spruice? What said I in any of these things which the plain words, or maine
grounds of the Scripture do not confirm? That the devil can not work, but
where he is? Will you give him more then an almighty power, to work where he
is not, or will you afford him an omnipresence equal with God, that he may be
every where, to the end he may work every where, as God does? Satan may
torment the soul, you will say, and not possess it.] The devils that could
not work on swine, but they must first Matthew. 8.
enter them, before they could make them run headlong into the sea, can they
work in men, before they enter and possess them? The Cananite that entreated
Christ to have Matthew. 15.
mercy on her daughter, who was Matthew. 15.
miserably vexed with a devil, received at length this answer; Mark. ^.
For this saying, go thy way ^he devil is gone out of thy daughter. The
father that brought his lunaticke son to Christ, confessed Mark. 9.
he had a d^mbe spirit, which did tear him, and cast him often into the fire,
and into the water to destroy him: and Christ confirms his words in saying;
Mark. 9.
Thou dumb and deaf spirit come out of him, and enter no more into him. So
that the devil cannot inwardly torment the body of man or beast, but he must
enter it, and so possess it. How much less can he torment the soul or work
therein, but he must likewise possess it, and have it in his power, before he
can afflict it?

The entering and possessing of men's bodies and souls by devils, are no such
infernal s^ (...) as you would make them; they are the caueats and admonitions
of Christ himself. Matthew 12.
When an unclean spirit, says he, is gone out of a man, and returning,
sindeth his house (whence he came out) empty, he takes unto him seven other
spirits worse then himsele, and they enter in, and dwell there; and the end of
that ^an is worse then the beginning. And Luke 11.
when a strong man armed keeps his house, the things which he possesses are
in pe^. So that the Scriptures warn us to have Christ dwelling in our hearts
by faith, let the devil find them empty, and so enter and possess them.

Now touching your Juniper conceits, that Satan inwardly did work or stir in
Christ's heart those strange temptations which you talk of, which indeed were
wicked and impious cogitations; or that he did torment the soul of Christ with
the pains of the damned, what Scripture I pray you does warrant these worse
then infernal speculations? For the devils themselves confessed, they had
nothing to do with Christ; and you make them the raisers of strange
temptations in Christ's heart, and inflictors of incomprehensible sorrows on
Christ's soul. And where they truly acknowledged that Christ's word and power
tormented them, you have devised, that the diue^ should unspeakably torment
Christ on the Cross. So lawful is it for you, and usual with you, to take
the fullness of power and grace from Christ, and to subject his soul and
spirit to Satan's subtlety.

Defenc page 85 li 9.
Notwithstanding this here I (...), that howsoever the means or manner was of
Sa^ and his furious bands assaulting of Christ on the Cross, it made certainly
an impression of most (...) sorrow and torment in his soul.] Your single and
double vouchers with certainty and warranty are so rise, that no wise man will
take your word for a gray go^e quill. You avouch it and you are certain of it,
but how prove you one line or letter of all that here you say? Christ's stripes
and wounds received of the Jews, were painful to him; and the taunts, mocks,
and blasphemies of all sorts uttered against him, were g^euous unto him; but
what is this to the most doleful and incomprehensible torments inflicted on
Christ's soul, as you say you be assured, by the devil? The Evangelists
express what was done and said to Christ on the Cross, that you disdain as
gross; and in your curious, but irreligious subtilitie, will have the devil
not only tempt inwardly the spirit of Christ with strange and most wicked
cogitations; (for the devil having by your doctrine power and choice what he
would suggest, would forbear no wickedness) but incomprehensibly torment the
soul of Christ; and when you should make proof thereof, you tell us you
avouch, it was certainly so.

Defenc page 85. ^i 12.
Christ felt and discerned by that means the very stroke of Gods own hand
upon him, and received the sting of his wrath and indignation therein, which
then wrought and was revealed chiefly then upon him for all our sins.] Mean
you that Christ felt the stroke of Gods own hand by the temptations, or by the
torments which Satan offered to his soul? If by temptations; besides that you
give S. James the lie, who says, James 1.
God tempts no man (with evil,) you make God with his own hand to move and
provoke Christ to wickedness, which is more then infernal wickedness to
avouch, If you mean by torments; those you teach must come from the immediate
hand of God upon the soul of Christ; and will you make the devil to be Gods
immediate hand? Choose here, whether all your grave discourse (at your first
entrance into this question) of the souls proper and immediate suffering shall
be wholly idle, and utterly false, or whether the devil shall be Gods immediate
hand. Gods immediate hand is his eternal, divine, and almighty power, which if
you admit the devil to be; I must confess all my speculations, believing but
one God, and him to be most pure and holy, are plain and gross in respect of
your new found hell, and your eternal and almighty Ruler thereof, the devil.
As for proof, I should wrong you to ask for any; it is not your manner to
vouchsafe to prove what you say; but to say what you list under certain
general stales of words; which are but dens of thieves to rob Christ of his
sanctity and glory. What Christ discerned in his sufferings, is never like to
come from you with any truth, you follow your fancies so much as your best
guides; which lead you to a sidelesse and bottomless pit of absurd dreams
and doctrines. You distinguish nothing, you define nothing, you prove nothing;
only you wallow in the mire of strange temptations, and most doleful and
incomprehensible sorrows; how, why, or what, you can not tell, but the hand of
God serves you at all assayes to bring out your misborne and misshapen
speculations under some show of religion, because you pretend the power of God.
For my part, what the Scriptures evidently avouch of Christ's sufferings, that
I faithfully believe; what is devised or added by men's imaginations and
fictions, I utterly reject not as false and presumptuous only, but as absurd
and irreligious.

What the Scriptures say Christ discerned in his sufferings, I have often
specified, which far differs from your strange and imaginary speculations.
They avouch of Christ, that he Acts 2.
saw God always at his right hand, that he should not be shaken; and therefore
his heart was glad, and his tongue rejoiced. And Heb. 12.
for the joy proposed unto him, (and therefore discerned by him) he endured the
cross and despised the shame thereof. Christ himself after his last supper,
Ioh. 18.
knowing all things that should befall him, and that Ioh. 13.
his hour was come, that he should depart out of this world unto the Father,
and that the Father had given all things into his hands, and that he was come
from God, and went to God; not only pronounced the devil, for all his coming
against him, Ioh 14.
had nothing in him, but speaking directly of his passion, said; Ioh. 17.
Father the hour is come, glorify thy son, that thy son may glorify
thee; as thou have given him power over all flesh, that he might give them
life everlasting. I have glorified thee on earth, and now Father glorify me
with thy self, with the glory which I had with thee before the world was.
With this most assured and infallible persuasion and resolution Christ passed
to his passion to be glorified, and thereby declared to be the Son of God.
Which the Thief on the cross confessing, received that present day an
everlasting reward in Paradise; And the Centurion and Soldiers, that watched
him, when they saw the manner of his death and woonders consequent,
acknowledged, saying; Matthew. 27.
Truly this man was the Son of God. Against this foundation of faith and
knowledge in the soul and spirit of Christ, if you dream of any doubt or
fear, that did arise in the heart of Christ upon any suggestions of men or
devils, you make him a liar and a sinner. His faith could not shrink without
heinous infidelity, because he was assured of his personal union with God,
and of his inunction with power and the holy Ghost from God, by the voice of
his Father speaking thrice from heaven unto him, by the visible descent of the
holy Ghost upon him at his baptism, by the service and adoration of Angels,
by the power and command, which he had ouerall creatures, and over devils
themselves. Wherefore the least doubt or distrust in Christ's heart, that his
person might perish, or his sacrifice be rejected, or that his Father was or
could be displeased with him, must needs have been most detestable impiety.
And this cleerenesse of faith and knowledge standing fast, and immooueable
against all the powers of hell, what strange temptations or incomprehensible
torments could the devil work in the soul of Christ, the Scriptures assuring
us, that the Ephesians. 6.
shield of faith (even in us) quenches all the fi^rie darts of the wicked, and
that James 4.
the devil will fly from us, when he is resisted? And therefore as 1. Pet. 4.
we rejoice, (and ought so to do) in that we be partakers of Christ's
sufferings; so Christ in all his sufferings had exceeding both comfort and joy,
though the anguish of his flesh were very painful unto him, whereto the
manhood of Christ did full mit it self, according to the will of God.

Defenc. page (...). li. 16.
Neither say you any thing whereby you do or can overthrow this assertion.]
What can, or need more be said against this, and all other your false and vain
conceits, then that they have no ground in the word of God, but are covered
with certain close and current phrases, which you never expound, least you
should lie open to infinite absurdities, and impieties. As even in this case,
which is now before us; you tell us, Christ dis^erned the very stroke of Gods
own hand, and received the sting of his wrath: where these words, the stroke
and sting, being metaphores, design no propriety nor particularitie of
Christ's sufferings: but any of those pains, which Christ received in his
body, may justly be called the stroke of Gods hand, or sting of his wrath. So
that you secretly carry your meaning in every place with some ambiguous words,
which cannot be directly refuted, because there is no special thing mentioned
in them, but general and metaphorical circumstances guilesully proposed.

Defenc. page 85. li. 17.
Our authorized doctrine in England agrees with me, saying, he fought and
wrastled as it were hand to hand with the whole army of hell.] At least you
dream so, but where are the words, that express any such thing, as you take
upon you to maintain? The Catechism says, Christ encountered, and wrastled
with the whole power of Satan. I say no less, but still observing Christ's
own words, that John 14.
within him (Satan) had nothing. You suppose, that Christ's own heart was a
soldier of Satan's, and fought against his faith by serving the devils turn;
the Catechism says no such thing. Satan with all his power and policy,
force and ^urie did what he could, by the mouths and hands of the wicked to
tire Christ's patience, and shake his confidence, but he could do neither;
Christ persisting in most perfect patience, faith, and obedience to the very
breathing out of his soul. To aggrauate the pains of Christ's stripes and
wounds, Satan omitted no mean, that by men he could execute. To undermine and
batter Christ's faith, the devil opened the mouths of the Luke 23.
People, that gazed on him; of the high M^k 15.
Priests and Luke 23.
Rulers, that conspired against him; of the Scribes and Pharisees that derided
him; of the l Passengers, that shook their heads at him; of the Matthew 27.
Soldiers, that crucified him; of the Thief, that hung with him; to mock,
revile, and blasphem^ him; as falsely calling himself the Son of God, and
forsaken of God, and left unable to save or help himself. Their tentations
the Scriptures do specify, which were sufficient to try the steadfastness of
Christ's faith and hope; of others they make no mention. And to these, or any
other if you think Christ's heart did yield but by fearing or doubting, whether
their words were true or no, you take from him all assurance of faith, and
place him in the midst between fidelity and infidelitle, hope and despair,
as not resolved whether God would deceive him, and forsake him under the burden
of our sins, and his sufferings. This perplexity would indeed have been a
strange temptation, and horrible torment of mind, but withal a manifest fail
in faith, and eclipse of hope, which if you take from Christ, you rob him
not only of his comfort, confidence, and glory; but even of all piety,
patience, and obedience for that time, as doubting whether God were faithful
in his promise, and whether the conjunction of God and man in his person might
be severed and dissolved or no. But of these temptations, fears, and sorrows,
I wish you to take heed, least if you defile the merits, or diminish the
graces of his sufferings, you declare your self to be any thing rather then a
Christian, and to have no part in the kingdom of God, and of Christ, by
dishonoring the Father, and the Son to serve your own fancies.

Defenc page 85. li. 20.
Where you detest my sense of the Apostle in this place, and yet give no
inkling of any other sense at all, it is more then half a conclusion against
you, that my interpretation of it is unjustly by you reproved.] Such
conclusions do well become a man of your judgment. The Defender ^ainly
presumes all places of his unanswered, to be granted.
As though I must be bound to make Commentaries upon all the Scriptures, which
you abuse, or else you will take the truth tardie by my default. It sufficed
good Sir, that your application had neither coherence with the Apostles words,
nor deriuance from them; and so was woorthely rejected as void of all reason
and sense. For this, that Christ's soul was inwardly tempted, and tormented by
devils, because he triumphed over them most gloriously, this, I say, to all
wise men is rather a meriement or a prattlement, then an argument. That they
resisted, or invaded, might happily be collected, not from the force of those
words, but from the disposition of such enemies: yet which way they invaded, or
how far they prevailed, can no way be thence coniectured, though it be
strongly by you conceited. The Apostles words as I have showed, may either
declare the glory of Christ's resurrection, wherein all knees of things in
heaven, earth, and hell did bow, and stoop unto him rising from the dead; or,
as some apply them, express the power and glory of his Passion, in which by
the perfection of his innocence, patience, and obedience, he spoiled sin and
Satan of al their right and force over his Elect, and carried all his Enemies as
Captives in an open show before God and his Angels, notwithstanding all the
instance, or resistance they could make. From either of these senses how you
can infer, that Satan tormented the Soul of Christ, or that he impressed in
Christ's heart spiritual wicked cogitations or motions, I verily do not see,
except you have a Patent to make Conclusions contrary to their Premises.

Defenc. pa. 85. li. 25.
Then you come to confute my fourth Reason, but the mainest points thereof you
have not so much as touched; I showed that the Godly sometimes in this life,
do feel a taste of Gods insinite wrath, and even of hellish sorrows. 2. That
Christ our Redeemer suffered for us as deeply, yea deeper, then even any of us
here do suffer, but all this you can here clenly pass over without any word
to it.] The matters were belike very weighty, and your proofs many, that I
was forced to pass them with silence. Indeed I neither took, nor had any
more time to refute your Treatise, then whiles my Sermons were in Printing, as
they know, that had the doing thereof: and that made me the shorter in
refelling your Reasons, and sometimes the darker in proposing ruin own; but
as for this, which here you complain of, I saw no cause, why in that speedy
dispatch, I should trouble my self any longer with it. The first Proposition
in some sense I admitted; the second, which you barely supposed without proof
I rejected as injurious to Christ, and repugnant to the Apostles words, which
you alleged for it. Neither have you in this long advised, and far consulted
Defense so much as meddled with the instances, that I gave against your false
Collection. Let him that will, read the 286. Page of my Conclusion, and see
whether touching the maine points here pretended, you were not briefly, but
truly answered, and stand yet staggered with the parts there specified. The
sum of mine Answer to both, as my words there witness, was this. Conclus.
pa. 286. li. 7.
The Terrors of mind, which we fecle through conscience of our unworthiness,
ignorance of Gods Counsel, and distrust of Gods favor, Christ never felt; his
Faith admitted no doubting, his love excluded all fearing, his hope rejected
all despairing. Ibid. li. 15.
He was tempted in all things alike, except sin. Then neither the roots,
parts, nor fruits of sin must be in him: but the Apostle, that excepteth
sin, excepteth all sinful adherents. What say you to this, is it no Answer?
I would gladly hear what you can reioyne against it. But you, that skip every
thing, which touches you to the quick, and iette in your general Phrases,
like a Crow in a gutter, over leap what you list; and then for a show surmise,
that your Reasons and proofs are silenced. Well I may speak now more largely
and plainly, but in effect I can speak neither more truly, nor more directly:
then I then did. Yet for your pleasure I will not refuse to put your
Propositions once more on foot, to see how current they are.

Defenc. page 85. li. 27.
The Godly sometimes in this life do feel a taste of Gods infinite wrath, and
even of hellish sorrows. You commit but three foul ouersights in this one
proposition. 1. You mar the whole, and make it impertinent to your purpose.
2. You contradict your Contradictions in the Defender.
maine Positions. 3. You rest on evident ambiguities, or open falsities. What
some of the godly do sometimes feel either in Body or Soul, makes nothing
to Christ's sufferings by your own Confession. Your own Rule is. Defenc. page
86. li. 32.
In these words Christ was like us in all Temptations and afflictions, we are
to understand all, that are incident to mankind generally, not which happen to
any man particularly. So that what the godly do sometimes feel (for not only
Children and Infants, but many thousand Christians die free from these hellish
sorrows of yours) may not be made a President for Christ's sufferings. And
where you, or your Corrector would after salve this oversight, by saying in the
margin; Defenc. page 8^ in margin. li. 1.
which though all generally feel not, yet generally is due to all in respect
of sin; you multiply your absurdities, you mend not the looseness of this
Proposition. For due to all in respect of sin, are all manner of external
and corporal plagues, from many of which your self would exempt Christ by
this observation of yours; and likewise reiection, confusion, desperation, and
eternal damnation are due to all in respect of sin, from which if you do
not exempt Christ, you exempt your self out of the number of the Faithful to
take a worse course then Judas, who yielded his Masters Body into the hands of
men, where this conceit yields Christ's Soul into the power of devils.

Secondly, be you now of the mind that the Godly do sometimes feel a Taste of
Gods wrath? How often have you resolved, and Proclaimed in this Book, that
Defenc. pa. 13. li 8.
to the Godly their afflictions, both small and great, are no effects of Gods
proper wrath, and now they sometimes feel a Taste of his Infinite wrath? What
shift to save this repugnancie, can you devise? [Gods Infinite wrath perhaps is
not his proper wrath.] It is the same, you say, that Christ suffered, and since
Christ by your Doctrine suffered none but the proper wrath of God, the
Faithful feeling the same, that Christ did, must suffer the same kind of
wrath, that Christ suffered. Again, can you find us an Infinite wrath in God,
that is not properly wrath? What has Gods proper wrath, of which you have
iangled so much, more then Infinite in time, or degree, or both? but these
Resolutions of yours be like your Inventions, they hang together, as drunken
men's steps, or mad men's dreams. Consult I pray you with your friends, and ask
them what answer you shall yield to this forgetfulness of theirs, or
variableness of yours.

Thirdly, what mean you by hellish sorrows? If you thereby note the fear of
hell, Men ^ay fear but not suffer the true pains of hell in this lise.
which may often afright the servants of God in this life, is that the worst
the damned feel? Have the true pains of hell no more in them, but a fear
thereof? Is it possible for men in this mortal flesh and life to endure the
true pains of hell, and of the damned? If you so think, you new stamp us a
strange, but an easy hell, in respect of those terrible judgments, which God
has ordained for the wicked in the world to come. Will you fly to your
metaphors, and say that hell pains are taken for great and exceeding? Then
play you with figures and phrases, as your fashion is, and come nothing near
to the substance of the cause. So that the one is a sensible untruth, the
other is a shifting trifle brought in to lengthen the tale, when matter
fails. And when all is said, so much is sound, as I forwarned at first, that
Conclus. pa. 286. li. 29.
fearing, doubting, or distrusting lest God will for our manifold sins cast
us from his presence, and condemn us to hell, comes in us from the
guiltiness of conscience, and weakness of faith and hope, which in Christ
neither had, nor could have any place.

My next proposition, which you left untouched, is, that Defenc. page 85. li.
28.
Christ our Redeemer suffered for us as deeply, yea deeper then any of us here
do suffer, or can suffer.] This proposition no way helps your intent, and
besides, wants both parts and proofs: for if the whole were granted, as you
offer it, you can never thence conclude, that Christ suffered the true pains
of the damned, till first you show, that all the faithful in this life do
likewise suffer the true pains of the damned, which were a monstrous
miscreance meet for your new made hell. Such desperate and reprobate
assertions, as have no touch of proof, nor taste of truth, you place in the
foreward of your fanseries. [But Christ you say, suffered as deeply as ever
any of us here does, or can suffer.] Then did Christ by your doctrine not only
doubt, and distrust, but even despair his own salvation: for so have many
done, that after were recovered and restored by grace; and so you wrappe the
Son of God not only within the guilt, but within the very sincke of our
sins inherent, now not in the temptation, but in the persuasion of the heart:
for therewith have many of the Elect been grievously afflicted for the time.
This it is for a man of your understanding, to wade in waters above your
height, and to find no bottom till you come to the depth of all impiety,
which you do not intend, but can not avoid by the consequence of your
positions. Two lines and less in my Conclusion, even where you complain for
want of answer, would have eased you of all these frantike imaginations, had
you but soberly considered them, or advisedly sought to disprove them. Christ's
Conclus. pa. 286. li. 10.
faith (I said) admitted no doubting, his love excluded all fearing, his hope
rejected all despairing. Which of these do you or dare you deny? Whether
doubting be infidelity? S. James says; James 1.
Let a man ask in faith, (...), nothing doubting, or staggering: sor let not
such a man think, that he shall receive any thing from the Lord. That
condition our Savior adds unto says: Matthew. 21.
If you shall have faith, and not doubt: for doubting, as Paul writes,
proceeds from infidelity. Abraham Romans 4.
doubted not of the promise of God through unbelief, but was strengthened in
faith; (...), being fully assured, that he which had promised was able to
perform it. Therefore Christ said to Peter: Matthew. 14.
O thou of little faith, why did thou doubt? and to all the rest; Matthew. 8.
Why are you fearful, o you of little faith? So that faith is a full and
constant persuasion of Gods promises without all fear or doubt, that we may be
deceived or defrauded. Then must there in Christ be either no doubting, or
small faith. And if unbelief in us be sin, what was it in Christ after so
many and so clear evidences of Gods own voice and oath unto him? Psalm. 89.
I have sworn to David my servant, Thy seed will I stablish for ever. And
again; I have sworn once by mine holiness, I will not fail David, his seed
shall endure for ever. And likewise; Psalm. 110.
The Lord swear and will not repent, Thou art a Priest for ever after the order
of Melchisedech. After these oaths, promises, and speeches of God from heaven
to the manhood of Christ, all doubting and distrusting is most heinous and
horrible sin; which, if any man attribute to Christ, he is worse then a Jew
or a Turk. For they know him not; we do know him to be the Son of God, and
Truth it self.

Set this down for an infallible rule in Christian religion, as indeed it is
the foundation of all our says (for if Christ might be a liar and a sinner, we
are but deceived in trusting to him) and none of these inward torments or deep
sufferings which you desperately dream of, can be fast^ed on Christ. So long
as Christ's heart and spirit stood fixed and immoued in the graces and promises
of God, no such strange doubt or fear, temptation or torment, as you talk of,
could afflict him. No force of Satan, no sting of sin, no storm of wrath
could confound him, or amaze him. In us these things are possible, because the
corruption of flesh, and want of grace often pinch us with remorse of
conscience, and remembrance of sin committed; but in Christ there could be no
such thing. And all your drifts to make him like us in our sinful affections,
and conflicts with confusion and desperation, as they have no ground in the
Scriptures, so are they weak and wicked, in that you measure the fullness of
Christ's graces, and his freedom from all sin, by the faithless and
fearful assaults, that sin and Satan make on the corrupt and irregenerate
parts and powers of our souls. Wherefore as I first resolved, so I now
reiterate by reason of your importunity, that 1 John 4.
perfect love (in Christ) did cast out fear, and Romans 5.
rejoicing under hope made him with patience to expect the performance of Gods
promises, and with all obedience to endure whatsoever the counsel of God had
soredetermined to be done unto

(...) which must be far from Christ? Is Infidelity, and distrust no sin
with you, that you make it common to Christ with us? or are doubting and
fearing no parts of infidelity? or what fear or doubt of his salvation could
incomprehensibly torment the soul of Christ, except his heart did first
incline from faith to fear, and so apprehend the grief of Gods favor lost,
or in imminent danger to be lost?

You have given us three variations of this incomprehensible and infinite pain
and grief, which should torment the soul of Christ, and yet you know not
where to rest. The first was unspeakable smart and pain from Gods immediate
hand, inflicting What torments the Defen^er has de^sed for Christ's soul.
the same anguish on the soul of his Son, that he does on the damned
spirits. For this you have neither script nor scrole, text nor title in the
word of God; it is a bold and lewd device of yours presuming what you please of
Gods hand, because it is diversely taken in the Scriptures. From thence you lept
to devils, and made them Gods instruments to torment the soul of Christ with
strange temptations, and incomprehensible sorrows suggested into the soul of
Christ. Then you made Christ's own heart conceive, and discern from the words
and acts of the Jews fired and enraged by Satan, the dreadful and painful
strokes and stings of Gods anger, and just indignation against him for our
sins; and yet all these are but the tumultuous dreams of your own head, and
certain wastefull words that may be drawn to diverse senses, besides which you
have neither expressed nor confirmed any thing. Now you begin to make
Commentaries upon the Apostle to the Hebrews, which are as clear as a coal,
and as sound as a satchell of saw-dust.

Defenc. page 86. li. 10.
First, en ho, in that which himself suffered, signifies either the Defenc.
page 86. li. 10.
matter wherein Christ is able to succor us, or the Defenc. page 86. li. 10.
means whereby he becomes ready and fit to succor us, or else the occasion
and Defenc. page 86. li. 10.
reason, why he is the readier to succor us, even in that he himself suffered
and was tempted.] Your expositions be like your conclusions, they have neither
root nor rind. Here are in show three parts of a division, all which indeed
(you say) are Defenc. page 86. li. 31.
but one and the same in effect, and so your triple division senseless and
needless, the parts importing one thing; and the Li. 27.
first way seems to you not the unlikeliest; which, if you put any difference
between them, is the falsest and farthest from the Apostles meaning. For that
Christ helps men in nothing, but what himself first suffered, that he
suffered al particular degrees, and special sorts of afflictions, as well in
soul as in body, which may befall any man; these are so loud lies, that but
you, no man would make either of them the apostles speech or purpose. But your
luck is to light on the worst, or your choice leads you to fancy the
foulest, that you may differ fro other men, and be singular in your own sense.
For your self see, and say, Li. 35.
all the particular (kinds of) crosses in the world neither could nor can
possibly come to any man, and so not to Christ. Why then make you that the
likeliest meaning of the Apostles words, that Christ suffered all the matter,
that is, all those kinds of pains wherein he succoureth us? If you mean
generally, that Christ tasted all sorts of pains, that is, both corporal and
spiritual, then shall you never conclude, that he tasted this or that kind of
pain in special; but it suffices that Christ had not only a divine respect
in mercy, but an humane sense and experience of our miseries both outward and
inward, to assure us, that he is compassionate and tenderly affected in our
infirmities and extremities, because he himself felt the sharpness of fear,
sorrow, shame and pain, whiles here he lived; and has not forgotten how near
they pinch the weakness of man's nature. And more the Apostle meant not in
those words then to show, the Son of God would in his own person and humane
nature feel our infirmities and miseries, that he might have an humane
commiseration and compassion of us, when we are afflicted, by the remembrance
of his own sufferings, which the words do fully fit. For Heb. 2.
en ho, in that (or in as much as) he suffered, when he was tempted (or tried)
he is able (with more tenderness of heart) to help those that are tempted.

Defenc. page 86. li. 18.
Which way soever of these three we take the words, yet they plainly infer,
that Christ him self felt all the misery and smart of our sufferings and
Temptations, which at any time we feel.] The smart and grief of reiection,
confusion, desperation, and such like Christ never tasted, because they are
faithless, and graceless, fears and sorrows in us. Yet in these Christ can
and does s^ccour us, not because he suffered the same, but for that he knows
what affliction of spirit, fear, and sorrow bring with them, by his own
experience, not of the same objects, which are sinful; but of the same
affections, which are natural. And none of these ways, which you mention,
came near the concluding of any such thing, except you urge the first against
all truth and sense acknowledged even by your self, where you say, Defenc.
page 87. li 21.
I speak not of every particular in each of them, or which every man meets
withal. Grant then, that Christ in his manhood would ^eele the sharpest
impressions, that fear or sorrow, shame or pain could make on the Body or
Soul of Man, but still without sin: is that a proof that Christ ^ed
reiection, confusion or damnation, because he tasted how deeply fear could
af^ct man's nature? What ignorant and vncoherent Collections are these; Christ
t^ed the sharpness of all our affections, as namely of fear, sorrow, and
shame; ergo he had all the same causes and objects of fear, sorrow, and shame,
that we do and may ^eele? Who reasons so that has any reason left in his
head or heart?

This (...) the (...) KATA PANTA, in all things, do fully import. The words
kata panta, in all things, or altogether, may have out of the very Text of the
Apostle to the (...) four several references, and none of them near the
false construction that you make of them. The first is, he must be like his
brethren, in all the parts of Man's nature; for ^e (...) not the (nature of)
Angels, but the Seed of Abraham. Wherefore in all things, (that is in all the
parts and necessary consequents of Man's nature) he mu^ be like (...)
Brethren. 2. He must be like not this or that Brother, and so not like any
particular Persons in any special cause or Circumstance, but wherein they all
a^e Brethren each to other, Hebr. 2.
in all those things he must be like them all. 3. It is but a likeness, that
the Apostle urges in all these things, there is no equality, much less an
Identitie required in those words, not that Christ in patient su^ering of
afflictions did not pa^ all, but these words import a Similitude, and have no
farther force. 4. These and all other things, that were in Christ, must be in
him without sin; Her. 4.
he was tempted in all things after a likeness, (but) without sin. So that
in all his Infirmities, affections, Temptations, and afflictions he was still
free from sin, which may be the Apostles m^aning in the la^r place, to note,
that how diu^rs soever Christ's Temptations were, yet he was temp^d in all
things without sin. Then all such fears and sorrows, as have in them any
doubt or distrust of Gods favor, and Christ's Salvation, are utterly excluded
from him by the Apostles own limitations, and therefore you loose but your
labor by pretense of these words to bring Christ within the compass of your
(...) fears and sorrows.

Defenc page 86. (...). 2^.
Hereto ^erueth our public Doctrine, Diram execrationem in se suscepit.] You
handle the (...), as you do the Scriptures and Fathers, turning them from
their right What Christ (...) for (...).
sense to serve your private Doctrines. Christ undertook our curse, says the
Ca^isme; what then? Christ undertook all our sins; and all the punishment
due unto them, not to (...) it in the same kind, but to dissolve it in his
Person, and to discharge us of it. Yea he undertook our reiection, confusion,
and damnation; to satisfy them, not to bear them; to cl^ them, not to bear
them. So that hence you may conclude a Satisfaction and dissolution made by
Christ of all these things, that were due to us; but you may not infer, that
he was utterly rejected, inwardly confounded, or eternally condemned; as we
should have been, and the damned are. Again, he took upon him the
Satisfaction and recompense of all our sins and pains. But where? Saint
Peter^aith, Christ bare our sins in his Body on the Tree; and Saint Paul
says, b (...). (...) 2.
Christ (...) things in (...), and things in heaven, by the blood of his Cr^,
and recon^ c (...) 2.
us in the Body of his flesh. Christ undertook then to abolish our curse and
cond^tion, but in the Body of his flesh, where he reconciled us unto God. So
that you must bring (...) words out of the Catechism, before your Doctrine
will (...) (...) drawn. And by your leave, I take the Catechism permitted to
be taught in Schools, but not Authorized for the public Doctrine of this
Realm. Neither are you the Man, that so much respect authority far more
public then this, where it sorteth not with your fancies. But here you have
caught a word or two, that may be misused, and that is the cause the Catechism
is so much magnified by your private Authority, as to be the public Doctrine
of this Realm. Which I speak not to disgrace the Book, but to make
difference betwixt your verdict, and the Judgment of the whole Realm.

Defenc. page 87. li. 7.
You might have given a good sense of my words (if you had any mind (...)) as
of those general and large words of the Scripture, whereupon I grounded my
self.] It is more then time, we should yield such a ghest as you are, the
same submission and reverence, that we give to the Sacred Scriptures; specially
when you abuse the words of the holy Ghost to your private and unsound
conceits. In the word of God I am bound to look to the meaning of the Writer,
who could not err; and therefore howsoever the words, if they were another
man's, might be rejected, yet in the Scriptures they are to be received with all
Religion, because he endited them, that is ^e Spirit of truth; and he has a
found and evident Doctrine in them, though we understand it not. And therefore
we must seek to other places of like sense, or more light, that we may learn
the meaning of the holy Ghost. Expect you the like d^tie, when you de^iue your
sullaine and unsavory fancies by false and loose consequents from the words of
holy write? as if you were not bound to beware how you abuse the Scriptures,
but we must look on, and hold our peaces, whiles you pervert the words of the
Prophets and Apostles at your pleasure?

You made a number of false Propositions and Conclusions without all wa^ant of
the word of God; as, Trea pa. 46. li. 10.
Thus do the members of Christ suffer: therefore of n^ (...) Christ our head
suffered the like: yea far greater terrors of God, and assaults of the
devil. And so you Reason, Ibid (...) 32. and page 47. li. 1.
which can not be refuted by the wit of Man; (...) (...) us not but wherein
he had experience of our Temptations, but he succoureth (...) in these (...)
Temptations of feeling the sorrows of hell; Therefore he himself ha^
experience of the some.] Where to show your wit, you join an affirmative
conclusion ^o a negative mayor, and in defiance of all truth and reason, you
make this childish and ignorant manner of reasoning to be irrefutable; And so
your pleasant Electua^, that Trea page 45 li. 33.
of all absurditi^s this is the greatest, that mere men should suffer more
deeply and more bitterly (the sorrows and pains of hell) then Christ did.
All these you build upon this foundation, Christ was Heb. 4.
Tempted in all things after aliken^sse, (but) without sin: no^ that ^he ^is
any such intention or direction in the Apostles words, but that you will mak^
such a Construction of them, and no man must say nay. To let you see your folly
and (...) iu this point, I Co^lus. pa. 283.
showed you many corporal pains and sorrows, and likewise many spiritual,
which Christ never felt, as touching the causes and objects of those
afflictions, though I did not exempt him from the general sense of those
affections. In the Body of Man, I named blindness, dumbness, lamenesse,
sickness, breaking of bones, burning of fire, and such like which Christ never
suffered; and yet in all these he can and does succor others. In the Soul I
reckned blindness, and hardness of heart, unbelief, desperation, frenzy, and
vexation with devils, all which Christ has often cured and healed, and readily
can, though he were never plunged into these, as men are. Wherefore your maine
and immooueable Collection out of the Apostle, as you dream, that Christ
succoureth us not, but wherein he had experience of the same, was a blind and
false in^sion of yours utterly mistaking the Apostles words and meaning. To
this what reply you?

Defenc. page 87. li. 18.
The Apostle and (...) both do speak of the sufferings of mankind in
general, and of each part of nature apt to suffer, but not of every particular
in each of them, or which each meets withal.] You are where you would be,
when you and the Apostle go hand in hand, as you make your self believe,
though you come nothing near the Apostles speech o^ sense. Then since it
suffices for the truth of the Apostles words, that Christ felt fear, sorrow,
shame, pain, and death which are common to all men; and there was no need,
that Christ should have all the same causes of fear, sorrow sh^me, and pain,
which every man has, or may have; what reason had you out of the Apostle to
conclude so confidently, that Christ must suffer the very same sorrows and
pains of hell, which sometimes in this life befall some men through vehement
remorse of sin, and faintness of faith? For they are not general to all
Ages and Persons; and if they were, yet proceed they from the guiltiness of
our own consciences, and the not feeling of Gods grace for the time, that we
may see our own unworthiness; neither of which could have place in Christ. [
General terms, you say, should be understood according to the possibility
and probability of the matter.] Be those the raines of your Reasons, that you
will utter matters neither probable, nor possible, and then require to have
your speech recalled to possibility and probability? Do other men use so to
speak or write, that when they have over lashed themselves, they fly to
probabilities and possibilities, such as they best like? You must look, good
Sir, to your Propositions and Conclusions, that they be sound and good,
concording with the grounds of Faith, and Rules of holy Scripture, and then you
shall not need to make such idle reseruations. Now in your Conceits, which I
repeated and refuted, what probability, or possibility do you dream of?
that Christ was touched and plunged deeper then any other man into fears,
Passions, and Agonies of reiection, confusion, desperation, and damnation,
though at last with much a do he wrastled from them all? Such Probabilities
keep to your self, no wise Christian will admit them, except he see them
proved with stronger Reasons, and cleerer Testimonies, then such loose
possibilities and probabilities, as you bring.

Your waterish stuff in the rest of this page is not worth the speaking to.
You wander about to salve the smallest, and clean skip over the greatest
points, that are objected against you. That Defenc. page 87.
Christ had not his eyes put out as Sampson had, nor was swallowed up by a
Whale, as Jonas was; nor was cast into a burning furnace as Sydrac and his
fellows were, nor was stoned to death as Naboth and Steven were: These I say
were just and full reproves of your licencious inference, that Christ of
necessity must suffer whatsoever his members suffered. I opposed other
instances besides these, touching the soul of man, from which Christ has
helped many, though he never had experience of the same; as from caecitie and
obstinacy of heart, from infideli^ie, and all manner of Iniquity, from
frenzy, fury, folly, and such like vexations and afflictions of devils.
Wherein if you give Christ no power nor ability to hear and help at his good
pleasure, you take both his honor and office from him. If you confess, which
the Scriptures avouch, that he has healed many, which were possessed and
oppressed by the devil, then you must either recall your invincible Reason, as
a palpable folly, or else you must subject the Body and Soul os Christ not
only to devils, which you dare do; but to all manner of Imp^etie and
iniquity, since there is no sin so great, which Christ will not forgive upon
true repentance, save wilful Blasphemy against his Spirit. [You speak of
Pains, not of sins.] And is it no pain to be possessed with the devil in
body or mind, as we read of many in the Gospel? diseases, burning, (...), and
such like, which Christ never suffered, are they no pains? frenzy, fury,
lunacie, are they not rather painful and grievous punishments of sin, then
sin? your Proposition which could not be refuted by the wit of Man, was
this; Christ succoureth us not, but wherein he had experience of our
Temptations and Infirmities, This speaks of Temptations and Infirmities; now
how far these words do st^etch, can you not tell? but you will amend the
matter, and clear both the Apostle, and your own Conclusion.

Defenc. page 87 (...) 37 and page ^8. 1. 1.
Thus this Scripture, is cleared, and my Reason justified: Christ succoureth us
not in any extreamer kind of pain, then he himself had experience of. But he
succoureth us in the feeling of the terrors of God, he releaseth us of the
pains and sorrows vn^easurable that rise thereof. Therefore him self had
experience of them.] You should do well to tell us, how this Scripture is
cleared? the place proves, that Christ had a Similitude with hi^ Brethren in
general, that is, as well in flesh and blood subject to death, as other suf^
and temptations. These three the Apostle reckneth and calls katapanta, all
the parts of Resemblance, which Christ had with the weakness and wretchedness
of our condition and Nature. Your self confess those three; to wit, Defenc.
page 8^. li. 6.
Infirmities, Temptations, and afflictions, to be all the things wherein Christ
was like us; for his manhood in substance was the same that ours is, and so
more then like. As for en (...), by which you would have to be signified Ibid.
li. 28.
All the matter, and every kind of pain, Wherein Christ succoureth us;
besides the manifest falsenesse of that construction, which I have sufficiently
reproved, you depart, as your manner is from all Interpreters new and old to a
singular sense, that no man likes but your self. The G^ke Scho^s collected by
Occumenius, thus expound it. (...) (...) in 2. cap. ad Heb.
(...). in that he suffered, signifies, For as mvch as he (...). And
Theodorct. The Apostle says, Theodoret. ^n 2. ca. ad Heb.
Whereas by experience Christ learned the weakness of Man's Nature, he h^lpeth
those that are impugned. And Theophylact. Theophylact. in 2. cap. ad Hebre^s.
That which the Apostle says is this. Because as a Man Christ understands
all by experience, and knows what affliction and (...) is, therefore he can
help, that is, he is the readier to streteh forth his hand, and with mercy to
aid the oppressed. From these perhaps you will derogate the knowledge of the
Greek tongue, though they were all natural Grecians, as you do from Saint
Austen; but that will do you little good, and less honesty. For the
skilfullest interpreters, that are of our Age and Religion, and w^l learned in
the Greek tongue, do exactly agr^ with them against you, (...) in his
observations upon the new Testa^ent says. (...). (...). in 2. ca. ad Hebre^s.
(...), id est (...) THEREFORE (...) Christ suffered, and was tempted, he is
able to (...) them, that are tempted. In 2. ca^. ad Hebrees.
Calvin, In 2. ca^. ad Hebrees.
Beza, In 2. ca. ad Hebrees.
Piscator, In 2. ca. ad Hebrees.
Marlorate, In 2. ca. ad Hebrees.
(...) in his Translation, and others with one consent express en ho not by
WHEREIN, as you do; but by ex eo quod, (...) hoc quod, ex quo, by that which
Christ suffered, (or because he suf^ered) and was tempted, he is able, (or
ready) to succor the tempted. The (...) Translation expounds it by for as
much as. And though you would (...) the mat^ and the (...) together, least you
should be taken tardie with a violent wresting of the Scriptures, yet the
simpl^ can see great di^nce between these two Interpretations: WHEREIN Christ
suffered and was tempted, (therein and in nothing e^se) he is able to succor
us; which is your erroneous exposition of the Apostles (...): and by this that
Christ suffered, (or because he suffered.) and was tempted he is able (that is
ready) to help them that are tempted; which is the General Resolution of all
these late Expositors. And so your cl^g of the Scriptures is the crossing and
misconsturing of them, against the full accord of new and old Interpreters.

As for your reason; that is justified with a ^itnesse, as error is (...) by
wilful ignorance. The Defenders (...) in framing Arguments.
For if a man would rake up all the reasons, that ever thwarted A^ or truth, he
shall hardly find any more or worse ^aults in any (...) then this has. To a
Neg^ ma^or being a plain comparison, you put an Negative conclusion, that is a
simple position; all three propositions have one and the same subject; and the
predicate in the Conclusion is no where found in the premis^es. But your Art
is like your truth, and therefore I marvel at neither. The form of your
reason being so out of frame, let us see how the matter of it can be justified.
The mayor of your first argument, which (^ou (...)) Trea pa. 46 li. 31.
could never be refu^ed by the wit of man, was this. Christ succoureth (...)
(...), but wherein he had experience of our temptations and infirmities: that
is, Christ helps no man in any thing, which he him^ before has not felt.
This false and l^d assertion you are gone from; and now you substitute an other
of the same here by way of comparison. Christ Defenc. page 87. (...) 38.
succ^ureth us not in any extreamer kind of (...), then he (...) had
experience of. Before it was the self same pain, but now it must be as
extreme a pain, though not the same. Neither of these has any foundation in
the sacred Scriptures, nor any coherence with the question, which I proposed.
Besides, this later, which is new coined, is a bold intrusion upon things
unknown, a false comparison of Christ's succouring and suffering, and no way
helps the Conclusion, that is sowed to it. For first how prove you that
former, o^ this later proposition? (...) (you will say) must be like (...) in
all things Omit, that th^se words are

(...)

(...) but that any such came simply from me, truly I do not remember; they
made nothing to my matter, who proposed the death of Christ by the shedding of
his blo^d to be the full redemption of mankind, without the death of the
soul, and pains of the damned. And by that time we both are considered, you
are as likely a man to fitten, or misconceiue, as I to forget, and mistake mine
own doctrine.

Next we see, that your pla^e out of Ambrose is alo fully to the same effect.]
Both Cyrill (...). 24.
and Ambrose speak to one effect, but neither of them one word to your
purpos^. Christ taking our nature, took also our natural affections of fear
and sorrow. So said Cyrill, so says Ambrose. What then? ergo Christ doubted,
and feared reiection and damnation. Be those natural, or sinful fears in us?
If sinful, Christ had nothing to do with them. He was like us in all things,
sin excepted. Natural they are not, because they are neither necessary nor
common to all, though they be consequents of our sin^ull corruption, when faith
fails us. There is a fear, as Damascene teaches, which is natural and
innocent, and not subject to sin. This the Lord admitt^d ^.
or suffered, when he would; not as we do, by constraint. There is another
fear, (...), that proceeds from infidelity, and the betraying (or
selfe-yeelding) of our thoughts. This the Lord admitted not. You confound both
these and by one which ^s a natural infirmity, would prove the other, which is
a sinful infidelity to be in Christ's person. But awake out of this drowsy
dream, and you shall see them not only distinct, but as far distant the one
from the other, as iniquity is from the integrity of man's nature.

That Christ laid aside for the time the delight of his eternal Deity, and
would be a^ed with the tediousness of our infirmity, Ambrose says; but that
it parted away from him, is your false translation, not Ambros^s intention.
That Christ did not dissemble our natural affections of grief and sorrow, but
would feel them for our sake; and in respect of our danger, Ambrose
confesses: but that Christ exempted himself from nothing Defen^ ^ag. ^8. li.
33.
in his passion that we have experience of, as touching pains and sorrows;
this is your medly, it is no part of Ambroses meaning. The causes of Christ's
sorrow are in that place repeated by Ambrose; you have the cunning to skippe
them, and to surmise others in their steads, of which Ambrose never dreampt, as
the fear and terror of reie^tion, maled^ction, and damnation, which Ambrose
abhors. ^.
Pro me doluit, (...) quod doleret. Christ sorowed for me, who had nothing
which he might sor^w for himself ^
. Doles igitur Domine non tua. sed mea vulnera, non tuam mortem, sed nostram
infirmitatem. Thou grieuest therefore Lord, says Ambrose, not at thy wounds,
but at mine, not at thine own death, but at our weakness. The occasions and
respects of (...) grief and sorrow are there set down by Ambrose, which you
make light of; and therefore you abuse the words of Ambrose, not so much
against me, as against himself. But these places and particulars I have
handled before, that may suffice till we come to Christ's agony.

Defen^. page (...) li 1.
To this v^ry purpose also, many others before rehearsed do affirm most
fully.] He that knew not your vain and vaunting humor, would think that so
many names of ancient Fathers, as N^ianzene, Fulgentius, Bernard, Tertullian
and Jerome, should not be impanelled but to some purpose; but the Reader has
by this time so good experience of your mistakings and wrestings, that he will
easily suppose you would make your most advantage as well of their words, as of
their names, if you had any sure hold in them. Howbeit, these places are
already discussed, and therefore as you refer me to the Pages, where you
cited them, so I send you to the places, where I examined and answered them.
Where the Reader shall soon see how you can play with places that make nothing
for you, by dreaming, that ancient Fathers thought as you do, because they
speak of humane infirmity and sorrow in Christ's soul.

D^fen^. pa. 89. l. 4.
You greatly abu^e them who take t^em otherwise: namely, as if they meant that
by the flesh and blou^shed of Christ merely and alone without the merit of his
souls and minds proper suffering, our whole ransom were paid. The chief
merit of Christ's obedience and patience, I refer to the soul of Christ,
since the body of it self has neither will nor sense, much less virtue or
merit; and the sufferings of Christ's soul by affections of fear and sorrow I
have often affirmed, I never d^ed. The death of Christ's soul I utterly
disclaim to have been any part of our redemption, and so do the ancient
Fathers before me with one consent. That you keep close, as it were
confession, and bear men in hand, that I uphold the mere sufferings of
Christ's flesh alone without any communion of his soul or mind. What tricks
you contain in those terms of the souls proper suffering, I little regard;
when you prove that which you pretend, by more then saying, I will take the
pains to refute it with more then denying. Defenc. page 89 li. 7.
As for our comparing the pains of Christ's suffering, with the pains even of
the reprobate in this life, I s^e not that you or any man living can find
fault therewith: only set aside their sinful suffering, which always I
testify that Christ was most free from. It is well, that not the Scriptures,
but you, compare the pains of Christ's sufferings with the reprobate; whereby
the Reader may perceive, that the first foundation of your new faith is your
own fancy; and the best bulwark you have for it, is the presumption of your
own brain, whereto you lean, without, if not against the Scriptures. Then
Christ yet at last shall be always and altogether free from all sinful
suffering; and then how might his soul or mind apprehend any doubt or fear of
Gods favor toward him, or any the least distrust or staggering of his
salvation or our redemption? his faith and hope standing sure and unshaken, as
also the full persuasion of Gods love toward his person, and acceptance of
his obedience, (...) and wholly possessing his heart, what fear or sorrow
common to him with the reprobate can you imagine in the soul or spirit of
Christ? Tell us what Christ apprehended or conceived, that should torment his
mind with equal anguish, as it does the reprobate. Your general phrases of
Gods proper wrath, and of the extremest spiritual punishments, are but hiues
to hide your poisoned honey in; express particularly your conceits, that we
may know whether they savor of truth and faith, or of error and infidelity.
Defenc. page 89. li 11.
Yea, I doubt not but we may compare Christ's sufferings in his agonies, even
with those of the (...) in (...). Neither do I doubt of your boldness in this
and all other ca^s, but if you will speak of the Christian faith, you must
show us what Scripture teaches you to compare Christ's sufferings in the
Soul, with the reprobate or with the damned. They be great adventures to
undertake of your own head to torment the soul of Christ with devils in like
manner as the damned are; or to give him the same (...) of Gods wrath upon
himself that the reprobate and damned have. For either of which, if you can
show any Prophet, Evangelist, or Apostle, that said so before you, we will
hold you excused; Tertull aduersus Hermogenem.
If it be not written, fear the curse appointed for those that augment or
diminish the word of God. For my part, I have learned to say with S. Austen:
Aug. contra literas Petilia. li. 3. ca. 9.
In any thing touching our faith, if an Angel ^om (...) teach otherwise then
we have received in the Scriptures of the Law and the Gospel, let him be
accursed. For Hilarious d^ Patris and filij essentia.
of Gods matters there is no speech (or doctrine) left us besides the word of
God. So that if the Scriptures make these comparisons and resemblances, we
easily admit them; if you take upon you to devise them, as new points of faith,
we as heartily detest them. And if I be not deceived, you will hardly make
either of these comparisons good by the sacred Scriptures. For you were even
now very busy with certain places of the Apostle, which to my judgment prove
the plain contrary. Christ Hebr. 2.
must (...) like his brethren in all things; and consequently in all his
sufferings. But neither the (...) nor the damned are Christ's brethren. His
sufferings therefore were not like theirs. And how could Christ's sufferings be
glorious, if they were like the reprobate or the damned? Have the reprobate or
the damned any glory in their (...), as Christ had in his? Father, said he, the
hour is come, glorify thy Son; speaking of the hour of his pas^on. By his
sufferings then Christ was glorified, and declared to be the Son of God;
which if you attribute to the reprobate and the damned, you must new alter the
whole course of God, counsels and judgments. Desenc. page 89. li. 16.
Touching the vehemency of the pain, Christ suffered (...) as ^terly and as
sharply, (yea I may say in nature the very same) as the damned do.] It must be
the self same in every point, before it can be as sharp and as bitter as
theirs. Had the damned but one kind of pain, the comparison were the sooner
examined; but they have exceeding many both outward and inward, and all these
must be common to Christ with the damned, before Christ's pains in sharpness
and vehemency can be equal with theirs. The grief of reiection, confusion
and desperation, they inwardly feel, the worm of conscience, the horror of
darkness, the pain of fire breeds them intolerable torments. Yea, what one
thing does the Scripture specify of the pains of hell, which with any
religion you may attribute to Christ? Your general refuge of Gods wrath will
do you no good; not only the Scriptures, but your self now at last
acknowledge the faithful feel a taste of Gods infinite wrath, who yet I trust
feel not the sharpen^sse nor bitterness of eternal damnation. If then Gods
wrath in some sort be common to all the suff^rings of men, just and unjust, in
this life and the next, what sequence has your supposall, that because Christ
felt Gods wrath in some measure, he therefore felt the very sharpn^sse of hell
pains? Defenc. page ^9. li 20.
If you say the extremest pains of punishment can not be where sin is not,
that is true: neither indeed can the least pains be where there is no sin.]
You be likely to understand weighty matters, that so much mistake ordinary
points of speech. That Christ's su^ings must be void of all sin, infers not
only the integrity of his nature, and purity o^ his actions, but the
sincerity of his affections; which could not be distempered in ^im by any
excess of fear or sorrow, but as in mind he did apprehend the truth and not
err, by doubting of Gods favor toward him; so in fear and sorrow admitted by
him, there could be no want of grace, no fainting of Faith, no decrease of
hope, but he must conceive and discern both Gods counsels and deeds rightly,
without mista^ing either the purpose of the punisher, or the measure of the
pain in the purgation of our sins. For he can not lie, who gave this
Testimony, that John. 18.
Iesi^ kn^ (...) that ^la come unto him, and that John 13.
the Father gave all things into his hands before his ^assion, which proves
as well his voluntary submission, as his full power to moderat^ all his own
sufferings, which he could stay, but would taste for the preserving of his
Fathers Justice.

Defenc. page 89. (...). 3^.
You grant his body suf^ered truly punishments for sin. Therefore his Soul
might suffer al^o even those of the extream^st degree.] If you meant to deal
plainly, you would distinguish the nature of the punishment, the measure of the
pain, and the purpose of The n^e, meas^re, and pur^ose of Ch^ists suffering^.
the Inflictour; in all which Christ differed much from the damned. For, first
you no way prove, that any kind of pain mentioned in the Scriptures to be
laid on the damned, was found in Christ's Soul or Body. Secondly, the pains of
the damned pass the Patience of all Men and Angels, and much more the
weakness and frailty of mortal flesh. Lastly, the purpose of God in laying
the burden of oursinn es upon his own Son, was not to dishonor him, or to
forsake him, or to execute vengeance on him prepared for the wicked, but to
take recompense from him for all our sins in such sort, as better pleased the
holiness and Justice of God, then if eternal damnation had been inflicted on
us. So that I see no one point, wherein the damned agree with Christ by the
verdict of the holy Scriptures: only he felt sharp and bitt^r pain^s for the
Trial of his obedience and patience; and so do all the Sons of God before,
or when they depart this life, though I willingly grant, that the sense of
Christ's pains in many respects were far greeuouser, then any the Godly can
feel with submission and devotion to God.

Defenc. page 89. li 37.
Your self also grants, that Christ both might and did suffer the
extremest pains that mig^t be without his own sin.] Then the more to blame
you, that content not your self therewith, but run to the Reprobate and to
the damned to draw Christ's Soul within the compass of their confusion and
destruction. I never sought to diminish or el^uate Christ's sufferings, so far
as the Scriptures gave any witness thereon: but to avouch, as you do, that he
suffered the true pains of the damned, as I then saw no Scripture to warrant
it, so I yet hear no reason to uphold it, besides your presumptuous will.
Howbeit I restrained the sufferings of Christ to the state of this life, where
he suffered; and excepted not only all stain^s of sin, and wants of grace,
but added holiness and righteousness to all his sufferings which must be
voluntary, religious, and meritorious, that they might be the more precious in
Gods sight; and this can agree to no sufferings of the Reprobate, or of the
damned. You would feign torment and afflict the Soul of Christ with Gods
immediare hand, but your proof thereof is so weak and idle, and your
inconstancy therein so plain and sensible, that you do but play with both
hands to see, which will soonest deceive the Reader. For sometimes it shall be
Gods own and immediate hand, and his most proper Act; sometimes it shall be
the displeasure of God against our sins conceived and discerned by the Spirit
of Christ that bred such torment and affliction of Soul; and which of these
two you will rather incline to, you cannot yet resolve.

Defenc. page 90. li. 1.
It was possible for Christ to conceive and feel in his mind far greater
sorrows and pains for our s^nne from Gods wrath, then he could ^eele merely
in his Body outwardly.] It ever has been the last refuge of all heresy to
fly from the truth testified in the Scriptures to the power of God, or
possibility. Tertullian being so answered by Praxeas replieth in this sort.
Tertullianu^ aduersus Praxeam.
Plainly nothing is hard to God; but if we use this sentence so abruptly in our
own presumptions, we may fame any thing of God, as if he had done it, because
he could do it. But though God can do all things, yet we must not believe
that, which he never did, but we must examine, whether he has done it. That
God tormenteth Souls in hell with his immediate hand, is a point stiffly
presumed by you, but as strange to the Scriptures, as the rest of your new
found devices: and why you should doubt of the literal sense of Christ's words,
Depart you cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his
Angels, there is no cause, but that you do not think, God is able to subject
sinful spirits to external means of punishment. And therefore you bring in
Gods immediate hand as only meet to ouer-master Souls and devils, and give
him no power to punish them by any Creature ordained for that purpose. Now
whether it be Faith, or Infidelity to ^lude all those places as ^iguratiue
speeches, where everlasting fire is threatened and mentioned in the Scriptures,
I have formerly said, what I thought sufficient, thither I remit such as be
desirous to read. Likewise that God with his immediate hand tormented the Soul
of Christ at the Time of his Passion with the same degree and kind of pain,
which the damned feel; this is an other of your Positions, for which you have
as much Scripture, as you have for the creating of another world.

What Christ disc^rned of Gods wrath to be laid on his person, I would gladly
here you express, otherwise then in general and doubtful speeches, which
under a show of some truth cover a number of your ^rroneous conceits. For first
it is certain, that Christ conceived truly as well of Gods Anger against our
sins, as of Gods favor toward his own Person, which infinitely exc^eded
the displeasure, that Gods holiness had against us, that were sinful
Creatures. Himself says: John. 8.
I know (my Father) and if I should say I know him not, I should be a liar like
unto you; but I know him. The same Euangelis^ says of Christ's sufferings:
Jesus John. 18.
knowing all things, that should come up in him. And this knowledge, if it
swarued from the truth, was not an ignorance, but an error in Christ believing
a lie insteede of Truth; which God forbid we should suppose of him, that not
only said, John 8.
I tell you the Truth, but John. 14.
I am the Truth. Christ th^n most certainly knew, that God was highly offended
with our sins, but better pleased with his Person; and that Gods love toward
him would accept his voluntari^ submission and Sacrifice, as a sufficient
recompense, and Satisfaction for the sins of the world. Again, he certainly
knew, that Gods displeasure against our sin, in love would not, in Justice
could not extend to the dissolution, r^iection, or d^struction of his Person,
but that God would temper the punishment of our sins in his Body, where he
bare them; that neither his obedience, nor patience should be wear^ed, or
overwhelmed. And to that end the Scripture plainly testifies, that Jesus
John. 13.
knew, the Father had given all things into his hands; and so whatsoever Christ
suffered was a trial of his obedience, to which he most willingly submitted
himself, that neither the burden of our sinn^s might seem a sport to him, nor
his case common to him with the desperate and damned persons. Christ then
neither did nor could apprehend or discern any wrath of God kindled against
his person, as the reprobate fear, and the damned find; neither any purpose in
God to punish sin farther than by the death of his body to purge it and
abolish it; nor the measure of pain determined to be sharper then his humane
patience could without repining or refusing endure. Wherefore though I
willingly grant as much pain in Christ's sufferings, as his patience could
sustain without declining or disobeying, yet see I no point, wherein the
sufferings of Christ, either apprehended or inflicted, did concord with the
pains of the damned. As for the terror of Gods anger against sin (which
wrought in Christ submission, not confusion) and sorrow for sin conceived, for
that God was thereby justly displeased; these and all such religious FEARS,
sorrows, and tremblings, I easily yield to the soul of Christ, which were
sacrifices in Gods sight of inestimable price, and very painful, though very
faithful submissions and passions of the inward man. The farther proof of
these, I refer to the place where I shall speak of Christ's agony; and in
the mean time assure the Ch^istian Reader, that neither this Pra^er nor all
his compartners shall ever be able by the sacred Scriptures to make any proof
of any farther or other sufferings then I have specified.

Whether the pains of body or soul in Christ were greater or sharper, I take
it to be a needl^sse and fruitless question. The pains of Christ's body were
proportioned The pains a^ well of Christ's s^ule as of his body were equal
to the strength of Chr^stes patience.
to the strength of his patience, and so were his fears and sorrows; and in
either, the soul was the part that felt the smart, and discerned the cause.
And if we balance these things by the consequents of nature, since the pains
from the body do in this life by their vehemence separate soul and body far
sooner and oftener then sorrows and fears of mind, (except in present and
ouerwhelming evils, which cool, quench, and overthrow the spirits with more
speed, though with less pains) then the sharpness of Christ's bodily pains,
having no release nor ease, but perfect sense and continuance, did pinch as
near, not as the pains of the damned, but as the passions or affections of
Christ's soul having fath and hope to support them, and comfort and joy
proposed to mitigate them. And even in the damned, both men and diu^ls, whence
you would seem to fetch your president for Christ's sufferings; whether think
you are the sharper, the pains which they now feel, before the day of
judgment, or the violence of fire, which shall then exceed all the pains they
now suffer? For both the devils and the damned have as much grief of
reiection, confusion, and desperation; and as mighty terrors and inward
torments of mind, as they are capable of; and yet neither of them have their
sharpest punishments. Of the devils the Scriptures say; Jude epist. verse. 6.
They are reserved in everlasting chains under darkness unto the judgment
of the great day. And the spirits themselves could say to Christ; Ma^th. 8.
Art thou come to torment us before the time? Of the wicked Peter says; 2. Pet
2.
God knows (how) to reserve the vn^ust unto the day of judgment to be
punished. And Romans 2.
thou (says Paul to every one of them) according to thine hardness, and
impenitent heart heapest up wrath to thy self against the day of wrath, and
revelation of the just judgment of God. By which it is plain, that the
terrors and torments of mind presently felt by the devil and the damned, are
far less then the vengeance of external and eternal fire reserved, and
then augmented on all the reprobate, both men and angels.

Defenc. page ^0. li. 4.
The greatest (pains) are no more sin, then the least. Therefore by your
own grant Christ might and did feel and endure the gr^atest sorrows of the
mind and soul, as well as the l^sser in the body.] Pains, if they be only
pains and nothing else, are not sin, and therefore the suffering of hell fire
is no sin; but the terriblest punishment of sin that men or angels shall
feel: yet terrors and torments of mind are increased by doubt, fear, or
despair of Gods goodness toward us, which are sins in this life, where
grace and mercy are proposed, and could not be in Christ without intolerable
infidelity, after so plain and plentiful assurances of Gods love and favor
toward him. Take therefore from Christ all doubt and distrust of Gods anger
and displeasure toward his person, and then it is evident, that neither his
apprehension of Gods wrath was the same that the damned and desperate feel,
no^ any way so sharp, as if Christ had conceived God to be displeased with
him, or purposed to destroy him, as the wicked are persuaded of Gods
indignation against themselves. Christ's sufferings then were wrath to the
sense and feeling of man's nature, but his Christ's Faith did not fail in the
sharpest of his paine^.
faith in the sharpest of his pains beheld the settled and assured love of God
toward his person, and he not only called God his Father in all his
afflictions, but out of his own power he gave the thief that confessed him on
the cross, the inheritance of Gods kingdom that present day together with
himself. So that he was more then persuaded, or resolved of Gods favor and
faithfulness, who took upon him in the midst of his sufferings to give the
kingdom of heaven to such as acknowledged and believed in him; though the
chastisement of our sins in his body and soul were by Gods justice and his
own consent very sharp and bitter unto him, that his love to us and obedience
to his Father might appear the more fully, not in peace, ease, and dalliance,
but in sorrow, pain and grieuance: by which ardent and constant love is tried,
as gold in the fire. Whereby it appears, that all your talk of Gods wrath
against Christ, equal with the damned or reprobate, has no truth nor sense
in it, but is a mere and flat falsity and impiety: only the general words,
that Christ suffered Gods wrath and displeasure against our sins, may be
tolerated, because the Scriptures use to call the bitterness of affliction in
whom soever the wrath of God, by reason it rises not simply out of Gods favor
and bounty, but is permixed with his Justice, that the transitory and
tolerable smart of our sins may even in this life, when we feel it and faint
under it, commend unto us the wonderful grace of God, that has for Christ's
sake released us of those everlasting and unspeakable Torments, which our
sins justly deserved, the Reprobate fully fear, and the damned by experience
most dreadfully do feel.

Defenc. page 90. li. 8.
You bring a Reason against this, that God spiritually punishes no man but for
his own uncleanness which is a thing merely untrue.] Out of two Pages in my
Sermons against the death of Christ's Soul you piked two words, where I call
the death of the Soul spiritual punishment, and because, to avoid
tediousness, I repeat not in every line the same words; you neglect, that
purposely in that Section I entreat of the death of the Soul; that eighteen
times in those two Pages I name the life and death of the Soul, that over
right those very words, which you bring, I set this Note in the Margin, the
Death of Christ's Soul could neither proceed from God, nor be acceptable unto
God, as the sum of that which I intended to prove in that place: that my
Conclusion immediately urged upon these words is this, Sermon. page 103. li. 1.
Christ then might not suffer the inward or everlasting death of the Soul: All
this I say you neglect, and ouer-skip many sound and sure reasons in those two
sides against the death of Christ's Soul, and carpe at two poor words, where I
use spiritual punishment for the death of the Soul. But take the words in
their right sense for the death of the Soul, whereof I reason in that place,
and then see what you, and all your Adherents can say against them. Eternal or
spiritual death, which seuereth the Soul from all grace and glory, God lays
on none for an others fault; because God never rejects or condemns any Man
but upon his own desert. Punish one for another by affliction of Body or Mind
he may, because he can restore and recompense, when he sees his Time; though
no Man (Christ Jesus excepted) can want sin, whiles here he lives, which God
may justly punish when, and in what respect he will.

Defenc. page 90. li. 13.
But I pray you show me this mystery how it is, that God cannot punish
spiritually where there is no sin inherent, but can and may corporally where
there is none.] Though there lie no Children of Adam, in whom there was not
sin either naturally cleaving to t^em, or voluntarily committed by them, yet
Infants after Baptism, by which Original sin and corruption in them is
pardoned, are said by better Divines, then you or I, to have no sin, and to
be often punished corporally for other men's faults. Saint Austen asserteth
both. August. Epist. 28.
Quis nonit, quid paruulis, de quorum cruciatibus d^ritia maiorum contunditur,
aut exercetur fides, aut misericordia probatur, Quis inquam nouit, quid ipsis
paruulis in secreto indic^orum suorum bonae compensationis reseruat Deus?
quoniam quanquam nihil recte fecerint, tamen nec peccantes aliquid ista
perpessi sunt. Who can tell, what good Recompense God reserueth in the secrecy
of his Judgments for those Infants, by whose pains (or Torments) the
hardness of their Parents or friends is repressed or their Faith exercised, or
their pity proved? because though the Children did no good Acts, yet neither
suffered they those things for any sin of theirs. Neither does the Church in
vain recommend those Infants to be honored as Martyrs, which were slain by
Herod, when he sought to kill the Lord Jesus Christ. Zanchius says the like.
Of Zanchius i^ tractitionibus Theologicis de 2. praecepto. pa. 340.
the punishments pertaining to this present life, by which we are visited of
the Lord, either in our outward goods or in our bodies, it is a clear case
that God very often does visit the sins of the Fathers upon the children.
But in the death of the soul, which is the spiritual punishment that I meant,
God himself says; Ezech. 18.
The soul that sins, even that shall die; the son shall not bear the
iniquity of the father, but the wickedness of the wicked shall be upon
himself. Saint Austen makes the difference, that I spoke of. August. ^pist.
75.
Neque enim haec corporalis est poena, qualegimus quosdam contemptores Dei cum
suis omnibus qui eiusdem impietatis participes non fuerant, pariter infectos.
Tunc quidem ad terrorem viuentium mortalia corpora perimebantur, quando que
vtique moritura: spir^tualis autem p^na animas obligat, de quibus dictum est,
anima quae peccauerit, ipsa morietur. This is no corpor all punishment, in
which we read some despisers of God have been wrapped with all theirs, that
were not partakers of the same iniquity: for then to the terror of the living
mortal bodies were slain, which at one time or an other must have died. But a
spiritual punishment bind^th souls of whom it is said the soul that sins,
that soul shall die. Neither shall you ever be able to show, that one soul
was slain for an others fault (as men's bodies often have been) except they
both did communicate in sin, which was the cause of their common destruction.

Defenc page 90. li. 16.
All the rest of your assertions, Page 101. 102. 103. 105. 266. 94. are of this
suite.] I like your wit, that you can make short work, and when you can not
answer, to say the things be of like suit. But refell the reasons brought in
these pages against the death of the soul, and you will find a warmer suite,
then you are ware of. I need not repeat them, if it please the Reader to
peruse them, let him judge in Gods name, whether it were weakness in you, or
in them, that made you ouerslip them.

Defene. page 90. li. 17.
By this one reason I weakened all yours, but you could pass^ that over
a^swearing unto it not a word.] By what authority must every trifle of yours
be tediously discus^ed, when you leap over six leaves at a iumpe, least you
should entangle your self with more then you could well discharge? It was
belike some worthy reason, that I durst not so much as offer a word about it;
let us hear it in Gods name. [ Ibid. li. 18.
If Christ's body hanging on the cross, and held by death in the grave, was
punished by God, where yet he found no sin, and which he still entirely
loved, and was never separated from; then so he might and did punish properly
Christ's soul also, and yet never divide his Godhead, nor his love from it.
The one stands with Gods justice, and with the nature of man in Christ, as
well as the other.] A wanton colt, when he winceth with his heels, thinks he
can batter walls, and beat down trees with a blow; when yet the skittish
thing does but hurt it self. Is this the reason which weakened all, that I
said in so many sides against the death of the soul? for of that I speak in
all those pages, which you quote. Need you a pair of spectacles so see the
difference between the death of the soul, and the death of the body, that
you so falsely, idly, and foolishly match them together? A very drone would
soon discern, that the death of the body innocently, obediently, and
patiently suffered could no way separate Christ from the favor and love of
God, nor hinder the work of our redemption, though it deprived hi^ of life,
sense, and motion in the body for the time, which are the good blessings of
God, when they are used to his glory; and yet the death of the soul, (which
leaves neither action, affection, nor communion of grace, truth, or faith in
the soul) seuereth both Soul and body quite from God, and makes them
hateful unto God, and altogether unapt to reconcile others unto God, when they
themselves are disioyned and parted from God. And therefore notwithstanding
your Crakes, that you can blow mountains before you with your breath; and your
craft, that shift the death of the Soul, (whereof I speak in all those
places) into a proper spiritual punishment of your own framing; you have not
avoided any one Reason there, nor offer so much as to come toward the matter in
question, but roue after your wonted manner with general phrases proper to
your self, and then think that no man sees you. [there are other punishments
in the Soul besides death.] but none, that can reconcile us unto God. For Rom
5.
We were reconciled to God by the death of his Son. 1. Cor. 15.
I declare unto you (says Paul) the Gospel, which I preached unto you, and
whereby you are saved. For first of all I delivered unto you, that Christ died
for our sins according to the Scriptures. Then you and whosoever else, that
preach or believe Remission of sins by any thing else, but by the death of
Christ, you preach not the Gospel, which the Apostle delivered, neither can
you look for salvation in Christ, that leave the maine ground thereof, which
is the death, that he tasted for all, and through which he destroyed him, that
had the power of death, even the devil. So that to step to any other
spiritual punishments for the satisfaction of our sins and reconciliation to
God, then to that which the Scriptures call the death of Christ and the death
of the Cross, is to renounce all, that God has ordained or revealed for our
Salvation, and to create you new Saviors after your own conceits. You must
therefore be directly and plainly brought to this point, whether Christ
suffered for us the death of the Soul by the Scriptures, and not such giggers
of proper punishments, nor strains of improper speeches, as you and your
friends hunt after; but fairly and fully according to the direction of the
sacred Scriptures, which must be heard, and preferred before all your fancies,
as well touching the death of the soul, as the truth of our redemption by the
blood of Christ Jesus. Wherein though I exclude not the sense and affections of
his soul, which felt the pain, knew the cause, and beheld the counsel of God
in all those sufferings undertaken for man, through the tender love that he
bare to man, yet none of those fears, sorrows, nor pains, which the soul
discerned and received, did any whit diminish the power of Gods spirit and
grace in him, nor the perfection of his faith, hope, and love, whereby the
soul cleaued fast to God without any separation; and consequently the
innocence, obedience, and patience of Christ's soul in his sufferings both
outward and inward, did confirm and manifest the life of his soul. But of
this more in due place.

Defenc. pa^ 90. li. 27.
Then you address your self against another, even one of the chiefest reasons
of mine, which I make from the strange and incomparable agonies of Christ in
the time of his passion.] You make no reasons from Christ's agony; but
assuming that for a show, which you do not understand, you infer what you
list, by your rash, presumptuous and manifest contradictions both to your self
and to the Scriptures. [ Ibid. li. 30.
These invaded him, as we read, principally at three times; First, in the
foretaste of his passion, Ioh. 12. secondly, in the Garden a little before his
apprehension. thirdly, in his very extreme passion it self on the cross.]
The Scripture mentions one agony, and you multiply that to three. In the
twelfth of John when some of the Grecians that came to worship on the feast of
Easter, were desirous to see Christ (of whom they had heard much) and made
their desire known to Philip, and he to Andrew, and they both to Jesus, Jesus
answered them, John 12.
The hour was come (even at hand) that the Son of man should be glorified;
by his death. This therefore was not a time to show himself, when his (heart
or) soul was troubled with other matters, even with the meditation and
preparation of his death. Now except you be so wise, that you will make every
affection in Christ an agony, there is no cause to conceive this to be an
agony. He often times thought and spoke of his death before, where no man
besides you does dream of agonies; and this very word is in other cases
ascribed as well to Christ, as to others, where no color of an agony does
appear. When he told his Disciples, that one of them should betray him, John
13.
(...), he was troubled in spirit; and meaning to raise Lazarus from death,
when he saw Mary the sister of Lazarus, and the Jews that were with her, to
weep; John 11.
he groned in spirit, and troubled himself, insomuch that he wept, which yet
was no agony, but a touch of humane compassion, showing the love he bare unto
them. The complaint on the cross, besides the words, had no show of an agony;
and what sense they bear, we shall after examine. Verily, he that would not
suffer his own Disciples to behold his agony in the Garden, would never in
the eyes or ears of his enemies with his own deeds or words verify their
reproaches and taunts against himself, as if he were forsaken of God, which was
the thing they vpbraided him with. And therefore you may devise not three, but
threescore agonies, if you will: The Scripture expresses one, and that you
neither rightly conceive, nor rightly use.

Defenc. page 90. li. 35.
To all (that duly consider) it appears so clear as the Sun at noone day,
that the pains of his passion, which plainly now he felt and feared (because
he knew he was to feel them further unto death) were the proper and direct
cause of those agontes. But we assume, that such strange and lamentable things
and behavior in Christ were not the effects one lie and merely of his bodily
pains and death. Therefore Christ felt and endured more then his me^re bodily
pains and death, by the testimony of the Scriptures, which thing you deny.]
Your clear Sun is the dark cloud of your own imaginations; your proper and
direct causes are the light and false conjectures of your own brain; your
conclusion is a childish digression not only from the things questioned by
me, but from the very matters proposed by you: only in the vpshot you hold
your wonted course, to strengthen your cause with a lie, when truth will not
stand you in steed. To begin where you end: you are not ignorant, that I
defend no such thing as mere bodily pains, your self have directly confessed
the contrary, as I have formerly showed. I say indeed, Christ suffered no
death, but only the death of the body; that you turn to a manifest vntrewth,
and say, I deny that Christ felt any more, then mere bodily pains. To what
purpose then is your conclusion, that Christ endured more then bodily pains?
What gain you by that, so long as Christ suffered none other death, but the
death of the body? Christ's fear and sorrow, which the Scriptures express in
the Garden, were more then mere bodily pains, and those though he felt, you
shall never thence conclude, that he felt the pains of hell or of the damned.

Defenc. page 91.
Your assumption, as you say, I grant and acknowledge; (and so your labor is
the less) but the proposition I gain say in my whole discourse, denying that
the pains of Christ's passion, or the natural fear of them was the proper
and direct cause of those agonies, or that the Scriptures implie so much.] If
you look well to my words, they contain two things; first, that the Sermon
page 17. li. 13.
right cause of Christ's agony in the Garden is not 14.
determinately and 15.
certainly revealed in the Scriptures; secondly, that the suffering of hell
pains at that present was the least probable cause thereof, if not altogether
intolerable. let us now see how you impugn either of these. Defenc. page 91.
li. 22. 14. 27.
[ this your assertion I simply deny: and then my proposition stands firm,
that his pains inflicted on him by way of proper punishment and vengeance for
sin were the proper and maine cause thereof.] This is the cleerenes of your
Sun-shining at noone day: you deny my assertion, and then your proposition
stands firm, ergo the Scriptures do certainly specify the proper and
direct causes of Christ's agony, and those were the pains of the Damned,
which you call the proper vengeance for sin. Then if you list to deny any
thing, the contrary is presently proved, and concluded by you as clear as the
Sun at noone day. such proofs and conclusions, which are nothing but strange
and violent Imaginations, your book is full of, and these twenty leaves and
more, which here you spend in examining Christ's agony, have nothing else in
them but such mere falsehoods and confusions. Before we speak of the
firmness of your proposition, I would gladly know which of these three
propositions, which here you have varied to show the settlednes of your
conceits, is that, which you offer to be examined. In the first you say,
Defenc. page 90. li. 37.
the pains of Christ's passion, which plainly now he felt, and feared to feel
further unto death: in the second you say Pa. 91. li. 7.
those pains or the natural fear of them: in the third you say, Ibid. li. 26.
his pains inflicted on him by way of proper punishment and vengeance for
sin, these were the proper and direct cause of those agonies. These and
those, these or those, these alone and not those, are childish and foolish
contrarieti^s with any wise man save with you; and yet all these are clear and
firm, because you have the wit to deny mine assertion.

Touching your proposition, that the Reader may conceive, how you clutter
things together to hold on your accustomed carriage, he must mark, that
Christ's agony had many parts and circumstances; some inward, some outward,
some affections, The parts of Christ's agony.
some actions, some apprehensions; and all these had their causes efficient and
adiuuant, near or remote, sole or concurrent according to their differences.
The Scriptures expressly note in that agony, which Christ had and showed in the
Garden, the inward affections of sorrow, fear, admiration, submission,
contention of mind in Christ. My soul (says he) Matthew. 26.
(...), is on every side sorrowful (or compassed round with sorrow) even unto
death. And he began, says Matthew, (...), to be full of sorrow, and much
grieved. For so the Apostle uses the word (...), what sense soever it bear
with profane writers, whereof we shall not need to dispute. Phil. 2. v. 26.
I thought it necessary to send unto you Epaphroditus my fellow soldier and
your messenger, for he was very desirous of you all, (...), and very pensive
(or much grieved) because you heard he was sick. S. Mark says, Christ in the
Garden began Mar. 16. v. 33
(...), to be afraid, or astonished; and full of heaviness or grief. (...)
signifies fear and admiration, which so fixes the mind for the time, that a
man neither speaks nor uses the vigor of his senses. As for submission of
mind, Christ's Matthew. 26.
falling flat with his face Mark. 14.
on the ground, when he powered forth his prayers to God, sufficiently shows
as much inward humiliation of the soul in Gods presence, as this outward
gesture of his body declared or required. His ardent zeal in prayer, and
vehement contention of mind S. Luke notes, when he says: An Luc. 22.
Angel appeared to him to strengthen him (with a message from God, Christ then
(...), falling into an agony, prayed more earnestly (or fervently) and his
sweat was like drops of blood trickling down to the ground.

Of this agony you have often spoken, and here you spend no small time about
it, but I scant believe you know what an agony means, much less what was
the true cause of this agony. Though an agony be sometimes abusiuely taken
for fear, yet properly it is a^firmed Etymologicon ex Orione.
(...), of him that is ready to descend into any combat, or conflict with
another; as Orion a most ancient Grecian observes. Damascene confesleth, that
(...), standing What an agony is.
in (doubt or) fear to miss^ of that we undertake, we are agonized. Galene the
chief of Physicians, and well skilled in the perturbations and commotions of
the body, that come from the blood or spirits, notes of what affections an
agony is compounded; ' F^are, says he, does pr^sently drive the blood and
spirits inward toward their fountain, Galenus d^ ^ausis comat^n. li. 2.
and contracteth them together by cooling the uttermost parts of the body; and
anger does (as suddenly) heat them, diffund and send them forth: (...), and
that which (in Greek) is called an agony, is compounded of them both, and
has inequall motions, according to the predominant affection. Aristotle a
great Philosopher in the knowledge of natural things, not only shows, that
there may be an agony without fear, as when we attempt things honest and
commendable, though di^cult, Arist Rhetoricorum li. 1. cap. 9.
(...), for which men (strive and) are agpmozed without fear; but also that
sweating in an agony comes rather from indignation and zeal, than from
fear. Idem Problemat. sect. 2. quest. 26.
An agony, says he, is not the passing of the (natural) heat from the higher
parts of the body unto the lower, as in fear, but it is rather an increase of
heat, as in anger and indignation. And he that is in an agony, is not troubled
with fear or cold, but with expectation of the event. Wherein Theophrastus
not much behind him, agrees with him: Theophrastus de Sudoribus. 12.
(...). An agony is not the removing of the natural heat, but the increasing
thereof, as in anger. And heat does dry the outmost parts of the body.

I speak not this to bind Christ's sweat in the Garden wholly to natural
causes, but to show that neither Divinity, Philosophy, nor Physic do permit
that fear or sorrow, which cool the blood, and quench the spirits, should be
the cause of this bloody sweat, but that rather as the Evangelist expresses,
it came from strength and contention of zeal, whiles Christ most fervently
prayed for that, which he was very desirous, and in present expectation to
obtain. An Angel appeared from heaven Luc. 22. 43.
(...), strengthening him (says the Scripture) no question with a message from
God. For Angels otherwise were not in this case to entermeddle. And then Christ
verse. 44.
entering into an Agony, (that is, into a vehement contention of mind to
prevail against that, which resisted or hindered him) he prayed more fervently.
From this feruencie of zeal and contention of mind came that bloody sweat,
which the Evangelist mentions; which whether we make to be according to
Nature, or above Nature, it could not proceed from fear or sorrow, as some
men imagine. For fear does drive the blood inward and cool it, and so can not
thin it, and expel it by the outmost parts and pores of the Body. The
Physician that wrote the Book de vtilitate Respirationis amongst Galens works,
says. Li. de vtilita^e Respirationi^ Galen. attribut. ^om. 7.
Contingit Poros ex multo aut feruido spiritu vsque adeo dilatari, vt etiam
exeat sanguis per eos, ^iatque sudor sanguineus. It sometimes happens, that
abundant or fervent spirits do so dilate the pores of the body, that blood
passes by them, and so the sweat may be bloody. If we lean not to the
course of Nature for the cause of Christ's bloody sweat, then Hilaries Rule is
very sound. Hilarious d^ Trinitate. li 10.
It is no Infirmity, which power did above the custo^e of Nature. No man then
may dare impute Christ's sweat to weakness, because it is against Nature to
sweat blood. Beda follows him in the Beda in Luc. cap. 22.
same words: Rupertus in larger. Rupertus de victoria verbi Dei. li. 12. ca. 21.
This is unwonted, this is above nature, the flesh whole, the skin not cut,
for blood to run out of all the body, and to fall on the earth as it were
sweat. Lyra receaueth the same. According to the Judgment of diverse Lyra in
Luc. ca. 22.
this was supernaturally done, that blood should come forth in steed of
sweat; that so Christ even then might begin to shed his blood for our
salvation. Then neither in Divine nor humane learning is there any necessity,
that the fear of your hell pains should be the cause of this sweat, which
Augustine, Prosper and Bernard ascribe unto Christ's will and power for a
mystical signification, as I have showed in my Sermon. page 38. and 39.
Sermons.

Thus see we by the words of the holy Ghost, that in the Garden Christ's Soul
was affected with fear, and afflicted with sorrow; his prayer proves his
submission, and intention of mind, after comfort sent him from heaven by an
Angel; and his bloody sweat, if we attribute it to nature, must come from
zeal; if we refer it to Christ's power above Nature, might have many causes
to us unknown in particular, though we can guess at the general. Of all
these circumstances, actions, and affections, there can no one direct cause be
designed in special, except in large terms we will say, the work of our
Redemption was the cause of them all; but neither pains, nor sufferings can
precisely be determined to be the proper ground of them all, since after
comfort from heaven, he fell to most fervent prayer, and therein to his bloody
sweat: much less can you conclude, that hell pains were the right and true
cause thereof. So that I have more reason to reject your mayor proposition as
apparently false, than you have right to pronounce it firm, because you can
deny mine assertion by flinging off all the Fathers, as unworthy to have their
judgments regarded, outfacing the Scriptures with phrases and figures to bring
them to your bent. But in the kinds of pains which Christ suffered in the
Garden, we doubt as much as in the causes of his agony. You must therefore
declare, what manner of pains you mean in your proposition, before we shall
fully understand you.

Defenc. page 91. li. 16.
You mean it seems, that Christ suffered pains in his soul, by reason of
the strength and zeal of his holy affections: and that those were the proper
and maine causes of that his most woeful and miraculous agony and complaint.
Therefore not only extraordinary pains inflicted upon him by way of proper
punishment, as my proposition intends.] You seek nothing but by confusion to
cover and color your absurd and false doctrines, and that makes you huddle
and heap things together without all distinction or exposition. Christ's
agony in the Garden was before any pains inflicted on his body or soul,
other than fear or sorrow, which were painful affections rising from diverse
occasions and causes, as we shall afterward see. His complaint on the Cross
was in the midst and extremest of his pains now inherent, and afflicting both
soul and body. You couple Christ's agony in the Garden with his complaint on
the Cross, and yoke them together as proceeding both from one direct and
particular cause, which breeds more doubt in my answer, that should contain
both in one, than truth in your argument, that obiecteth both at once. That
the Reader may therefore perceive whe^eof we reason, and so the better observe
the difference betwixt our assertions, let meadmonish him, that as evil to
man's sense or reason, depends on time either past, present, or to come; so
the impression, that is thereby made in the soul of Evil past, present, or to
come, works sorrow, pain, and fear in the sou^e of man.
man is either ^orrow, pain, or fear. Not that these words are not sometimes
confounded, and their caus^s conioined, as sorrow and fear have pain in them,
that is a sense of ^uill past or approaching, as well in others as in our
selves; and the continuance of pain may be feared, even whiles the present
greeuance is suffered; but that we can expr^sse no truth, nor admit no speech
of these things if we keep not their names distinguished, as their impressions
and passions are. sometimes we make but two, as timor and dolor, fear and
grief; and then we comprise the third, which is sorrow for any good thing
past, or lost in us or others, under grief; which is the offense of mind, that
evil either present in sense, or fresh in memory brings with it. SORROVV
then Sorrow.
I call the grievous remembrance of our own evils suffered, or of their evils
past or approaching, whom we love. FEAR is the doubt and dislike of future
evil to our selves Fear.
or others; as also the declining of imminent evil, and shrinking at the sight
thereof. Both th^se are painful affections and impressions of evil, which
according to their degrees and causes do often so far oppress and burden the
soul in this life that they speedily part the soul from the body: and both
consist in the apprehension and estimation, that the soul makes of evil
foreseen or suffered. for some men fear that, which others do not, and some
regard not that, which others exceedingly grieve at. and so fear and sorrow
require not only the cogitation and cognition, but the judgment and c^nsure
of the soul; which PAIN does not. For pain depends neither Pain.
on the action, nor imagination of the soul, but is an absolute sense of
present and inherent evil, that naturally offends the soul. for example, in
the pains of the body, the soul naturally feels all offense rising within
the body, or violently offered unto the bodi^, though she knew not whence, or
how that pain comes. Therefore I make pain as it is distinct from fear and
sorrow, and rises from neither of them, to be a natural and absolute passion
and sense of evil present and inherent in soul or body. 1. John 4.
fear has painfulnesse, says Saint John; and sorrow not only 2. Cor. 2.
swalloweth up men, but 2. Cor. 7.
causes death, as Paul writes, and experience teaches; yea Prou. 13.
hope differred afflicts the soul, says Solomon. So that all our
affections may have grief in them, love and joy not excepted, when they are
disappointed: and sorrow and fear may be mitigated, but not separated from
grief and dislike; yet in neither of them is the evil present and inherent,
nor the sense and feeling thereof absolute or merely passive, but according as
the mind conceaueth and esteems of the causes and objects thereof, so the
grief of fear and sorrow increases or decreaseth.

Now touching Christ's agony in the Garden, the Scripture avouches, that
fear and sorrow possessed and grieved his mind, but that an absolute or
inherent pain was inflicted on Christ's soul by the immediate hand of god,
either in the Garden, or on the Cross, this is a late and lew de device of
yours, it has no ground nor proof in the Scriptures. And if by pains you
mean this absolute kind of torment impressed on Christ's soul by Gods own
hand, as you would have it; I utterly deny that any such pains presently felt
were parts or causes of Christ's agony in the Garden, and so your proposition,
that you fained to be firm, has not one true word in it.

Defenc. page 91. li. 27.
Let us try your proofs for it, and mine against it.] you mean no such
matter as you pretend. For first you took hold of Christ's fear and sorrow,
which were painful affections; and when you have thereby gotten the name of
pain into Christ's agony, you slide from his affections, were they never so
painful, and shuffle in your absolute torments of Christ's soul from the
immediate hand of god, under the name of proper punishment and vengeance for
sin, to be the true causes of his agony. if you thinck I mistake you, look
back to your justified reason so lately iustled in, and to the fathers, which
you brought to confirm the same, and see whether I wrong you or no. your
assumption and illation there, were these. Christ Defenc. page ^8. li. 2.
succoureth us in the feeling of the terrors of god, and releaseth us of the
sorrows unmeasureable that rise thereof. therefore Christ himself had
experience of them. Terrors are fears of things unwonted, which make us
tremble, and sorrows are expressly named by you; both which were affections in
Christ, as they are in us. you cited out of Cyrill, that Ibid. li. 11.
unless Christ had feared and sorrowed (at his passion,) we had not been
quit from fear and sorrow; and out of Ambrose, that Christ li. 38.
in his agony with the sorrow of his soul (did) extinguish the sorrow of our
souls. As also, that he carried about him our fears and our affections.
Defenc. page 48. li. 17.
minus mihi contulerat, nisimeum suscepisset affectum. Christ had done less
for me, if he had not admitted MINE AFFECTIONS. Now when the affections of
fear and sorrow are confessed in Christ's agony, you reject that as absurd,
and will hear of no pains, but of the torments of the damned from Gods
immediate hand on the soul of Christ; which though you neither do nor can
prove, yet you hope with prating and wrangling to seem to say somewhat.

Defenc. page 89. li. 28.
Before we come to proofs, we must know, that this your Resolution, as you call
it, is first most vain; also directly contrary to your self; and then
altogether vn^rue, and presumed by wide conjecture, as God willing I will
presently show.] Perform but one of these challenges to be true, and take all
the rest as granted, for your small pains therein bestowed: but your dreams
are so violent, that when you stick in the mire, you think you fly in the
air. You will show us your own erroneous and presumptuous folly; and other
show of any matter worth the meddling with, you do make none.

Defenc. page 91. li. 32.
First I heartily entreat the Christian Reader to mark well and to consider
how your L. does contriue three notable equivocations in these few words;
Christ suffered in his soul the wrath of God: which you seem to grant, but in
truth you do not. And if we add also the pains of hell, then he opposes a
fourth fallacy against us. And these three or four are the only pillars of his
doctrine. I make no pillars of my doctrine, but the manifest words of the Holy
Ghost teaching us by the Scriptures the price and manner of our redemption;
which lest any man should think I divert, and wrest to my private or secret
conceits, as you do, I show the ancient and true Church of Christ did so
belee^e them and expound them before me. The pillars of your doctrine are
phrases, follies, and falsities, which if you did not hide with general and
ambiguous words, the considerate Reader without entreaty would soon mark
your mysteries: but because you are so kind as heartily to pray the Reader to
mark how you play the man, I desire him likewise to observe, how shamefully
you come short of your great brags, and even betray your cause to him that well
considers it.

Defenc. page 91. li. 37.
For the three former, your first equivocation is in the word, Suffered: and
about it we deal in this place. Et page 92. li. 19.
Now your next equivocation is in this, He suffered in soul. Your next, in
Gods wrath. Both which I have plainly showed before. As also your fourth
fallacy, which may be called Fallacia accidentis.] To the three last notable
equivocations, as he calls them, here is all that this Defensor speaks in
this place, where he would have thee, Christian Reader, so considerately to
mark some marvelous matters. And thus shall thou often be troubled with his
vain tatling, when thou most expectest either his proofs or his promises. He
sends thee back to peruse his former pages, where thou shall find as little
to the purpose, as here thou do, though words he wanted not to cover his
conceits. Is there be any thing in those pages proved by him, which I have not
in the same places confuted, I am content to hazard the peril of thy censure.
Howbeit, I think thou may perceive by my carriage, that I desire to avoid
and prevent all ambiguities, as much as in me lies. I speak as plainly as my
simple ability will suffer me; I distinguish things as evidently, as either
the matter permits, or the truth requires. And therefore he, that in all
his defense has yet uttered not one distinct and clear sentence touching his
cause, but clowded and cloaked with proper and mere, and such like shifts, and
shadows never expounded by himself, and known to no man, but himself, has
small reason, (though as much in this as in the rest) to say that fallacies are
the Pillars of my doctrine. But if thou believe Pedlers praising their own
wares; then may thou credit this booke-maker craking of his clear and
Sunshine proofs, which he himself neither expresses, nor understands.
The equivocation of the word SVFFERING which in this place his mastershipp will
deal withal, will give thee a taste, what thou shall look for in the rest.

Defenc. page 92. li, 1.
The common and ordinary phrase understands herein, Christ's feeling of
pains inflicted on him by way of PROPER punishment and satisfaction for sin,
which he undertook for us. Only this in the ordinary and usual manner of
speech is signified by Christ's suffering, or his passion: and so we always
understand by it.] This is one of your enlightened and purified expositions,
which is as fair and bright, as the darkness of Egypt. Do men usually and
ordinarily describe Christ's passion to be nothing else, but the feeling of
pains inflictedon him by way of proper punishment? who uses these words by
way of proper punishment, besides your self and your adherents, who under that
color would secretly convey the pains of the damned into the soul of Christ?
for what is the proper punishment of sin? that which all sinners not Redeemed
by Christ must endure, or that which all men being sinners do endure, or that
which none endured but Christ alone, because it was proper to the dignity of
his person, with that punishment, which god laid on him by the hands and
mouths of men, to satisfy the justice of God for our sins, and utterly to
abolish the guilt and wages of our sin? Proper may be either to the damned,
whose sins are never pardoned; or proper to sin in all mankind, ever since
the first man forsook his Creator; or proper to Christ's person, and not
common to him with the damned. Which of all these senses do you contain in the
word Proper? You spoke even now of equivocations, and made a grievous complaint
to your Reader, that I meant to circumuent you with ambiguities; and what is
this but to turn your Readers eyes aside on me, whiles you play your part with
the maine work of Christ's passion for man's Redemption? how often have I
challenged in you this shifting with proper and improper, when and where pleased
you? Christ's sufferings in all men's speeches, save yours, were far larger
than his passion. He suffered afliction all the time of his life, yea the whole
course of his life was a continual suffering of reproaches, disdaines,
dispites: besides the natural infirmities of our flesh, as hunger, cold,
wearines, weeping and such like, which in his person were all sufferings, and
yet no man calls his life his passion: his passion we take to be the manner
of his death, and so all his sufferings from the Garden to the grave, imposed
on him by the hands, mouths, or hearts of men betraying, forsaking, or pursuing
him, were parts of his passion. The false accusing and unjust condemning him,
the mocking, reproching, and reuiling him to be wicked and forsaken of God,
were parts of his passion, and yet these were no inherent nor sensible pains,
of which you would seem to speak, when you exclude his affections of fear
and grief of mind, as no parts of his passion.

Defenc. page 91. li. 6.
You cunningly take another rare sense of this word, as it signifies the
affections of the mind in Christ wholly bent to holiness, and obedience of god.]
you are a learned Squire, that do not understand, the soul suffers as well
by her affections, as by her senses; and that in Christ the hearts and tongues
of the Jews concurred to his passion, as well as their hands. The affections
and perturbations of the soul are usually and properly called by the Greek
fathers (...), and by the Latin, passiones, passions or sufferings of the
mind. The Apostles apply the word (...), SVFFERINGS, both in Christ and in
us, as euenly, and as often to fear, sorrows, rebukes, reproaches, losses, and
such like griefs of mind, as to stripes and other violences proffered to the
body. Manifest proofs thereof are every where occurrent in the Scriptures.
Heb. 10 v. 32
Remember the former days (says the Apostle to the H^brewes) wherein you
sustained (...), a great conflict of sufferings; partly whiles ye were made a
spectacle with reproaches and troubles, partly whiles you did communicate with
them that were so used. (...), for you had a joint feeling of my bands, and
received with joy the spoiling of your goods. Yet had they Hebr. 12.
not as yet resisted unto blood by striving against sin. So Peter: 1. Pet. 4.
Wherein you communicate (...), with the sufferings of Christ, rejoice, that in
the re^elation of his glory you may be glad and joyful. If you be reproched
for the name of Christ, blessed are you, and the spirit of glory rests on
you. And again: 1. Pet. 2.
This is thanks with God, if a man for conscience to God endure sorrows,
(...), suffering unjustly. Paul's afflictions, which he calls his infirmities,
(even as he says: 2. Cor 13.
Christ was crucified through infirmity) are reckened in many places by
himself, amongst which are 2. Cor. 6.
Reproach, infamy, want, sorrow, fear of and 11.
danger, and 11.
care, affection and and 11.
zeal for others and 11.
weakened or and 11.
offended; whereby it may be seen, what was meant by the words of Christ
touching Paul's sufferings, Acts 9.
I will show him how many (or how great) things he shall suffer for my name;
and by his own, I rejoice Coloss. 1.
(...), in my sufferings for you. Yea not only fear and sorrow of mind, which
are the painfnll affections of our nature, but even corporal affections,
though natural, were sufferings in Christ. Damascene writing of the natural
and innocent, yet painful passions and sufferings, which Christ took unto
him, says: Damascen. orthodoxae fidei. li. 3. ca. 20.
(...), natural and innocent passions (or sufferings) are those what soever,
which entered into man's life by the condemnation of the first transgression; as
hunger, thirst, weariness, labor, weeping, vexation, declination of death,
fear, agony, and such like, which are naturally in all men. These all Christ
took unto him, that he might sanctify all.

And how can it be otherwise, since the soul feels pain and grief, as well
by her understanding and will, as by her senses, and that in other men's dangers
and troubles, where love and pity prevail with us, no less then in our
own. August. de ciuitate Dei. li. 14. ca. 6.
what is fear and sorrow (says Austen) but the will dissenting from those
things which displease us? and generally according to the variety of things
which are desired or shunned, as the will is pleased or offended, so is it
changed and turned into these or those affections. Then as nature teaches us
to fear our own dangers foreseen by sense or understanding, and to sorrow
for our present miseries or losses; so love teaches us to do the like in other
men's harms either present or approaching, whose persons the more we embrace,
their perils and overthrows the more we lament. Now he that is De ciuitate
D^i. li. 12. ^a. 16.
affected, suffers, says Austen. Neither are the violences offered to the
body called pains, but because the soul by nature disliketh them, howsoever
by faith she may be content to endure them for Gods cause; and so the
impressions of fear and sorrow, in that they are painful, they are sufferings
of the soul, though charity persuade them in other men's troubles, or
necessity impose them in our own cases, or piety raise them in respect of
God. Psalm. 51.
A broken heart and contrite spirit, is it not a suffering, because it is a
sacrifice unto God? Philip. 2.
Work^ your salvation, says the Apostle, with fear and trembling. Are these
no sufferings, because they tend to salvation? Matthew. 5.
Blessed are you when men reproach you and pursue you, and speak all evil
against you falsely for my sake. Rejoice and be glad, for great is your reward
in heaven; so pursued they the Prophets before you. This is a great blessedness,
and yet a great suffering of mind, to be reviled and slandered; and therefore
holiness in Christ, as in the Saints, did not exclude, but rather commend and
advance Christ's sufferings.

D^fenc. page 92. li. 12.
Speak plainly I beseech you, and deceive us not. Call not this his souls
suffering, but his ^oules holiness and righteousues.] I call that SVFFERING in
Christ, which was painful and grievous unto him; though withal it were
righteous and holy. Matthew. 11.
Blessed are they that suffer persecution for Righteousness. Shall it be no
persecution, or no suffering, All Christ's sufferings were rig^teous and holy.
by reason the cause is righteous and holy, for which the godly do suffer, and
their patience and submission to god in their troubles are duties of holiness?
all sufferings in Christ were most righteous and holy, for in them he showed
not only voluntary patience, and obedience, but innocence also. Does this make
his stripes, wounds, or death to be no sufferings because he 1. Pet 3.
Suffered the just for the unjust? Deceive not your self, and I see no man
else, that goes about to beguile you. I speak not of those works of piety and
charity, which Christ performed to God and man with joy and delight; I speak
of those infirmities, temptations, and affections, which were grievous and
painful unto him, though the suffering and enduring thereof were most
religious and righteous in him. And you, that sever his holiness and
righteousness from his sufferings, as if he were defiled and accursed with
them, lewdlie abuse both the word of God, and faith of Christ, which contain
no such thing.

Defenc. page 92. li. 10.
Christ's exact and perfect keeping of Gods just law, and his sufferings, are
two parts of Christ's mediation greatly differing, and ought not both in truth
be called his passion or satisfaction for sin.] His passion I call the things
suffered at or about the time of his death; because not the instant of
breathing out his soul, but the whole order and manner of coming to his death
after his last supper, is by the Scriptures enclosed in the name of his death,
and by all sober and advised writers called his Passion or suffering of death.
His whole life besides was full of sufferings, and even those natural
infirmities of hunger, thirst, weariness, and such like, were voluntary
sufferings in him, because he had power enough in himself to repress or
exclude those punishments in^licted for sin on our nature; and consequently
the infirmities and affections of mind, that were gri^tious, were likewise
voluntary sufferings in him, and pertained to the humility and obedience, to
which he submitted himself for the fuller satisfaction of our sins, as well
by his life as death. That our whole life is a suffering for our sin in Adam,
S. Austen exactly notes: August. in Psalm. 37.
Non enim in illum non est vindicat^m; a^t frustra dixerat Deus, morte
morieris: aut aliquid patimur in ista vita, nisi ex illa morte, quam meruimus
primo peccato. Neither did God not revenge Adam, nor said in vain: Thou shall
die the death; neither do we suffer any thing in this life, but from that death
which we deserved by the first sin. And making an example of hunger, says;
August. ibid.
Ista fames, naturalis quidam morbus est, quia natura nobis facta est poena ex
vindicta. Primo homin^ quod erat poena, natura nobis est. This hunger (of the
body) is a disease of nature, because the punishment inflicted (on Adam) to
revenge (his sin) is our nature. That which was punishment to the first man, is
become nature to us. Christ then in partaking our nature, did partake with our
punishment, and his submitting himself to that, what was it but a continual
suffering of our punishment, by feeling our natural infirmities both of soul
and body, though still without sin, and all natural necessity, as in us;
that his obedience might be the more evident and acceptable unto God. So that
it is no equivocation in me, to call fear and sorrow of mind in Christ,
sufferings for sin, notwithstanding they were innocent and obedient in him,
and so parts of his humane holiness and righteousness directly tending to
satisfaction for our sinful disobedience. The full price and payment whereof
was death, the close of man's life, which as it was the last, so was it the
greatest and weightiest part of his obedience, and recompense to Gods Justice
for our sins: but it is an idle vagation in you, when you can neither refute
nor resist the truth, to make an appeal against ambiguities, when you your
self can neither prove, nor dare plainly express, that you intend.

Defenc. page 92. li. 21.
Sir I hope you will not think to beat down all before you with nothing but
cunning, yet vain deceit, countenanced out with cruel and hateful words.]
You lack an Ostler to bring you to bed, you have traveled sore, as a man may
see by your foming at mouth. If I say any thing, that I do not particularize
and prove to be the received and public doctrine of Christ's Church agreeing
with the Scriptures for many hundred years, before your device of hell pains
in Christ's soul was heard of amongst Christians, let me lose in Gods name
both my labor and my credit with the Reader: but if you, that stand iangling
about proper punishment and mere vengeance for sin, and will not one word
further, cry out in your passions, as sick men do in their dreams, that you
are ouerborne with cunning and countenance, they are not all wise men, that
have parts in plays, nor all true men, that talk of losing by the high ways.

Defenc. page 92. li. 24.
Further you are in this your Resolution directly contrary to your self, as
before I have briefly yet sufficiently showed.] So says he, that neither
agrees with the truth, no^ with himself. Ignorance in you is no praeiudice
to me, much l^sse malicious folly, that pronounce before you understand; and
take nothing right, though it be never so plainly delivered. In the place where
you challenged my contrariety, I put in a full discharge thereof, and here you
repeat the very same, though you would seem freshly to find out some solemn
matter.

Defenc. page 92. li. 26.
Again you censure your self very sharply, for your resolutenesse in this
cause (where you say) It is curiosity to examine, presumption to determine,
impossibility to conclude certainly, what was the true cause thereof.] To
affirm every thing and confirm nothing, is grown now such a trade with you,
that you have neither care, nor conscience what you say. Could you certainly
conclude, what was the true cause of Christ's agony, you The precise and
particula^ cause of Christ's agony is not revealed, though the g^nerall
occasions may be con iectured.
were free from this censure; but in that you bring nothing besides your own
conceits no way grounded or supported by any evidence of the sacred Scriptures,
my speech is verified in you, that since it is impossible out of the Scriptures
to conclude any certain (that is particular and praecise) cause of this
agony, which has so many parts and secrets not revealed unto us; it is
presumption in you to determine, that the present suffering of hell pains from
the immediate hand of god, was the cause thereof; and to call it in question,
argues itching curiosity to search for that, which is concealed from us. Why
then do I conclude resolutely, that the cause of Christ's agony i Defenc.
page 91. li 12.
could not proceed, but from his submission to God, or compassion to men or
both?] Do I conclude any CERTAIN or precise cause in particular, that make so
many diversities of general causes, that might be, as submission to God, or
compassion on men, or both? They say brute beasts do bewray themselves to
want all reason, by want of numbering. Take heed least if you see no distance
betwixt THREE general heads or occasions of Christ's fears and sorrows, and
ONE certain and precise cause thereof, men think there lies somewhat else in
you under a man's skin. For what else should I say to the grossenes of his
conceits, that has not learned to understand the difference betwixt three
general disiunctiues, and one special and certain a^firmatiue? My
resolutenes if your Brains were not buzzed with more pride then skill, is
against your pains of the damned to be suffered in the Soul of Christ, since
neither damnation nor confusion could take hold of him; but they that will not
wilfully blind themselves, as you do, with your presumptuous fancies, must
believe, that piety to god, and charity to men, or both led Christ to these
fears and sorrows, which the Scriptures mention in his agony; though we
cannot precisely pronounce, what particular respects moved each afsection in
him.

D^fenc. page 92. li. 29.
Thirdly where you make but two causes, submission to God, and compassion to
men, else where but one, religious fear; but before you very precisely made
six: if you agree no better with your self, I have small hope you will agree
with us.] To look for learning, wisdom, or sobriety from him that has none,
is to look in vain. Some would seem rich by often looking on that little,
which is left, when all is spent: and you would seem learned by oft^n telling
us one tale, though it contain nothing but lies and toies. That I make but one
cause, to wit Religious fear, in the 23 Page of my Sermons, look there who
list, he shall find you a fabler. In the fifth cause that might be of Christ's
agony, which was the deprecation of Gods wrath, I yielded to some men's
speeches so far, (for quietness sake,) that it ^ight be said, Christ feared,
that is, Sermon. page 22 li. 2^.
shunned everlasting death: and that the sight of gods wrath Sermon. page 21. li.
19.
tempered and made ready for the finnes of men, which the Scripture calls a
cupp, Pa. 22. li 35.
might for a time somewhat astonish the humane nature of Christ; yet so, that
the sight of our sins, and the wages thereof Pa. 23. li. 2.
impressed nothing (that is no fear) in the soul of Christ, but a religious
fear to sorrow for the one, and pray against the other. Here are expressly named
religious fear, sorrow and (zealous) prayer; occasioned by the sight of the
cup of Gods wrath prepared for our sins. How then does this exclude the
rest of the causes, which are there precedent or consequent? or how come you to
cast away Christ's sorrow for sin, and prayer against the desert of our evil
deeds, (whereof the first rose from the submission, that Christ made unto Gods
wrath provoked, and the second from the compassion, that Christ had toward men
endangered) and to leave but one, where I name three? Are you so well skilled
in the Scriptures, that you do not know, a Religious fear of God compriseth
the whole service of God; and therefore might much more contain the holiness of
Christ's affections, when he submitted himself to the will and hand of God for
our sakes? What rudenes then, or rashness, or both is this, when I note diverse
parts or effects of one thing, or use diverse words to describe one and the
same matter, for you to quote out contrarieties by Arithmetic, because the
words be different, and never to weigh the sense in which they accord?

So trifle you with the two general causes, as if they could not contain the
six special that, I say, might be of Christ's agony, when yet those six are
but remembrances of some respects, that Christ might have in his fear and
sorrow; and those two comprehend all six as parts, or consequents of Christ's
submission to God and compassion on men. Neither do I pretend or profess,
that every of these six was the whole and entire cause of his agony; (It is
your dottage so to dream, and no piece of my mind.) These six, and many more
reasons and occasions Christ might have at that time to fear and sorrow,
wherein I do not determine, which was the full and true cause of that agony;
but how many respects might lead him to fear and sorrow at that present, which
I do not conclude as certain, but propose as possible, and far more
probable, then your real pains of the damned supposed at that instant
actually to torment the soul of Christ. Leave therefore your one, two, and
six, to Tilers to tell their pinnes, or Wittalls to number their Geese; and
show that either I determine any precise or particular cause of Christ's agony,
thereby to deserve mine own censure, as you do; or that those six, which I
mention, may not be referred to those two generals, which I note, that so at
least you may make me disagree with my self.

Defenc page 92. li. 32.
Last of all this your resolution, making Christ's piety and pity to be the
only proper and maine cause of all his woeful passion, is utterly false and
untrue, having no ground but mere conjectures.] Your memory is as brickle, as
your reason is feeble. Those six causes of Christ's agony, and not of all his
woeful passion, as you lightly leap you know not whither, I did no otherwise
propose, then that they Sermon. page 17. li. 28. 29.
might be, and every one of them more likely, and more godly, then your device
of hell pains. As for the only cause of that agony, I meddled with no such
matter, my words are evident to the contrary: Ibid. li. 30.
Others at their leasures may think on more, which I shall be content to h^are;
but that piety, or charity, or both must be the Roots of Christ's fear and
sorrow, and not infidelity and distrust of Gods favor toward his person or
function, nor the Real and inherent sense of Hell pains common to him with
the damned as you do peremptorily, but pestilently dream; in that I said I
was resolute, and so I yet remain. And you shall sooner prove your self to be
the man in the Moon, then Christ's soul to have been tormented with any
real pains inflicted on him by the immediate hand of God, which position of
yours has impiety for the ground, and folly for the proof; howsoever you
thinck to face it out with your insolent verbositie.

Defenc page 92. li. 37.
Your first cause is submission to the majesty of God-sitting in judgment,
when Christ was thus astonished and agonized therewith:] I pray thee Christian
Reader to remember in all these causes, what was my purpose and promise even
now specified, not to conclude The first cause concurring to Christ's agoni^.
these as necessary and entire causes of Christ's agony, but to show them
possible, and more likely and Godly, then his Pagent of Hell pains inflicted
on the soul of Christ. The reason, that led me to set down this as one of the
causes, that MIGHT BE of Christ's agony, (for so I always mean, though
perhaps in course of speech I always add not so much,) were the words of our
Savior. John 1^.
Now is the Judgment of this world, now shall the Prince of this world be cast
out. And I, if I were lift up from the earth, will draw all men unto me. This
said he signifiyng what death he should die. The judgment, which here our
Savior notes, was not at that instant, when he spoke these words, but at an
hour to come, when Satan the Prince of this world should be John 16.
judged, that is eiected and cast out from Revel. 12.
accusing the Saints, and the Revel. 12.
salvation of God and power of his Christ established in heaven. So much the
words of Christ imported, when he said, Now shall the Prince of this world be
cast out; and not, now already is he cast out. This Judgment then was
Redemptorie, not condemnatori^, wherein the son of God in our flesh was
admitted to make satisfaction for the sins of all, that should believe in
him; and to pay the price that should appease the justice of God provoked by
our misdeeds, and so to reconcile us to the favor of God by the blood of his
Cross, that there might be no more place for Satan to accuse us any longer
Revel. 12.
night and day before God as otherwise he did. The issue of this judgment
Christ before expressed, when he said, and I, if I were exalted (to the Cross)
will draw all men unto me; And after, when rising from his fervent prayer, he
said; Mark 14.
Behold the son of man is delivered into the hands of sinners. As also to the
Jews, that came to apprehend him. Luke 22.
This is your very hour and the power of darkness; as likewise to Peter, when
he John 18.
drew his sword, and smote the high Priests servant, and cut of his right
ear; put up thy sword into thy sneath, John 18.
shall I not drink of the cup (says Christ) which the Father has given me?
The fruit of this Judgment is every where specified in the Scriptures. 1. Pet.
2.
Christ bare our sins in his body on the Tree, by whose stripes ye were
healed, that being delivered from sin, we should live to righteousness. What
need you then so curiously question, Against whom or in what cause sat God in
judgment now when Christ was thus astonished, and agonized? God sat in
judgment to receive satisfaction for the sins of his elect at the hands of
his own Son by his humility and obedience unto death.

Defenc. page 93. li. 3.
Of necessitte it must be one of these three ways. First, Gods majesty and
great justice now at this time might sit in judgment against us, and so
consequently, yea chiefly against Christ himself as our Ransomepaier and
Suertie in our steed. li. 16.
Secondly, God might be considered now as judging Satan the Prince of this
world. Pa. 94. li. 40.
Thirdly, Gods matestie and justice may be considered sitting in judgment
merely against sinfullmen.] You be copious where you need not, and careless,
where most cause is you should be circumspect, to make an idle show of small
skill, you bring here a TRIPLE judgment of God; First, against us and Christ
our suertie; Secondly, against Satan; Thirdly, against sinful men, which
were either elect or reprobate: as though one and the same judgment of God for
man's Redemption did not concern all three: to wit, Christ as the Redeemer,
Gods judgment for our redemption concerns Christ, men, and Satan.
Satan as the accuser, the Elect as the ransomed, leaving the reprobate in
their sins through their unbelief unto the dreadful day of vengeance. In
that the Redeemer was by this judgment received and allowed to make
satisfaction for the sins of his elect, Satan was excluded from all place and
power to accuse them for sin, or to reign over them by sin, and the
purgation of their sins, which should believe in Christ, being made by the
Person of the Savior, they were reconciled to God by the death of Christ and
discharged from the wrath to come; the anger of god remaining on such, as by
faith obeyed not the son of God. Save therefore your fruitless pains in the
rest, and show why the beholding of Gods power and justice now sitting in
judgment to redeem the world, and to receive recompense from the person of
Christ for the sins of men, might not breed a religious fear and trembling
in the humane nature of Christ.

Defenc. page 93. li..
If you mean that thus Christ with submission beholding his Father in
judgment at this time was cast into this agony, it is the very truth, and
the same which we maintain.] You take this for a show to build your fancies
on, but as your manner is you abuse trewthes to serve your turns. Let it stand
for good, that Christ now beheld his Father Christ might behold the power of
his Fathers wrath against sin, and yet not fear the vengeance due to the
wicked.
sitting in judgment to require recompense for the sins of the faithful;
what follows? that God awarded the self same vengeance against the person of
Christ, that we had deserved, and should have suffered, if we had not been
redeemed? This is a false, heretical, and blasphemous conclusion no way
coherent to the premises, and no way consonant to the Scriptures. For then
final destruction, desperation, confusion and everlasting damnation of soul
and body to hell fire, which without question were the wages of our sins, as
we may see by their example, that are not cleansed from sin by the blood of
Christ, must without reservation or remedy have lighted on the person of
Christ. If that vengeance of sin, which was due to us, could by no justice be
inflicted on the person of the son of God, no not, if he had borne the sins
of the whole world; how then could the doubt or fear of his punishment on
himself cast him into this agony? you will release him of the circumstance,
but tie him to the substance of the self same pains, which the damned endure.
When you sit in judgment on Christ, show your wicked and witles conceits, as
much as you list; but the father, to whom of right it appertained, sitting in
judgment to receive (...) from the person of his son, who was most willing
thereto, ne did, ne could by justice determine any thing against his own
son, that should either derogate from the person of Christ, or abrogate the
love which God professed and pronounced so often from heaven toward him. God
might have condemned us, that most justly deserved it; but to adiudge the same
condemnation to his own Son, was simply impossible to the Justice, holiness,
truth and love of God. For so the union of Christ's person must either be
dissolved, which god has faithfully sworn, and mightily wrought, or else the
second person in Trinity must have tasted of the same vengeance with the
damned and with the Devils, which is a blasphemy that the Devil never
drempt, nor durst to broche.

Defenc page 93. li. 8.
This (...) not, but that Christ had recall pains inflicted from the Father,
as from the (...) (...) (...) against us in him, who were thus acquitted by him.
Not denying is a slender proof of that which you should with most infallible
certainty conclude (...) you did a (...). If Christ's manhood might and did
righteously and justly sear and tremble at the glory, power and majesty of
God sitting now in judgment to proportion the price that should be paid for
man's ransom, how does that (...), the real pains of the damned were
inflicted on the soul of Christ at that instant, except in mad men's
conceits, which respect more their pangs than their proofs, and prefer their
wills before the wisdom of Gods spirit, or witness of man's reason. All
judgment against sin, you will say, tends unto condemnation.] No judgment
against the Son of God could proceed unto damnation for what or whose sins
soever. And therefore to me, and to all that observe the words of the Holy
Ghost, it is a cleerer case than the Sunne-shining at noone day, that we are
reconciled to God by the death of his Son, and healed by his stripes, who
bare our sins in his body on the tree, and whose (...) was shed for many sor
remission of sins. Your infliction of hell pains on the soul of Christ is
no such trifle, that it may be lightly taken up for your pleasure, or
humorously surmised upon your vain conjectures; you must evidently and
ineuitablely prove it, before any wise or sober Christian will or should
believe it. Ch^istes fear and agony, you think, could have no other cause.]
Of all others this can never be concluded to have been the cause, since there
is no witness nor word thereof in all the Scriptures. That everlasting
damnation was due to our sins, we have no doubt, but that any such judgment
could be decreed or executed against the Son of God, or against any part of
his person, we less doubt. Wherefore it is most manifest to all that list not
to mix their desperate devices with Gods eternal truth, that no such
judgment could be given against the person of Christ, as we should have (...),
or as the damned feel; but the Esa. 53.
chastisement of our peace was laid upon him, and Heb. 5.
though he were the Son, yet by the things which he suffered, he learned
obedience. [ It is no judgment, you will say, where nothing is condemned.] In
the final judgment of God against the wicked, both their sins and their
persons shall be condemned; that is, their persons shall be everlastingly
rejected and adjudged to perpetual torments of body and soul in hell fire
for their sins, which God justly hates and punishes. In the 1. Pet. 4.
judgment, which begins at the house of God, sin is condemned in their
flesh, as it was in Christ's, but their persons are beloved in Christ, and so
cleansed from sin by him that sanctifies himself for their sakes, and whose
blood cleanses them from all their sins. The pattern of which judgment was
precedent in Christ their head, to whose Romans 8.
image the whole body must be conformed, that 2. Tim. 2.
suffering with him, they may reign with him, and being 1. Pet. 4.
condemned as touching men in the flesh, they may live as touching God in the
spirit. There must be the same mind in us, that was in Christ, even as there
is the same condemnation in our flesh that was in his. For in Christ and all
his members, sin was condemned in the flesh, that their spirits might live to
God, and their bodies be raised again to be partakers of the same bliss with
their spirits. The Scriptures therefore do not appoint the judgment of hell
or of the damned unto Christ and his members, but only the destruction of their
flesh joined with the salvation of their spirits.

What need had Christ (you will ask) to fear this judgment?] As Christ had
less need to fear the judgment seat of God, than all his members, so had he
more will, care and power to give God his due, than all the rest of his
brethren. And therefore approaching to God for sinners and with sin, as he
undertook their persons and cause, that is, to present them to God, and to
profer satisfaction for their sins; so he taught us all our duties, which is,
to approach the throne of Majesty with all reverence and fear, when we behold
his passing glory, and our exceeding infirmity, and in faith of his
goodness, and fear of his greatness, to tremble and shake before him. This
Christian submission which God requires of all men, Christ did most of all
perform, when he presented us and our cause to God; and therefore prostrate
flat on the earth, he humbled himself with greater fear and trembling (but
without distrust or doubt of Gods favor) than ever man before or since did.
This fear and trembling with all submission and devotion yielded by the humane
nature of Christ to the divine Majesty of God, you no way like; but in a self
conceit will have it to be the fear of desperate and damned persons, and
Christ's soul to be actually tormented with the same pains that are the
sharpest in hell: and all this you gather upon none other ground, but for that
Christ exceedingly feared and sorrowed in the Garden. But if no man guided by
Gods spirit may hear the words, do the works, or receive the messengers of
God, but with fear and trembling, as a service and duty belonging to the
Creator from the weakness of the creature; how much more might the humane
nature of Christ now offering us all, that were sinful, to the presence of God
with infinite desire and most ardent prayer to make recompense in his own
person for our offenses; and so through his love and savor with God, to
reconcile us to God; how much more I say might Christ in our cause and in our
names show all possible fear and trembling to so great Majesty so mightily
displeased with us? And therefore in either respect both of his own religious
humility, and our sinful infirmity, he might perform this service and
submission unto the throne of Gods heavenly presence.

Defenc. page 93. li. 32.
Your testimonies touching men sinful, make nothing to the purpose at all: for
these could not by reason of their sins endure the very presence of Gods
Majesty, being in any measure revealed unto them: but Christ in himself being
free from all sin, could be in no such case.] Your exceptions are more
frivolous, and no way fit your fancies: for what if conscience of sin breed
an amazed fear in men, when the glorious presence of God is in any measure
revealed unto them, does that exclude the religious affection and submission of
fear and trembling, which man's weakness in this life owes to the divine
Majesty? Esa. 66.
Him will I respect (says God) that is poor in spirit, and trembles at my
words. Not only Gods glory revealed, but his word denounced requires
submission and reverent trembling. Phil. 2.
Work your salvation (says the Apostle) with fear and trembling; not meaning
men should always be amazed, or that God still revealed his glorious presence,
but that our infirmity remembered, and his Majesty considered, we should do
all things commanded by him with fear and trembling. Of the Corinthians Paul
testifies, that they received Tite 2. Cor. 7.
with fear and trembling. Such reverence the faithful yield to the words and
works of God, that they tremble at the presence of his messengers. And lest you
should think, that only conscience of sin, and the brightness of Gods
presence impresse this affection, the Apostle requires servants to obey their
Ephesians. 6.
carnal masters with fear and trembling: and witnesses of himself, when he
preached the Gospel to the Corinthians, he 1. Cor. 2.
was amongst them in fear and much trembling. So that not only guilt of sin
makes men to fear and fly the sight of God, as in Adam, when he first
transgressed; and in Peter, before he was called (whose words you abuse, to
elude the rest, which is brought against you) but in all our actions, duties
and affections we are willed by the holy Ghost, to have a religious and
reverent respect with fear and trembling to the word, will and presence of
God. Heb. 12.
Let us have grace, thereby to serve and please God with reverence and fear.
Where we are taught, that not sin, but grace makes men to serve and please
God with reverence and fear, which before are called fear and trembling,
during the time of our conuersing here on earth. Though then Christ did
neither fly, nor fear the presence of God for any conscience of sin, yet
his humane nature consisting of our flesh, and compassed as yet with our
infirmity, knew well what religious and reverent submission with fear and
trembling was due from the creature to the creator; and specially, when he
presented us that were sinful to the throne of Grace: for whom he humbled
himself under the mighty hand of God, to abolish our pride, and approached
Gods presence with unspeakable care and sorrow, fear and trembling, to
recompense our heavy dullness and careless neglect both of Gods anger and our
own danger. Which Christ observed in his own Disciples, that otherwise
dearly loved him, and were often called on by him to watch and pray, and yet
were they in their deepest s^eepe, when he was in his greatest agony.

Defenc. page 93. li 37.
No better is that of the Angels (mere creatures) vailing their faces at the
glorious presence of God the Creator of all: but Christ the Mediator was not a
mere creature, but always personally united with greater power than the
Angels were; and always sustained by it.] As if the manhood of Christ did not
hunger and thirst, waxed weary, and wept, though it were always united to his
Godhead. The greater his power, by which he might have refused and repelled all
infirmity, the greater his humility and obedience, that would subject
himself of his own good will to these afflictions and affections of man's
weakness. By suffering of death, as likewise in all our infirmities, he made
himself Heb. 2.
lower than the Angels; yet what does that hinder, but the manhood of Christ,
which was made of a woman, and therefore a creature, though personally joined
with the Creator by the great goodness and grace of God, might in the days of
his flesh most willingly submit it self with religious fear and trembling,
since that either showed the thankfulness of the creature to the creator for
so great honor and favor, as to be received into the conjunction and
communion of the Godhead, or declared his love and likeness to us, that in our
cause would lay down his power and right for the time, and be like affected
with us, that so he might commend us unto God? You can be content, that the
Defenc. page 94. li. 5.
Godhead should purposely hide it self as it were, and withdraw his wonted
comfort, that the manhood of Christ might be subject to the pains of the
damned, which you call full punishment for us; but you can not hear, that the
Godhead should guide the manhood of Christ to humble it self in our cause with
a most religious and reverent fear and trembling, to give God his due, and
thereby to teach all his members to do the like. But if the Apostle speak
most truly, that the Romans 8. v. 26
spirit it self makes requests for us with sighs which cannot be expressed;
why should not the manhood of Christ much more perform the part that is proper
to his office, to pray for transgressors, with all affection and submission
belonging to God either from our nature, or from our condition? In sin Christ
might not communicate with us; but since sorrow for sin, and most humble
submission to the power of God displeased with sin, are rather in Christ's
person recompenses for sin (which we could not make) than infections of
sin; why should you by pretense of Christ's power make those religious
offices impossible to him, whom notwithstanding you will have amazed and
confounded in all the powers and parts of soul and body with the terror and
fear of your hell pains? Is your zeal so great for Christ's power, that you
will not have him trouble himself with any religious submission of mind to
the throne of Gods glory, by his example to teach us to tremble at the
greatness thereof; and yet you spare not to load him with unspeakable terrors
and fears of Gods indignation, and his own confusion? Such devotion does well
beseem your hellish inventions, but it no way sorteth with Christian religion.

Defenc page 93. li. 11.
If Austen and others sentences (in the 350. and 34. Pages of your Sermons) be
thus understood, that the complaint on the Cross, was not Christ's in respect
of himself, but in respect of his Church, for whom then and there he answered
before God coming now to execute Judgment for their sin, so are they well,
and rightly understood: otherwise there is not truth in them, namely as you
seem to use them.] Your twisting Christ's Agony in the Garden and his
complaint on the Cross in one thread, that the one may seem the cause of the
other; shows your humorous conceit preferring your rash apprehension before
the Judgment of all the ancient Fathers. I sever them, because in the first
Christ showed fear and sorrow; in the second on the Crosle, he suffered real
and actual pain of Body and Soul, which of his Agony you cannot prove,
though you presume it never so proudly in spite of all the Fathers cited by me,
of whom you pronounce with as much disdain as a crauling Creature can, there
is no truth in them, if they be not of your mind. But leave this pride, that
puffs you up with such vanity, and pricketh you forward to so much falsitie;
Athanasius, Cyprian, Hilarie, Ierom, Epiphanius, Ambrose, Augustine, Leo, and
the rest shall go with all wise men for religious and advised Interpreters,
when such an huff-cap, as you are, shall be thought fitter to learn, hen to
teach. Of their expositions, when we come to that circumstance of Christ's
passion, God willing we will say more; in the mean time I might not bury your
brauing them, ( that there is no truth in them) least with my silence I should
smooth your insolence.

Defenc. page 93. li. ^6.
In respect as God proceeded against Satan and for this cause, that Christ
should be cast into these dreadful fears, sorrows and bloody agonies, what
man of Judgment will Imagine? what color of likelihood is there in it?] That
Satan was presently cast out from hindering man's salvation, and should in the
end be trodden under foot; that Christ obtained by his prayer for us: but what
spoil he should make in the Church of Christ by heresy, iniquity and
Tyranny, when our Savior beheld, who could not be ignorant thereof, why
should not that move the manhood of Christ both grecuously to sorrow for the
weakness and dullness, falls and offenses of his members, as also with most
vehement and inflamed zeal, even unto the sweating of blood, to pray against
the power and rage of Satan, to have it cut short and fully subjected, as all
other enemies, under his and our feet? And who of any sense will think it
strange, that Christ approaching the brunt of his passion should perform that
to all, which he professed to Peter and the rest. Luke. 22.
Behold Satan has desired you to winnow you as wheat, but I have prayed for
thee, that thy faith fail not: because he was the first that should have most
need? Christ was able without prayer, if we respect his divine power, to
uphold Peter and all the rest against the worst, that Satan could do unto
them; John 17.
Whiles I was with them in the world, I kept them in thy name, those that thou
gave me, have I kept, and none of them is lost: But this was the time of his
submission and humiliation even unto death, and therefore soreseeing himself
and all his members by Gods just judgment to be so far delivered into Satan's
hands, that they should be sifted with all manner of tentations and trials; as
he most humbly submitted himself, and his members thereto, so he most
affectionately and with greater vehemency, then ever man did or could pray,
desired the feebleness and folly of his elect to be forgiven them, and the old
and cruel serpents head to be bruized, and conquered, that he might have no
power, but to bite their heels. These I say, and many more occasions and
reasons might lead our Savior to that prayer so full of compassion and
affection to us, that even feruencie might open the pores of his body, and
strain forth his blood, to show that he bent all the powers of Body and Soul
in making his prayers unto God.

As for joy and triumph, which this conquest over Satan did and does bring, I
make no doubt thereof; but we now speak of the prayer, wherewith Christ
obtained it, and of the trial, wherein both head and members were to be
conformed, and consummate with affliction, and that for the time was as sharp,
as the fruit thereof in the end would be sweet; that not only Christ was
first to Luke. 24.
suffer those things, (which the Scriptures mention) and so to enter into his
glory, but 2. Timoth. 3.
as many, as will live godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer persecution. For
this is the judgment of God beginning at his own house, and even at his own
Son, Acts. 14.
We must through many afflictions enter into the kingdom of God. In speaking
against these things you show as much judgment, as you do in the rest of your
conceits, which have your bare word for their best warrant, and your unlearned
humor for their chiefest help.

Defenc. page 94. li.
Thirdly, if you mean (that God sat in Judgment) here against the sins of
the elect, Christ knew the eternal and sure decree of God, which had turned
the cup of vengeance already from them upon himself, as being their Suertie:
so that this comes to our assertion.] Christ knew, that the second person in
Trinity by whom his manhood was now assumed, had before all worlds consented
to bear the burden or punishment of our sins in his Body, and by himself to
make the purgation of them, and that the Father, Son, and holy Ghost had
eternally decreed this to be the mean and (...) of man's Redemption; but as for
the Cup of vengeance to be turned on (...), if thereby you intended the
vengeance due to our sins, and inflicted Christ and his members must (...) of
one and the same Cup.
on the damned, which is your design throughout your Defense, then neither had
God made any such decree, neither did Christ know any such conversion of the
Cup from us upon himself: he rather knew the contrary. To James and John the
Sons of Zebedee, that asked to sit, the one at his right hand, the other at
his left, he answered; Mark. 10.
Can ye drink of the Cup that I shall drink of? and they saying, they could,
he replied; Ye shall drink indeed of the cup, that I shall drink of. If
Christ had the Cup of vengeance common to him with the desperate and damned,
then James and John, and consequently all his Disciples and members drank of
the same Cup, for they all drank of his cup. And Paul missed much of his
reckning, when he said; Phil. 3.
I counted all things loss, and do judge them to be dong, that I may know the
fellowship of Christ's afflictions, and be made conformable to his death. Can
you persuade any man of common sense, that Paul was so desirous to suffer the
death of the Soul, and the pains of the damned, that he judged all things
vile in comparison thereof? for so he was affected to the fellowship of Christ's
sufferings, which was an other manner of Cup, then you conceive, or else Paul
erred very grossly in his Account.

Defenc. page 94. li. 16.
Touching the Reprobates do you think, that Christ here so vehemently wished
them better, whom he knew God hated: or that for pity of them he fell into
this Agony and sorrowful prayers? Such a Iester besides your self, a man
shall hardly iump with all. Of Christ's Agony in the Garden as there were
sundry parts, so there were sundry causes. You take every particular by the
Pole, and examine that, as if it were offered to be the sole and entire cause
of the whole Agony. But leave this wide wandering, and little understanding,
and try whether Christ were not so much affected to his own Nation, that he
greatly sorowed for their reiection. [ Ibid. li. 19.
Christ says a little before he would not so much as pray for them.] He would
not pray to cross Gods Counsel toward the whole Nation, but only for such
as should believe in him: yet he pitied them, and prayed pardon even for
those, that put him to death: Luke. 23.
Father forgive them, for they know not what to do.

Defenc page 94. li. 20.
It is certain Christ rather would have greatly rejoiced to see the due
execution of Gods most holy and deserved Justice, which is a special part of
his high glory.] Your certainties are like Spiders webs, every touch will tear
them. If Christ of your certain knowledge would have so greatly rejoiced to
see the destruction of the Jews, how came it to pass, that beholding
Jerusalem he wept for it? If the remembrance of their desolation moved him to
tears, would the present sight of their destruction have bred in him such
great joy, as you talk of? Have you so utterly forgotten, what he says of
himself at this time of his appearance in his humility? John. 12.
I came not to Judge the world, but to save the world. There is a time when he
shall come to Judge the quick and the dead; but now John 3.
God sent not his Son to condemn the world, but that the world through him
might be saved. Ela. 42.
A bruized Reed (says the Prophet) shall he not break, and smoking flax
shall he not quench. So far was he at this time from doing or delighting in
any violence, how certain soever you make your self of his ioyfulnesse to see
destruction executed on that Nation. The words of David that Psalm. 58.
the Righteous shall retoyce when he sees the vengeance, license no man to
desire vengeance, but to expect Gods time, whose will we pray may be done; and
concern those enemies only, that with impl^cable malice seek the utter ruin
of the godly. In which case the deliverance of the faithful being joined with
vengeance on the wicked, God will have his me cies toward us magnified, though
it be mixed with the destruction of the wicked. Otherwise Christ has commanded
us to Matthew. 5.
love our enemies, to bless them which curse us, to pray for them, which
persecute us, so that we may be the children of our Father which is in heaven.
But you have found a Fox, or a fern brake, because it was said, Let this Cup
pass from me, and not from them. What if I answer you with Ierom? Christ said
not, (...). in Mat Cap. 26.
Let the cup pass from me, but (...) this cup pass, that is, of the people
of the jews, which can have no excuse of ignor^nce, if they killme, since they
have the Law and the Prophets, which daily feretell of me. This Christ
requesteth not, as fearing to suffer, but in (...) toward the former People,
that he might not drink the (...) by them. And with Ambrose? (...) (...). 10
(...) (...). (...) 22 (...) and (...) (...)
Therefore Christ said, take this cup from me: not because the Son of God
seared death, but for that he would not have them though cuill to (...); (...)
his (...) (...) pe pernicious (to them,) which should be healthful to all. And
with (...)? (...). ^n (...). tract. 35.
For those then, whom he would not have perish by his Passion, he said; Father,
if it be possible let this cup pass from me, that both the world might be
saved, and the (...) not perish in his Passion. And with (...) (...) ca. (...).
Bid who exactly follows Ieroms words? You will reply, there is no truth in
them; but the more you use such answers, the more pride and less wit you
show, to think that all men (...) absurd besides your self, when you can
seant speak one word touching vour new found faith, without a sensible
absurdity.

Defenc page 94. li. 31.
Your next supposed cause, (...) toward men contains three (...) causes
here: First, for the (...) of the Jews: Secondly for the dispersion of his
Church: Thirdly, his zealous grief generally for the sins of the world. All
these (...) always in Christ, and The second cause (...) to Christ's agonte.
caused no (...) always heaviness in him: yet no more then a godly and heavenly
mind could and would (...) (...) digest and bear. It is well that of your
(...) at last you see these six causes may be revoked and referred to the two
gene (...) roots, whence I said Christ's agony might proceed; and so no reason,
but a mere desire to (...), did lead you to demonstrate my disagreements by
one, two, (...) six; which upon your better advise your self can reconciie
within the space of a lease. For as these three are contained in Christ's
compassion toward men, or rather did procced from the astection of his love to
man so the rest are as easily reduced to Christ's submission yeld^d in pictie
unto God, or to the same profession of charity toward man, or to both.
Touching the e three, you grant, they were always in Christ and caused no
doubt always an hea^ines in him; but moderate, such as a godly mind might
cheerfully digest. First then, how come you so suddenly to fling of your
former Resolution made not fifteen lines before, that certainly Christ would
have greatly (...) to see the execution of Gods deserved justice on the Jews?
would Christ both certainly and greatly have reioiced to see the destruction of
that people and city, and yet the foresight thereof caused no doubt always
heaviness in him? These are not your contrarieties, but concordance; wherein you
rightly agree with your self, that never vsein your assertions to make one
piece agree with an other. How much Christ might grieve at those things, we
shall presently examine; but that he grieved more at this time now in the
garden for these respects, then at any other time before, you do not grant,
because you see no reason for it. Of Christ's affections neither I can yield nor
you may ask the reason; they were voluntary, and rose within him, when his
will gave place unto them. He saw Jerusalem often, and knew of her desolation
from the beginning. Why wept he then but once over her? why did he not the like
for other Cities, wherein the Jews dwelt, can you tell? he was often tempted
by the Pharisees, and still saw the hardness of their hearts. Why did he then but
once (that the Scripture reports) behold them with Mar. 3.
anger and grief for their obstinacy? his passion he always remembered, and
often fore told; why then was he troubled with the thought thereof, but once
that we read? Athanasius gives this answer. Athanasius de incarnat. Christi.
Now is my soul troubled, this now was, when he himself would. Damascene
(...). (...) (...). ca 23.
insisteth on the same words, and makes the rule general, that (...) li. 3.
ca 20.
(...) (affections and infirmities) in Christ never prevented his will, because
nothing in him was forced, but all voluntary. (...), etc. he hungrea, when he
would; he (...) when he would; he feared when hewould; and died when he would.
Saint Austen observes the same. (...). in (...) (...). 49.
Turbaris tu nolens, Turbatus est Christus, quia (...). Thou art troubled
against thy will; Christ was troubled, because he would. He hungered, it is
true, but because he would; he slept, it is true, but because he would; he
sorrowed, it is true, but because he would; he died, it is true, but because he
would. In illius potestate erat sic vel sic (...), velnen affici. it was in his
power to be so or so affected, or not affected. The reason which he gives, is
sound; and the Scripture, on which he builds, is plain. Ibidem.
Qui^ enim (...) posset nisi (...) ipse turbare; vbi summa potestas est,
secundum volunt^tis (...) turbatur (...). Who could trouble him besides
himself? where (...) power is, there (...) is troubled according to the (...)
of the will. And so the Scripture notes. John 11.
he groned in spirit, (...), and troubled (or affected) him self.

If this Rule be true, which has the grounds of faith, and the words or the
holy Ghost for a foundation, then your assertion is false, and against the
faith, that tkese were always in Christ, and always caused an he (...) in
him. For you imply a continual necessity of sorrow and grief in the Soul of
Christ, where the Scriptures and Fathers teach us, that nothing could (...)
grief or sorrow on him, but when he himself would. And that Jesus sometimes
reicyced, and Luc. 10. v. 21.
exulted in Spirit, giving thanks to his Father for hiding (the mysteries of
his kingdom) from the wise and prudent, and revealing them to seely ones, the
(...) is evident. You therefore, as your manner is, grant that which is false,
and deny that which is true. For what if Christ often, though not always,
sorrowed for these three aforesaid, is that any proof, that (...) Passion
approaching, where he saw (...) jews should call for the vengeance of his
blood to be on them, and their children; and was now by most earnest and ardent
prayer to obtain remission of sins, direction of his spirit, and protection
from Satan for his whole Church, (the Time and place now (...) requiring it,)
he should not with greater sorrow behold the one, and with more (...) zeal
entreat the other? But Desenc. pa. 94. li. 37.
I strangely deceive my self you say, if I think that any or ali of these did
so far exceed in him, as to procure his most dreadful and bloody Agony.
When I hear you speak some truth, or see you understand any thing right, I
will more regard your word, then now I do. That these things might be the
causes thereof, shall plainly appear to the sober and advised Reader, when we
come to the discussing of them; Howbeit I do not say, that every one of these
six was the whole cause of his Agony; as you childishly carpe; or that these
six were the sole causes of his Agony; but these respects were such, as might
most exceedingly grieve, and most inwardly affect the Soul of Christ, making
now way by prayer to procure the course of man's Redemption to be actually and
effectually decreed and pronounced at his instance; which he would after
perfect with patience. Neither are there greater works in man's redemption,
then these that were now in hand, with which if you think it not likely, nor
possible, the Soul of our Savior should be mightily affected, your erroneous
Imagination is far stranger then my position of piety and possibility. for
as if you ask me, what the Angel that came from heaven, said to Christ in the
Garden, I must openly profess, I take upon me no such knowledge, but leave
Gods secrets to himself and his Son; so what occasions besides these might
at that instant affect the Soul of Christ, I dare not determine, though you be
so desperate, that you nothing doubt, Christ then felt in Soul from the
immediate hand of God the self same pains, which the damned do in hell;
Notwithstanding the Scriptures insinuate no such suspicion, much less avouch
any such Doctrine for man's redemption.

Defenc page 95 li. 1.
For the Reiection of the Jews what reason bring you. Christ wept over their
City: ergo, now at his Passion he was driven into his dreadful Agony for
this cause.] You must make your own match, or else you will quickly mar all.
Where I professed it impossible certainly to conclude the true cause of Christ's
Agony, your wisdom takes a part of my words, and clappeth on a Conclusion
to them of your own stamping, and then you say the Argument is naught: and so
nimble you be at nothing, that where I repeat six causes, that might be
concurrent therein, you will have me infer, that every one of them was the
whole and sole cause thereof. But your mastership is to warm to be wise, and
to selfe-willed to be sound, you do not so much as see, or care, why I took
this in for one of the causes, that might meet in this Agony. The reverent
Sermo. page 19. li. 4.
regard I had to the Judgments of Ambrose, Ierom, Augustine, and Bid, who
observed this before me as one of the causes, that might be of Christ's sorrow
in the Garden, made me number this amongst the rest, howsoever you spurn them
away like foote-bals, and think with a wild gallop to win the Goal. But
soft Sir, first their opinions lie in your way, which wise men will respect
before your empty words, and lasie likelihoods, that have no salt in them,
besides the sharpness of your humor. Secondly, my reasons to my purpose are
available enough, though you mishape them with a senseless error of your own,
as if every of these six were the single and sole cause of this agony. There
can no one particular cause be assigned of Christ's fear, sorrow, and zeal in
the Garden; but since himself is a witness, that his Soul was (...) on every
side pressed with sorrow, my proofs which you cannot avoid, infer, that
amongst others this might be one cause of his sorrow. And so much those Fathers
profess, as I have formerly showed; and you cannot decline them but with
impudent flurting at them, that Defenc. page 95. li. 15.
this verily cannot stand with any reason. But of our Reasons let the Reader
Judge. Christ wept at the sight of Jerusalem, when he remembered her desolation
by the hands of the Romans. What grief then was it to him in all reason, to
foresee the reiection of that people from the savor of God by their rash and
wicked desire to have his blood on them and their children, at the time of his
arraignment before Pilate? If Moses and Paul so vehemently (...) at the fall of
their brethren according to the flesh, that for their sakes the one wished to
be wiped out of the Book of God, the other most sacredly protested the great
heaviness and continual anguish, that he felt in heart for them; how much more
then did it grieve the Savior of the world, who far exceeded both the other
in compassion and mercy, to see himself, that came to bless them, and save
them, to be the ruin and stone of offense, that should stumble them, and their
children, striking them with perpetual blindness, and bruizing them with
everlasting perdition, through their unbelief. To this what answer you?

Defenc. page 95. li. 28.
It proves that Christ surely had very great pity and commiseration of
them, but nothing else in the world.] I professed to prove no more. Why then
should not this be one of the causes, that moved Christ to sorrow in the
Garden, where he confes^ed his Soul was on every side heavy? Ibid. li. 30.
Christ might have far greater pity of them, then Moses or Paul had, and
yet he was able to carry his affection far more patiently and quietly then
they were able.] Does any man besides you say, that Christ was impatient in his
Agony, but that as he was fully able to restrain all violence and vehemence
of affection in himself, when he would; so was he likewise able to show the
inward touch and motion of mercy toward that people, by what signs he would,
and by far greater then Moses and Paul were able, and yet without all
distemper or impatience, as you interpret his Agony to be. Ibid. li. 34.
Also Christ knew exactly Gods counsel and purpose for their reiection, which
those holy men were not so particularly sure of. Wherefore Christ might better
stay the vehemency and breaking out of this affection, which in such a case
must needs tend against the known will of God.] Moses and Paul were sure
enough of that, which they were sorry for, though the evidence of their
knowledge was not comparable to Christ's in any thing. And I pray you what
lets, but the clearer Christ's knowledge was of the horrible vengeance of
God, that should light on the Jews for their wicked despising and murdering of
him, the greater might his sorrow be for them, so long as he sorowed not, that
God would be righteous, but that they would be both impious in the fact, and
incredulous in the Gospel of repentance, and so provoke the Justice of God to
that extreme revenge. Neither is that any way to impugn Gods known will, to
be sorry that men will be so mad, as to heap up vengeance on their own heads:
God rather allows that affection in us here on earth, where we are not
compassed or confirmed with glory, as our Savior then was not with his, that
as Lament. 3.
he does not punish with his heart (or willingly,) so we should not wish, or
before hand rejoice at the destruction of our enemies, whom we should love, and
for whom we should pray, even when they persecute us, as he taught us by his
own example in praying, Luke. 22.
Father forgive them, they know not what they do; and inspired Steven with the
same mind to say at the time, when they stoned him, Acts. 7.
Lord lay not this sin to their charge. So that your exceptions are rather
prejudicial to your own positions, then to mine, which are no way weakened
with these pretenses, but rather strengthened.

Defenc page 95. li. 16.
Christ's express compassion toward the Jews (Luke 19. Matthew. 24.) a little
before he prepared him to his passion, plainly shows that now in the Garden
and so still forward, he gave him self wholly to other thoughts and matters,
namely such as concerned his great work in hand.] Out of your learning you
allow Christ's compassion toward the walls and buildings of the temple, and
the stones of the city, for he shows in both places, which you cite, that a
Matthew. 24. 2.
Luc. 19 44.
stone shall not be left upon a stone, either in the Matthew. 24. 2.
Temple or Luc. 19 44.
City, which concerned the Jews temporal state and safety; but touching the
reiection of that whole nation for these fifteen hundred years (as we find to
this day) from Christ sorrowed that his death should be the ruin of the Jews.
the knowledge and grace of God, whereby their souls might be saved, which
Christ most clearly foresaw would befall them for their putting him to death
so barbarously, tumultuously, and contemptuously, that in the higth of your
skill, you count not a matter worthy Christ's cogitation or compassion. Such
chipps you hew to help up the building of your new made hell, that the Savior
of the world upon your word must be mindful of the walls and houses in which
the Jews dwelt, and forgetful of their Salvation, of whom, and for whom he
was borne, and to whom he was first sent, if they would have received him: as
if the son of God knew not how to proportion his sorrow for them according to
the dangers, that were imminent over them. But in all wise men's eyes, if he so
much pitied the ruin of their city and desolation of their Land, that he
wept for it, what sorrow and grief shall we think he inwardly took to see the
perpetual destruction of so many thousands, and all their posterities so many
hundred years through their own madness in thirsting for his blood? and why
should this be excluded from the great work of man's Redemption, which he had
then in hand, when he was in his agony, since not only the future pains were
foreseen by him, but all things incident and consequent were plainly to him
foreknowen; Amongst which was the utter abandoning of Gods former people for
their infidelity to the doctrine, and for their cruelty to the person of
their and our Lord and Savior.

Defenc. page 95. li. 7.
A little before when he thoroughly intended and expressed his affection touching
that matter, yet thereby he fell into no such agony, but only wept and
mourned for them.] Christ knew his times and places for all his affections and
actions far better then such a guest, as you are, could direct him. His
affections before men he did moderate with all sobriety and gravity, they
never saw in his face nor heard from his mouth an indecent gesture or speech.
For his vehement and most fervent affections, (which yet proceeded from no kind
of impatience nor distemper of mind, as you imagine, but from the fire and
flame of his most sacred humility, and zeal to God, and love and piety to
man) he chose the time nearest his passion, and the place secret not only from
others, but even, from his own Disciples. Had the people openly seen him in
these fears prayers and sweats they would have judged him either Mar. 3. v. 21.
madd, or John 7.
possessed with a devil, as they did, when no signs of a troubled mind
appeared. Christ therefore in his heavenly wisdom would have no witnesses of
his most fervent affections, as it seems by the course of the Scriptures, but
God and his elect Angels, in so much that he willed the rest of his disciples to
sit where he appointed them, and took Peter, James, and John, that had seen
his glory in the mountain, and went on-ward with them to his purposed place,
but left them a stones cast of, when he went to his passionate prayers: where
for the darkness of the night they could distinguish nothing; besides their
incredible heaviness to sleep whiles their master was in his greatest agony,
which proves they neither heard, nor saw what befell him. How childishly then
do you reason; Christ, when he spoke of the destruction of the city, fell not
into an agony before the people: therefore the grief of their reiection could
be no part of the sorrow, which he assumed in the Garden. As this is most
frivolous, so the rest is most captious. For what if his sorrow for the Jews
were not the cause of his bloody sweat; or of that part of his piaier, Father
if it be possible, let this cup pass from me? Is that a reason, this was not
respected by Christ at that time, because he had The different affections in
Christ's agony had different causes.
diverse other assaults and seas of sorrow, touching himself, and others, as
well as touching the Jews? what hobling is this, to ask one entire cause for
so many different affections and actions, as Christ showed in his agony; where
the Scriptures note not only fear and sorrow on every side, but extreme
humility, and ardent zeal with such feruencie of spirit in prayer, that the
sweat brake from him like drops of blood? who, that sought truth, or read
but the words of the Evangelists, would thus cavil with matters of such
moment? Christ was in these passions and prayers by the space of an hour (for
so himself said to Peter, Matthew. 26.
What could ye not watch with me one hour and he prayed (...) more intentiuely
or more fervently after he was strengthened by an Angel, then before. Shall we
think he said nothing all that while in his prayers, but only these words O my
father if it be possible, let this cupe pass from me? This he repeated thrice,
as the Scripture observes, but his prayers were longer, and extended to other
things, except we think Christ was an hour repeating three lines. Besides the
Scriptures note a change in his prayers. For after the Angel from heaven
appeared to him, and strengthened him, Luc. 22.
(...), then entering into an agony, he prayed more earnestly, than before, so
that his sweat trickled down to the ground like drops of blood. You say
there must be one entire cause of all these passions. So you say, but which way
do you, or can you go about to prove it, save by the liquor of your own
lips, which is weaker then water to glue these things together.

Defenc. page 95 li. 21.
The work of Christ at this time wrought by him is by a proper and peculiar
name justly called his passion, not his compassion. Which I would have you to
note.] A man may soon note the worthiness of your arguments, that when neither
by truth nor reason you can prevail you fall to collude with the names of
passion and compassion. As if Christ's passion did not sometimes import the
whole history of his death and sufferings, wherein are confessions,
reprehensions, predictions, prayers and promises of Christ, as well as pains
endured. And did it note noe more but pains, are not the passions and
affections of fear and sorrow, as painful many times to the soul, as the
stripes and wounds of the body? Such trifles you take for triple engines, when
your conceits must be concluded; all other men's arguments have no shape of any
reason with you; so deeply you are in love with your self and your own
inventions, be they never so ill-fauoured or misshapen.

Defenc. page 96. li. 2.
Lastly those holymen (it seems) having their thoughts wholly defixed on
their vehement pity toward the Jews, earnestly and constantly wished that
the cup of Gods eternal wrath might come upon themselves, that the Jews who
deserved it, might escape. But Christ in his passion contrariewise desired that
cup, which he tasted to be to bitter, and to violent for him, might pass
away from himself.] If your suppositions of Moses and Paul were granted you,
which yet are no way true, they make the stronger against you, though you
dissemble the sight thereof. For if pity toward the Jews so far prevailed
with those two being the servants of Christ, that they yielded their souls to
eternal torments, as you imagine, to save their Brethren; how great reason
then has it, that the Messiah himself, in whom was the fulness of all
mercy, might be moved with such inward compassion for that whole nation, that
he most earnestly and frequently prayed in the Garden to have this cup (that
is, this manner of death, whereby the Jews should perish) to pass from him, as
Origin, Ierom, Ambrose and Bid expound those words? and though your hellish
humor be so hot, and so haughty, that you pronounce of every thing, there
is no semblance of reason in this; yet the considerate Reader will find in
those men's judgments, whom I have named and produced, more sap and pith then in
your hell pains. For seeing the affection of mercy has been so mighty in
men, that they were more then perplexed with this grief, what bring you but
babbling to show that Christ might not fervently pray, if so it pleased God, not
to make his death the mean of their utter overthrow; and when he saw their
pertinacie and infidelity to be such, that his prayer did not prevail for
them, to be troubled and agonized in mind for their woeful and wilful
destruction? Christ praid for himself, not for them.] But these learned
Fathers tell you, he prayed not against his own death simply, but respecting
them, by whose hands it should come, and whose eternal ruin it should be.
Your cup of hell pains, which you dream Christ then tasted to be too bitter
and too violent for him, is a false and fond conceit of yours, having neither
truth, sense, nor likelihood in it, and yet forsooth both Scriptures and
fathers must give place to your devices, and semblances. This I speak, if your
assertion of Moses and Paul were admitted; howbeit indeed you are not able to
prove one word of all that you affirm in this case. You take certain very
obscure and much questioned words of Moses and Paul for your groundwork, and
at your pleasure without all proof you build thereon a whole world of falsehood
and confusion. Out of which, and the like dark and doubtful places because
the most of your hellish doctrine is drawn, I think it needful to let the
Reader see, how far and what those words infer, which you so much strive to
abuse.

When the children of Israel had made them a Calfe of gold, and feasted and
played Moses prayer for the people examined.
before it, as the God that brought them out of Egypt, the Lord was wroth and
said to Moses; Deuter. 9. v. 13.
I have seen this people, and behold it is a stifnecked people; 14.
let me alone, that I may destroy them, and put out their name from under
heaven, and I will make of thee a mighty nation, and greater than they be. For
this sin, when Moses prayed that the whole nation might not be destroyed, he
said to God; Exodus 32. v. 31.
This people has sinned a great sin. 32.
And now if thou will take away their sin: and if not, wipe me out of the
Book which thou have written. To whom God answered; Verse 33.
Whosoever has sinned against me, I will put him out of my book. The first
thing here to be considered is, what God threatened to the people, and promised
to Moses; the next, what Moses did, or could desire for them. God did not
threaten presently to execute damnation on all the people, there were many
thousand children amongst them, that knew not what idolatry meant, but he
would temporally destroy that whole nation, and raise Moses to a greater number
than they were. Neither may we think, that God then would make a new number of
predestinate, and assure the kingdom of heaven to all Moses offspring without
rejecting of any one of them, but that he would give the land of Canaan,
whereof he spoke to their fathers, unto Moses and his posterity. Against this,
Moses pleads two things unto God; HIS GLORY, lest the Egyptians should
blaspheme, and say, Exodus 32. v. 12.
he brought them out in malice to slay them in the mountains, and to consume
them from the face of the earth: and HIS PROMISE, when he Verse. 13.
swear by himself to Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, to multiply their seed as the
stars of heaven, and to give them all the land ( of Canaan) to inherit for
ever. So that Moses entreats God to regard his own glory and truth, and
not in that sort to revenge the peoples sins, by rooting them and their seed
from the earth. And touching Gods offer unto him, he so far preferred his
care of Gods glory and mercy toward the Israelites, before his own dignity
safety, and posterity, that he desired God, if the people were destroyed from
the earth, to raze out him also and his posterity, that he might not see the
ruin of his nation, and hear the reproach of Gods name. Moses does not meddle
in this place with Gods eternal and secret predestination, which he knew was
immutable, and whereof the Egyptians neither had, neither could have any
knowledge; and therefore so to conceive Moses words, as if God should
everlastingly damn him, if he presently damned the people, is a construction
full of presumption and impiety. Moses did not say, So thou will spare them,
condemn me; but if thou will not forbear them, destroy me (and mine) also.
Wherein you may make Moses so mad, (which God forbid) that he would go to
the devil for company; but you can not show by his words, that he desired his
everlasting damnation might be their eternal salvation. Moses was too well
learned in Gods mysteries, to think that he could be the Savior of that
people, or that his soul was a meet price for their redemption; he refuses
all his personal honor, which was great in Gods sight, his present life, and
future hope for all his offspring in the land of Promise, rather than he would
see the destruction of that whole multitude committed to his charge. This I
take to be the true meaning of Moses words, and the book there, of which he
speaks, to be Gods (...) decree, to have him (during their abode in the
desert) to be the leader and (...) of his people, and his seed after him to
inherit with the rest of the Israelites.

The words of Paul, Romans 9. v. 3.
I did (or could) wish my self separated from Christ for my brethren according
to the flesh, somewhat differ from the words of Moses, and may receive Paul's
wish for the Jews considered.
even by Grammar a double sense; the first actual and absolute, the second
potentiall or conditional. It is evident to every man but meanly acquainted
with the Greek tongue, that the verb (...) is the praeterimperfect tense
Indicative, and regularlie signifies, I did wish, in times past; and since
neither (...) is added to it, nor (...) before or after it in the same
sentence, there is no necessity to make it Potentiall, as if he had said, I
could, or would wish. Since then the words naturally serve the first sense, I
did wish myself (...) from Christ for my brethren the Jews, and many learned
and ancient Interpreters and Expositors have so rendered both the words and the
meaning of the Apostle in that place; I do not see what (...) argument can
thence be framed The time was when he so wished.
to support any of those more than strange conceits, which here you would
establish. The (...) translation says; (...) (...).
(...) (...), Wishing I was. The Commentaries under Ieroms name; (...). i ca.
9. ad R^m.
Optabam aliquando, cum (...) Christum, non modo (...). I did ^o wish, when I
persecuted Christ, I would not now so (...). So Ambrose; (...). os. in (...) 9
(...) Romans
Optabam inq^it, non opto. I did wish it, says Paul, I do not presently wish.
So Primasius; (...) 9. ad R^m.
Optabam (...) non nunc optarem. I did wish it sometimes, I would not now wish
it. And Sedulius; (...) 9. ad R^m.
Optabam, inquit, non opto. I did, I do not wish it. Against this exposition
can nothing be brought, that is not easily answered. Paul takes Christ and the
Holy Ghost as witnesses to his own conscience, that his heaviness was great,
and the grief of his heart continual for his brethren the Jews, in regard of
the good which he wished them in Christ, and his desire to have them saved. And
how far this zeal and affection for his people did carry him before to run
headlong against Christ, and to do his uttermost to be a castaway from Christ
for their sakes, themselves did discern by his sharp and eager persute of
Christ's Church. He therefore ever was, and yet is a zealous well-willer to his
own Nation, though he were now called to be the Teacher of the Gentiles.

Those that refer this speech to the time when Paul wrote to the Romans, must
first have leave to supply the text with a Potentiall particle in Greek called
(...), and If Paul (...) (...) the time when he wrote, ^is words were
conditional.
then to add certain conditions unto (...), which is if, and must be
understood correspondent unto (...) to make the difference betwixt the
Indicative and Optatiue Moods. For when a man says he could or would wish this
or that, he means, If there were not some stoppes to hinder his desire. And
so the Apostles words, if they be, Potentiall, they import some necessary
respects, that stayed him from actual (...) so much. They then which would
have the Apostle to speak Optatiuely; I could wish my self to be severed from
Christ for my brethren; do understand; so as it were pleasing to God, possible
for me, and profitable to them. For no man of any sense or judgment does hence
conclude as this Defender does, that it was possible; Paul was too great a
Divine to think, that Gods eternal counsel and election could be changed for
any man's private desires or wishes; but he declared, as they suppose, how
willing he was to renounce all the honor, hope, and happiness, that Christ
had called him unto, so it might be for Gods glory, and their good that were
his kinsmen after the flesh. What is meant by separation from Christ, and
whether Paul wished an everlasting deprination of all bliss or no, the best
Interpreters do not agree. Nicolaus Hemmingius a learned professor of true
religion, commenting upon Paul's Epistles, says: Hemmingius in ca. 9. ep. ad
Romans
What shall we say of this affection in Paul? Hoc (...) teneamus principium,
quod nihil (...) absurdi, nihil impij, nihil contra salutem animae suae, nihil
contra dilectionem Christi, spiritu enim Christi agebatur Paulus. Hoc stabilito
principio, necesse est hanc separationem a Christo non intelligendam esse de
interna separatione ae Christo and aeterna; sed de externa tantum and
temporali, qua (...) perire in carne, vt saluentur alij in spiritu. Let us
hold this for a maine principle, that Paul wished no absurd, no wicked thing,
nothing against the salvation of his own soul, nor against the love of
Christ: for Paul was (in this) guided with the spirit of Christ. This
foundation lying fast, we must necessarily understand this separa^ion from
Christ (which Paul wished) not of any internal or eternal separation from
Christ, but only of an external and temporal, whereby he wishes to perish in
the flesh, that others might be saved in the spirit. This is another of Ieroms
Expositions in his questions to Algasia: Hieron. ad Algasiam. quaest. 9.
We shall find the same affection in Moses and Paul toward the flock
committed unto them. A good shepherd lays down his life for his sheep,
which is all one with this (of Paul) I wished to be separate from Christ; and
with that (of Moses) Wipe me out of the book which thou have written. And
withal see how great the Apostles love was to Christ, that he desired to die
for Christ, and to perish alone, so all sorts of men might believe in him.
Perire autem non in perpetuum sed imprasentiarum. Perish Paul would not ever
lastingly, but for this present life. He would therefore perish in the flesh,
that others might be saved in the spirit; and lose his own blood to preserve
their souls. Haymo likewise; Haymo in 9. ca. ad Romans
Hoc loquebatur de occisione corporis sui, cum nullo modo optaret mentis
affectu separaria Christo. This (Paul) spoke of the killing of his body, when
by no means he wished the affection of his mind to be severed from Christ.

Photius and Oecumenius in their Greek Scholies have another interpretation,
which In Comment. lingu^ (...). fol. 700.
Budeus a man of no small judgment in the Greek tongue does follow: Photius
apud Oecumenium in 9. cap. epist. ad Romans
(...). Paul does not say, he would be made a separate from Christ, that is,
now to be divided from Christ, (that were most detestable) but (he could wish)
to have been (still) a separate from Christ, that is, as yet to have continued
an alien, and not to that present time to have cleaned unto Christ. In effect
Paul says, I would have wished mine own self not yet to have come to Christ,
but to How the Graecians expound Paul's words.
this day to have remained separate from him, if this might have helped your
entrance and faith in Christ. This in effect Benedictus Aretius a learned
Expositor of our time, does embrace: Paul Aretius in 9. cap. epist. ad Romanos.
desires himself for (his kinsmen) the Jews to be anathema from Christ, that
is, for a time to be a stranger from Christ, that in the mean while his nation
might have place in Christ, and himself at last be saved (with them.) The
words may likewise be taken for an imperfect speech, as though he had said; I
could wish this, if it were lawful for me (salua pietate) by the rules of
piety; I would do it for Christ's glory, who could not want means to restore
me again from this (anathema or) curse.

Chrysostoms exposition best pleases Peter Martyr and Zanchius, as if Paul had
been content for Christ's glory and the Salvation of the Jews, not to have
been severed from the love and favor of Christ, but if it were possible
thereby to do them good, from the bliss and happiness, that Christ would
bestow on him. Howbeit they both make it simply impossible, and that even to
Paul's knowledge, that this should, or could be. Peter Martyr in 9. cap. Epist.
ad Romanos.
Neque mirari debemus Paulum hoc optasse, cum non posset fieri, (illum enim
dubium non est ad praedestinatos pertinuisse) voluntas enim nostra saepe
rapitur ad ea quae sieri non possunt. Neither ought we to marvel, (says
Peter Martyr) that Paul wished that which could not be: (for he no doubt was of
the number of the Elect) since our will is often carried to things impossible.
(...) de tribus (...). li. 5. cap. 3. (...). 2.
In the word Anathema, (separated from Christ) I consider (says Zanchius) two
very diverse and distinct things, towitte, separation from the love (and
favor) of Christ, and privation from the fruit of Christ's love, which fruit
is blessedness it self, or a blessed and everlasting life in heaven with
Christ. That Paul wished to be severed from Christ, meaning, from the love and
favor of Christ, and to become execrable unto Christ for the safety of his
brethren, Dari nullo modo potest, aut debet, this in no wise may, or ought to
be granted. For this is repugnant to that, which he said before in the end of
the eight Chapter, yea to the Principal cause, which led him to his desire.
The ground whereof was not so much his affection to his brethren, as his love
chiefly to Christ. And comparing Moses words and wish with Paul's, he says.
Ibidem.
I do not doubt, but as Paul did no way desire to be severed from Christ, that
is, from his communion and favor: so Moses by no means did ask, that God
would rather strike him out of the number of his friends, then destroy the
people. Neque enim hoc potuit salua pietate expetere, aut petere, for neither
could he desire, nor ask this with any piety; but as Paul wished him self
alone rather, if it were possible, to be depriu^d of eternal happiness, then
all the Israelites to be rejected from grace, and thereby the name of Christ
and glory of God to be endangered by blasphemous minds and mouths. Ibidem.
Neither is it any impediment, which is opposed touching the immutabilitie of
Gods election and his Justice, against which Moses seems to tend, when he
desires that God would destroy him being an Innocent, and ordained to
salvation. For Moses Prayer is to be understood with this Condition, if it be
possible, and yet he knew, it was not possible.

There is a fifth Exposition of this place, which thinks that Paul led with a
fervent This exposition may not simply be received.
love and zeal to have the Jews partakers of Christ, did not remember or
respect either the Counsel or Justice of God to be immutable, which yet are,
but brake forth into a vehement affection, as desiring to exchange his eternal
damnation for their Salvation. These leave out all manner of Conditions, not
because there were not many, and must be many, before the wish can be religious
and pleasing to God, but for that the Apostle wholly defixed on his care for the
Jews, did not in that Passion consider the rest. But by their leaves, that are
the leaders to this exposition, well this may be conceived of some short and
sudden motion rising from man's infirmity; but this can never be imagined of
the Apostle advisedly and iudicially writing to the Romans, and weighing all
his words with the wisdom of Gods spirit, which if they take from the Apostle
in that part of this Epistle, where he calls Christ and the holy Ghost to
witness, that he speaks the truth, I see not why they may not derogate all
Authority from the rest of his writings, when after so great deliberation, and
vehement protestation they make him forget the chiefest grounds of Christian
Religion earnestly urged by himself in the self same Epistle, and even in the
next words before, written in the later end of the eight Chapter. It is
therefore a dangerous position to say, the Apostle was amazed or astonished in
his writings, or so carried away with his affections, that he knew not what he
wrote in those Scriptures, which are Canonical. For it opens a gap to all
impieties and heresies, to think that Paul led with Christ's spirit, did not
remember nor respect, that Gods eternal election could not be changed, nor the
chosen vessels of Christ be everlastingly condemned for the love and zeal,
which they bare to Christ, nor any man or Angel admitted to be the Redeemer
and deliverer of the Reprobate from the just and deserved wrath of God provided
for them. All which pestilent errors are consequent to this supposition, that
the Apostles speech was absolutely without condition; and must be granted to
be possible, before his desire or wish could simply take place. It is therefore
resolved even by them who first devised this exposition, that Paul's wish in
this place was wholly impossible, as well in respect of God, who would not
change his eternal counsels and decrees; as of the Apostle, who being a chosen
vessel could not perish; and likewise of the Jews, whose deserved destruction
so often denounced by our Savior, as where he said, Matthew. 21.
The kingdom of God shall be taken from you, and to Jerusalem, Luke 19.
They shall not leave in thee a stone upon a stone, because thou knew not
the day of thy visitation, and many such threats; could not be auerted. Only
this Defender to show his discretion, out of these dark places, which admit
many senses, collecteth that to be possible; which by the verdict of the holy
Scriptures and of all Interpreters new and old is avouched to be simply
impossible; and thence he makes his notable observations, which indeed are
nothing else but gross and palpable errors.

Defenc. page 96. li. 25.
From thence I observe four notable points. First, That if God omnipotent, and
only sovereign Lord will, he may inflict damnation and the pains of hell
upon mere men, not for themselves, but for others, nor for their own sins,
but for the imputed sins of other men: much rather then might he do this to
Christ, whom God sent indeed and ordained for that purpose. Flatly contrary
to your Assertion.] To make your Observation Note.
the nearer to the pattern, which you follow, you must say, that God, if he
will, may inflict eternal damnation (for temporal damnation to hell the
Scripture knows none,) on his elect, (so were Moses and Paul;) for their love
to Christ and their Four notable errors falsely grounded on the facts of Moses
and Paul whereof (...) the first.
brethren, for that was the cause of their wish. And then you have made a
worthy Corollarie, that indeed contrarieth my Assertion, and not mine only,
but also the express words of the holy Ghost, the maine grounds of the
Christian Faith, and the resolution of all writers first and last, that have
spoken of these places. To Moses Petition Gods answer was, that he would not
wipe an Innocent out of his book, but, Exodus 32. verse 33.
Whosoever has sinned against me, said God, I will put him out of my book. So
that God himself did not only refuse Moses Prayer in that part, but declared
it to be repugnant to his Justice to condemn the guiltless with the guilty.
The Apostle, the next words before these, by which you would make it possible
that he might perish for others, professed; that Romans 8. v. 38.
neither death, nor life, nor Angels, nor things present, nor things to come,
nor height, nor deapth, nor any other creature was able to separate him from
the love of God in Christ. And therefore generally demands, Ibid. v. 35.
Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? No creature is able, as he
exactly avouches; and as for the Creator, Verse. 33.
It is God that justifies, (and therefore cannot be contrary to himself)
Verse. 34.
who shall condemn, where God in Christ does acquit? [ God you think may
change his mind.] His eternal counsel decreed, revealed, and assured in
Christ, God neither will correct, because he is wise, and before all worlds
foresaw all that might move him to the contrary, neither can alter, because
he is truth, and so can neither repent, nor change, as men do. The Romans 11.
Gifts and calling of God are without repentance. 2. Tim. 2.
The foundation of God stands sure, and has this seal, the Lord knows who
are his. James. 1.
With him is no varying nor turning; And therefore our Savior excepteth it as
a thing not possible, that the elect should perish, when he says; that false
Prophets and great wonders in the later days should deceive, Matthew. 24.
If that were possible, the very Elect.

By his power, you will say, God may do it, though he will not.] Gods power
was most absolute over all creatures to dispose them at his pleasure, before he
determined and settled his will in Christ Jesus, what to do with them; since
which the holy Ghost teaches us in plain words, it is impossible that God
should lie, having made his promise to all his elect in Christ, and bound it
with an Oath; not because he is become weaker then he was, but because he has
fastened his counsel, and revealed his truth in his Son, which he neither
will, nor can change; not for want of power, but because of his truth, which is
constant and immutable. Heb. 6. v. 17. 18.
God willing (says the Apostle) more abundantly to show the stablenesse of his
counsel, bound himself with an oath, that by two immutable things (his
promise and his oath) wherein it is impossible that God should lie, we might
have strong comfort. So that howsoever you in your irreligious sophistry do
say, God Omnipotent may inflict damnation upon men for others, If you mean
upon his Elect, such as Moses and Paul were, whose examples and words you would
seem to follow, you defend an open and exact Impossibility Note.
and heresy; speaking of damnation as the Scriptures do, and as you do in
this place, where you say, those holy men (Moses and Paul) Defenc. page 96. li.
5.
Earnestly and constantly wished Gods eternal wrath might come upon
themselves, that the Jews might escape it. Will you fly from the elect to the
reprobate, and say that God may inflict damnation on them for other men's
sins? Then are you clean gone from your examples of Moses and Paul, for they
were no reprobates; and as far from all regard of Gods Justice, who eternally
condemns no man but for sin permanent and inherent, as in all the
reprobate? For though God do save without merit for his mercies sake, yet he
condemns no man eternally but for sin; and that either committed, or
inherited. Genes. 18.
Be it far from thee (says Abraham to God) to slay the righteous with the
wicked, and that the righteous should be even as the wicked, be it far from
thee. Shall not the Judge of the world do judgment?

If it be simply impossible for Gods elect to perish, as our Savior
witnesses, what heinous and horrrible falsitie and impiety is it to say, The
Son of God might be damned for sinners? And though you shift sides and say,
Defenc page 96. li. 29.
Much rather then man God do this to Christ, yet if you hold either to your
former examples, whence you deduce this; or to your words in this very
sentence, whence you draw this comparison, you must say, much rather then may
God inflict damnation and his eternal wrath on Christ; which whether it may
not rightly be called one of your hellish mysteries, I leave to all Christian
men to judge. Such wicked observations when you make from so weak and false
foundations, the Reader may soon see, what a notable Divine you are, and how
likely to teach the truth, that pretend Gods power against his will for the
utter ruin os all Religion. Christ you say was ordained for that purpose.]
Christ was not ordained to be damned for us.
What to be damned for others, or rather to bear the chastisment of our peace,
that we might be healed with his stripes? The Prophet Esaias says he was wounded
for our transgressions, and bruized for our iniquities. But you are the first
supplanter of all Patriarchs and Prophets, that say Christ was damned for our
sins. You will come in with your temporal and substantial damnation, to
which you subject the Soul of Christ: But Sir if you believe and teach the
same truth, which the holy Ghost does in the word of God; Why swerve you so
much from the words and grounds of the Sacred Scriptures? Why does nothing
please you in man's Redemption but hell and damnation inflicted on Christ, where
you never learned any such lesson out of the Prophets or Apostles? And here
your abused and unadvised examples, which you pretend for this purpose, import
no such thing, but rather the clean contrary. For if it were not possible for
Moses and Paul everlastingly to perish, because they were elected in Christ;
how infinitely more impossible was it, that Christ should perish, in whom all
are elected? And how Christ could perish but either by the dissolution of his
person, or else by the joint condemnation of the second person in the most
glorious Trinity to the fire of hell, I do not see; since these are such
blasphemies, as hell never hatched the like.

Defenc. page 96. li. 31.
That which there you mention, is the ordinary and common rule: The Soul that
sins it shall die: but in Christ this was extraordinary and singular that
the just died for the vni^st.] The words which I cited, are sufficient to
reprove the first of your four notable observations as stark false. For
there God swears by himself, that the Ezech. 18.
Soul which sins that shall die: and consequently, the Son shall not
bear the iniquity of the Father, neither shall the Father bear the iniquity
of the Son; much less shall Moses and Paul bear the iniquity of the whole
people, as you dream they might. And so much Gods answer to Moses imports;
Exodus 32.
whosoever has sinned against me, I will wipe him, (and none other) out of my
Book. As for Christ, since he was God as well as man, his person could not be
tied to the Laws and Rules appointed for men, but what he himself would admit
in his own person, to that by willing obedience he submitted himself; namely
in his Manhood to die the death of the Cross for our sins according to the
Scriptures, but not to be damned for us, nor to die the death of the Soul
mentioned in the Scriptures; to whose Doctrine we must stand, and not to your
devices, when we speak of Gods judgments against sin, or of the purgation
of our Souls. Wherefore that God himself by his own body would be the Price
of our Redemption, was indeed a thing proper and singular to the person of
Christ, wherein neither Moses nor Paul could be partakers with him, or examples
of him: and therefore your fitting their prayers to his Passion, to make your
hell pains thereby possible, is a thing far fet, and no way pertinent to this
purpose.

Defenc. page 96. li 22.
I take it plain enough that these sinned not in their desire, and I suppose
you take it so too, in that you allege them, and ground your Reasons of
comparison upon them.] They sinned not, because their desires were conditional
and submitted to Gods good pleasure with reservation of their duties;
otherwise if they thought that possible, which they desired, as you do, by
their destruction, (who were the chosen vessels of mercy) to excuse the
reprobate from damnation deserved by obstinacy and infidelity, they not only
erred from the truth, but sinned in praying to have their wills take place
before and against the will of God. But Moses in love to Gods glory, and care
for his charge, desired to be partaker of such temporal vengeance, as should
befall the whole people of God; and Paul's words, that are potentiall, must be
conditional; otherwise he needed not to have said, I could wish, but I do
wish. The which because he does not, but only show his desire, were it
possible and pleasing to God, therefore he may be well excused from sin,
though you condemn this in him, and that in Moses as a Defenc. page 95. li. 33.
Distemper. Touching my alleging their grief for Gods people, I do not use
to venture on such desperate conclusions as you do. To my purpose it was
sufficient, that they both were Romans 9.
grieved at heart with great and continual heaviness for their Nation, which
are the undoubted and unquestioned words of Paul, and causes of Moses Prayer:
farther I did not go, but from that care and sorrow of theirs, I observed it
both lawful and likely for the Messiah, as he was man, to be inwardly and
deeply troubled in his affection with the present and perpetual ruin of that
people for his death by taking his blood upon them and their children. And this
stands sound and good, whatsoever become of your new and notable
collections, which show your small Judgment, and less truth in points of
Divinity.

Defenc. page 96. li. 34.
Secondly, we see here that there may be possibly a death of the Soul, a
curse, and separation from God, which is in it self neither siane, nor
conjoined with sin necessarily: but merely a suffering of punishment from
God for the sins of others imputed. Contrary to you also page 73. and 310.
yea generally every where.] You remember belike the old rule, Ex impossibili
sequitur quodlibet, from an impossibility supposed any thing will The second
err^r draw^n from their example.
follow: and seeing your self destitute of all proofs for your new Doctrine,
you will needs make lotteries of impossibilities, and thence draw what you like
best. For taking a plain impossibility for your maine ground, you thereupon
frame us four observations as impossible, as the first supposition. And this
absurd wandering from all truth and faith you would have the Reader Note, as a
special demonstration of your discretion and understanding in matters of
Religion. Suppose as you do, that God through his omnipotent power may turn
heaven into hell, and reuerse all that he has decreed and provided for the
different rewards of piety and impiety, and you may soon prove what falsitie
you will by flying from Gods counsel and truth to his power and might: But
Christian religion teaches not whatsoever is possible to Gods power, but what
is ordained by his will, and revealed by his word. Otherwise what heresy can
you name touching Gods works in his creation or redemption of the world, that
defends impossibilities to Gods power, setting aside all respect of his will
and truth? This therefore is the high way to uphold all falsities and
impieties, to oppose Gods power against his will and word, and to believe he
has done, whatsoever his almighty power is able to do.

Concerning the death of the Soul, though here be no place to speak largely
of it* it is double by the confession of all Divines, and even of the
Scriptures themselves. For as the places are diverse, where men do abide, here
and else where, in this life and the next; so the life, which the Soul
enjoys, is proportioned to the place, where she continues; God in his
wisdom and goodness having so provided, that whiles she governs the body
here on earth, she should be partaker of him by the grace of his spirit, and
hereafter in the kingdom of heaven she should have the full fruition of him by
the manifest revelation and communion of his glory. Likewise the death of the
Soul prevails in this life by sin, which is the natural depriving, or
voluntary renouncing of all grace, and in the world to come by damnation,
which is the just rejecting of all the wicked from any fellowship with God in
his glory, and the fastening them to everlasting torments in hell fire. Gods
actions in either of which are most just and holy; for he withdraws and
denies his grace, when it is refused; and excludes them from all access to
his blessedness, that here on earth despised both him and it, adiudging them
to the just desert of their sins in everlasting flames: But neither of these
can possibly take hold of man without sin committed, or inherited. And
therefore your imagining a death of the Soul without sin, is a supposing of
things impossible, since neither Moses Prayer nor Paul's wish in that sense,
which you follow, were possible, as all Divines both new and old confess.

Chrysostom. (...). 16. in ca. 9. ad Ro^.
Paul wished (says Chysostome) to be separate from Christ, (...), if it were
Paul wished if it were p^ssible and lawful.
possible. And again, Therefore am I grieved (says Paul) (...), and if it
were (lawful or possible) to be separated and estranged, not from the love of
Christ, ((...), far be that from me to wish, because he did this for love)
but from that fruition and glory, I could admit it, that my Lord should not
be blasphemed. Photius, as he is collected by Oecumenius, Ibidem.
thus expresses Paul's wish. (...) (...) (...) ca. 15. in 9 ca. (...). ad
Romanos.
Paul says, (...), that if it were possible by my destruction for Christ to be
glorified, and the Jews to be saved, I would not refuse it. I could wish it,
says he, (...), if it might be, if it were lawful, if that choice were given
me; I would prefer the glory of Christ, and the salvation of many before
mine own. The new writers that take Anathema for a separation from Christ, as
Chrysostom does, add the same conditions which he does, confessing it never
the less to be simply impossible. The judgments of Peter Martyr and Zanchius
we saw before. Aretius repeating this exposition amongst others, says. Or else
Aretius in ca. 9. epist. ad Romanos.
separated from Christ, that is everlastingly damned, if that were possible,
that with the loss of one soul the salvation of many thousands might be
redeemed. The affection of those that speak lovingly, proceeds often to
things impossible. For of it self neither was it possible, that the Apostle
with his destruction should redeem the unbelieving Jews, and it had been
wicked so to think, since the merit of Christ alone is propitiatory; neither
was this lawful for the Apostle to offer himself to be a Red^mptorie
sacrifice for the salvation of others; but the Apostles affection is to be
considered wishing impossibilities upon an honest desire. Piscator in his
Scholies upon that Chapter to the Romans. Piscatoris Scholia in ca. 9. ad Romans
I did wish, for, I could wish: Nempe si lic^ret sulua pietate, meaning, if it
were lawful so to do without breach of piety. Beza. Bezae Annotationes in 9.
ca. ad Romans
This is very much to be observed, that Paul does not say, he did so wish at
any time, but he was so affected, that willingly he could be content to redeem
the destruction of his nation with his own, nempe sisieri sic potuisset,
meaning if that might possibly be. And therefore it is a needelesse
disputation, that many here undertake, whether this wish were lawful or
unlawful. If Paul ref^ained thus to wish, because it was neither lawful, nor
possible actually to obtain it, how senseless and truethlesse are your four
observations grounded upon the possibility and piety of this wish; whereas
all men of any judgment or understanding conclude the clean contrary? but
such is your carriage that except you may cross the resolutions of all men, you
think your self no body. Be famous therefore in your folly, that bring
impossibilities and impieties for the chief foundation of your late sprung
faith; your Reader I trust will require some better proof, before he give you
allowance in matters of such moment as these be.

Defenc. page 97. li. 1.
Thirdly that extraordinarily there is greater love among mere men, then only
to die bodily one for another, though usually and ordinarily a greater cannot
be found among men: which is it that Christ means: but how much more then may
the love of Christ toward his elect be far greater: contrary to your
assertion page: 107. 108.] Your doctrine is all extraordinary, The Defend^r
says the Scriptures ^re ordinarily true, that is, sometimes false.
that no ordinary rules of the Scriptures can stand with it. Howbeit in this
you challenge Christ, and not me, who says: John 15.
No man has greater love, then to lay down his life for his friend. That is
ordinarily true, you say but extraordinarily false. Then extraordinarily by
your supposition Christ sometimes speaks an untruth, though it be not
ordinary with him so to do: which honor you yield to the rest of the
Scriptures. For when you can not otherwise avoid them; those, you answer, are
the Defenc. page 96. li. 32.
ordinary and common rules of the Scripture; But your doctrine consists of
extraordinary Rules, which are no where found but in your own brain. You
have heard Chrysostom, Photius, and Zanchius avouch (who are the chief
commenders of the exposition, which you would seem to follow) that Paul
neither did, nor might prefer the love of his Countriemen before his own
salvation, and communion with Christ; but that his principal respect in this
wish was his love to the glory of Christ, which he more esteemed then his own
soul. So that nothing did hinder Paul to prefer Gods glory before the safety
of his own soul, and yet Christ's rule to stand true, that no man has
greater love, then to lay down his life for his friend. Neither was it the
death of the Soul that Paul wished, since he would by no means, as these old
and new writers observe, be severed from the love and favor of Christ, but
from the joy and honor that is laid up for the saints of God. Peter Martyr is
of the same opinion with them. Pet. Martyr in ca. 9. epist. ad Romanos.
Neither does Paul in this place say, he wished to be separated from the love
of God, (nullo enim modo voluisset ab illo amando desistere: for by no means
would Paul have ceased from loving God) only he wishes to be excluded from the
blessedness and fruition of God. And this every one of us ought to be willing
unto, even less to regard his own (eternal) happiness then the glory of
God. Now he that still loves god, and is beloved of him, by no means can
suffer the death or curse of the soul mentioned in the Scriptures. 1. Cor. 16.
if any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be Anathema maranAtha, that
is accursed in the highest degree. then could not the same curse befall him,
that loved Christ dearer then his own soul; but the words of our Savior must
needs be verified in him, Ma^th. 10.
he that loses his soul for my sake, shall find (or save) it.

So that neither of your suppositions are true, either that Paul preferred the
love of men before the safety of his own soul, or that for their sakes he was
content to die the death of the soul mentioned in the Scriptures, which is a
separation as well from the love and truth of God, as from the glory and
felicity of God. And your comparison, for which you intend all this, and
wherewith you would cross my assertion, is most untrue, that Christ's love to
his elect led him to die the death of the soul, or to forgo the favor and
fellowship of God for their sakes. For the conjunction of Christ's manhood to
his Godhead, being personal, was far greater and nearer then the knitting of
Paul or Moses unto God; and if that union were broken, all the works and
sufferings of Christ's manhood were no way able to bring us to God. Christ
could not be content to be separated from God for us.
Wherefore it were a thing extremely impious in the manhood of Christ, and no
less dangerous to our salvation, for him to be content to be utterly severed
from the union and communion of the divine nature, with which he was personally
joined; and though your imagination of Moses and Paul be false enough, and
altogether impossible, yet to dream the like of Christ, is the higth of all
impiety. Neither does that diminish his love to us, since there was no need
thereof for us, his other sufferings being sufficient in the just and exact
judgment of God; and the love, that led the second person in Trinity to lay
aside for the time the full and perfect fruition of his glory, and equality
with God his Father, and in our flesh to empty and humble himself, not only
to the infirmities of our nature, and miseries of our life, but even to the
shame and pain of our death on the Cross, far exceeded all the loves, that
men or Angels could show unto us. For there is more distance between the
glory and Majesty of God, and the sense and shame of our misery and
mortality, then betwixt the salvation or damnation of men or Angels. Wherefore
Christ's love to us may not be diminished, or made inferior to the love of
creatures, though he were not damned for our sakes, since that ineuitablely and
irreuocablely would have fastened us to a greater condemnation, and no way saved
us; whereas now his unspeakable fellowship with God has recalled us all from
the damnation due to us, to be partakers of the love and grace, that eternally
and infinitely he possessed with God.

Defenc. page 97. li. 6.
Fourthly, we see here these holy men, without feeling any pains inflicted by
Gods wrath, but only through an earnest and mighty compassion of love had their
minds drawn so wholly to think on this special thing above their reach, that
during the time they turn not themselves to any other cogitation. li. 17.
This you acknowledge may be in men, and yet you will not scoff at them as
cast into a Trance by it, nor reproach them with infernal confusion. How much
less ought you so to deal with Christ.] Your fourth observation is like the
rest, that is, void of all reason and truth. For though you take upon you to
be bold with Moses and his prayer, which yet you cannot show li. 14.
was directly against his own salvation, as you avouch; what proof have you
that Paul advisedly and considerately writing to the The fourth error
pretended from the former examples.
Romans, was amazed, and had no remembrance that Gods election was immutable,
and certainly reserved for him and the rest of Gods chosen in the heavens? will
you tell us, that the Scriptures were written by men amazed, and forgetting the
first principles of religion even in their writings? you may do well to make
that your fifth observation rightly matching your doctrine and devotion: but I
ween few wise men will allow this or that audacious enterprise in you. I did in
those words of mine which you bring, describe what astonishment by nature was;
to wit, fear and admiration so mixed, that for the time both sense and speech
are suddenly inter^upted, whiles the soul most earnestly beholding, or
declining that, which she (...) not or endures not, neglects the sense or
speech of her body, as regarding or attending greater things, that presently
or fearfully oppress her. What is this to Moses or Paul? if they were
astonished with fear, then neither could they speak, nor write; how else they
should be carried besides themselves, I do not see, nor you do not say. Moses
had often access to god, and so feared not to speak, or pray unto him; and at
the first kindling of Gods wrath against the people, for making the Golden
Calfe, Moses carefully and mindfully proposed in his Exodus 32. verse. 11.
prayers to God both the reproach, which the 12.
Egyptians would breath forth against gods holy name, and the 13.
oath made by God to Abraham Isaac and Jacob, to give their seed the land of
Canaan for an everlasting inheritance. And the Scripture says that upon that
prayer, before Moses went down from the mount, Exodus 32. verse. 14.
The Lord changed his mind from the evil, which he threatened to do unto his
people. Less cause then had Moses afterward to be amazed, having already
diuerted and pacified the brunt of Gods anger against the multitude, and
praying now for the quite abolishing of this sin, out of Gods remembrance,
and the continuance of his favor, and presence to go before his people.
Augustine thinks Moses was well advised in his prayer, and knew Gods mercy to
be such, that he would rather spare the wicked, then destroy the godly; of
which goodness in God Abraham presumed, when he made request for Sodom.
August. in Psalm. 77.
God (says Austen) so spared that nation, that he kindled not his whole wrath
utterly to root them out, and make an end of them, which appears plainly in
Gods speech, and Moses prayer for their sins; where God said, I will raze
them (from the earth) and make thee a great people. But Moses interposeth
himself, paratior deleri pro ipsis, quam ipsos, readier to be cut off, than
they should, (...) apud misericordem se id agere, qui quoniam nullo modo
deleret ipsum, etiam illis ipsis parceret propter ipsum, knowing he should
prevail with him that was merciful, who would by no means destroy him, but
rather spare them for his sake. So that Moses by the judgment of S. Augustine
was not amazed in his prayer, as you falsely presume, but remembered himself
well enough, and put his life into Gods hands, as more willing to be slain,
than the whole multitude should, and knowing that God would rather spare them
in mercy, who were trespassers, than slay him, that was innocent.

For Paul you have less reason, since he does not actually wish it, but
says, he could wish it, if it were lawful and possible; meaning, he could
be content to put body and soul into Gods hands, to do there with what
pleased him, so the truth of Christ might be received and acknowledged of the
Jews. His manner of speech, which must be conditional, except you grant it to
respect the time past, proves that he was well advised in referring all to
Gods will, and reserving as well Gods counsel, as his word revealed, without
touch or impeach. And therefore that the Apostle so writing was amazed, I see
no ground, besides the gulf of your own inventions. I am far therefore from
scof^ing at them, as if they were in a trance, in whom I see no such
amazedness as you imagine; much less may you take upon you for your pleasure,
to put the son of God into the same distemper, as you call it, with others;
since both his words and deeds recorded by the Evangelists, declare him to
have been not only full of grace and truth, but mindful of the least
circumstance, that pertained to his passion, and of purpose to direct his
sayings and doings to all those issues, which the Scriptures forespake of his
sufferings.

Defenc page 97. li. 20.
Specially you should acknowledge that his marvelous perplexity might well be a
means, that his sudden wishes against his own constant purpose and Gods
will were yet no sins.] That Christ might be somewhat astonished in the
Garden, I do not deem, because that was an affection incident to our nature,
and specially for that the Scripture applies the words, (...), Mar. 14.
he began to be afraid and astonished, unto him; but that this astonishment
continued all the time of his passion, or of his prayers in the Garden, and
that it proceeded from the sense of hell pains inflicted on him, these are
your voluntary fancies void of all foundation in the word of God, and wholly
depending on your private conceits. For were it an astonishment, as it was
sudden so it must be short; and though for the time it might suspend sense
and memory, yet when Christ began to pray, he resumed not only the power of
speech, which in a maze men want, but of understanding also, since prayer
without faith is a sinful temptation of God, and faith requires as well
knowledge, what we ask, as persuasion of Gods goodness, that he will grant
our desires. So that both the turning of Christ's tongue to speak, and the
directing of his heart in prayer, do prove sufficiently, that Christ speedily
recovered both sense and memory, if we grant, he was on the sudden somewhat
astonished; the cause whereof you boldly conceive to be what you list, as your
manner is without any care to make proof thereof. But as your observations were
most absurd and false, so are your collections, that Christ by his pains (then
felt and feared) had Defenc. page 97. li. 23.
infinitely more cause to be in his mind amazed, then either Moses or Paul;
since the Scriptures mention no pains then felt of him in his mind, besides
the affections of fear and sorrow, which though they be painful to man's
nature, yet differ they far from the pains of the damned, to which you
seek in this place to fasten the soul of Christ.

Defenc. page 97. li. 26.
As for the Fathers which you cite, if they mean as they seem to do, that
now at his passion among other causes of sorrow there wanted not this, even his
great pity toward his forlorn countriemen, then we join with them. If they
mean, as you would have them, that this was the maine and chief cause of his
extreme sorrow and amazedness, therein Ivtterly leave them.] You have a long
while in most lavish manner untowardly pretended, that Defenc. page 94. li. 20.
Certainly Christ would have greatly reioiced to see the due execution of Gods
most holy and deserved justice upon the Jews; and now with a sudden
retraite you join with Ambrose, Ierom, Augustine and Bid, that this among
other causes of sorrow wanted not in the Garden. Then as here you be more
soberlie minded then before, or he at least that made this collection for you;
so this often crossing your self, argues that either you have not yet
recovered your wits, to understand what you write, or that your helpers being
in diverse places, and not seeing the one what the other wrote, you have
unhandsomely patched their notes together without marking, wherein they
contradicted each other. But this we take to be the nearest the truth, since I
do not urge this cause to exclude all others, which by any due circumstance of
the Scriptures might concur to grieve him in the Garden; only I noted that
those learned and ancient fathers coniecturing the causes of Christ's sorrow at
that instant, never drempt of your hell pains, which you have lately coined
out of the hollownesse of your own heart; but observed other causes, that might
afflict his mind, which you in your Treatise rejected with great skorne,
howsoever some of your friends have since drawn you to be otherwise minded. As
for your leaning them, it is little to the purpose, they will remain wise and
godly expositors, when such a blind guide as you are, will be lightly regarded
withal your fantastical Novelties.

Defenc. page 97. li. 31.
Howbeit this here note in the, that these Fathers avouch Christ feared not his
(bodily) death or passion: for thereof only they speak here questionles. You
contrariwise say that Christ feared (bodily) death, for thereof also you
discourse, and had more cause as you think so to do then any of his members.
First then they questionless gainsay your new plot of man's redemption by the
pains of hell. For they speak of the death, which Christ died for our sins
accordingto the Scriptures, which if they took to be only bodily, as you
grant; they knew nothing neither of the death of the Soul, nor of the second
death of the damned, which you avouch Christ must suffer, before he could
redeem us; and so they, or you are clean besides the Christian faith. Again,
they do not simply say, he feared not death, for then should they cross other
fathers (and even themselves) affirming, that Christ had a natural fear of
death, but the fear thereof was not the cause of this Agony, that is, he
feared it not so much, as to be thus afflicted at the remembrance of it.
Otherwise Ambrose himself says. Ambros. in Luc. li. 10. de tristitia and
dolor Christi.
Debuit ergo Dolorem suscipere, vt vinceret tristitiam, non excluderet, and nos
disceremus in Christo, quemadmodum futurae mortis mestitiam vinceremus. Christ
was therefore to admit sorrow, that he might conquer it, not exclude it, and
we in Christ might learn to overcome the fear of death approaching. So Cyrill.
Cyril. The sauri li. 10 ca. 3.
Quando formidasse mortem videtur, vt homo dicebat: Pater transeat a me Calix
iste. When Christ seemed to f^are death, as a Man he said, Father let this Cup
pass from me. For though as a man he abhorred death, yet as a man he refused
not to perform the will of his Father, and of himself, being the word (or
Son) of God. Morti ergo, quam vt homo formidabat, seipsum pro nobis vt Deus
tradidit. To death then, which as a man he feared, he delivered himself for us
as God. And Athanasius. Athana. Ora tio 4. contra Aria.
As by Death Christ abolished Death, (...), and all humane miseries by
suffering them as a man, so by usual fear he took away our fear, and made
Men no longer to fear death. And Damascene. Damascen. orthodoxae fidei li. 3.
ca. 18.
As a Man (Christ) would have the Cup to pass. (...). These wrrds proceeded
from a natural fear. And Theophylact. Theophyl. in 26. ca Matthaei.
(...). It is incident to the nature of man to fear death, for death entered
besides (or against) Nature, and therefore nature flies death. Idem. in Luc.
cap. 22.
The common fear of man's nature Christ cured, (...) consuming (or dispersing)
it in him self, and making it obedient to the will of God. This your ignorance
apprehends as a contradiction in them, but were you quietly minded, or better
acquainted with their positions, and reasons, you would soon see, that these
may stand together, that Christ might have a natural fear of death incident
to man, and yet that fear not to be the whole cause of this agony.

Defenc. page 97. li. 37.
Thirdly, touching his regard of his Church generally the same answer serves,
as it is given to the last point before.] You mean that among other causes of
his sorrow this wanted not, which is as much as I avouched. And the more
dearly he loved his The third cause concurring to Christ's agony.
Disciples that followed him, and the whole Church, that should after believe
in him, the more inwardly he might sorrow for their infirmities, and earnestly
pray for their safeties, being no way ignorant of satan's eger and watchful
malice against them. Since then after his resurrection and ascension he should
in glory appear to the face of God for them, what let was there, but he might
now in the days of his flesh, approaching to his passion for their deliverance,
in most humble and ardent manner mediate as well for their redemption as
preservation; and in this love and zeal toward them, for whom he gave
himself, power out both abundant tears, and bloody sweats to show the height
of his desire and care to provide and purchase their protection and salvation?
His supplications for us were a necessary part of our reconciliation to God,
as well as his sufferings for us; and the Prophet expressing the one, adioyneth
the other as no less requisite then the former, in saying; Esa. 53.
he bare the sin of many, and prayed for the Trespassers. And no doubt he
chose this place and time before his apprehension with inflamed and vehement
affection of prayer to direct the course, and strengthen the force of all his
sufferings, that receiving comfort and courage from above, he might wade
through the work of our redemption with greater assurance and confidence in
the eyes of all his enemies, to whom he would show neither fear nor sorrow,
but silent and constant patience.

Defenc. page 98. li. 1.
If you urge that these Fathers are so resolute for these causes, as their
words pretend, then you your self abuse them more than ever I did or mean to
do, where you say, it is curiosity to examine, presumption to determine,
impossibility to conclude, (as these do) what was the true cause of Christ's
agony.] A wise answer forsooth, and worthy the vigor of your wit; to say
their words are so resolute, that I condemn them more than you, when they with
all inoderation temper their speech, and by the generality or diversity of
occasions, that might engender fear to Christ in the Garden, show they mean
nothing less than to conclude any direct or particular cause of that agony.
Ambroses words are; Ambros. in Luc. lib. 10. de tristitia and dolor Christi.
Nec illud distat a vero. Neither is that dissonant from the truth. And
again; Ambros. in Luc. lib. 10. de tristitia and dolor Christi.
Et fortasse ideo tristis est. And perhaps he was therefore sorrowful. And so
Augustine; August. in Psalm. 87.
Non incongrue nos dicere aestimo. I think we speak not without some reason.
The rest admonish in general, that Christ sorowed not for himself, but for
us. Does this conclude any special and certain cause of that agony? But when
you can not otherwise decline them, you think it enough to shift them off with
such a jest as this is. Indeed they touch your free hold somewhat nearly,
when they say, Christ sorowed not for any sufferings of his own: this you
impugn for life; and if their assertion in this be true, they turn your hell
pains clean out of Christ's passion. For if Christ suffered, as you dream,
the death of the damned, he had good cause to fear and grieve at that which he
felt; but with one consent Hilarie, Ambrose, Jerome, and Bid reject that as
false, that Christ did (thus) fear and grieve for any sufferings of his own.
Whether therefore you or I most abuse these Fathers, let the Reader judge. And
howsoever your helpers have somewhat haltered your headlong humors, not long
since, as I have sormerly showed, you flung off these Fathers in this very case
as Trea. pa. 67.
fond, absurd and void of likelihood, reason, and sense; which whether it be
an abuse to so grave and godly writers, I leave the Reader to censure as he
sees cause.

Defenc page 98. li. 6.
Fourthly, you allege his inward sorrow and zealous grief for the sins of
the world to be the maine and chief cause of this agony. Surely even to
rehearse these your arguments is refutation of them enough.] Your pe^uish
perverting of my reasons, and clapping a The fourth cause concurring to Christ's
agony.
conclusion unto them against my express purpose and premonition, is indeed as
soon refuted as rehearsed; but refer them to that for which I bring them,
and then your bragges are more than boyish. I plainly professed in my Sermons,
that since the Scriptures expressed no particular cause of Christ's agony in
the Garden, it was impossible certainly to conclude any direct or determinate
cause thereof. What folly then is it in you to suppose, that I go about to
infer that, which precisely I forwarned was impossible to be concluded? Of
the causes, which I produced, I professed no more, but that they were consonant
to the rules of piety, and might concur in Christ's agony, which you do
grant after your nice manner by confessing these wanted not; and when you have
yielded as much as I urged, then you run back to your silly shift, and say
they were not the maine or chief causes of that agony; your hell pains are
left out, which must have a place, as you think, in that perplexity of
Christ's in the Garden. But sir first prove your hell pains were then and
there inflicted on Christ's soul, and then you shall have leave to couple that
to the causes of Christ's agony. Till you so do, in vain you deny the rest
for want of this. It suffices me to show religious and zealous respects of
piety and charity, which might move Christ to those affections, and other
proof of voluntary actions and inward affections can none be brought. And yet
you may remember, sir Defensor, though you dissemble it, that when you trample
so readily, but yet so rudely on my reasons, you wrong the ancient fathers,
whence I collected them, more then you do me. Hilarie and Ambrose do
peremptorily teach, that Christ's sorrow in the Garden was not for himself, nor
his own sufferings, but for our sins and wounds. And though you refute me
with breathing out more absurdities then sentences in this your defense, yet
the sober Reader will not suffer you so soon to deface their judgments and
opinions, whom I follow. But we shall hear some doubtie dispute to mainetaine
this matter.

Defenc. page 98. li. 9.
All these are proper parts of his holiness and righteousness, as I have
said, but no proper parts or causes of his bloody and most dreadful agony,
that is of his sacrifice satisfying for sin. Only his pains were, which then
he f^lt and feared.] All these were religious respects of fear and sorrow,
which wanted not in Christ's agony, as you grant; now whether they were
painful or no, a man would think should be no great doubt, but with one that
has lost both wit and sense. Saint John says, 1. John 4.
Fear has painfullnesse. August. de ver^is Domini secundum Iohannem, Sermon
42.
Sunt duo tortores animae, timor et dolor. There are two tormentors of the
soul, fear and sorrow, says Austen. And who that has but his five wits,
does not feel, that fear and sorrow are afflictions and vexations of the
soul? Wherefore your excluding them from the sacrifice for sin, because they
are no pains, is a learned piece of work which never a Morter-maker in
England would stumble at besides you. Let shame, if not sense, teach you that
fear and sorrow are very painful afflictions of the soul, and rather
comprised then exempted in Christ's sufferings by that text of Scripture, which
you pretend; and therefore necessary respects and pertinences to the sacrifice
for sin. Psalm. 51.
The sacrifice of God is a troubled spirit, says David. Why then should not
the affliction of Christ's spirit with fear and sorrow be properly a part of his
sacrifice and suffering for sin? They were proper parts, you say, of his
holiness.] And might they not also, when they grew vehement and grievous, be
parts of his sufferings? You would seem skillful after your unlearned manner in
the soules-suffering. Is there any suffering more proper to the soul then fear
and sorrow from her own cogitations, apprehensions, and affections? from the
immediate hand of God, you think, is more proper. That in some cases may be
possible, though in Christ's you can prove no such thing; but that is most
proper, which the soul never wants, and has of her own nature. And
therefore so far is it from being exempted from the sacrifice of sin, that
in us there is none other sacrifice for sin but repentance which is all one
with godly sorrow, bringing with it 2. Cor. 7. ver. 11.
c^re, f^are, desire, zeal and such like effects of true detestation of sin,
as the Apostle describes. Repentance for himself Christ could have none,
because Inward and (...) sorrow for ^ur (...) must be ^ound in Christ's
sacrifice for them.
he never sinned, but as our transgressions displeased the holiness, and
provoked the wrath of God against us; so when our Lord and Savior came to make
full satisfaction for our sins, he did not only appease the justice of God
by enduring his hand, but contented the holiness of God by inward and infinite
sorrow for our sakes and sins, which we were not able to yield unto God. To
have accepted the punishment, which Gods justice awarded, and to have neglected
the offense and displeasure, which gods holiness conceived against sin, had
been not to pacify, but to provoke God, in not regarding the cause which
moved him to take vengeance on sin. It is therefore most agreeable to the
rules of piety, that the inward sorrow for our sins, which the son of God
impressed on his humane soul, when he prepared himself to make purgation of
them, did no less affect and afflict him, then the outward pains received in
his body; and why you should exclude this from his agony, there is no reason,
but that you are most in love with that, which has least proof or likeliehood
to be the cause of this agony.

This being exactly noted by Hilarie, Ambrose, Cyrill and other ancient and
learned Fathers, I did rightly to observe it, how lightly soever your insolent
conceit esteems it. (...) de (...). li. 10.
Igitur cum and tristitia de nobis est, and oration pro nobis est, non possunt
non omnia propter nos gesta esse intelligi, cum omnia pro nobis quibus
timebatur, orata sunt. Since then both (Christ's) sorrow was concerning us, and
his prayer for us, all the rest must needs be understood for our sakes, for so
much as all his prayers were powered forth for us, for whom he feared. So
Ambrose Ambros. de fide ad Gratianum. li. 2. c. 3.
mihi compatitur, mihi tristis est, mihi dolet. Ergo pro me et in (...) doluit,
qui prose nihilhabuit, quod doleret. Doles igitur Domine Jesus non tua, sed mea
vulnera, non tuam mortem, sed meam infirmitatem. Christ is affected for me, he
is heavy for me, he soroweth for me. He sorroweth then in me and for me, who
had nothing in himself to sorrow for. Thou sorrowedst Lord Jesus, not for thine
own wounds, but for mine; not for thine own death, but for my weakness.
And Cyrill: Cyril. de recta fide ad Reginas li. 2. ca de Sanct^fication and
(...) Christi.
That Christ might make our prayers acceptable (to God,) himself begins the
matter, even opening his fathers ears to the nature of man, and making them
most ready to the prayers of such, as were in any per^ll for his cause.
Therefore in him, (...), as in a second (root or) first fruits of mankind, we
were praying with strong cries, and not without tears, that the power of death
might be abolished, and the life (restored or) strengthened, which was at first
bestowed on our nature. And Bid: Bed^ in Luc^ c^. 22.
If Christ were sorrowful to us, that is, for our sakes, it must needs be, that
he was comforted (by the Angel) for us, and to our use. For what should he
ask with that agony for himself, who here on earth gave heavenly things with
power? Then neither Christ's sorrow in the Garden, nor his prayer with that
agony after he was comforted by the Angel, were for himself or his own
sufferings, much less for hell pains devised and inflicted by you on the
soul of Christ, but his extreme sorrow and affectionate prayer might well be
for our sins, whose cause he undertook, and for our sakes, whose persons he
then presented unto God with most vehement contention of spirit, and of all the
powers of soul and body.

Defenc. page 98. li. 12.
Neither in respect of these your supposed causes could Christ say, Save me
from this hour, nor, Let this cup pass from me: as in respect of his
infinite pains, he might.] The hour and cup which Christ speaks of, are
by himself referred not to any pains What cup Christ drank of.
suffered in the Garden, as you pretend, much less to the pains of hell
inflicted by Gods immediate hand on Christ's soul, as you would have it; but
to the time and manner of his sufferings from the hands of the Jews. Of the
hour, after all his prayers ended in the Garden, and his last return to his
Disciples, he says: Mar. 14. v. 41
Sleep hence forth, and take your rest, (...), the hour is come, behold the
Son of man is given into the hands of sinners. Here is that hour that Christ
so much spoke of, even the time that he should be delivered into the hands of
sinners to suffer a cruel and shameful death at their hands. And so he told
them, that came to take him, Luc. 22. v. 53
This is your very hour, and the power of darkness. And this he called the
Cup, which his father gave him to drink. For when Peter drew his sword to
defend his Master from the hands of the Jews, Jesus said unto him, Ioh. 18. v.
11.
put up thy sword into thy sheath: shall I not drink of the cup, which my
Father has given me? Peter neither did, nor could hinder the cup, which you
imagine Christ drank in the garden from the immediate hand of God, he meant
plainly to resist the Jews, that they should not apprehend Christ. That
enterprise of Peter when Christ would repress, and submit himself to his
fathers will and counsel for his death, he said as we saw before, shall I not
drink of the cup, which my Father has given me? So that the Scriptures
mention the hour and cup of Christ's suffering on the Cross from the rage of
the people and malice of the rulers; of your invisible cup containing the
death of the damned, they say nothing.

Defenc. page 98. li. 16.
His holy and righteous affections were at all hours and seasons in him
without measure holy, yet now at his death did not so expressly break out and
show themselves, as they did at diverse times before.] You receive a just reward
of your error, that whiles you labor to impugn the truth, your luck is not
to light on one true sentence to your purpose. That extreme fear and sorrow
were at all hours and seasons in him, which yet were holy and righteous
affections in Christ, is a notable untruth; and that they did not break out
so expressly in the garden, as at diverse times before, is another as false as
the former; and but that it is no news in you to fasten on fancies, a man
would marvel to see so many falsehoods couched so closely together. Christ's
quiet and constant affections of piety to God, and mercy to men, were always
in him, but these were not at all hours and seasons painful unto him: coming
now to make What fear and sorrow Christ was to yeel^ to God when ^e offered
the ransom of our sins.
satisfaction for our sins, as the head for the members, and the Redeemer for
his prisoners, Christ was to yield unto God as much fear of his justice
provoked, and sorrow for his holiness displeased by our sins, as his humane
nature could admit, without loss of those gifts, or decay of those graces,
which the fullness of the holy Ghost had rooted and established in him.
Wherefore damnation and desperation excepted, and all dubitation excluded as
well of his person, as of his function, he might yield to God for us, and as
part of our ransom, the lowest degree of submission, and deepest impression of
fear and sorrow, that man's nature could feel without doubting or distrusting
the favor and goodness of God toward him or his. Wherein he did not only
religiously give unto God, that which was due unto the holiness and Justice of
God, but he set us a pattern how we should approach to God, when we find our
selves laden with sin, even in all fear and trembling of so great power and
majesty, and with inward grief and groans of heart for displeasing so
admirable holiness, that we may receive comfort from God, when we do not
spare truly to acknowledge his goodness, and earnestly to lament our own
wickedness. These very painful, but yet very holy impressions of fear and
sorrow with tears and sighs unspeakable, Christ showed and sanctified in his
own person, as an acceptable sacrifice to God, not for any blemish of his
own, who was the clean and undefiled lamb of God, but for our heinous and
enormous sins, the excess whereof could never be matched or purged but by
the infinite dignity and humility of him, that owing nothing paid all, and
forced to none of these freely offered his obedience to the honor and glory
of his father.

Defenc. p^g. 98. li. 21.
It stands not with his pi^tie, to wish that his strong and vehement
affections of holiness should pass from him or be weakened in him. for my part
I can see no sense nor sap in these assertions. You see sense and sap in
that which has neither truth, proof, nor use in the word of God: and in the
plain principles of piety (so unsavory is your palate) you find no taste.
Those words, Let this cup pass from me, most men refer to the death of the
cross, which Christ was after to suffer. Will you thence infer, that the
fear and sorrow, which he felt in the garden before his apprehension, were not
grievous, because they were religious? And what if Christ spoke of the present
impressions of fear and sorrow, which he wished to be mitigated with comfort
from God, as they were within a while by the sending of an Angel from heaven;
did he therefore wish the holiness of his obedience and humility to be
changed, because he prayed the burden thereof might be eased? Psalm. 51.
Restore to me, (says David) the joy of thy salvation. Does that prove David
prayed against the godliness of sorrow for sin, because he would have the
sharpness of it turned into joy? no more is it consequent, when Christ
weakened himself with exceeding susception of fear and sorrow, though both
religious, that he wished the holiness of either might cease, when he would
have the painfulness of either as^waged? A damned or desperate fear and
sorrow you would better digest in the soul of Christ, though Christian piety
do detest it; but a vehement affection of godly fear or sorrow you endure
not, because it has no concurrence with your hell pains.

Defenc. page 98. li. 24.
Where you ascribe to this his deep sorrow of zeal for men's sins, his
sweating blood in his agony above Nature after a strange and marvelous manner,
I dare say you deliver strange maruailes in Divinity.] Christ sweating blood,
if it were natural, I do not ascribe to fear or sorrow, but rather to
vehement intention of prayer, which the Evangelist mentions in that place: if
it were above nature, as (...). (...). 28 and 29.
Hilarie, Augustine, Prosper, Bid, and Bernard do think, there can be no
reason required of his voluntary affections, besides his will, the cause
whereof is secret to us, though some ancient writers conjecture at the
significations of it. But why it should not be marvelous, have you any reason?
for admit your own conceit were true, which as yet is no way justifiable by
the sacred Scriptures, ever read you there, that any man before or besides
Christ had sweat like drops of blood falling from him, for all their
complaints, Christ's (...) sweat^ was not only (...) (...) proper to Christ.
as you pretend of hellish fear, sorrows, and pains? It must then be
marvelous, which no man else, but only Christ, did ever perform, whatsoever
the cause thereof were; and in your fancy most marvelous, since you dream,
that all the members of Christ suffer the like pains as due to mankind for
sin, and yet you can produce none of them, that ever did sweat blood but
Christ alone. And where you make the pains of hell to take hold of Christ's
Soul till the time of his death, yet did he not after this, show any such
thing but only in the Garden. How could it then be but marvelous, that so
violent a cause continuing and increasing, as you imagine; the effect, which in
your fancy was this bloody sweat, should cease, and not appear, but when
Christ would? but whether of us delivers strangest maruailes in Divinity,
you that hold, the death of the damned and the true pains of hell were here
inflicted on Christ's Soul by Gods immediate hand, and must likewise by your
supposall on all Christ's members: or I, that teach Christ as our head, in the
work of our redemption, for the satisfaction of our sin offered as much sacred
fear of Gods power, and inward sorrow for our displeasing the holiness of
God, as man's nature without despairing or doubting was capable of; let all the
faithful judge, and examine every man his own conscience, in which of these
twain he is like unto Christ. For they must be conformed to his sufferings,
before they shall be partakers of his glory. If then none shall reign with
Christ, but such as have suffered with Christ, which must be hell pains as you
defend; I leave it to each man's secret cogitation, that shall light on this
question, how many thousands of good and godly men must give over all hope of
salvation, since with sighs and sorrows unspeakable stirred in them by the
holy Ghost for their offending and displeasing the goodness of God, they are
and ought daily to be acquainted; but with the true pains of hell, and death
of the damned in this li^e, few Christians have any communion. And if any
through distrust of Gods mercies, and assault of their own sins, be
terrified with desperation or dubitation, let them assure themselves in either
of those they be most unlike unto Christ, whose faith stood ever fast, and
fully resolved of Gods favor, both toward his person and function; which was
the purgation of our sins, and the reconciliation of God with man.

Defenc. page 98. li. 28.
The fifth cause, you say, might be the Cup of Gods wrath tempered and made
ready for the (...) of men: which you interpret to be eternal malediction.]
You are no good The fifth cause con^urring to Christ's agony.
reporter of my words, in auouching that I interpret the Cup of Gods wrath
tempered for the sins of men, to be eternal malediction. My words are.
Sermo. pa. 21. li 22.
In this Cup are all manner of plagues and punishments for sin, as well
spiritual as corpor all; eternal as temporal. And before I came to declare,
what Christ might behold, and by prayer decline in the mixture of this Cup; I
expressly forewarned, that Sermo. pa. 21. li. 27.
diucrse men have diversely expounded those words of Christ, (let this Cup pass
from me; li. 36.
and in this variety of judgments I meant to refuse none, that any way agreed
with the rules of truth. So that I here repeat the opinions of others, and
only show in what sort and sense they must be restrained and referred, before
they can be concorded with the truth of the Scriptures. But let us hear what
you impugn, and how?

Defenc. page 98. li. 30.
You say Christ knowing what our sins deserved, might intentiuely pray to
have that Cup pass from him, which was prepared for us. For us, whom mean
you? the elect or the reprobate? what malediction? the whole and absolute
pains thereof only, or the eternity of the continuance thereof also?]
Wrangling is your best refuge, when you know not otherwise how to right your
self. Is this so hard a question with you, what was the desert and wages of
our sins by Gods justice, had we not been redeemed and saved from the wrath
to come by Christ Jesus? Is it so strange Divinity, to separate nature from
grace, and justice from mercy in the elect, that they may discern, what they
were, and should have been in them selves without the favor of God in Christ,
who freed us, when we were servants to sin; quickened us, when we were dead in
sin; and saved us, when we were justly wrapped in the same condemnation with
others for sin? Do not all these words, Redemption, Remission,
Reconciliation, and Salvation in Christ prove, that of our selves, and in our
selves we were prisoners subjected to sin, and condemned as enemies, to God
without Christ, in whom we are freed, pardoned reconciled and saved? Your ears
are very curious, that can not abide to hear what was deserved by our sins,
and prepared for our sins, had God dealt with us in justice, not in mercy for
his Sons sake. It is healthful and needful for us to remember and
acknowledge, what our natural desert and condition was without Gods heavenly
commiseration on us, and election of us in Christ his Son.

Defenc. page 9^. li. 35.
If you mean the Elect, Christ knew that he must not only see and
contemplate, but feel and suffer all the whole pains of that punishment,
which our sins deserved, and this was prepared for himself our ransom
payer, and not for us.] Christ was not only to suffer that, which in his
person should be sufficient in the righteous judgment of God to appease his
anger, and purge our sins, but he was farther to see and behold from what he
delivered us, even from the wrath to come. How should the price and ^orce of
his death be known unto him, if he were ignorant what dreadful and terrible
vengeance was reserved and prepared for sin, if he did not redeem us?
Wherefore he was not only to feel that, which should free us, but exactly to
view and know the rest, that was due to our sins, if he did not auert it. And
where you proclaim with open mouth, that Christ must feel and suffer all the
whole pains, which our sins deserved; it is a pestilent and evident
impiety. For either you must defend, that our sins deserved not the loss of
Gods kingdom, and the perpetual pains of hell fire in body and soul; or
else you must confess, that Christ suffered the same. You spoke even now of
strange maruailes in Divinity. These monsters be past maruailes, which you
prove only by your self, and by your own surly conceit. [ this was
prepared for him, and not for us,] Was hell fire prepared for Christ? he was
ordained to be our Savior by the sacrifice of himself on the Cross, that by
his death full of shame and pain he might redeem the transgressions that were
in the former Testament; but that hell fire or everlasting death, which is the
desert of our sins, was prepared for him, is a Doctrine fit for no man, but
for him that has made a shipwreck of his faith to land his fancies on shore.
[Damnation you will say, was not prepared for us, but rather Salvation:] mean
you without Christ, or in Christ? in Christ, I have no doubt but we were before
all worlds appointed to be heirs of Salvation, when in our selves we should
deserve far otherwise. But here showing the means of man's redemption, I
speak of man not yet redeemed, and therefore l^ing as yet in the desert and
danger of damnation, i^ Christ did not deliver him. In which sense the Apostle
not only says, Ephesians. 2.
We were by nature the children of wrath, as well as others, but Romans 5.
by the offense of one, (death came) on all men unto condemnation. Which speech
the ancient Fathers do every where follow. August. Episto^a. 89.
Qui per generationem illi cond^mnation obligati sunt, per regenerationem ab
eadem condemnatione soluuntur. They which by birth are obliged (or fast tied)
to that condemnation, are by regeneration delivered from that condemnation. And
so Idem. Epistola. 105.
merito namque peccati vniuersa massa damnata est. By the desert of sin the
whole mass (of mankind) was condemned. If the Christian faith permit us to
say, that we were condemned before we were redeemed, since we could not be
redeemed but from condemnation, how much more lawful is it for me to say that
everlasting death was deserved by us, and prepared for us without Christ; since
the reward of sin was first provided for the devil and his angels before man
fell through his inticements, and was never since unprepared?

Defenc. page 9^. li. (...).
The truth is, he could not by any means pray against that, or decline that,
only unless he were for the time in some astonishment and perturbation of his
senses, which by the infiniteness of that pain he well might be, yea he could
not but be, as is before showed to have happened in Moses and Paul.] There is as
much truth in this, as in the rest of your devices. Here are errors as thick
as hops, shuffled in upon your bare word, the proof whereof you bring after at
leisure about latter Lammas. 1. That Christ felt infinite pain^s of hell, which
you before named all the whole pains, which our sins deserved. 2. That by
the infiniteness of that pain he could not but be in some astonishment, and
perturbation of his senses; which though here you mitigate with (some) yet
afterward you strain it above the extremest degree of astonishment that might
be. Your words are. Defenc. page 128. li 26.
Therefore no marvel though this astonishment (in Christ) were far greater,
then is to be seen in any man, that ever was or shall be. Wherein you keep
the Savior of the world as long, and as often, as pleases yourselfe. 3. That
against these pains he could not by any means pray, only unless he were
thus astonished: 4. That Paul in his Epistle to the Romans expressing his
affection for the Jews, was likewise astonished and amazed, as not knowing
what he said. Defenc. page 99 li. 8.
This is the very point of our Defense: affirm this, and you affirm with us
all that we hold and profess.] When I am out of my wits, I may chance to hold
these conceits with you, otherwise so long as God gives me grace to be soberly
minded and well advised, I will see other manner of warrant for all these
weafes and straies then you yet show, before I affirm them or profess them.

Defenc page 99. li. 9.
Otherwise if you mean, that Christ prayed intentiuely to have the whole and
entire cup of eternal malediction and death pass from him, which both the
elect deserve and the reprobate sustain, that as it is p^ssing strange
doctrine, so is it simply impossible. For he could not intentiuely pray against
that, nor fear that, which he perfitly knew concerned him not at all, and by
no means could ever possibly come n^are him.] I premonished the Reader, that I
would there repeat the diverse judgments of diverse men, and so far admit
them, as they might accord with the Christian faith. To this opinion of some
men that Christ was in his agony stricken with a fear of eternal death, and
so might pray against it; I gave two expositions, how those words might be
tolerated in Christian Religion without apparent impiety. The one, that Sermo.
page 23. li. 21.
Christ had no need to pray for himself, (against that cup of eternal
death) but ONLY FOR US, who then suffered with him and in him. The other, that
if we would conioine Christ's person with ours, fear must there be taken for a
shunning and declining of that cup, which he Ibid. page 24. li. 10.
religiously disliked. For Ibid. page 23. li. 29.
touching himself, albeit the innocence of his cause, the holiness of his
life, the merit of his obedience, the abundance of his spirit, the love of
his father, and unity of his person did most sufficiently guard him from all
danger and doubt of eternal death: yet to show the perfection of his humility,
he would not suffer his humane nature to require it on right but prostrate on
the earth besought his father, that cup might pass from him, and was heard
in that he shunned or avoided. I repeat the self same words, which then I
used, to let the Reader see that I shift not hands, nor change not minds as
there is no cause I should; but that this Broker neglecting my manifest
limitations to other men's opinions, and evident speech, as also suppressing my
purpose, would have the world believe that I grant Christ doubted and feared
eternal death to come on his own person. Which in the maze that you put him
in, sir defensor, might well be, since you avouch he knew not what he prayed,
or else he sinned in praying against the resolute and known will of God; but by
my positions it is impossible, that any distrustful fear of hell, or eternal
death should fall on the soul of Christ for the reasons there shortly, but
sufficiently collected by me. And this is your idle course throughout your
Book, to catch at a word and never to regard what goes before or after, be it
never so plain and perspicuous to recall your misconstruing my speech. Omit
then your wanton rouing, or malicious swaruing from my meaning and saying, and
refute either of these limitations, if you can.

And first least any man think, I limite other men's words without just cause,
I meant herein the words of the Catechism, which you would feign pull into your
pack, as also of some other writers, whose sayings so long as they might be
salued with any good construction, I thought not fit to repel as intolerable
in Christ's Church. The Catechism says. Nowels Catechism Greek and Latin
page 281.
Christum non communi modo morte in hominum conspectu mulctatum, sed et
aeternae mortis horrore perfusum fuisse, horribiles formidines atque
acerbissimos animi dolores pro nobis perpessum et perfunctum esse. Peccatoribus
enim, quorum hic quasi personam Christ us sustinuit, non praesentis modo, sed
and futurae etiam aeternaeque mortis dolores atque cruciatus debentur. Christ
not only died our common death in the sight of men, but was also perfused (The
Translator of the Catechism into Greek allowed as well as the Latin says,
(...) agonized) with the horror of eternal death, and suffered and felt for us
horrible fears, and most bitter sorrows of mind. For to sinners, whose person
in some sort Christ here sustained, were due the sorrows and torments not of
this present death only, but also of future and eternal death. Of the pains
of the damned really inflicted in the garden on Christ's soul by the immediate
hand of God, and of Christ's extreme astonishment for the present Torments
thereof, the writer of the Catechism knew nothing; (these devices of yours are
later then the making of that Book;) but he speaks of Christ's fearing the
infinite wrath of God against our sins, which he apprehended in the Garden,
and in respect thereof fell into this horrible fear. These words of the
Cat^chisme, if we refer to the fear Christ had for his members then joined
in one body with him, whose cause he undertook with more desire and care then
his own, since he emptied and loaded himself to purchase their advancement
and ease; they might be received and approved as sufferable in the Christian
faith: but if we so took them, as if Christ had any doubt or distrustful
fear of his own salvation, they were not agreeable to the truth. Your self
sir wrangler speak against this later sen^e of the words, as much as I do.
For you say, Defenc. page 99. li. 11. and 12.
It is passing strange doctrine, and simply impossible, that Christ should
fear the cup of eternal malediction, which he perfectly knew concerned him
not at all, and by no means could ever possibly come near him. But the
Catechism says Christ was perfused (or perplexed) with the horror of eternal
death. And as our head knit with us into one and the same body, he might
tremble at eternal death hanging over our heads, and most dreadfully persuing
our sins in us, if he made not satisfaction for us. You would shift the word
eternal out of the text, and tell us a tale of the substance thereof, which
you will imagine how Christ shall suffer by a new device of yours, though the
Catechism speak nothing thereof: but if you expound the Catechism, and not
correct it, or confute it, you must show us how Christ might feel or fear
EVERLASTING OR FVTVRE DEATH due to sinners. For those are the words of the
Catechism; who not content to say EVERLASTING, adds thereto FVTVRE death,
which of force must follow after this present death separating the soul from
the body, except you have the skill in Grammar to make future go before
present. How Christ in conjunction with us, and compassion on us, might fear
everlasting death for us, as imminent over us, and yet speak in his own name,
I will in place convenient more largely declare, when I come to Christ's
complaint on the cross; till which time I pray the Reader to have patience,
least I should be forced often to prove and repeat one and the same thing.

Touching the other limitation, that Christ might fear, that is, war^ly and
religiously shun the cup of eternal malediction, and intentiuely pray
against it, as well in respect of himself as of us: you blunder out a
proposition which in Christ's cause is not so true as you take it to be. Pa.
99. li. 13.
He could not (you say) intentiuely pray against Christ's manhood pr^ied for
that with all (...) which his person by rig^t might have chalen^ed.
that, which he perfectly knew could by no means come near him. By this rule
Christ should pray for nothing touching himself: for Christ perfectly knew all
that God had most certainly decreed toward him; and chiefly Gods resolute and
revealed counsels for his glory. What need then was there Christ should pray
for any such thing, since he perfectly knew what should come to pass, and by
the power of his person was fully able to dispose of heaven and hell, life and
death both present and eternal. His own words are: (...) Whatsoever things
the Father does, the same things (...) John 5.
does the Son also: for likewise as the Father raises up the dead, and
quickens them, so the Son quickens whom he will. The Father judges no
man, but has committed all judgment to the Son; that all men should honor
the Son, as they honor the Father; and has given him power also to execute
judgment, in that he is the Son of man. Christ perfectly knew, that E^a. 42.
and 49
he should be given for a light of the Gentiles. Did he not therefore ask it
according to David's prophecy; Psalm 2.
Ask of me, and I will give thee the Gentiles for thine inheritance? Christ
neither had, nor could have any doubt of his glorification. Did he not
therefore pray: John 17.
Now Father glorify me with thine own self, with the glory which I had with
thee before the world was? Was not Christ most assured, that he should Esa. 53.
divide the spoils of the mighty, and be a Hose. 13.
death unto death, and a destruction unto hell? and yet David applies these
prayers unto him; Psalm. 22.
Deliver my soul from the sword, my desolate (soul) from the power of the
dog. Save me from the lions mouth, and hear me from the horns of the
unicorn. Though therefore by the right of his power he might have said in all
things, as he did in some, Matthew. 8.
I will, be thou clean; and again, John 17.
Father I will, that they which thou have given me, be with me even where I am,
that they may behold my glory; yet to demonstrate the wonderful virtue of his
obedience and humility, he suffered his humane nature humbly to pray for that,
which his person could of it self perform, and in all things referred
himself to his Fathers will, though he also said to his Father; All thine are
mine, and I am glorified in them, and all things that the Father has, are
mine. Then might Christ in the Garden pray, that the cup of eternal
malediction deserved by our sins might pass from him and his, though he
submitted himself and his members to drink of the cup of Gods wrath so much
as should please his heavenly Father; which he was assured in regard of his
prayer should be no more than he and his should well endure.

Defenc. page 99 li. 16.
All this is nothing else in effect then your first cause, his submission to
Gods majesty sitting in judgment. wherefore you might have lessened your
number, and so your answer to this might have been the same, which is made to
your foremost.] Your conceit is not so current, that I should pare my number
for your pleasure. Christ himself says, Matthew. 22.
On these two Commandments, (thou shall love the Lord thy God, with all thine
heart, with all thy soul, and with all thy mind; and thy neighbor as thy
self) hangs the whole Law and the Prophets. Were therefore then the ten
Commandments, which God gave to Moses, superfluous, because they might be
revoked to two general contents? special parts and duties are profitablie
delivered, so long as they be any way distinguished, notwithstanding they may
be comprised in fewer, but more general branches. The work of our Redemption
was the sum of all that Christ did, said, or suffered here on earth. shall
we therefore reject the rest of the Gospel, because the substance thereof may
be expressed in a word or twain? [these you will say, are not distinct in
matter but in words.] Who told you so? The trembling at Gods glory, when it
was revealed to man's infirmity; the honoring Fear and sorrow necessary in
the sacrifice for sin.
of his sanctity with godly sorrow, which was despised with our iniquity, the
mitigating of his anger with humble and earnest prayer, which was provoked with
our contempts, were they not three different effects even in Christ himself,
and so might stir up three religious affections of fear, sorrow and prayer?
Why then should they be confounded in Christ, whose humane nature might yield
all three to God, as well in respect of piety to God, and of charity to men,
as in regard of his office for the satisfaction of our sins? for he might not
approach the presence of God as a Priest with our person and cause, who were
sinful, though he were innocent and holy, to make intercession and sacrifice
for our sins, but he must give God his due glory, have compassion on our
misery, and mediate for our safety. As therefore I see no cause to exclude
these affections and actions from the satisfaction for sin, so I see greater
reason to include them in the sacrifice for sin, except we make Christ a Priest
only by his SVFFERINGS and leave him neither any honor of OFFERING nor right
of PRAYING for us in the purgation of our sins, which were a strange kind of
Priesthood, and no way answerable to the Leuiticall in that, wherein the apostle
compares them. For in the Law the Priest was to present the sacrifice to God,
and to pray for the trespasser; which if you think needless in the true
sacrifice, that should propitiate the sins of the world, you must correct the
Apostle, that makes the Law a figure of the Gospel, though the person of the
Priest, and the price of the sacrifice far excel all that was under the Law.

Defenc. page 99. li. 20.
Furthermore, you knit in within this, four other sever all causes of Christ's
agony, as you reckon them pa. 27. First, his taking of our infirmities in his
flesh to cure them. Secondly, his breaking the knot betwixt bodily death and
hell, which none but he was able to do. Thirdly, Gods anger which might be
executed on his body, but was mitigated by him. Fourthly, the desire he had to
continue the feeling and enjoying of Gods presence with his body.] As there is
no one thing in the Scriptures, that receives and has more diverse opinions of
it, than Christ's agony in the Garden; so I proposed as many as had any
coherence with truth, and left the Reader to make his choice, which he liked
best. Howbeit, I did not page 27. reckon four several causes of Christ's
agony, as you mistake, but of the Sermon. page 27. li. 23.
fear which Christ had and showed of (his bodily) death. His agony had other
parts and affections besides fear and astonishment, as sorrow, zeal,
submissiue and intentive prayer, and a bloody sweat: the objects and ends
whereof might be as different as the things themselves. For example; Christ's
fear in the Garden might have many respects and causes as well as his sorrow.
He might fear the glory of God now sitting in judgment to receive recompense
for the sins of his elect. For as Christ himself, who best knew it,
confirms it by saying, John 12. Christ's manhood might fear the glory of
Gods judgment.
Now (at hand) is the judgment of this world, now shall the Prince of this
world be cast ont: so we must not think so mighty and weighty matters, as
the judgment of the world, and the casting out of Satan the accuser of his
brethren, and the admitting the Redeemer to present himself here on earth for
our cause to the face of God in judgment, were decreed and settled by God
without some revelation of his glory and majesty meet for those persons and
purposes. For this is a rule which may every where be observed in the
Scriptures, that when God is described as a Judge, he is said to sit in a
Throne, and all the host of heaven to stand before him, to resemble the glory
of his judgment: as we find in Daniel. 7. verse. 9, 10. Esa. 6. verse. 1, 2. 1.
Kings. 22. verse. 19. Wherefore David says, Psalm. 9. v. 7.
The Lord has prepared his throne for judgment. This Michaiah and Esaias the
Prophets say they SAW, which whether it were by sight, as Steven Act. 7 v. 55.
looked steadfastly into heaven, and (with his eyes) saw the glory of God, and
Jesus standing at the right hand of God; or in spirit, as Ezechiel waking, and
Ezech. 8.
sitting in his house with the Elders of Judah before him, was by a divine
vision brought to Jerusalem, to see all the abominations there committed; I
dare not determine. Christ himself says, I saw Satan fall down from heaven
like lightning. Which way soever Gods glory in judgment was revealed unto
Christ, and beheld of Christ in the Garden, it was able for the time of his
humility to impresse a religious fear and trembling into his humane nature,
since Christ came now by judgment to have the burden of our sins taken from
us, and laid upon him, that he might make satisfaction for them.

Another thing that Christ might justly, and yet religiously fear in the
Garden, offering now to ransom man from the wrath of God, was the POWER of
Gods wrath, H^ might fear (...) power of Go^s wrath (...) our sin which h^
was to ^eare.
which is fully infinite, and so far exceeds the strength and reach of man's
nature, that our earthly infirmity, to which Christ submitted himself for our
sakes, can not comprehend the greatness thereof, nor think on the power
thereof without fear and trembling. Psalm. 90. v. 11
Who knows (says David to God) the power of thy wrath? for according to thy
fear, (that is, as thou art feared,) so is thine anger. Contempt and
carelessenesse kindle and increase the wrath of God against us, fear and
submission assuage it. And when I name fear, I mean not a dreadful distrust
of Gods purpose toward us, which is desperation, but a persuasion and
confession of his power over us, whereby we fear to displease him, and tremble
before him withal submission, when we have displeased him. This fear Christ
teaches his disciples, when he says, I will show you, Luc. 12.
whom you shall fear; fear him, which after he has killed, has power to
cast into hell; ye^ I say, fear him: not meaning, they should firmly believe,
God would everlastingly condemn them, but that thinking on his power
prevailing here and in hell, they should beware to provoke him, and with all
humility prostrate themselves before him, when they had offended him, to
prevent his anger. [Christ (you will say) needed not thus to fear, since he
was no sinner.] For himself he needed not, because he was innocent and
obedient in all things to the uttermost: but since he was at this time now to
bear the burden of our sins in his body, and to have the chasticement of
our peace laid upon him, he might, and did justly fear the power of Gods wrath
provoked with our sins; which though he were assured could not rage on him
unto condemnation, yet God had infinite means to press and punish the humane
nature of Christ above that it was able to bear. And therefore except Christ
would contemn the wrath of his father, which were impious, he was withal
possible fear and trembling to deprecate his fathers anger against our sins,
knowing that God would at his most ardent and most suppliant prayer both pardon
us, and proportion that pain according to the weakness of our flesh which he
bare about him, that neither his obedience, nor patience should be overwhelmed
nor endangered, but only proved and tried, that in all things Christ might
show himself a pattern of perfection, as well by patience in affliction, as
by innocence of life. And this fear the more vehement in Christ, the more
pleasing to God, since it proceeded neither from infidelity nor distrust, but
from piety confessing the greatness and justness of Gods anger against our
wickedness and unworthiness, and from charity putting his holy and
harmless person in the gappe between us and God, least the wrathful
displeasure of God lighting on us should utterly consume us.

A third cause concurring with the rest of Christ's fears in the Garden,
against Christ might fear the sting of death as horrible to man's nature.
which he prayed, might be the natural abhorring of death, which his manhood
then had and showed in private, because he neither despised that punishment of
God laid upon our sin; which indeed is and ought to be displeasant to man's
nature; in that it was inflicted on us for disobedience; neither would he
suffer his soul or flesh to struggle and strive with death (as ours do when
sense and life begins to fail) in the eyes of his persecutors, to whom by
the present and quiet breathing out of his soul in their sight, he would
declare himself to be the disposer and ruler of death; and so more then a man,
though as a man he were content to die for our sakes. And this kind of fear
very learned and well read Divines agree might be the cause of Christ's
prayer in the garden, to have the Cup pass from him; not that he was then
amazed, and in that astonishment prayed against the known will of God, as you
imagine, and on that foundation build your conceit of hell pains to be then
suffered in the soul of Christ, which you think excluded both reason and
memory from Christ: but that he therein accorded with his fathers will, who
would have that Cup hateful and horrible by nature, though faith and
obedience should ouerrule the fear and sting of death in our flesh, and Gods
will be preferred before the natural dislike, which he would have us to feel
of death. Zanchius de tribus (...) part. 2. li. 3. cap 9.
As touching Christ's divine Nature (says Zanchius) there was always one and
the same will of the Father and the Son concerning his death and passion. Yea
as Christ was man, he was always obedient to his Father, and therefore he
said; I always do the things, which please him. What meaning then has, Quod
deprecatur mortem and calicem, that he prays to be freed from death, and from
the Cup? Naturaliter, qua homo, expauescebat, and exhorrescebat, fugiebatque
mortem, Naturally as a man Christ feared, abhorred, and shunned death, and his
natural horror of death he called his will, when he said, Not my will be done,
to wit, this natural will which I have as a man. Yet neither does this will
of Christ resist his Fathers will. for the Father would have Christ to be like
us in all things sin excepted, and to that end would have him made Man.
Therefore when Christ did naturally shun and desire to escape death, he did
not contradict his Fathers will, because the Father would have this (natural)
horror and fear (of death) to be in Christ, as a punishment of our sins.
Wherefore it is altogether false, that Christ's will in this was diverse from
his Fathers will. For we have concluded, that this natural horror of death,
which Christ called his will, was not repugnant to the will of his Father,
whereby he would have Christ subject to this horror. If in respect of the same
end the Father had been willing Christ should die, and Christ had been
unwilling, or had never so little refused, then their wills had been indeed
repugnant. But in reference to the same end, that is to our salvation, Christ
always had the same will that his Father had. For in regard of our salvation
Christ's will was ever the same, and constant: but in respect of his humane
Nature he never put off this affection, wherein he was like us, and whereby we
naturally fly death. By the judgment of this learned writer the variety of
wills in Christ, the one naturally shunning death, as in a man like us, the
other accepting and desiring it for our salvation, was no contrariety either
in it self, or to the will of God; but God himself would have the sting of
our common and usual death to be grievous unto him, because it was the
punishment of our sin in Adam, and yet obedience to counteruaile that
natural detestation of death, when God for his glory calls us to that
trial, as he did his Son in that case.

The like limitations of Christ's prayer in the Garden (if it were possible let
this cup pass from me) other ancient writers delivered before Zanchius, who
observe this express condition out of Christ's prayer, That if it were
possible to stand with Gods will and our salvation, then Christ prayed the
cup might pass from him, and not otherwise. Orig. in Math. tract. 35.
Christ taking unto him (says Origin) the nature of man's flesh, retained all
the properties thereof: according to which he prayed in this place, the cup
might pass from him. It is the property of every faithful man first to be
unwilling to suffer any pain, specially that tends to death, because he is a
man, and has flesh; but if God so will, then to be content even against that
will of his own, because he is faithful. There is also another Exposition of
this place, which is this: If it be possible, that all those good things may
come to effect without my passion, which otherwise shall come by my death, then
let this passion pass from me, that both the world may be saved, and the Jews
not perish by putting me to death. So Bid: Be^a in 14. ca. (...).
If death may die without my death in the flesh, let this cup (says Christ)
pass from me, but because this will not otherwise be, thy will be done, not
mine. And Euthymius: Euthymius in Matthew. cap. 26.
As a man Christ said, If it be possible, that is, so far as is possible. And
in saying, Yet not as I will, but as thou will; he teaches, that we must
follow the will of God, though nature reclaim. So that the preferring of Gods
will before the desire of his own nature, and the limiting of his prayer with
this condition, If it were possible (not to Gods power, but to Gods purpose) to
save the world without his death, then he desired the cup might pass from
him; prove apparently, that Christ was not only well advised in that prayer,
but he meant to teach us, that neither the power of his enemies did oppress
his weakness, nor his own love lead him to a needless death; it was rather
Gods determined and irreuocable counsel and will, that he must die, or we must
perish. By which we learn not Christ's inconstancy, as of a man amazed, but
an excellent mystery of Christian religion, that no sacrifice could take away
sin, but only The intent of Christ's prayer in the garden.
the death of Christ on the cross, which he for our sakes earnestly desired,
though by his thrice declining it, if we might possibly be otherwise saved, he
showed how painful and grievous that suffering would be unto him. We are
therefore by the one to collect, how intolerable that cup would be to his
flesh; and by the other, to behold his ardent love to us, and willing
obedience to his Father: which things, if in your conceit they conclude Christ
to have been therein amazed, I shall conjecture, that your wits are not to
this hour yet well recovered; since greater piety and charity could not be
showed in that infirmity, wherewith Christ was then compassed, and acerbitie
of pains to come, which he did not dissemble. Now let us hear how you impugn
this.

Defenc. page 99. li. 26.
The first of these (four) makes in my mind much for us. For understanding
that Christ took all the infirmities and passions whereto men's nature is
subject, to the end he might cure all and every kind of them in us; then it
follows, that he wanted not the pains and immediate sufferings of pains
inflicted by Gods own hand in his soul.] It is but your mind that makes so
much for you, your collection is otherwise as wide from reason and truth, as
any may be. For what if Christ taking our nature unto him took therewith all
our infirmities and affections, (which you cunningly call passions, a word
indifferent to affections and sufferings) does that infer that he took unto
him the pains of the damned, because man's nature through the hardness of his
impenitent heart is subject after this life by Gods just judgment to
everlasting damnation for sin? are your eyes so ill matches that you cannot
discern betwixt natural affections cleaving to all men from their birth, and
the real suffering of hell pains inflicted, as you defend, by Gods immediate
hand on the souls of the faithful here in this life, which in deed are
reserved for the wicked in another world, and are sometimes feared of the godly
here on earth, when the conscience of their sin through want of faith calls
Gods favor in question with their own hearts? first prove, that all the godly
have the pains of the damned inflicted here in this life on their souls by the
immediate hand of God; (for nature is not proper nor private to this or that
man, but common and constant to all men) and next, that notwithstanding your
hell pains thus suffered, they are in constant and perfect faith and assurance
of Gods favor and his heavenly kingdom; and then you have some pretense for
your purpose, which now is none. For touching the first I appeal not only to
the Scriptures, which teach no such thing; but to the consciences and
experiences of all the faithful, whether this can have any truth in it, that
the true pains of the damned are really inflicted on all their souls here on
earth by Gods immediate hand. And secondly, when they feel any fear of Gods
wrath, or doubt of Gods favor; whether that come not through the failing and
shrincking of their faith, which, pressed often with the number of their
sins, fears least God will visit their offenses with a mercielesse
judgment, because they have so greatly provoked him. The fear of hell may
justly make them quake and tremble, which they acknowledge they have worthily
deserved, and the same terror does often, though not always, pursue the
wicked unto desperation: but other torments of hell actually inflicted by Gods
own hand on the souls of all the faithful, as the Scriptures deliver none,
so you shall not be able to prove any common to all mankind, though God want
not power to punish where and as pleases him. If therefore you speak of
natural affections, they were common to Christ with us, but in us excessive
upon every occasion, which in him were moderate, till they were inflamed with
piety or charity, and then they burned more in him then in us, by reason of
his abundant gifts and graces far passing ours. But if you talk of some
secret speculations private to your self, and some others of your sort, that
dream perchance of hell pains both night and day according to your own
fancies, then no words of mine, nor of any ancient father come near those
devices of yours, which are known to no man either by reading or feeling, but
to such conceiters as you are, if happily you do not belie, or deceive your
own hearts.

Defenc. page 99. li. 37.
This your authors here do fully affirm; Cyrill, Ambrose and others, as
before we have observed.] Mine authors there are easily read, and if any such
thing be there mentioned, or thence to be concluded, I am content you shall be
thought to speak some truth, which is almost a marvel in you, you wrie all
things so absurdly to your senseless fancies. Of your fourth argument, and of
these authors I have largely delivered, what I take to be true, even in the
place, where you produced them to this purpose. And so I leave this as lately
refuted, lest I lengthen the volume to much.

Defenc. page 100. li. 1.
It is most unreasonable, which here you do, (if you do as you seem) to
understand them of mere bodily death, and of the infirmities meerelie of his
flesh.] Show that they name, or intend any other death, then the death of
Christ's body on the cross, or else your otherwise conceauing them without any
words of theirs is a plain perverting them, to pull them to your part. Of
infirmities when they speak, they mean natural, such as were no derogations
to faith, nor hope, nor to any other the graces of Gods spirit in Christ, and
in them all Christ was like unto us, whether they were infirmities of body or
soul. Whether fear and sorrow be infirmities merely of the flesh, is a doubt
fit for Fear may be intellectiu^ or sensitive.
your discussing; they may be sensitive or intellectiue according to their
objects; and in Christ, since they were caused by things rather foreseen then
felt, or at least by dangers and doubts weighed and considered by the spirit of
Christ, I know no reason why you ascribe them merely to the flesh. As for the
contrarieties, which you would take hold of, that Christ as a man did abhor
and fear death, and yet not so much as to fall into that agony or bloody sweat
for fear of his sufferings; with such a slack and shallow Reader, as you are,
they may bear a show of repugnancie; but to any man, that marketh or
understands what is said, it accords full well, that Christ might have a
natural fear of death, which is common to all the godly; and yet no such
perplexed fear for any sufferings of his, as to sweat blood for pain thereof.
And this makes more against you, then you will seem to acknowledge. For if
Christ had no such afflicting fear in regard of his own suffering or passion,
but only in respect of us and our danger, then certainly by the censure of
Ambrose, Ierom, and Bid, Christ suffered no pains of hell, nor of the damned,
since they would bread another manner of agony, then this life could endure. And
howsoever the view of death fast clasped with hell, till Christ did break the
knotte thereof, might seem terrible to Christ's humane consideration; yet for
so much, as he was secured from the one by the innocence, unity, and dignity of
his person, though he submitted himself to the death of his body; this fear
was both righteous and religious, and as far from the pains of the damned,
as any sufferings of the soul in this life might be.

Defenc. page 100. li. 10.
He would not, he could not so fear and be affrighted, yea and piteously
astonished with such sorrow oppressing him, as to sweat drops of blood only
for fear of his bodily death; Neither would he pray at all, much less so
vehemently, and so often times as he did, against that which he perfectly knew
was Gods will, and his own most willing purpose to undergo.] It is more then
folly to mistake, misplace, and misapplie every thing after this sort as you
do; and then to collect you know not what, nor why, from your own unwise and
rash presumptions. What if Christ had more cause of sorrow in the Garden, then
his bodily death? ergo he felt the pains of the damned inflicted on his Soul
by Gods immediate hand. Tie this argument to the manger, litter is fitter for
it, then an answer. Such blockish and brutish sequences were the first mortar
that plastred your hell pains to Christ's passion. The work of our redemption,
which Christ now undertook to have pronounced and settled by the righteous
judgment of God, and his Elect to be freed, and pardoned of all their sins
by the sufferings of his person, The work of our redemption was cause enough
to provoke Christ's bloody sweat.
and to be restored to Gods favor by his mediation, as also satan to be
rejected from prevailing against them, or so much as accusing them; was a
matter of the greatest moment in all Christian Religion. What marvel then, if
the manhood of Christ, when it approached so weighty a work, as by prayer
first to obtain and confirm all this, that after he might the more
cheerfully and constantly accomplish his obedience unto death; What marvel I
say, if the glory of Gods judgment, and power of his wrath, the number of our
sins, and neglect of our own state; the sharp and eger malice of satan made
Christ with all possible fear of the great might and majesty of the Judge,
all passionate sorrow for the crimes and contempts of the prisoners, all
earnest and zealous intention of prayer against the impugner and impediment of
man's deliverance, to agonize himself even unto a bloody sweat? If in our
prayers the spirit of Christ stir up Romans 8.
sighs unspeakable, when we remember what danger we were in; what sorrow,
cries, and tears may we justly think, the fountain of mercy and piety
would power forth in our behalf, when our salvation was now in question before
the Judge of all the world, and how burned that fire and flame of Christ's love
and care for us, till he was comforted and assured from heaven, that God would
not by our wickedness or unworthiness be stayed from performing his mercies
toward us, in Christ his Son, nor from accepting Christ's obedience and
sacrifice as the full ransom for all our transgressions notwithstanding all
the resistance that sin or satan could make in the righteous judgment of God?

This, you will say, God long before had purposed and promised unto his Son.]
Christ was most earnestly to ask what God had faithfully promised to grant.
And that made Christ the more earnestly pray for it, since God had from the
beginning determined, as well to have it asked by his Son, as granted by
himself. And therefore Christ's supplications for us in the days of his flesh,
and at the hour of his passion now approaching, were as needful as his
sufferings, for so much as piety and charity are perceived rather by the Soul,
then by the flesh; and God would never have accepted the outward murdering of
Christ's body without the inward and acceptable sacrifice of his voluntary
obedience, patience and love even unto death which were the points, that were
chieflly precious in Gods sight.

Defenc page 100. li. 19.
Or else Cyrill means no more, but that Christ naturally misliked and (...),
(even as all flesh does,) all bodily pain and death. This we always yield,
and it makes nothing against us.] It makes less for you, that Christ had and
lawfully might have, as you grant, a natural misliking and shunning of all
bodily pain and death: and consequently knowing the sharpness of the pain,
that was prepared for him on the cross, might without breach of piety, or
repugnance to Gods known will desire to have that Cup pass from him, if it
were possible for man by Gods good pleasure to be otherwise redeemed and saved.
And this reservation of Gods will in his prayer, FATHER (...) Luke ^2.
IF THOU VVILT, take away this Cup from me, which was the possibility meant by
Christ, and his present preferring Gods will before the instinct of nature
liking ease, in presently saying, Nevertheless not my will but thy will be
done; does exquisitely prove that Christ was not astonished in his prayer, nor
past remembrance of Gods known will, as you dangerously surmise: and no cause
you should conclude he felt hell pains in this agony, because the Scripture
concealeth the sense of his fervent supplication, when after comfort received
from heaven he fell into an agony of most earnest and ardent prayer, in which
his sweat was like drops of blood. And therefore your foolish and wicked
imagination, that Christ in his agoni^ was so amazed, that he knew not what he
prayed, nor discerned when he impugned the will of God, is without all leading
or likelihood of the word of God, and grounded only upon your wilful and
hasty humor, when the Scriptures, and fathers precisely conclude the
contrary.

Defenc. (...). 100. li. 27.
Therefore I conclude, he thus feared not his bodily death, but it was the
pains of the second death which he felt and so feared.] This conclusion may
well be yours, it rightly resembles the Maker. Christ feared somewhat, and not
his bodily death; ergo he felt the second death, which the Scripture says is
the lake Re^el. 21.
that burns with fire and brimstone. So many gappes in one conclusion would
no man make besides you. For first, how prove you, that fear was the cause of
his bloody sweat? If it were natural; fear, which quenches the spirits, and
cools the blood, could not procure a bloody sweat. If it were supernatural
and mystical, (as Hilarie, Austen, Prosper, Bid and Bernard observe) then can
you conclude no cause thereof, but must leave it as a secret and wonderful
effect of Christ's power and will known to God, and unknown to man. Secondly,
if we grant ^eare might be the cause thereof; the fear of Gods power infinitely
able to punish the sin of man on the person of Christ without the pains of
the damned, might justly strike the Manhood of Christ with any terror that
man's nature was capable of, without the loss of grace and faith. For fear
does not always apprehend what danger is toward, but only that some danger
above our reach or strength is imminent over us. Thirdly, if fear of what you
will, were the cause of this agony, it is no way consequent, that that which
Christ feared, was really inflicted on him; since fear is of future, not of
present eui^l; and the Apostle bears witness in this case, that Christ was
heard (or freed) Heb. 5.
from that he feared. Fourthly, how many things Christ would or did obtain of
his Father for us by his sufferings, so many things might concur as causes of
this inflamed prayer, whence (...) by order of the Evangelists narration, this
bloody sweat. So that there being four^ maine exceptions against your
collection, whereof you shall never avoid any one, you soaring aloft and
stooping to nothing but your own dreams, light just on your hell pains, not
because the Scriptures make any such mention, but because that best pleases
your humor. And this is the very closet of your cause, and pride of your
proofs touching hell pains suffered in the Soul of Christ: Neword, ne letter
of Scripture to warrant it, but as you wrested Paul's wish to four notable
untruths, so you sweep up Christ's sweat to make perfect your Pageant, that
from things obscure, unknown and doubted with all men, as touching the precise
and particular cause thereof, you may resolve what you list, and ti^ your
Conclusions with cart-ropes of vanity and falsitie.

Defen^ page 100. (...). 28.
But you say, (page 26. you should put 25.) the sorrow and fear of death,
which it pleased our Savior to feel in o^r nature came not for want of
strength, but of purpose to quench and abolish those affections in us. I say it
came from both.] And I say you do not only rashly cross Saint Austen in that
Negative, but you know not what you say. For the question is not, whether fear
and sorrow be infirmities, which is your wise conceit; but whether Christ
admitted them by his power and will, or by constraint and necessity, which
Saint Austen there calls infirmity, and I named want of strength. His words
a man would think are so resolute, that without better ground then you have
any, a sober Divine would not so proudly confront them. August. in Iohannem
tract. 60.
Non est (...) (...) dubitandum, non ^um (...) infirmitate, sed (...) turbatum.
It is by no means to be doubted, that Christ was troubled, not for any
weakness of mind, but of (his own) power. What says your wisdom to this?
Austen means not only by infirmity, but also by his own will and power.]
Coherent and different things may be thus coupled together, because both may be
true; and diverse respects may reconcile contraries: but in one and the same
sentence and sense to harle priuations and positions whereof the one excludes
the other, as you do, is to make no construction, but a contradiction in Saint
Austens words. As if a man should say, this answer of yours is not only
foolish, but also wise; not only unlearned, but also learned; we^e it not
ridiculous? And yet you knit Saint Austens words together in that sort, where
if the one be true, the other is false. For if Christ were troubled by
infirmity and necessity, then was he not by his power and will, as Austen
avouches he was. Wherefore you hit Saint Austens meaning as rightly, as if a
man should post to London Bridge with his back toward it. [ or else you
confute him your self.] as how? because I say with Austen, Christ admits
these affections and infirmities of man's nature, not for want of power to
repres^e them, but by volun^arie obedience and humility, that in him they
might be meritorious. Then how these affections prevailed on Christ's Soul, is
the Question; whether by necessity, Christ not being able to resist them, or
moderate them, which is the weakness of man's nature; or by his own
submission, when he would, as he would, and to what end he would.

August. in Iohannem tract. 49.
Thou art troubled, says Austen, against thy will; Christ was troubled because
he would. In illius potestate erat sic vel sic ^ffici, vel non affici. It was
in his power to be affected thus, or thus, or not to be affected. Where there
is sovereign power, there infirmity is governed according to the direction of
the will. He must be ruler and commander of nature by his power, that was not
troubled with any affections or infirmities but according to the liking of his
own will. So was it in Christ. August. ibidem tract. 60.
Non ^rgo est aliquo cogente turbatus. Affectum quippe humanum, quando
oportuisse iudicauit, in seipso potestate commouit. Christ was not troubled by
the compulsion of any. For when he thought it needful, he did stir in
himself by his own power humane affections. If to raise fear and sorrow
within himself, when he would, were power above nature, and no humane
infirmity; as also to appoint how far they should prevail in him; what was
it then by the power of these affections in him, to repress and temper all our
infirmities and affections, and to endue us with heavenly grace and courage to
resist and restrain the excess of those affections in our weak natures? was
it power, or infirmity in Christ thus to work, either in himself, or in us?
It was power no doubt in Christ to limit the time, degree and force of those
affections, which his will would admit; and in all these things the less
necessity of nature urged him; the more acceptable was his obedience unto God,
that would voluntarily subject himself to our miseries, pains and
afflictions. I then neither do, nor need deny, that our natural infirmities
were common to Christ with us, but those were voluntarily received in him
August. de trinitate li. 4. cap. ^3.
quia voluit, quando voluit, quomodo voluit; because he would, when he would,
and as he would, even as Austen says of his death. And though it be most true,
which the Apostle writes of Christ; 2. Cor. 13.
He was crucified through (or as touching his) infirmity which was the flesh
of man in him; yet Saint Austens exposition of those words is right good, where
he says, Ibid. lib. 13. cap. 14.
de qua infirmitate ait Apostolus, quod infirmum est dei, fortius est
hominibus; even of that (...) (wherein Christ was crucified) the Apostle also
says, the weakness of God is stronger then men. What seemed weakness in
Christ, and is so called in the Scriptures in comparison of his divine power,
even that far passes the power and strength of men; and therefore the same
Apostle calls 1. Cor. 1.
Christ crucified the wisdom, and power of God.

Defenc. page 101., li. 9.
Feign you would wipe away that Argument of ours, which sticks nearer to you
then you will seem. In malefactors there is a quiet and contented suffering
of most exquisite and extraordinary torments often times, which they endure
only by (...) natural strength and courage of mind. How much more likely is
it then, that Christ the very Rock of all strength and fountain of patience
would not thus seem affrighted and astonished, for his mere bodily death, and
that before it came unto him?] Your brablement is more tedious to me, then your
Argument troublesome. You spend here a whole leaf to show that Malefactors and
Martyrs often suffer most horrible torments very quietly and altogether without
any such agony, as Christ showed in the Garden. How makes that against me,
who teach out of Hilarie, Ambrose, Ierom and Bid, that Christ was not thus
agonized for any sufferings of his own, much less for fear of a bodily
death; though he would be like us in having a natural horror of death, as
Athanasius, Austen, Cyrill and Damascene affirm? What wandering and trifling
is this, to be loquent in things superfluous, and silent in matters most
serious? The whole work and weight of our redemption was now before Christ's
eyes and apprehension in more exact and lively manner, (he now appearing before
the judgment seat of God) then we in this body can discern or describe. For
as all things needful shall be present and patent to us, when we are brought
to Gods Tribunal, where no truth of things without us, or within us, which
concern us, shall be covered or concealed from us; so Christ presenting
himself before the judgment of God to have Man redeemed by the ransom, which
he would yield for him, and satan eiected from preuayling against his members
by his mediation, did perfectly and fully behold both the detestation, that
Gods holiness had of all our sins, and the power of his wrath provoked by
our defection and rebellion; as also the dreadful vengeance prepared and
ordained for sin, and our dull and careless contempt of our own misery,
together with the watchfulness and egernesse of the Adversary; the brunt and
burden of all which he must receive, and auert from us by that kind of
satisfaction and recompense, which the justice of God should then require at
his hands. None of those things might be hid from Christ's present and perfect
view, when he came now to perform that, which the judgment of God should
think a just price and full recompense for the sins of men. The due
consideration, contemplation, intuition and apprehension whereof being in
Christ more clear, then we can conceive, might worthily make the Manhood of
Christ not only fear and tremble, but in his prayers to God to stir and
inflame all the powers and parts of body and Soul, as far as man's nature and
spirit were able, with all submission, intention and deprecation possible to
power forth themselves before God. These you push away not as false, but as
parts of Christ's holiness; as if any fear or sorrow could be in Christ, which
were not religious and holy; and substitute other sufferings of the damned; as
the second death, and the true pains of hell from the immediate hand of God,
deuiced by your self without any direction of the Scriptures; and those you
dream Christ not only feared, but really felt in the Garden, otherwise he
could not sorrow and sweat as he did.

And because you would seem to say somewhat, though little to the purpose, and
less against me, who avouch no such thing; you heap up here malefactors,
murderers and thieves, besides martyrs, who never sweat blood for any bodily
torments inflicted on them. Grant all this, though there be differences, which
yet you see not, what infer you? That Christ did not thus sweat for his
bodily death. What then? Ergo he suffered in the Garden the death of the
damned, and the true pains of hell? This conclusion hangs to the premises
with hay-ropes, you wind it which way you will, and then you say, I would
feign wipe it off. But to me that neither say, nor said any such thing, that
Christ was thus agonized only for fear of his mere bodily death, these be
rather wildgoose-races, then sober men's reasons impugning any thing that I did
or do defend.

And yet your comparisons be not so current, as you conceive them. For though
murderers or malefactors for obstinacy or stupiditie, and martyrs for
constancy may despise the torments, which they suffer, so long as strength of
desperate malice in the one, or of heavenly grace in the other resists or
endures the pain; yet when nature is subdued and conquered by pain, that the
soul must yield to death and depart, then can no man express, nor ever could
any man declare, what conflicts of fear and horror the soul has with death
and in death. Only Christ, who on the Cross did voluntarily and instantly
breath out his soul with all quietness contrary to the course of man's
nature, might before hand show in himself, if it pleased him, the anguish and
agony, which naturally the soul has in her struggling with death, and
fainting under death, and which God had impressed on man's nature at the time of
the departure of the soul from the body, in remembrance and resemblance of
Gods displeasure against sin, when by his mighty power he severed the soul
and spirit of man asunder, to give way to death for the revenge of the first
man's disobedience in all his offspring. I speak not this, as if there were none
other causes, that might be of Christ's agony, but to show that your
comparisons, which you take to be so strong, are worse then weak, since the
souls both of Martyrs and Malefactors have a natural terror and horror of
death impressed in them by Gods power and will, though whiles strength and
memory dure, they may be so confirmed in their good or evil purposes, that
they do not yield so long, as they can make resistance. This natural horror
of death, which man's soul has impressed in her by Gods own doing, if Christ
would admit in the Garden privately before his Father, as obedient to his
ordinance, not openly before his enemies, to whom he would show nothing but
patience and constance above all malefactors and martyrs, what force have your
examples to refute this, since Christ voluntarily showed that in the Garden,
which the souls of all men naturally do, when the fear or force of death
falls on them? Petri Martyris loci communes class. 2. loco. 1. sect. 51.
Omnes pij statuunt in morte ir^ diuinae sensum esse, ideoque sua natura
dolorem and horrorem incutit. quod and Christus ipse, dum or aret in horto, and
alij multi sancti viri declarauerunt. All the godly (says Peter Martyr)
resolve there is a sense of Gods wrath in (bodily) death, and therefore by the
nature thereof it strikes a fear and terror (into us) which Christ himself,
when he prayed in the Garden, and many other holy men have declared.

To let you farther see, that your Malefactors and Martyrs do not prove, that
Christ might not show himself afraid of death in the Garden, though in
patience and constancy he exceeded all mankind, when he came to the present
feeling of his pains, you shall hear the judgment of S. Austen affirming,
that Christ by this voluntary Christ would be like the weak to comfort the
weak.
fear would of mercy conform himself to his weak members for their
comfort, lest they should despair when they feel the fear of death
oppressing them. August. in Iohannem tract. 60.
Firmissimi quidem Christiani, si qui sunt, qui nequaquam morte imminente
turbantur. Sed numquid Christo fortiores? Quis hoc insanissimus dixerit? Quid
est ergo, quod ille turbatus est, nisi quia infirmos in suo corpore, hoc est,
in sua Ecclesia su^ infirmitatis voluntaria similitudine consolatus est, etc.
They are indeed most settled Christians, if there be any such, which are not
troubled when death approaches: But are they stronger than Christ? Who will so
say, though he were never so mad? What is it then that Christ was troubled
(therewith) but because by the voluntary show of his weakness he did comfort
those that were weak in his body, which is his Church: that if any of his
were troubled with the approaching of death, they should in spirit behold him,
lest thinking themselves by this (fearfulness) to be reprobates, they should
be swallowed up with a worse death of desperation? And elsewhere with
admiration of Christ's goodness for this very cause; Idem in Iohannem tract.
52.
O Lord (says he) God above us, Man for us, I acknowledge thy mercy; for in
that thou being so great, would of thy love be voluntarily troubled (by
Ibidem.
taking the affection of thy members) thou do comfort many in thy body (the
Church) which are necessarily troubled with this their infirmity, lest by
despairing they should perish. So that neither of these ways Martyrs nor
Malefactors are stronger than Christ, though he feared death, which you
imagine they do not: but Christ either in respect of his Fathers ordinance
against sin showed that conflict with death in himself, which the souls of
all men have naturally, be they Martyrs or Malefactors, before they depart
their bodies; or else of mercy toward us he would voluntarily assume our
weakness in the Garden, lest we should despair, when we feel the stroke and
terror of death, as by his example on the cross he led us to immooueable
patience and confidence in all our afflictions.

Some Malefactors (you say) despise death, and often smile in their torments.]
Being hardened in their sins, and obstinate against God, they may have either
stupefaction of sense by Satan's means, to encourage others to the like
wickedness by their contempt of death; or else obduration in their mischief,
till the time of repentance be past; but their souls, that so stiffly contemn
Gods judgments, have another manner of terror before they forsake their bodies,
when indeed it is too late for want of sense and memory to call for grace. And
the Martyrs themselves, as all good Christians that are resolved not only
quietly to suffer, but to desire death, that they may be with Christ, are by
Gods grace preserved in that mind so long as understanding and faith prevail;
but when the powers of the soul are overwhelmed by the violent pains and
pangues of death, she is by Gods ordinance in all mankind, and even in the All
feel the sting of death which Christ expressed before (...) aied.
faithful suffered to feel the touch and sting of bodily death, which is
fully known to none, but to God that ordained it, and to herself that feels
it; though this agony of death be shortened or succored, as pleases God of
his mercy to dispose in every man: and in Gods elect this anguish, though it
be very sharp for the time, turns to their good and his glory; God
supporting and comforting the souls of his Saints with hope of a better life.
Your reasons therefore are all idle and impertinent, which you draw from the
patience of Martyrs, or stiffness of Malefactors. For admitting all that to be
true, which Martyrs by grace, and Malefactors of pertinacie perform in their
torments, whiles strength and memory serve them, yet have they both their
conflicts with death, when they can neither speak nor express what they
feel, and malefactors a most fearful confusion, when repentance being past,
which they neglected, their souls are now suffered to see the terrors and
torments of hell, into which they shall presently depart. And this natural
anguish of death, which assaulteth all men, when the soul feels the
strangeness and bitterness of her divorce from the body, Christ might
purposely ^uffer to arise in himself in the Garden, that tasting it with
perfect sense and memory, he might sustain it with greater patience and
obedience (though it were very painful) than all mankind besides.

Defenc. page 101. li. 20.
All your answer is, malefactors are no fit comparison for the son of God:
for they are desperate not having any fear or care of God, till they feel the
force of his wrath in hell fire. What an answer is this?] The answer is
^itter and fuller, then your wit serves you to understand, or your learning to
refute. For this ignorant or desperate contempt of Gods judgment, which you
allege in malefactors, Christ might not follow; since he rightly discerned,
and religiously feared Gods displeasure against sin even in the death
inflicted on the body of man. So that Christ showed an humble regard of Gods
punishment with due fear and sorrow, which impenitent Thieves and murderers
neglect till it be to late; and yet when he came to the very suffering of death
on the Cross, his silence and patience far exceeded both malefactors and
martyrs. The cause of your error is this, that you ascribe that to weakness of
heart and want of strength in Christ, which he of humility to God and mercy
to his members voluntarily admitted in himself to comfort and strengthen the
weak, which are not able to imitate his perfection of patience on the cross.
Leo de Passione Domini sermon. 7.
In our baseness (says Leo) Christ was despised, he sorowed in our
heaviness, and was crucified in our pain. For of mercy he took unto him the
passion of our mortality to this end, that he might heal it, and his power
admitted it, that he might conquer it. All things in him were full of
mysteries and full of miracles. Bernard sermon.
Agnosco plane in duce belli (...) trepidationem, agnosco agroti vocem in
medico, agnosco infirmantem gallinam cum pullis: confidero charitatem, stupeo
miserationem, 1. de S. (...).
expauesco dignationem: I plainly see (says Bernard citing Christ's prayer in
the garden) in the captain of the field the fear of weakelings, I see in the
Physician the voice of the sick, I see the hen weak with cherishing her young
ones: I consider the love (of Christ) I am even amazed at his mercy, and I
tremble to see what he voutchsafed (for us.)

Defenc. page 102 li. 1^.
To leave these and come to the patience of Martyrs in their sufferings. It is
admirable what joy, what peace, what triumph they show in the midst of a
thousand most strange and bucherly torments, noe less, if not greater in
outward show then the sufferings of our Savior Christ.] It is far more
admirable in our savior Christ, that he would be weak for As Christ would be
weak to comfort the weak in the Garden, so was be stronger than the strongest
on the Cross.
their sakes, that were weak, when it pleased him before his passion, and
strong for their example, whom he would make strong, when he came to the height
of his sufferings; and by either as well weakness as strength, teach us in
both to depend on him, and not to exalt our selves against him or before him, as
you do Martyrs with your manifold terms and torments. And have not Martyrs
think you, before they depart this life, as great conflicts with the pains
and horror of death, as Christ had any, though the wisdom of God reserve the
natural sting of death till the soul fecle her bodily senses and powers
overwhelmed, and her self violently forced to forsake her seat, in which case
she would utterly faint, if she were not supported by the secret goodness of
God, and taken from that conflict in her body by the hands of Angels to be
brought with joy to the presence of God? Cyprianus de Passione Domini.
That fear of Christ's (in the garden says Cyprian) expressed the common
affection of man's infirmity; and the generality of all men that live in the
flesh, to be urged with this sorrow, and that the dissolution of the soul and
the body cannot want this grief. Martyrs you suppose want this grief, or
willingly endure it, but you are deceived in either of these as in all things
else. August in Iohannem tract. 123.
Si nulla esset mortis, vel parua molestia, non esset tam magna martyrum
gloria. If there were no pain, or but small pain in death, the glory of
martyrs would not be so great, says Austen. And again. (...) de ciuitate
(...). li. 13. ca. 11.
Tam mol^sta (mors) est, vt nulla explicari locutione possit, nec vlla ratione
vitari. So pairfull is death, that it can by no words be expressed, nor by no
means avoided. Bernard. de (...) (...) and (...) (...) (...).
Quid horribilius morte? in morte tam dulce carnis and animae vinculum
amarissimo secandum erit diuortio. What is more horrible (says Bernard) then
death? in death the union of body and soul, which is so sweet, shall be severed
with a most bitter divorce. But martyrs you think are willing to endure it;
they find as much unwillingness in nature, as they fiind readiness in faith,
or desire in hope; save that in them necessity works obedience. August. de
(...). (...). sermon 32.
mortem horret non opinio sed natura. It is nature (says Austen) not opinion,
that abhors death. Quis enim vult mori? prorsus nemo, and it a nemo, vt
beato Petro diceretur, alter te cinget and feret Ibidem sermon. 33.
quo tu non vis. Who will die by his will? utterly no man, and so certainly no
man, that it was said (by Christ) to Peter, another shall gird thee and lead
thee whither thou would not, when he went even to martyrdom. Death
therefore by Gods ordinance has in it a sting repugnant to man's nature, which
all men, even martyrs themselves do feel, and when the pain is so great, that
it passes both their strength and their patience, the force thereof seuereth
their souls from their bodies; albeit in Gods Elect all things turn to their
good, this agony of death not excepted, in which God supporteth them whiles
they have sense, that they despair not, and after some conflict with death,
takes their souls from them, now joyful that they are delivered, and shall
be presented to the Throne of Grace. This Christ alone of all men was able
exactly to know and feel in himself before and without the pangues of death;
not that he was weaker than Martyrs, but that all the godly might assure
themselves he tasted even the sharpness of death, to which they are subject,
and is able and willing to sustain us, and save us in the natural conflict
and horror of death, as he did himself.

Defenc. page 103. h. 2.
All this other godly men do also suffer and feel, which they take passing
joyfully and quietly.] Who told you that there is joy and rest in the pangues
of death? Have the gates Job. 38.
of death been opened to you? or has any of the dead certified you, what
(...) there is in ^euering the soul from the body? Did God punish Adams
disobedience with joy Martyrs (...) joy (...) (...) death, but not in death.
and ease? or does nature abhor pleasure? True it is, the godly ought not to
be dismayed with the fear of death, since it is God that wounds and heals,
kills and quickens, brings to hell and brings back again; but they
must acknowledge death to be Gods punishment on Adams sin, and the
straightest gate, that leads to heaven. (...) de (...) (...).
This punishment (says Cyprian) was laid on all Adams offspring without
exception, that the difficulty of the last passage (out of this life) should
be feared. Hanc nemo anxietatem euasit, and nemo egrediente anima sine
amaritudine expirauit. This grief n^ man has ever escaped, nor any ever
breathed out his soul without bitterness. And Martyrs no doubt do, or should
privately in their prayers to God, see the sharpness of death in respect of
their strength, and confess the justness of this punishment laid on all men
for sin; and so with all religious fear and most earnest prayer to God for
his assistance and defense against the terror of death, approach their ends;
though the cause for which they die should comfort them, and make them
cheerful in the eyes of all their adversaries, when they have first given God
his due, and reposed themselves on his heavenly protection. Even so did Christ
teach us by his example, who to his Father in the Garden confessed the natural
horror of death, which he would feel, and felt for our sakes; and after to his
persecutours showed no such thing, but readily met them, willingly offered
himself to them, and patiently endured whatsoever pain they heaped on him.
Cyprianus de Passione Domini.
Latens in humanitate omnipotentiate Discipulis pauidum, coram per secutoribus
terribilem exhibebat. Omnipotency covered in man's nature, sho^ed thee
fearful to thy Disciples, and terrible to thy persecutours, says Cyprian of
Christ. When Christ was carried bound to the President, he was not suppliant
to the Sergeants, yea, he despised: he greatness of Herod and Pilate, and de
impietate and malitia suauitas pietasque Christi triumphat, and the mildness
and godliness of Christ triumphed over the malice and wickedness (of his
persecuters.)

Defenc. page 102. li 26.
You answer, if death be not fearful to the servants of Christ, they are the
more bound to their Lord and Master, who was the first that by death disarmed
death, and severed death and hell. What is this to our reason?] Enough, and
more than enough, if your captious head would conceive it right. For Christ
took from death all destroying power over the Elect, and from them all amazed
and confounding fear, which others find in death; and so not only by his
example taught them to resort to God with prayer for comfort against the
terror of death, but by his agony enabled them to go securely and quietly to
their deaths, notwithstanding the horror thereof; since he will help them in
the midst of that misery, and receive them with glory, when others think
them swallowed up with death.

Defenc. page 103. li. 10.
By breaking the knot betwixt death and hell, he could not be so woefully
affected and afflicted above measure as he was, if he did not suffer by them
somewhat extraordinarily. Unto Christ might feel somewhat extraordinary, yet
not the pains of hell.
this you have nothing to answer.] Are the pains of hell and the death of the
damned come now to SOMEWHAT EXTRAORDINARY? Here may the Reader see the very
depth of all your new doctrine. It was SOMEWHAT, that Christ SVFFERED or FEARED
in the Garden: ergo it was the second death and the pains of the damned. All
your idle and erroneous illations and amplifications of martyrs and malefactors
end now in SOMEWHAT, if you could tell what; and because you know not what it
was, you will imagine what you list. I do not doubt, but it was somewhat
extraordinary, that moved Christ to this fear, sorrow, and intentive Prayer
after comfort received from heaven by an Angel; although I dare not determine,
what it was, which the Scriptures do not express; much less presume it to be
the second death, as you do against the Scriptures, or frame a new hell of the
damned, for Christ's soul to pay our ransom, thereby to cross the whole
course of the word of God teaching and assuring us the blood of Christ was the
price of our Redemption. I see many things extraordinary, or rather nothing
wholly ordinary in the son of God, specially at the time of our redemption,
which he alone for the innocence and excellency of his person, and power
could, and did thoroughly perform. Yea even in his agony though some things
might be common to him with man, yet none of those things could be sustained
by any man, as they were by him. And therefore your somewhat betraieth your
presumption, when thence you infer what you best like, because the Scripture
has not acquainted you with every secret affection or action, that was
required in man's salvation.

Defenc. page 103. li 22.
It was not therefore that only, but some other death far more dreadful and
intolerable, which made Christ man, (being also God) in such wise to tremble
and quake.] I hope you do not mean, that Christ's godhead trembled at your
other death, or was subject to any humane fears or miseries, nor that your
other death was so dreadful, that his divine power could not keep him from
trembling and quaking at it. It was no small part of Christ's obedience and
humility to lay aside his strength, when he suffered for our sins, and not
by power to resist, repulse or ease the pains, which his passion should bring;
but with exact sense to feel it, and with wonderful patience to endure it.
Neither was it no part of Christ's purpose by his sorrow and fear in the
Garden to give us to understand, that he would use no power, which he might
easily have done, to diminish the vehemence or sense of the pains prepared for
him; least his so saving himself from smart by his secret power should delude
Gods Justice, impair his love to us, and put us in despair of following his
example; since we had no power to succor ourselves, as we might imagine of
him, had he not by natural and evident signs of true fear and sorrow
confirmed unto us, that he felt his afflictions, as much as we do ours, and
will help our infirmity, and ease our misery, though he would not spare
himself. So that hence a good Christian would collect Christ's submission to
the weakest degree of man's infirmity, and his communion with us in tasting the
sharpest of our sorrows, and not exaggerate his power to make him capable of
the second death, Revel. 21.
which is the lake burning with fire and brimstone, as the Scriptures affirm;
and consequent, not antecedent to the first death, as you dream in Christ's
case, besides that the Revel. 14.
smoke of their torments (which are cast into this lake) ascends evermore,
and they have no rest night nor day.

Defenc. page 103. li. 25.
Indeed Christ had far greater cause (as you say) to fear even his bodily
death, then any of his members have. For it was therefore because death
approached unto him clasped fast with hell, so that he could not by the
ordinance of God meddle with the one, but he must feel the other.] My words
enlarged and perverted by you may seem to make some music for you, but of
themselves they are true, and no way touch your untuned and hie strained
cratchets. That Christ must and did break the knot betwixt death and hell,
which otherwise were fast clasped together, and by receiving the one in his
own person did free all his members from the other, is no question neither
with me, nor I think with any Christian man. The just vengeance deserved and
prepared for sin, which was temporal and eternal death, the Redeemer must
thoroughly know least he should ransom us he could not tell from what.
Wherefore not your new found hell, but the wages of our sin, which was
eternal death, usually called hell in the Scriptures, might not be hid from
the e^es of Christ; but even the just and full reward of our iniquities was to
be presented to the sight and spirit of the Redeemer, that in the presence of
God he might behold the weight of our sin, the greatness and justness of
Gods anger against it, and accordingly conceive how dear the price, and how
sharp the pain must be, that should quitte us from this debt, and yet how
precious his person, and infinite his obedience was, that by one death should
excuse us from the other. Whether these things were revealed and showed to
Christ by sight, as the terrors and torments of hell might be; or by vision, or
in spirit, I dare not pronounce; I meddle not so far with Gods secrets: God
has ways enough to propose the Iudgemets of the next world to men here
living, when and how pleases him; but of none of these might Christ be
ignorant, least we make him a Savior at peraduentures, as not knowing all
things, that directly belonged to his office, and sacrifice, and to the causes
and effects of our Redemption. That therefore Christ must have a perfect
knowledge and lively sight and view of all these things pertaining to the
weight and burden of man's deliverance, chiefly now when he appeared in Gods
judgment, (where nothing is covered) to perform the fame, I may safely grant;
but that he felt or suffered eternal death, or the pains of the damned, or
the full wages of our sins, this you shall never prove, how much soever you
presume with licentious but irreligious words to cover it, and convey it into
the Creed of Christians.

Defenc. page 103. li. 29.
He did not contemplate and look on them a far of, nor had to do with one
more then the other, but by suffering one he felt both, and by enduring one he
endured both.] Your speeches are false, absurd, and impious, howsoever you will
qualify them, when you come to the point, with the substances, but not with
the circumstances of eternal death and damnation. First, show that the
Scripture teaches any such thing of Christ The Defender forgeth apace new
parts of the Christian faith.
as that he suffered the second death, or the pains of the damned. Next, that
your device of this new second death, which dureth but for a moment, and
proceeds from Gods own hand agrees with the word of God. And Thirdly, that
God did thus torment the soul of his son with his immediate hand, either in
the garden, or on the cross. All these things are your own dreams plainly
plastered to the Christian faith with figures and phrases of your own coining;
and yet you think you have wrong, if you be not suffered to change the whole
Creed, and outface the Scriptures with your idle fancies. That Christ should
and did suffer a bodily death on the cross, the Prophets did forshew, the
Evangelists do witness, and the Apostles do confirm. That he died the
second death in the garden before the first, or that this death came to him by
fitts, and dured but the turning of an hand, and was inflicted on his soul by
Gods immediate hand, as the other death was on his body by the Jews, what
Prophet, what Evangelist, what Apostle did ever teach or write? And how hang
your own words with your own conceits? by suffering the one, Christ felt
both, (you say) and by enduring the one he endured both.] Then in the Garden,
when as yet he suffered not the death of the body, he felt not your second
death; and Gods immediate hand did cease, if by the one, which the Jews
inflicted he endured both. If you fly to Christ's fearing and apprehending the
second death by the first; then are you far from his suffering and enduring
it; and this apprehension, which was not erroneous in Christ, as it is in you,
might offer him a fear of Gods power, which is more infinite, then the
manhood of Christ could comprehend, and so might be terrible to him, as it is
to all the godly when they find or feel Gods anger against sin; but it
could breed no persuasion, or distrust, that God would destroy him for our
sins, since he perfectly knew God would save us by his sufferings.

Defenc. page 104. li.
Also you forget my argument: that Christ always charged his Disciples not to
take their bodily death heavily for righteousness sake. ergo he himself would
never be so dismayed with the fear of it.] As I did not profess in my
conclusion to refute all your follies, which were both trifling and tedious, so
if I had purposed any such thing, I should have skipped this, as an argument
rather of your ignorance and vanity, than of any force or verity. For first,
where did I defend in my Sermons, that Christ's bodily death was the cause of
this agony? reckon my six causes on your fingers ends, if your memory be so
fickle, that refuting them you can not tell what they are, and see whether
Christ's bodily death be any of them or no; if it be none, how does this
argument conclude any thing against me, who show so many things, which might
concur in Christ's fear, besides his bodily death? Wherefore your
conclusion, if it were good, is no way prejudicial to me, nor beneficial to
your hell pains. For though Christ feared somewhat else, there is a large leap
between somewhat else, and the death of the damned. But what was it that Christ
willed his Disciples to fear? Christ teaches all his to fear Gods power, as
himself did in the garden.
Gods purpose meaning to condemn Christians to hell, or his power, that was
able to destroy soul and body in hell? Did Christ teach in these words a
desperation of Gods favor, or submission under the mighty hand of God, and a
religious fear not to displease him? To fear religiously, not distrustfully
Gods power, since they were persuaded of Gods goodness whom Christ calls his
friends, and so not to provoke him, considering the mightiness of his arm, is
the sum of Christ's doctrine in that place; as God himself by the Prophet
Esaias taught all the faithful, saying; Esa. 8.
Sanctify the Lord of hosts, and let him be your fear^ and let him be your
dread. A deep impression of this fear commended to all the Elect, whiles
here they live, Christ himself might have and show in the Garden, and be
far from doubting his own salvation and our redemption. So that Christ's
words do no way touch your new device of hell pains, except by contradicting
it. For where Christ said, Luke 12. v. 4.
I speak to you my friends, verse. 5.
I will forwarne you whom you shall fear, (...), fear him that has power,
AFTER HE HAS KILLED, to cast into hell: you contrary to Christ's words
avouch, that God first cast Christ's soul into hell in the Garden, and after
killed his body on the cross, where Gods course is, as Christ observes,
after he has killed, to cast into hell, or Gehenna, where the pains of the
damned are. And so where Christ makes the second death of the damned to come
after the death of the body, you make in Christ and all his members the second
death to go before the first, which is a gross oversight as well against order
as against truth; save that your conceits have neither order, weight nor
measure.

Defenc. page 104. li. 11.
Here you have a notable saying in the margent, which must not be forgotten, we
must prefer Christ's sufferings before all Martyrs, not for his pains, but
for his Patience. Not for his pains, but for his Patience? A rare distinction:
If you could make us believe, that the greatest patience is tried and
discerned, where the smallest pains are, then you said somewhat.] The margin
will prove you fit to play with a feather, and willing to embrace a babble
before a better thing. Do my words there import or intend, that Christ's pains
were less then the pains of Martyrs? Having said before as much as I thought
good, touching the comparison of Christ's pains with other men's, I observed
here that Christ's patience in suffering far passed theirs, whatsoever we
resolved of his pains. My words were. Sermo. pa. 7. li. 10.
Longer torments others have endured, but never greater for the time, nor with
like patience. This, as your manner is, you ouerskip, and where I refuse a
needless contention, what kinds of pains are sharpest here on earth, but
avouch Christ's patience far exceeded the tolerance of Martyrs, whatsoever
Christ's patience was greater than any man's whatsoever his pains were.
his pains did; you neither remember what I before avouched, nor what these
words infer, but make your self merry with your own folly. We must
prefer, I said, Christ's sufferings before all Martyrs, not for his pains,
(the exact degree whereof I know not) but for his patience. Does this hinder,
but that Christ's pains were equal to any Martyrs sufferings, though I took
not upon me to make them sharper, then all the pains, that ever were felt on
earth? My words before were plain enough, greater torments for the time others
never endured: And if such a Wyer-drawer, as you are; would go to cafling,
which is the sharpest kind of pain, it pertained not much to the purpose,
there could be. no question, but Christ's patience in his extreme pains did
far excel all men's. Indeed you little regard his patience, for you put him
in a maze all confounded and all astonished, where neither obedience nor
patience could have any place: and as for pains you will none other, but the
pains of the damned, which pass the patience of men and Angels. Wherefore
that I would make men believe, the greatest patience is tried in the smallest
pains, is a buzzardly device of your own, and howsoever I would not contend,
whether Christ's pains were the sharpest that ever were suffered on earth, yet
I before resolved his pains to be as great, as any man's ever were in this
mortal body, and his patience to be far greater and painfuller to him. The
reasons whereof I gave before in my Sermons, though your course be to leap
over what you list, and to meddle with no more then you may entertain with a
wrest or a jest.

The eminence of Christ's patience above all Martyrs I showed to consist in
these two points; in exacter sense, and perfecter obedience at the time of his
sufferings, then any man ever had, or could have. For in others the more
violent the tortures, the sooner they ouerwhelme the sense, and hasten death;
but in Christ (whatsoever you dream to the contrary) there was no confusion,
nor corruption of sense; rather when his pains were sharpest, and himself
weakest; then was his sense as tender, if not tenderer then at any time before.
Again in others, even in Martyrs, when pain does pass their strength, the
Soul struggleth and strives to repel or avoid the pain, which when she
cannot conquer, nor resist, she departs the body. In Christ it was
otherwise; when the sharpness of pain most fiercely assaulted him, then did
his obedience and patience rise to the highest degree. So that nothing in him
refused or declined the bitterness of his pains, nor so much as repined or
shrunk at it, but to the uttermost he put himself with all submission and
patience advisedly, obediently, and quietly to bear, and endure the greatest
rage and excess of his intolerable torments, which no man's strength or nature
can perform. And this I trust touches the trial and proof of Christ's
patience, and not the inward habit, as you call it; not so much as
understanding, that my words concern the use, and not the gift of Christ's
patience. And if I would enterpret my words, as you did Saint Austens a little
before, when they contained contraries, not consequents, as mine do, and so
say, Christ's sufferings must be preferred before all Martyrs, not for pains
(only,) but for patience also, since there could be no use of patience in
Christ without pains: then by your own interpretation, which in things
consequent is very requisite, you have flowen fair, and seized on a Butterfly.

Defenc. page 104. li. 28.
By this also we may see how vain your next conjecture is, that he feared in
his Agony corporal castigation above his strength. For why may not Martyrs and
others fear as much cruelty and extraordinary torments at the hands of men,
as Christ had cause to do?] You have an habit of understanding nothing
besides that, which no man understands besides your self. When I tell you
that another thing Sermo. page 24. li. 18.
which Christ might justly fear and earnestly pray against, (though his soul
were never so safe, from the pains of the damned) was the power of Gods wrath
to be executed on his body: li. 22.
for God was armed with infinite vengeance to afflict and punish the body about
that the humane flesh of Christ was able to endure: You answer, why may not
martyrs fear as much at men's ^andes. Wisely forsooth, and as much to the
purpose as chalk to make cheese. Why should not Martyrs fear the power of men
against their bodies, as much as Christ feared the power of God against his
body? If you see not the cause, ask one of the children that dwells at next
house to you, if they have learned to know God from men, and they will readily
tell you; though my words were full enough, but that your head was so empty,
as not to see what I said. God I said, was armed with infinite vengeance to
afflict the body above that the humane flesh of Christ was able to endure. Are
men so armed as God is, even in this life? I troe not, and therefore are not so
to be feared.

Defenc. page 104 li. 32.
Why should the fear of any whatsoever mere bodily pains, overcome Christ's
patience?] Even therefore because it was humane, and weak in respect of God,
and far unable to bear that, which God could impose. [ Are not martyrs as
far unable?] Yes far less able, whether it be the hand of God, or of man,
which they must feel. [Why then are not they as much afraid?] Of Gods power
they are, when and wheresoever showed unto them, or duly considered by them.
As Moses when God Exo. 19. v. 16.
lightened and thundered on mount Sinai before the delivering of the Law, Heb.
12. v. 21 Why Christ feared more than martyrs do.
feared and trembled by the Apostles report, as well as the rest of the people.
And as for the rage of men, Martyrs first know, that Gods wrath toward them is
appeased by Christ Jesus, and therefore they shall feel no more but the hands
of men. Secondly, that as the cruelty of humane tortures increases, so God
either assisteth his servants by diminishing the bitterness of their pains,
or suffers their strength or sense to be overwhelmed by the fury of their
torments, in which case the soul though impatient of such pain does not
sin, because the violence is greater then man's strength can endure, and
thereby drives the soul from the body. With Christ it was otherwise. For
where he was to bear our sins in his body, and had power sufficient in
himlefe to decline or frustrate all that men could do unto him, when he would;
he was to see that Gods hand might join with the Jews rage for the
punishments of our sins in his flesh; and that the sharper the anguish, which
he should feel, the exacter the sense thereof which he must have, and yet must
still continue the perfection of his obedience and patience; since no violence
of torments, were they never so intolerable, might ouerwhelme his sense, or
force his soul from his body, but he must expect the time appointed by his
Father, when he should in full sense and memory breath out his soul at an
instant, as I have formerly showed. He might therefore fear as well the
violence, as the continuance of his pains (far more then Martyrs need) if
he did not deprecate the power of Gods wrath deserved by our sins, to be
eased even in his body, where he bare our sins. For God was and is able to
aggrauate bodily pains far above the strength of man's nature in us or in
Christ, without means, or by means whatsoever. So that Christ desiring this
cup, which he now beheld (for THIS does demonstrate somewhat conceived in the
cup, which he declined) should pass from him, might have this meaning, that
the cup should pass from him, and not oppress his patience, because his
flesh was but weak to bear that hea^ie burden in his body, which our sins
provoked; and was heard, as the Apostle notes of this prayer in the garden,
and eased of that he seared.

Christ knew all things, you will say, that should befall him.] Then he also
knew, what his prayer would auert of that punishment which our sins deserved:
and since it is evident, that greater torments both of soul and body were due
to us for our sin, as we find by the damned, who are in the same desert with
us, though not partakers of the same mercy with us: why should not Christ by
his prayer, which he knew God would hear, decline what he disliked in the cup
of Gods wrath mixed for the sins of men, and yet submit and commit himself,
after prayer made, wholly to the will of God his father?

Defenc. page 105. li. 1.
If you mean that he felt greater (pains) concurring in and with the bodily
punishment inflicted by the wrathful hand of God armed with infinite
vengeance, then you say well, and we acknowledge it.] If I will mistake fearing
for suffering, and bodily for ghostly pains, and the cross for hell, and make
Gods immediate hand a pretense for all these devices, as you do, then I say
well, as you suppose; but if I make the power of God able to afflict for sin
the Body or Soul of man above all humane strength without the pains of the
damned; and Christ justly to fear the power of Gods wrath, if he did not by
earnest and humble prayer pacify Gods indignation for as much as exceeded the
weakness and patience of his manhood, then my conjectures are vain, though
they never so well agree with the rules of religion and piety. But in this you
do, as all Sectaries are wont to acknowledge no sincerity, but in their own
secrets. August. contra (...) (...). (...) li. 11 cap. 2.
Tues ergo regula veritatis? quicquid contra te facit non est verum? Are you
then the rule of truth? and whatsoever is against you, is that not true?

Defenc. page 105. li. 4.
Your other cause is, for that by death his Body should want awhile the feeling
of Gods presence. But did not Christ perfectly know that this was Gods decree
and certain appointment, yea his own most free will and purpose?] He that
once has undertaken to wrench the Scriptures from their right sense, will
never stick to wrangle with all the world, as long as brain, or breath will
give him leave. Often enough if that would serve, you have been told, that I
produced not those four points, on which you last insisted, as causes of
Christ's agony, but as respects of his fearing, disliking, and shunning bodily
death; against which you say nothing, but that he could not, he would not so
fear it, as to sweat blood for it. Which silliness, if not sottishness,
still to impugn that, which I do not affirm, and to post over the rest as
pertinent to Christ's perfection and holiness, and so no part of his
sufferings, is the best ground of your defense: but take any of these four
points, which you so much mislike, and refer them rightly to the end, for
which I brought them, or any of the former five causes concurring to Christ's
agony, and speak directly and truly to any one of them, and you shall be
excused for all the rest. But being not able to refute one of them in sound and
upright reasoning. All your shift is, to misapply the respects of Christ's
declining death, as if I made them causes of his agony; and to single the
causes, which I avouch might all meet in Christ's fear and sorrow in the
Garden, as sole and singular efficients of his whole agony. With this childish
Art you have almost waded by them, not denying, as indeed you cannot, that
they were then before Christ's eyes, when he feared and sorrowed in the Garden,
but that either they were no new things to him, or else parts of his
righteousness and holiness. Both which Answers are very idle. For your hell
pains, if that were part of his Passion, were no more news to his foresight
then the rest; and all Christ's sufferings even of your hell pains (if that
conceit had any truth in it) were parts of his obedience and patience, as well
as his suffering of fear and sorrow, or of bodily death. Wherefore these be
but strains and starts to make your Reader believe you have somewhat to say,
when indeed your oppositions are so slight, that they bewray how gladly you
would, and how hardly you can distress any of these causes, which I said might
concur in Christ's Agony. They all were weighty and godly respects
impressing no small degrees of fear, sorrow, care and zeal on the Soul of
Christ, and directly pertinent to the work of our redemption now in hand. And
where you shift them of as parts of Christ's habitual holiness always resting
in him, know you good Sir, that I speak not in this case of the permanent
gifts of grace always inherent in Christ's Soul, but of the painful
impressions, which those respects did therefore now presently and sensibly
make on the Soul of Christ more then at other times, because they came now to
execution, which before were but in cogitation, and by religious and humble
prayer, he was now to settle the whole course, force, and effects of his
sufferings.

Defenc. page 105. li. 10.
Call you this greater perfection in him than in other men, to pray expressly
against the known will of his Father, yea against his own?] That Christ
prayed against the known will of his Father, is an irreligious and dangerous
dream of yours. This Toy you trump in every where, as if it were some choice
Answer, and yet this empty reason makes as much against you, as against me,
if there were any weight in it. For if Christ did suffer the pains of the
damned according to your device, was it not his Fathers known will he should
so do, yea and his own also? How then do the pains of hell excuse him from
praying against his Fathers known will? [ he was so amazed therewith, you will
say, that he knew not what he did.] Christ must then be wholly deprived of all
understanding, if he neither remembered his Fathers will, nor his own, nor our
salvation, for whose sake he was content to suffer. And how then came he so
suddenly in the very next syllable to remember himself, and his Fathers will?
[ He was now freed, you will say, from that astonishment.] How fell he then
thrice into it? [he had so many touches of hell pains, which must needs
confound all the powers and parts of his body.] Then all the time of his
apprehension, examination, condemnation and crucifixion he felt no such thing,
since the Gospels bear witness, that he wisely, religiously, constantly,
carefully, and every way admirably behaved himself in each word and deed
after to the instant of his death; and remembered all things that were written
of him. Is not here a fine mockery, which is the fortress of all your hidden
mysteries; that to prove your hell pains, you must bring Christ into three
such fits and pangs of confusion and oblivion, that he knew not what he said,
or did; and presently with the speaking of (YET) to restore him again to his
perfect sense and memory, and so to free him from all your new devised
Passions? besides your selves, no writer old nor new did ever find in Christ's
prayer, that he knew not what he said; and the condition added before his
prayer, Luke. 22.
Father, if thou will, take away this Cup from me; and the submission following
with the same breath, yet not my will, but thine be done, do plainly prove
that Christ had exact remembrance and regard of his fathers will, besides that
the Apostle affirms of this prayer, that Christ Heb. 5.
was heard, in that he feared. So that if this be all the Scripture you can
produce for your hell pains, I protest before God and his whole Church, I will
sooner believe that you were out of your wits in writing this, then that Christ
was forgetful in praying that, which he spoke in the Garden.

Defenc. page 105. li. 10.
Again could this thing in any reason be such an horrible grief unto him; to
have his flesh lie dead for a day and a few hours, would the thought of this
make him sweat blood for grief, and to need an Angel from heaven to comfort
him, and to pray three times vehemently, this cup might pass from him? verily
it is unreasonable to thinkeso. Who has bewitched you thus openly and usually
to fasten on untruths? I alleged six causes that might (...) in Christ's
agony, you have piked out of my words four more then ever I meant to be
reasons of his bloody sweat, and are nine of these now puffed away with a
breath, and nothing left by your swelling and insulting eloquence, but the
deadness of Christ's body, whiles the soul wanted? this it is for a man to
trust to his tongue, when his teeth be gone; and to bleate, when he cannot
bite. If the cause were not Gods, it might be thought a pastime thus to feign
and face; but in so serious questions to use such idle and false imputations
and frivolous refutations, is a grief to any good man's ears and a corrosiue
to his conscience. Of Christ's agony, and the causes that might occasion his
fear, his sorrow, and his zeal in the garden I have said so much that I am
weary with repeating, though you be never weary with resuming the self same
childish and erroneous mistaking. The reason of my speech is plain and
evident, howsoever you take the course rather to misreport it, then refute it.
For if the souls of Gods saints do by nature unwillingly leave their bodies
to which they are united, though by them they are often molested and burdened;
(otherwise death were no punishment of sin, but a sign of Gods far our which
is nothing so) how far iuster cause then was there, Christ should naturally
dislike death not only because it was a subversion of nature created, and
quickened by God, and an effect of Gods displeasure against sin imposed on all
men; but also for that it should during the time deprive him of life, sense and
action with great slander and infamy, and cheefely should exclude for a
season his body from that blessed communion and fruition of his divine grace
and glory, which formerly it felt, though the personal union should not be
dis^olued? now the more Christ liked and loved that adherence to God, which he
living enioied, the more grievous was the want thereof, which death took from
him for the time, though it were after restored with greater glory. This I did
not put for the cause of his agony, as you idly amplify, but noted it as a
respect, that might worthily lead Christ to dislike or abhor death in respect
of his perfection and communion with God above all men and Angels, save for the
will of his father, and the good of man, which ouerruled this dislike in him.

Defenc page 105 li 22.
You say excellent well, but by your practice in all matters so far as I see,
you never mean to observe it: in Gods cause let Gods book teach us, what to
believe, and what to profess. show me then where you read in Gods word any or
all these to be effectual causes of this strange (...) or (...) my part I
shall never believe you.] If I did profess to bind men's faiths to these causes
of Christ's agony, as you do to your new redemption by the pains of the
damned, I would show you where I read them in the word of God, or else I would
leave ^ch believer to his liberty: but I forwarned all men, that the
Scriptures directly and particularly speaking nothing of the causes of Christ's
agony, the safest rule that I could find, or they could follow, was not to
depart from any known and received grounds of Religion and principles of
piety for the causes thereof. For since the Scriptures keep silence, and our
Savior himself would not show it to all his Disciples, but chose three from
the rest to go with him, and took the dark time of the night, and left those
three (whose eyes were so heavy that they could not for^eare sleep) about a
stones cast before he would pray, because he would not have them (...) to all
that he said, or did in that place, I see no reason why any man should be over
curious in searching that, which the word of God has not precisely revealed,
specially seeing no demonstratiue cause can be given of secret affections and
voluntary actions, such as these were in Christ. And your audacious and
presumptuous boldness is the more chalengeable, for that you not only take
upon you to give the right and exact cause thereof out of your own brain, but
you light on such a cause, as has no foundation in any part of the Scripture,
nor any coherence with the maine positions of the Christian faith vnfalliblely
delivered in the word of God. Wherefore I have not transgressed my directions,
when I teach what just and weighty respects of fear, sorrow and zeal our Lord
and Savior had in the work of our redemption; which might be the causes of
that earnest prayer and agony, and withal showed the judgments and opinions
of diverse ancient and learned Fathers concerning the same; but you as insolent
in your conclusions, as in your conceits, take upon you to specify the full
and true cause thereof, for which you have no show of Scriptures, nor touch of
reason. And such is the cause which you yield, that thereby you cross the
chief streams of faith and truth most current in the sacred Scriptures, and
with all learned and religious antiquity. The same rule then binding you,
which binds me, show you, what Prophet, Evangelist, or Apostle ever taught or
thought the pains of the damned to be inflicted on Christ's soul in the
Garden by Gods immediate hand, and that without the pains of hell we could not
be (...); or else my not believing you will not excuse your enterprise; you must
answer to God, and to all the faithful, for innouating the very roots and
branches of their redemption by the blood and death of Christ Jesus, which you
avouch to be insufficient for the ransom of our sins, except your hell be
thereto added, when the Holy Ghost, who should best know the truth, being the
spirit of truth, has expressed no such thing in all the Scriptures.

Defenc page 105. li. 32.
Your sixth and last maine cause is, that Christ by this his bloody sweat and
(...) prayers did nothing but voluntarily perform that bloody offering and
Priesthood (...) in the Law. This we simply grant.] If you should truly repeat
and conceive any part The (...) (...) (...) (...) agony.
of my writings, you should put your self to more pains, than you are willing
to take, justly to refute it. Wherefore your course is either to misrecite, or
to misconstrue all that you bring. In the oblations of the Law, which
prefigured the death of Christ, I observed, that not only the Sacrifice was
slain by the shedding of blood, but that the person of the Priest was
sanctified, as well as the sinner presented by the Priest to God with earnest
and humble prayer to make atonement for the trespass. And since the truth
must have some resemblance with the figure, Christ might in the Garden perform
some points requisite to his Priesthood, as the sanctifying of himself with
his own blood, and presenting his body to be the redemption and remission of
our sins, with most instant and intentive prayer for the transgressors. This
if you simply grant, as in words you say you do, tell us now which way you
will conclude Christ's suffering of hell pains in the Garden from his bloody
sweat? [ It hinders not our assertion. Much less does it further it: but
yet if there might be a cause of Christ's voluntary sprinckling himself with
his own blood, and dedicating it to Gods pleasure for man's redemption besides
and without your hellish torments, you will come shorter than you reckon, to
make good your conclusion.

Defenc. page 106.
The Scriptures which you cite, prove indeed that Christ now executed his
office of Priesthood, but will you divide and exempt his death on the Cross
from his Priesthood?] Who besides your self restrains Christ's everlasting
Priesthood either to the garden or to the cross? But it was one thing for
Christ with fervent and submissiue prayer to present and submit his body,
which was his Sacrifice, to the will of his Father, as he did in the garden;
and another thing, to receive and admit the violent and wicked hands of the
Jews executing their rage on his body with all reproach and cruelty, as he
did on the cross. Now what had his Priesthood to do with the pains of hell,
since he was to present and perform the bloody sacrifice of his body
prefigured in the Law, which he did in the garden, and on the cross? And
for so much as you grant, that Christ's bloody sweat, and his vehement prayers in
the garden were pertinents to his Priesthood prefigured in the Law, which
indeed is Hebr. 5.
confirmed by the Apostle, as you can show no figure of suffering hell pains
or the second death in the sacrifices of the Law, no more does either of these
performed in the garden concern any secret death of the soul, which Christ
there suffered from the immediate hand of God.

Defenc. page 106. li. 14.
Why say you not as well, that his death and bloodshed on the Cross showed in
him no pains nor infirmity, but only that voluntarily he made himself there
the true Priest, and performed the prefigured bloody and deadly sacrifice for
the sins of the world? As good reason altogether you have to say so, as to
affirm it of his agony,] No by your leave: for Christ did not actually offer
two sacrifices; the one ghostly, suffering the pains of hell in the garden, as
you imagine; the other bodily and bloody, yielding himself to the death of the
cross. Heb. (...). 14
With one oblation he has made perfect for ever them, which are sanctified;
verse. (...).
and we are sanctified by the offering of the body of Jesus Christ once (made).
This sacrifice was presented and submitted to Gods will in the garden, but
finished and consummated on the Cross, which could not be without pains and
infirmity belonging unto death. In the garden, where no Scripture says Christ
died, I admit not the second death nor the pains of the damned, which are
thereto consequent. And where you say, I refuse all pains and infirmity in
Christ's agony, it is one of your wonted trueths, which in another were an
open lie. I admit not the pains of the damned, or of the second death, til you
show where the scripture teaches, that Christ suffered two deaths; the first
on the Cross, and the second in the garden, and that before the first.
Otherwise painful affections of fear and sorrow, which were humane
infirmities, though voluntarily and religiously received by Christ into his
soul, I every where acknowledge, and with Cyprian make them entrances to his
oblation for the sins of the world. (...) de (...) (...).
vt fieret voluntas Patris, and sacrificium carnis a timore and (...) (...),
suberant victime desolatori^ carbones, quos obedientiae liquefactus adeps
extinxit. (...) the will of the Father might be done, says Cyprian and Christ
begin the sacrifice of his flesh with fear and sorrow, consuming coals (of
fear and sorrow in the garden) were pu^ under the sacrifice, which the sweet
fatness of his obedience m^lting did quench. So that Christ began the
sacrifice of his body in the garden, offering that to be disposed at his
fathers will for the life of the world, and his entering to it was with fear
and sorrow, the painfulnesse whereof his obedience abolished, and so without all
fear went to the rest of his sufferings before and on the cross, where he
perfected and ended his oblation, despising all torments and punishments, that
the wicked could device for him. (...) ibidem.
(...) vt sanaret in^irmos, timuit vt faceret securos. Christ sorowed to heal
our weakness, and feared to make us secure. I beheld (...) works (o Lord
says he) and admire thee fastened to the cross between two condemned
(Thieves) now to be neither fearful nor sorrowful; but a conqueror of thy
punishments.

Defenc. page 105. li., 6.
You mean voluntary in such sense that Christmas not also urged thereunto by
any violence of pains and fear procuring it in him naturally.] I mean by
voluntary, that Christ had power enough to resist and repress the vehemence
and painfulness of these affections (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) his
affections as ^e saw cause.
in him self; and therefore against or without his will they could not trouble
him. For (...) did not prevail or exceed in him, as they do in us against our
wills, but he must be willing to submit himself to each affection of fear and
sorrow, before they could take hold of him, or be grievous to him. Our nature
though he took in substance, yet the corruption and distemper of our sinful
nature he did not take; and therefore as before our fall the innocence and
rectitude, that was in man, could guide and govern as well the rising, as the
inflaming of his affections; so much more Christ, who besides sincerity from
sin, and liberty from corruption, had the grace and power of Gods spirit
above measure in his humane nature, could so restrain and repress in himself
all affections of fear and sorrow, that till he was willing, and thought it
fit, they neither did move, nor molest his humane flesh, or spirit. And when
he suffered man's nature in him to feel the same affections, that are in us,
they were holy and righteous in him, declaring his obedience to his Fathers
will, and not disordered as we find in the corruption of our flesh. And where
you add that Christ was urged (to his bloody sweat) by violence of pains or
fear procuring it in him naturally; you speak not only against the truth,
but even against your self. For within one leaf after you grant, (...). 107.
li. 16
it was above the course of nature; led thereunto by Hilaries words, that it
was H^lar. de Trinitate li. 10.
non secundum naturae consuetudinem, not according to the accustomed course of
nature. And indeed how could it be natural, since fear cannot by nature cause
a bloody sweat? and of all the men that you imagine did ever suffer the pains
of hell, you never read in the Scriptures or else where, that any of them did
sweat blood. Now if it were natural to pain, yea to your supposed pains of
hell in this life to sweat blood, as many as you urge suffered the same, yea
all the members of Christ, to whom in these sufferings you make him like, must
needs at one ^ime or other sweat blood as well as Christ. Wherefore it is
certain that either you fitten and feign th^se sufferings in other men, or
else Christ was not urged NATVRALLY to this sweat by any ^eares or pains of
hell, that oppressed him in the Garden.

Defenc. page 10. li. 2.
Of this (Exposition) with all the rest you pronounce, that they are sound and
well agreeing with Christian piety. Yet is it contrary to your Resolution
also, yea it is contrary to the Scripture expressing his fear and vehement
sorrows, and discomfort to have caused his Agony.] Your words are of so small
weight, that a man would skant spare you Oystershels upon your credit. You know
not the difference betwixt the occasion of Christ's sorrow and sweat in the
Garden, and the exposition of his complaint on the cross. What I say of the
one, You more then negligently apply to the other. As for my Resolution Page
290. prove it contrary to this position (for exposition it is none, since it
concerns the cause of Christ's sweat, and not the sense of his words;) and
you shall after many fails and follies prove somewhat. Otherwise if these
things in the Garden concerned Christ's priesthood, which is mine Assertion in
this place, I hope his Priesthood proves both his submission to God, to whom
he yielded himself obedient and suppliant, and his compassion on man, for
whose sake he refused not to make a bloody and deadly offering of his own
body, which is my Resolution in the Page, that you name for a contradiction to
this.

But the Scriptures are against it.] That were worth the hearing, if you had
any in store; but if your ignorance be such, that you bring the parts of
Christ's agony for the causes thereof; and your insolence such, that you will
pronounce what the Scriptures shall say or mean without any farther proof, you
may soon make them contrary to themselves, as you do in the maine matter and
merit of our redemption by the death and blood of (...). That Christ in the
Garden began to be afraid, and said of himself, he was on every side
sorrowful, and after comfort received by an Angel from heaven fell into an
agony of intentive prayer, in which his sweat was like drops of blood, this
the Scriptures report. What was the direct and particular cause of this fear
and sorrow, or for what, after the vision of an Angel from heaven, Christ
prayed so earnestly, that his sweat was like blood, this is the Question in
this place. Wherein like some late risen Apostle, you take upon you to decide,
what best sorteth with your error, and proclaim that to be express Scripture.
But where does the Scripture express, that Christ's fear, sorrow, and
discomfort caused his Agony? If they were parts of his agony, as well as his
bloody sweat, then must there be a cause as well of these, as of the other;
and they caused not his bloody sweat. Now the cause of neither is directly
mentioned in the Scriptures. The Scripture Comfort by an Angel and intenti^e
prayer went before Christ's bloody sweat.
speaks of Christ's prostration and prayer, of his triple Petition that the
Cup might pass from him, of his Disciples heaviness and neglect to watch with
him, of their danger and tentation, of the weakness of flesh, as well as of
his sorrow or fear. Does it therefore express these to be the causes of his
agony? and how does the Gospel declare discomfort to have caused that agony?
because it says, there appeared to him an Angel from heaven (...),
strengthening (or comforting) him? the Angel was not able to inspire any
spiritual strength into Christ, that is proper to the spirit of God; neither
did the Angel perform the part of an honest neighbor, to persuade Christ
with words to be content and patient; these kinds of strengthening and
comforting are not tolerable in this place; but by his message from God (for he
was Gods messenger coming from heaven,) he declared in all likelihoode, that
Christ's prayers were heard in that he feared. For so much the Apostle notes of
Christ's prayers in the Garden, which in all coherence was the comfort the
Angel brought with him, when he appeared to him in the Garden. Now this
comfort would rather assuage his sorrow and fear, then increase it. Yea how
could any comfort brought by the Angel cause this agony? you dream perhaps
Christ would not receive that comfort, but notwithstanding the Angels
comfortable message continued his former agony, or fell into a worse then
before, wherein he sweat blood. If your dreams be express Scripture, then
here is all the Scripture you have, even your presuming besides the Scripture,
or rather against the Scripture. For since the Evangelist affirms, Luke. 22.
an Angel from heaven, that is from God, appeared comforting him, that is with
a comfortable message to him; in all reason his fear and sorrow did now cease;
and he fell upon this comfort received as I think, not repelled as you
imagine, to an agony, not of fear and sorrow, much less of hell pains; but
of more vehement prayer, then before, and in that zealous and inflamed prayer,
in which he powered forth not only the strength of his Soul, but the very
spirits of his body for desire to prevail for man against sin and satan, his
sweat was like blood.

Defenc. page 107. li 1.
The words next before in the text are; Luke 22. 43. 44.
AN ANGEL CAME TO GIVE HIM SOME COMFORT, that is, lest he should be overwhelmed
quite in his sorrow and discomfort; but still he was in his agonic, and sweat
like drops of blood trickling down to the ground, and presently says, MY
SOVLE IS FVLL OF SORROVVLS EVEN UNTO THE DEATH. ^ The Tempter in the
wilderness, that sought by pretense of Gods power and protection to procure
Christ's overthrow, had more regard not to be taken tardy with corrupting the
Scriptures, than you have in this place: for he cited the words as they lay,
without addition or interposition of his own, which you do not; buttaking some
parts of the text for a show, you most untruly and most pestilently corrupt
both the text and the truth of the Gospel. You cite out of S. Luke ca. 22.
verse. 43, 44; these words in a different letter, as the words in the text next
before Christ's bloody sweat; An Angel came to give him some comfort, etc.
Are these the Evangelists words? Was your haste so great, or your care so
little, that you could not, or would not so much as look in your book for the
right words of the text? S. Luke says, Luke 22. v. 43
There appeared unto him an Angel from heaven (...) strengthening him, or
comforting him; no doubt with a message from God, which what it was, we do not
know, except we apply the Apostles words to this purpose, where he says:
(Christ) Heb 5. v. 7.
in the days of (...) (...) did offer up prayers and supplications with strong
crying and tears, to him that was able to save him from death, AND WAS HEARD
IN THAT WHICH HE FEARED. This if we take to be the comfort which the Angel
brought from heaven, the Apostle might well intend it. For that Christ's
prayers were heard, and so much declared to him by an Angel from heaven, could
not be but very comfortable to him. If we list not to believe this was the
Angels message of comfort, then we must confess, that the comfort which the
Angel brought, is unknown to man, as the certain cause of Christ's bloody
sweat.

But whatsoever we suppose of the Angels message, there is some difference
betwixt S. Lukes words, and those which you cite, as the words next before the
text. [not in matter you will say. I speak of the words which you may not
alter, when you profess to cite the text whatsoever the matter be. [You keep
the meaning of the Evangelist, you think. Such a meaning, as you your self
make of the Evangelist: for you translate (...) (which is strengthening him) to
give him some comfort. Where by the diminutiue ( some) you would implie, that
it was not sufficient to remove his fear; and that intent you betray in the
next line, citing again your own words in stead of S. Lukes, and apparently
corrupting his text: for coming to cite the 44 verse, (...), and falling into
an agony he prayed more earnestly (or intentiuely:) in stead of these words,
professing to cite the text, you say, But still he was in his agony. And as
for the words, he prayed more earnestly, which are The (...) corrupts S. ^uke.
immediate before Christ's sweating blood, you shut them clean out, as not
fitting your turn, lest the Reader should think his vehement prayer after
comfort received was the cause of this agony; for that the Evangelist places
it next before in the text. Your words then, he was in his agony, are no
good translation; and that which is added, but still he was in his agony, is a
violent corruption; for genomenos there does not signify his being, or
continuing that which he was before; but his becoming that which he was not
before. For example, Gal. 4. v. 4.
God sent his Son genomenon made of a woman, and genomenon made under the
law. Does the word genomenos here signify, that Christ was man before he was
conceived of his mother, or rather, that he was made of his mother, which
before he was not? and so, made under the law, does not import, that Christ was
subject to the law before he was man, but that being altogether free from the
law he would become subject to the law, which before he was not. Likewise Ioh.
1. v. 14.
ho logos sarx egeneto, the word was made flesh, which before it was not. This
difference of the word (...) from (...) the Greek Scholiast observes
commenting upon S. Paul's words, I could wish to be separated from Christ for my
brethren. Photius apud (...) in (...). 9. Epist. a^ (...).
(...). Paul does not say, (he could be content) to become a curse, which is
NOW PRESENTLY to be severed from Christ, but to be (or have been) a curse,
that is, to have yet continued severed from Christ. So that (...), to be m^de
or to become, is (...), from the present time, and (...), to be, is still to
continue. Wherefore genom^nos enagonia, is falling (at that present upon
comfort received by the Angel) into an agony, and not as you corruptly
translate. still he was in his agony.

An agony (you will say) you use for all Christ's affections and actions in
the garden.] But so does not S. Luke; he refers the word to Christ's more
ardent prayers, and to his bloody sweat. If we speak abusiuely, an agony may
be taken for fear, as I have formerly showed; or if defectiuely we name one
part for the whole, which How some use the word Agony.
some men use to avoid length of speech, and the number of particulars; then
Christ's agony may stand to note all his affections, actions and supplications
in the garden: but if we speak properly, as there is no cause nor proof S.
Luke should here do otherwise, then Christ's agony both by the propriety of
the Greek word, and by the circumstances of the text, was that vehement
contention of mind, wherewith Christ prayed (...) more fervently than before,
being now strengthened or comforted by the Angels appearing and message, and
even powered forth his spirit to God with so zealous affection, that his sweat
was like blood. This you would cross by your corrupt translation, in saying,
BUT STILL he was in his agony, though the words of the Evangelist do not
import, that he continued still any former agony, but upon the strength and
comfort received by the Angel, he fell into an agony of most vehement desire
to prevail in the work of our redemption, and to remove all impediments, for
which he used so strong cries and tears, that his sweat was colored like
blood.

All these things you venture to determine by your own authority, as if the
Scriptures were under your command, and little think, that wise and godly
Readers will censure your licentious intrusion on the Scriptures as it
deserves. Neither can you cease for ought that I see: for as you affirm that
which our Savior assumed upon the Angels message, to have possessed him before
at his entrance into the garden; so the words which he spoke before any prayer
in the garden, and much more before the appearing of the Angel, you make
consequent to his bloody sweat. Your handsome and holy translation and
exposition is, Defenc. page 107. li 3.
but still he was in his agony, and sweat like drops of blood trickling to
the ground: and presently says, My soul is full of sorrows to death. Where
you commit two notable falsifications even of the Scripture it self. The
D^fender adds to Saint Luke that which he never wrote, and leaves out that
which he wrote.
For first these words, My soul is full of sorrows even to death, are not in
S. Lukes Gospel, whence you would seem to cite them, as presently said after
Christ's bloody sweat. Next you pervert both the other Evangelists, in which
these words are written: for both Matthew and Mark, which witness the
speaking of those words, precisely record, that they were spoken to Christ's
three Disciples before he departed at first from them to pray in secret, and
before he began to express any desire, that the cup might pass from him.
Read the texts, they keep almost the same words. When Christ had said to the
rest of his Disciples, Mar. 14. v. 32
Sit you here till I have prayed, 33.
he took Peter, and James, and John, and he began to be afraid, and in great
heaviness; 34.
and said unto them: My soul is very heavy unto death: tarry here and watch. 35.
So he went forward a little, and fell down on the ground, and prayed that if
it were possible, that hour might pass from him. You turn all vpside
downward, and tell us out of S. Luke, that still Christ was in his agony and
sweat like drops of blood, and presently says, My soul is full of sorrows
even to death. With such additions, translations, and corruptions against the
circumstances described in the Scriptures, some doubt may chance to creep at a
creuie into some men's consciences touching the cause of Christ's agony, but
your pains of the damned are not one jot the nearer for all your inuerting and
perverting the Evangelists words to your will. For what if Christ did sweat
blood at first, which the Gospel refers to the last, does that give
entrance to the second death and torments of the damned? Are not the pains of
this life able to make men sweat blood, but you must run to hell for the lake
that burns there with fire and brimstone, before man's body may color his
sweat with the show of blood? Is it harder for Christ to resolve his blood into
sweat by zeal without pains, or with bodily pains, whiles he was living,
than when he was dead to send out of his side, first Ioh. 13 v. 34.
blood, and then water, so distinctly and miraculously the one after the other,
that S. John confirms it with his own verse. 35.
sight, lest so strange a thing should not be believed?

Defenc. page 106. li. 35.
Though it be against the common course of our nature for any pains or fear
to sweat blood: yet the divine power with and through pains and fears might
wring out of his body that trickling bloody sweat. As it is plain that it did
by the words next before in the text, an Angel came to give him some
comfort.] Your head was troubled about some weighty work, when one sentence
wrang from you such contrarieties and falsities. But the Page 105. li. 38.
Page before, you took special exception against me, if I did not think,
that Christ was urged to his bloody sweat (for thereof you speak in that
place) by violence of pains, or fear procuring it in him NATVRALLY; here you
say, it is against the common course of our nature for any pains or fear to
sweat blood. Could it be naturally procured in Christ, and yet against the
common course of our nature? again if it be against the common course of our
nature for any pains or fear to sweat blood, by what reason or authority do
you conclude hell pains out of Christ's bloody sweat? for if no pains or
fear can by the course of our nature procure a bloody sweat, how know you
that Christ did sweat blood for pains or for fear? for hell pains, you will
say, he might.] Not by any course of our nature. For then all his members which
at one time or other feel the like, which Christ felt, should sweat blood, as
Christ did. But that I trust is sensiblely false. [ The divine power might
wring it out of his body.] So it may raise Children to Abraham out of stones.
Does that infer, that men are made of stones? and might not the divine power
wring this sweat (for that is your phrase) out of Christ's body as well
without hell pains, as with them? is it hard for God to make a man sweat blood
without the pains of the damned? [ It is plain that it did by the words next
before in the text.] Does the text name hell pains, or the fear of hell? what
will you not adventure, that thus presume to outface the Scriptures? the text
names many things before, and you like your crafts-master will make your
choice, though the Scripture do not express, what was the cause thereof. [
The words next before the text are an Angel came to give him comfort.] Then
comfort belike cast him into this bloody sweat, if the words next before
declare the cause thereof; which were very strange, that a man by comfort
should be cast into a bloody sweat. Why may not I rather say that the vision
of an Angel put him rather into this sweat, then the comfort, which was
brought him, since Daniel was Dan. 8. v. 27.
stricken sick and astonished with a vision, as diverse others of Gods saints
have been? yet I think neither of these to be the cause of that sweat, but
as I say in my Sermons, it might be voluntary either for signification, as
Austen, Prosper, Bid, and Bernard do think; or for sanctification and
consecration of his person and sacrifice answeareable to the manner of the
legal oblation prefiguring this as the truth; or for vehement contention of
spirit in prayer, which indeed is the next thing mentioned before his sweat,
and showed his desire and zeal to be more then humane for the Redeeming and
reconciling of man to God by the shedding of his blood.

Defenc. page 106. li. 27.
You conclude that Christ's agony demonstrating Christ's Priesthood must not
rise from the terror of his own death; and yet a little before you openly
confess and grant, that his agony did rise from the fear of his death.] The
effect of Christ's Priesthood performed in the garden must in no wise concern
himself. For he was not a Priest to make intercession, or to offer sacrifice
for himself, but for us. And therefore his prayers then uttered in his agony
with strong cries and tears, if they pertained to his Priesthood, they were
made for us, and not for himself; and declared his voluntary profering and
presenting his body and blood to Gods pleasure, to be the sacrifice for man's
Redemption, and his fervent supplications to have it accepted as the full
Ransom for his elect, that the accuser and supplanter of his Church might be
removed from Gods presence, and wholly subjected under Christ's feet. Now if
this desire and offer for us must not only be voluntary, but inflamed with
wonderful vehemency, then would not Christ sweat blood for any terror of his
own death, but for his infinite feruency to prevail and obtain his petition
for us. You permix Christ's fear, and his fervent zeal together, and call the
whole action his agony, though it contain both fear conceived at first, when
he approached Gods presence in judgment for sin, and comfort received at last
by message brought from Heaven, and out of this confusion you collect what you
list, and say what you please to no purpose. That Christ might have a natural
fear of death, I then said, and yet see no cause to recall it; but that I said
Christ did sweat blood for fear of his bodily death, this is one of your
painted faces with which you would outface the truth. Howbeit this persisting
in your ignorant folly without remembering or regarding what is said on the
other side, argues ridiculous negligence, or malicious diligence: of which
because I have already spoken, I will say no more.

Defenc. page 106. li. 33.
Why should Hilarie deny, that Christ's bloody sweat came of infirmity? or
Austen, that Christ's fear and perturbation was of infirmity?] Because they
had learned judgments, and sober considerations in these matters, which you
want. They beheld Christ's power, which no force of hell or Satan could
impeach, but where and when himself would permit. They saw the innocence and
integrity of Christ's humane nature, which could not be tossed nor troubled
with inward affections, but when and how far he was content to admit them.
They knew the infinite love of God to his son, for whose sake we were all
beloved and adopted; and that the father was so far from tormenting the soul
of his son with his immediate hand, that John 17.
he gave him power over all flesh, and John 13.
gave all things into his hands even before his death, and against the time of
his agony in the garden. Wherefore as the John 14.
Prince of this world had naught in him, and for that cause neither sin nor
corruption were found in him; and John 10.
no man took his soul from him, but he laid it down of himself; so neither
necessity nor infirmity of our nature could oppress or possess him, but he
must first give place to it by his will, and guide it by power, that in all as
well sufferings, as doings, he might be obedient, and yet righteous. And had
they heard such a ghest, as you are, tell them a tale of Gods Defenc. page 106.
li. 38.
divine power wringing out of Christ's body a bloody sweat, they would have
rung you another manner of Peale. For what is wringing, but violent forcing?
and what is violence, but inuoluntary constraint, which is any thing rather
then obedience? and so where the Apostle professes of Christ, that he was
obedient even unto death, you have spied out that Christ's bloody sweat was
WRVNG from him, and so no part of his willing and free submission and obedience
unto God.

Defenc. page 107. li. 12.
Where they say, Nec infirmitas quod potestas gessit, that proves the clean
contrary: for ideo and infirmitas quia potestas gessit. For the working of his
power in him argues the suffering of his infirmity. The power of God is
perfited in infirmity.] If you would ascribe neither Religion, nor learning to
two such Pillars of Christ's Church, as Hilarie and Austen were, you should at
least leave them common in sight and understanding of their own words. It is
enough for a man of your sise to lack learning, truth, and sense. They were
very learned and wise, or else the whole Church, that has hitherto esteemed and
received them for such, was much deceived. But you, that have found a new faith
in the Scriptures, no marvel if you catch the fathers with contrarieties,
which others never drempt of. The ground of their words is the clear rule of
reason, nature, and truth, confirmed in heaven, earth and hell: that
contraries in one and the same subject, time, and respect do exclude one
another. As if any thing be cold, it is not hoate; if it be dry, it is not
moist; if it be straight, it is not crooked; and so if it be weak, it is not
strong. Hence they conclude, if there could be in Christ no compulsion to fear
and sorrow, then was there election; if no necessity, then liberty; and
consequently if no preualence of corruption against his fulness of truth and
grace, then it was not infirmity, that subjected him to these violent and
painful affections, but it was his will and power, that raised and restrained
them in him self. Against this what says our master of new maxims? [ nay it
was therefore infirmity, because power did it.] This indeed crosteth their
sayings, but withal it crosses all truth, if you take their words, as they
spoke them. [But you mean, as your marginer notes therefore there was
infirmity, because x Defenc page 107. ad marginem. li. 3.
there was power.] He can never shoot amiss, that never offreth to any mark.
Where was there infirmity, and where was there power? in the person of Christ?
belike Hilary and Austen did not know, that Christ was God and man, and had in
his person both the infinite power of God, and the voluntary weakness of man,
that being compared with his Godhead might well be called infirmity: as the
Apostle sai^th, Christ was crucisied concerning (his) infirmity, that is, in
the weakness of his flesh, but yet that voluntary weakness of God, or in God
the son, was stronger then all the power of men or of Devils, whom his
manhood spoiled, and carried captives, with an open triumph. This is not their
meaning to say, that Christ had no infirm part in his person, compared with
his divine power, that is no manhood, but only his Godhead; and therefore your
reply to that purpose is as senseless, as it is needless.

Where Christ's divine power did punish, there his humane infirmity did
suffer.] This is your wresting of their words against their meaning, to bring
them to your compass, but this is no part of their speech. That weakness is
patient, where power is agent, this may be; but what is that to their words,
which are very true without your punishing power? Hilarie says, Hilar. de
Trinitate. li. 10.
To sweat blood is against nature, and so not a weakness in nature. Since then
it was above nature to sweat blood, he ascribes it to Christ's will and power
performing that in his body, which nature could not do. Ibidem.
Quis rogo furor est, repudiata doctrinae Apostolicae fide, mutare sensum
religionis, and totum hoc ad imbecillitatem and contumeliam rapere naturae,
quod and volunt as est, and sacramentum, quod and potest as est, and siducia,
and triumphus? What madness is this (here you, Sir Defender, how he requiteth
you for perverting the truth of his words) by refusing the faith of the
Apostles doctrine, to change the sense of religion, and to impute all that to
the imbccillitie and contumely of (Christ's) nature, which was (his) will, and
a mystery, yea power, considence and victory? And again, lest you should
think he wanted reason for his speech: Ibidem.
Quarogo side naturaliter infirmus fuisse defenditur, cui natural fuit omnem
human arum infirmitatum inhibere naturam? Forte stulta atque impia peruersitate
hinc infirmae in ^o naturae presumitur assertio, quia trist is sit anima eius
vsque ad mortem. With what faith, I ask, is (Christ) assirmed to be naturally
weak, to whom it was natural to heal all man's infirmities? Happily by a
foolish and wicked peevishness he is therefore presumed to be of a weak
nature, because his soul was sorrowful unto death. This ground of his speech
is short, but sure, except you will deride Christ, and say, Luke 4.
Physician heal thy self; or blaspheme him with the Pharisees, and say as they
said; Matthew. 27.
He saved others, he can not save himself. It was then in Christ not want of
power to repress these passions, or repel these infirmities, that subjected
himself unto them, it was his own willing obedience, that would taste them,
and power that did guide them, lest they should break into the distemper and
excess of our corrupt nature.

The power of God, you say, is perfected in infirmity.] Those words I trust
were not spoken of Christ; and howsoever in some sort they may be verified of
Christ, yet is there no comparison betwixt our natural infirmity, and his
fullness of truth and grace. Esa. 11.
The spirit of counsel and truth rested on him John 3.
without measure: we wholly want it, till Gods power in some degree confirm
our infirmity. Again, infirmity in these words does signify outward
afflictions and miseries: for so the Apostle there expounds it: 2. Cotin. 12.
verse. 10.
Therefore I take pleasure in infirmities, in reproaches, in necessities, in
persecutions; for when I am (outwardly) weak, then I am (inwardly) strong. So
that those words can not rightly be referred to inward infirmity; and might
they, yet Christ's gifts and graces of the Holy Ghost were not only far above
Paul's, but in the greatest degree that any creature might have them, and
greater than all the gifts of men and angels. How then does it follow, that
Christ was weak, because Paul was weak? Yea, if Paul's weakness were
perfected by Christ's power, as Paul himself confesses in that place; Ibid.
verse 9.
Very gladly will I rejoice in mine infirmities, that the power of Christ may
dwell in me; then from those words Christ's power is proved, and not his
infirmity. But take it which way you will, though this be the truth which I
have told; these words do nothing hinder Hilaries and Austens confession,
that Christ's infirmity was voluntary, where ours is necessary; and so
infirmity in him was not for want of strength, but for merit of
righteousness, and was both received and directed by his will and power. And
where you are so often on the hoigh to impair S. Austens credit with yours,
you shall do well to get you some more understanding in him, before you rush so
rashly against him, left if it come to the balance, whether you or S. Austen
be in an error, you find few friends so favorable, that will forsake him to
follow you. His resolution, which you may put off with pride, but you shall
never refute with reason, is this: August. de ciuitate Dei. li. 14. ca. 9.
Habemus ergo has affectiones ex huma^a conditionis infirmitate, non autem it a
Dominus Jesus, cuius and infirmit as fuit ex potestate. (...) etiam ipse
Dominus in forma serui agere vitam dignat us humanam, sed nullum habens omnin^
peccatum, adhibuit eas, vbi adhibendas esse iudicauit. Cum ergo cius in
Euangelio ista referuntur, quod Lazarum suscitaturus lachrymas fuderit, quod
propin quante passione tr^stis fuerit anima eius vsque ad mortem, non falso
vtique ista referuntur. Verum ille hos motus certa dispensationis gratia, ita
cum voluit, suscepit animo humano, vt cum voluit, factus est homo. We have
these affections (of fear and sorrow etc.) by the infirmity of man's condition,
but the Lord Jesus had them not so, whose infirmity was of his own power.
Wherefore the Lord, when he vouchsafed to lead an humane life in the form of
a servant, but utterly void of all sin, admitted those affections, when he
saw it fit to admit them. And in the Gaspell, when those things are reported of
him, as that he wept when he was about to raise Lazarus, and that his Passion
approaching, his soul was sorrowful unto death; these things are not falselie
written of him, but he admitted these motions in his humane mind for certain
purposes, even when he would, as when he would he was made man.

Defene. page 107. li. 20. 18.
I judge their very meaning to be, that here appeared not Christ's infirmity
only in suffering, but his divine power also in punishing, and this they
speak fully for us, and against you.] If you make them speak that they never
meant, they may chance to speak with you; but leave them to express their own
minds, and then they neither speak, nor mean with you. But what is the
reason, they so soon speak with you, where not five lines before you
controled their speech, as repugnant to the truth? have you now by your glozes
made them liars like your self? you should at least be more constant, if not
more prudent, then first to challenge in their speech a contrariety to the
truth, and then to claim a conformity to their sense. They meant no such thing,
as you make show of, but they speak of Christ's power, which stirred and
governed his affections, as he thought good, that they might declare him a true
man, and yet be parts of his obedience, and submission to his Father, though
withal they were religious and voluntary. For as he emptied and humbled
himself, so he weakened and troubled himself, when he saw time; not for want
of power, but of purpose so disposing and despensing his affections, that by
his virtue he might moderate them in his own person, and cure them in ours.

Defenc. page 107. li. 28.
Those other mystical and figurative sayings of Austen, Bid and Bernard, how
shall we admit them without better warrant? that Christ's bloodshed was to
signify, that Martyrs do shed their blood, what reason have we so to think?
or that his bloodshed should signify the purging of his Disciples hearts from
sin, yea or of all his Church in the whole world? It did not signify this,
but it did it indeed.] If their opinions of Christ's bloody Christ's bloody
sweat might hau^ signification as well as the water that ^anne out of his side.
sweat, be not to be admitted, because they bring no warrant besides
themselves for it, how should we admit your loose dreams and dangerous fancies
of a new found hell inflicted on the Soul of Christ in the Garden by the
immediate hand of God, which is not only strange, but repugnant to the
Scriptures? theirs is possible, and agreeable to the rules of faith; yours is
not. Why Christ sent out of his side, after his body was dead, first blood, and
then water, can any man give the reason? Saint Austen says, August. in Johan.
tract. 15.
De latere pendentis in cruce, lancea (...), sacramenta ecclesiae profluxerunt.
Out of Christ's side pierced with a spear, as he hanged on the cross, the
Sacraments of the Church issued forth. What warrant had he so to say? the
Scripture does not vouch so much; and yet the Church of God has ever since
regarded, and received that speech of his. So for Christ's bloody sweat,
finding no reason delivered in the Scripture, he descended to the
signification, which might be thereof, that Christ by sweating blood in his
whole natural body, foreshewed the martyrdomes of his mystical body, the
Church. You ask for a Reason.] The resemblance is evident, and the performance
consequent; greater reasons then which cannot be given of significations. You
like it not.] No marvel; nothing pleases you besides the wringing out of
this sweat by the divine power punishing. You have neither proof, nor truth
for your second death to be suffered at this time, and in this place; and yet
you would have your absurd conceits preferred before Saint Austens judgment.
It was above the course of nature, you grant; and since it was not natural, it
must be miraculous, if not mystical. Now if it were a miracle, there may no
reason be required of it, but it must be left to the power and will of the
doer. To what end Christ did it, if you like neither Austens, Prospers, Bedes
nor Bernards judgments in this case, know you any man so unwise, as to like
yours?

You say, it did not signify the purging of the earth from sin, it did it
indeed.] Did the bloody sweat of Christ in the Garden purge indeed all his
Church in the whole world from sin? what needed then his death and passion
afterward on the Cross? what needed his body be given for them, and his blood
to be (violently) shed for remission of sins, if this sweat did indeed purge
all our sins? but you speak in this, as you do in all other things, without
caring what you say, so you bring somewhat to continue your cauilling. This
sweat the Apostle calls Heb. 5.
tears, and joins them with Christ's vehement prayers in the garden, which he
says were heard. Then Christ's fervent desire to prevail in the work of our
redemption against all the hindrances thereof, might in all reason move him
to pray with tears, respecting our misery, and yet indignity, for whom he
prayed; and so be the cause of this bloody sweat: and your hell pains must
give place, till you find some better proof for them, then your bare
auouching, that this sweat might rise from the very pains of the damned,
which is your single supposall with far less warrant, then any thing that
Austen, Prosper, Bid or Bernard said. And as for your binding all their
significations and your imaginations in a bundell together; when you first
prove, that the Scriptures affirm any such thing, as the second death, or the
pains of the damned to be suffered by Christ, then we will talk what might
rise from your hell pains; in the mean time know you Sir wanderer, that if
the rest might be the causes of this bloody and voluntary sweat, then you
may put up your pen, and lay your unquiet head to rest.

Defenc. page 107. li 31.
Hitherto we have made it manifest that in truth you have nothing in all these
words against our Doctrine, that pains and sorrows were the true and proper
cause of Christ's dreadful agony; nor to prove that his mere bodily pains
or death was the whole cause. Now we are to show the like in his most woeful
complaint on the cross: where he says, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken
me.] And I have made it more manifest, that you have less for your doctrine of
the second death and the pains of the damned to be suffered in the Soul of
Christ, whiles he prayed in the Garden. For what reasons be these; Christ
feared and sorowed in the Garden, and he prayed so intentiuely that his sweat
was like blood: ergo, he suffered the second death and the pains of the
damned: except a man were disposed to run mad with reason? [He feared
somewhat else besides a mere bodily death.] What then? how many degrees and
causes of fear and sorrow have I showed, that might conioyne in Christ now
seeing in Gods presence and judgment the weight of our redemption, and the
number of our sins, together with the vengeance provoked by them, and the
power of Gods anger displeased with them, and yet no point nor part of the
second death to be suffered by him? if there might be any cause besides yours,
then yours can never be certainly concluded from the Scripture, which is the
thing I first affirmed to the Reader. You ask me where I read mine in the
word of God, and I ask you the like. The Text says, Christ feared and
sorrowed, but the cause of Christ's fear or sorrow is not there declared. Then
no cause being expressly mentioned, neither mine nor your, I lea^e it to the
censure of the Christian Reader, which of us two takes the surest course: I,
that (...) no cause but concording with the maine grounds of the Scriptures,
and such as you confess wanted not in Christ at that present, and whereto the
learned and Catholic Fathers give full consent and approbation; or you, that
wade alone by your self in your own conceits, such as have no foundation in
the word of God, and are repugnant to the Principles of Christian Religion
confirmed by the Scriptures, and confessed by the greatest pillars of Christ's
Church, next after the Apostles. And where you promise to show the like in
Christ's complaint on the Cross, I easily believe, you will perform the one,
as well as you did the other, by your own fancies without all regard of truth
or proof.

Defenc. page 107. li. 37.
You will a^ke me here what kind of forsaking may this be.] Loose not your
labor, I will ask you no such thing. What have I to do with your vntidie
devices wynoing words as men do chafe to and fro without any manner or offer
of proof? The question I did and do ask, is; not what you parle out of your
own platform, but how you can prove by the word of God, that forsaking in
this complaint of Christ's was either damnation, or the second death, which your
Reader perceaueth now to be your purpose, though you long dissembled it. Your
interlacing those words with qualified phrases serves but to save you from
apparent heresy and blasphemy. It makes no manner of proof, that those
words must so be understood, or that the pains of the damned may thence by
any color be concluded. [ Ibid. li. 3^.
I plainly showed you before, if you had regarded it.] And I more plainly
opposed those things against it, which you neither did, nor can answer: and
do you think, that neglecting what you list, I must be forced laboriously to
disprooue all your devices, before you show what dependence they have with the
Sacred Scriptures, or with the primative faith of Christ's Church? my grounds
excluding your exposition and conclusion, are to be seen in my Sermons page
32. 33. and are such, as you shall never defeat. The first is, that
dereliction and forsaking do no where throughout the Scriptures import
damnation, or the second death, which is your drift in this place; but are
always applied to the judgments of this life. The second, that in the wicked
castawaies it argues reprobation from grace, and desperation of glory, which
if any man imagine of Christ, it is rather furious blasphemy, then erroneous
folly. Thirdly, that in the godly the word used by Christ notes either
destitution of help, or diminution of comfort in time of trouble; but neither
in David, who first spoke them; nor in Christ do they with any show conclude
the true pains of the damned. Fourthly, that no construction must be made of
this word, that may decrease in Christ the fullness of truth and grace, which
never wanted in his Soul, or draw him within the compass of erroneous
mistrusting or mistaking Gods favor and counsel toward him. These grounds
standing good, which you shall never be able to remove, your warbling with
those words to make them pliable to your will, is but time and pains lost;
wind them which way you can, by example of any Scripture you shall never wrest
them to that height, which you desire. But because you are so far in love with
your own fancies, and my leisure now serves me better then it did before, let
us hear what kind of forsaking you would feign fasten to Christ's complaint
on the Cross.

Defenc. page 108. li. 1.
Christ being now in the feeling of infinite pains inflicted on him sundry
ways, and that directly from Gods proper wrath for our sins, he felt his
whole humane Nature for the time left all comfortless and alone, without any
joyous assistance of his Deity.] Do you enforce all this from the word for
saking, or would you add it to those words, which Christ spoke? either way
your ignorance or impudence is clear and manifest. For if you dare add so
many circumstances of so great importance to those words, you are not a
tolerable expounder, but a notable peruerter of Christ's words. If you would
conclude so much from the word, you show your self most ridiculous against all
the rules of Divine Doctrine, and humane sense to deduce all those sequels from
that one word. For neither infinite pains, nor from Gods proper wrath, nor in
Christ's whole humane Nature, nor all comfortless are necessary consequents to
that word; and yet grant all these, so far as any truth or experience
conuinceth them to be felt in this life, they no way amount to the second
death, or to the true pains of the damned, which is the thing you should and
would infer from this complaint.

Defenc. page 108. li. 7.
I mean his Godhead as it were withdrawing and hiding it self from him, for
that season of his Passion gave him no sense nor feeling of ease, comfort, or
joy.] Your own mouth testifies against you, that you do not expound, but
corrupt the Scriptures to serve your conceits. Begin with the last. Does not
the Apostle in plain words say, that Christ Heb. 12.
for the joy set before him endured the Cross? Who could set any joy before
him in that case, but God alone? then apparently did his Godhead set before him
assurance of joy, and that everlasting in the highest degree, which was so
great, that it led him with patience to endure the Cross. [He had no present
feeling thereof, you will say.] So you must say, or else in exact words you
show your self to contradict the spirit of God. But if God did propose it, and
Christ did most certainly know it, and expect it; had faith and hope in him no
present sense nor feeling? had not Christ far certainer and fuller knowledge
and sight of Gods presence, favor, and promises, then any faith or hope in us
can have? Romans 5.
If then we rejoice under the hope of glory, did not he? did not he know, that
he Luke 24.
was to suffer those things, and (so) to enter into his glory; when he called
them fools, and slow of heart, that believed not all that the Prophets have
spoken by the spirit, 1. Peter 1.
forewitnessing the sufferings of Christ, and the glory that should follow? Did
the spirit of God by David bear false witness, when he said of Christ, and in
Christ's person; I Acts 2.
beheld the Lord always before me at my right hand, that I should not be
shaken; therefore did mine heart rejoice, and my tongue was glad, and my flesh
shall rest in hope? Ease from pain he felt none; ne would he feel, till by
death he determined his sufferings, but comfort in his afflictions he could not
want, because he was not only patient and obedient to the will of God, and so
not void of comfort, when he had done the will of God, to receive his promises;
but even in the midst of his sharpest pains he saw the counsel of God for his
glorification, and our redemption; and beheld God as his Father most highly
pleased with him, though justly displeased with our sins, the smart whereof
he must feel in his flesh.

That therefore Christ's whole humane Nature on the Cross was all comfortless
and alone, is false doctrine, and repugnant not only to the words of David,
that Christ Psalm. 16.
beheld God always at his right hand, that he should not be moved; but even
to the manifest assertion of Christ himself, who said to his Disciples, John
16.
the hour is come, that you shall be scattered, and leave me alone; but I am
not alone, for the Father is with me. Now if God were always present with
Christ, that he should not be shaken, God was always well pleased with him.
Yea God was joined to him, not ingrace alone, as he is with us, but in nature
and person, as he is with no man else nor Angel. If then we have comfort from
Gods grace and spirit in our afflictions, how much more did consolations abound
in Christ, even as sufferings did? for since God is 2. Cor. 1.
the God of all comfort; who comfort us in all our troubles, that as the
sufferings of Christ abound in us, so our consolation (should) abound through
Christ; how is it possible, Christ should comfort us, if he were himself all
comfortless in his pains? shall we derive that from him, which he had not? or
rather is it impiety so much as to think, that any inward comfort wanted unto
Christ, who was personally united to God, and on whom the Esa. 11.
Spirit of God rested, (that is always continued with all fullness of grace
and truth) Esa. 11.
even the spirit of wisdom, and under standing, the spirit of counsel and
strength, the spirit of knowledge, and of the fear of the Lord? If this spirit
never departed from him, he could want neither peace nor joy in the holy Ghost,
and so no comfort incident to man's nature afflicted, as he then was, and would
be; yea that was the least degree of his comfort, which was common to him with
us, who yet derive all our comfort from him: he had the nearest, surest,
highest, and plentifullest spring of comfort in his own person, that any
creature was capable of. To make therefore his whole manhood all comfortless
without any inward peace or joy from Gods spirit, is a detestable doctrine,
subuerting the communion of both Natures in Christ, and so dissoluing the union
of his person, if neither part of his humane nature had any sense or feeling of
his Godhead.

Defenc. page 108. li. 5.
I say not he wanted now all assistance of his deity.] If he wanted peace and
comfort in the holy Ghost, if he had no longer any certain knowledge, nor
understanding of his fathers will, and if he felt inwardly in his humane soul
no persuasion, apprehension, nor expectation of his fathers presence, favor,
and promises; tell me what assistance he had of his Godhead, when all these
things failed in him? [ioious assistance Christ found no joy in his p^ine, but
comfort in his hope.
he had none.] Is it fit for such a wrangler, as you are, first to dishonor
the sufferings of Christ with the leaven of your fancies, and then to sprinkle
them with the holy water of your Phrases? how often has it been told you,
that for obedience to the will of his father, the son of God would use no
power to repel his pains, nor to diminish his sense thereof, but only
patience, whereby we might be assured, that he felt his afflictions on the
Cross with quicker sense and greater pains, then we are able with any
patience to endure? And is this all that now you would say, that Christ found
no joy in his pains? what Cow-keeper does not know, that pain is pain, and
not joy? but was Christ's pain such that it excluded his soul from the
remembrance or sense of all Gods graces so richly powered on him, and promises
so faithfully made unto him? you were best come in with your mooueable fittes
of astonishment, and tell us that in one and the same sentence, when Christ
said, My God, my God, he was in full and perfect assurance and assistance of
Gods favor, whom else he could not call his God, if he felt no comfort in him,
that is the God of all comfort; and when he pronounced the next syllable, why,
he presently fell into a sudden pangue, where he was forsaken, and left all
comfortless and alone according to your devices. And if any man be so wise, to
let you lead him through such thorns, as to grant in Christ on the Cross
sometimes hope of glory, and sometimes fear of confusion, sometimes comfort
and suddenly distrust of his salvation, sometimes Gods favor and full
assistance, as in affliction, and by and by the second death and the pains of
the damned; he may dally with faith and infidelity, with heaven and hell, with
Christ and Beliall as you do. But if it were not possible for Christ
crucified, being the wisdom and power of God, to be tossed and tumbled with
such contrary blasts, then has the forsaking, which he complained of, an
other manner of sense, then you imagine.

And whatsoever meaning you ascribe unto it, you may not with a word, that
admits diverse interpretations, impugn the plain and open words and deeds
of our Savior, in which is no question. As when the high Priest asked him,
Mar. 14.
art thou Christ the son of the blessed? Jesus said I am; and ye shall see
the son of man sit at the right hand of power, and come in the clouds of
heaven. And when the Thief, that was crucified with him, said unto him; Luc.
22.
Lord remember me, when thou come into thy kingdom; he answered, Verily I
say unto thee, to day shall thou be with me in Paradise. As also breathing out
his soul, he said, Ibidem.
Father into thine hands I commend my spirit. If to be the son of God, and to
sit at Gods right hand in glory, if to dispose of Paradise at his pleasure, and
to commit his spirit into his Fathers hands, be no signs nor proofs of
comfort and joy, then let your exposition bear some show: but if these be more
then arguments of most excellent honor and glory, not only reserved for him,
and confirmed unto him, but assumed and professed by him, even when he was
condemned and crucified; who that had any care of truth, or respect to reason,
would auouche, that Christ's Defenc. page 108. li 9.
godhead gave him for that season of his passion no sense nor feeling of
comfort and joy neither in spirit, soul, nor body?

Defenc. page 108. li. 16.
This was that extreme humiliation and exin^nition of nature, wherein God
spared not his son, and wherein Christ spared not himself:] If you may sit
judge not only over Prophets and Apostles, but over Christ himself, you will
soon appoint him to suffer, what pleases you; but when you come to make
proof thereof, you betray the violence of your spirits, that must have all
things give way to your wills, and the weakness of your judgments, that
discern not humility from infidelity, nor religious patience from hellish
astonishment. Philip. 2.
Exinanition and humiliation the Apostle names in Christ, but either
voluntary, and either in comparison of his divine glory and majesty; wherein
being equal with his father, he took on him the form of a servant, and
Christ emptied himself of glory not of grace.
humbled himself, becoming obedient to the death of the cross, The Apostle
neither says nor means, that Christ emptied himself of all grace or comfort
in his whole humane nature, but laid aside the use and show of his divine power
and honor, whiles for love to us he performed the work of our redemption in
the shape of a servant, and became obedient unto the death of the cross, which
was painful and shameful, but not astonished with the pains of the damned,
nor subjected to the second death. This is your yarne, which you would feign
weaue into the Apostles words, but truth and falsehood have no fellowship; no
more have your dreams and the Apostles doctrine. As much it makes for you,
that God spared not his own son, but gave him for us all, whence you may as
well conclude, that God adjudged his son to everlasting destruction and
damnation, for that were indeed not to spare him, as that he inflicted on him
the true pains of hell, least he should seem to spare him. The Apostles
words expound themselves; God spared not his son, but gave him for us; This
giving him into the hands of sinners for our sakes was Gods not sparing him,
otherwise that God spared him in nothing, which either his power was able to
impose, or our sins did deserve, this is doctrine for him that means to be
an Apostata from all faith and truth, to set the father at as great enmity
with his son, as our sins did deserve, or could provoke. The higth of
Christ's not sparing himself was, as the Apostle teaches, his obedience unto
the death of the Cross; if you will have Christ's obedience stretch to the
second death of the damned, you must get you some new Scriptures; these that
are already written, witness no such thing.

How bent you will lack no Scripture. For rather then you will acknowledge
your want in that behalf, you will make every Chapter throughout the Bible to
speak of your dreams. For even (...). page (...).
here you quote Deutero: 10: 17 and Luc: 16: 17; in the first of which places
the Scripture says: Deuteronomy. 10. 17.
The Lord your God is God of Gods, and Lord of Lords, a great God, mighty, and
terrible, which accepts no persons, nor takes rewards. What is this to
Christ's sufferings or to the pains of the damned? was it after noone, or
after midnight, when you quoted these places, you knew not why nor wherefore?
So play you with Luc: 16: 17. where it is said, Luc. 16. 17.
It is more easy that heaven and earth should pass away, then that one tittle
of the Law should fall. Will you hence infer, which is the thing that you
should prove; ergo Christ was forsaken of all outward and inward comfort and
joy? besides you no man has the grace to make such fair and clear
demonstrations of your doctrine.

Defenc page 108. li. 21.
This forsaking or dereliction beseems the time, place, person and cause of
Christ our ransom payer, and purchaser of salvation with the price of his own
most direful pains: not any other far fet, or hardly applied, and strangely
devised by the brains of men. As i^ truth all those other senses hereof are
which you rather embrace.] Somewhat it was you mustered four places of
Scripture so wisely chosen, and well becoming your cause, before you would
offer to determine the matter; and now puffed up with pure pride, and pricked on
with singular disdain, you censure the whole Church of Christ, and the chief
lights and leaders thereof (I still except the Apostles) as peruerters of the
Scriptures, traducing their expositions, as far fet, hardly applied, and
strangely devised by the brains of men. But if you so much despise their
learning, religion, and judgments, who were Gods blessed instruments to
maintain his truth against all heresies, and his Church against all
Schismatics, and think your brains to be more than the brains of a man;
take heed lest your Reader begin to suspect you have the brains of some other
kind. If Athanasius, Hilarie, Chrysostom, Basil, Cyrill, Epiphanius, Jerome,
Ambrose, Augustine, Origin, Tertullian and Leo may not be thought, in the
verdict of any wise or sober man, as likely to understand the sense of Christ's
words on the cross, as your humorous and presumptuous, shall I say brain,
which you so much abase in others, or head without brain; then I must confess
my fault, who love not to lean to mine own wit in cases of faith, but rather
prefer the religious and laborious inquiries of others, chiefly of learned
and ancient Fathers, where it concerns matters of salvation, and the grounds
of Christian religion, which they carefully received, and faithfully delivered
to Gods people so many hundred years before we were borne. And what ma^uell
you be so bold with the brains of men, as you term it, when you take upon
you to ouerrule the words of the Holy Ghost? For where in the sacred Scriptures
the blood of Christ shed for us, is recorded to be the true price of our
redemption, you controlling as well the Apostles as the Fathers, tell us here
that Christ Pa. 108. li. 23.
purchased our salvation with the price of his most direful pains; where by
direful pains you mean hell pains, that your speech in this case may be as
new as your faith. Belike then in your conceit Peter, Paul, and John, though
Christ's Apostles, were never well Catechized nor instructed in their faith,
since they affirm, 1. Pet. 1.
we were redeemed by the precious blood of Christ, and Ephesians. 1.
we have redemption in Christ through his blood, and Christ Revel. 5.
by (his) blood redeemed us unto God; which lesson you like not, and therefore
you say our salvation was purchased with the price of Christ's direful pains,
that is, of hell pains suffered in the soul of Christ; which has no blood,
unless you can as easily devise new blood for Christ's soul, as you have done
a new hell for Christ's sufferings. Till you so do, give me and other Christians
leave to think, that the second death which you dream of, did neither beseem
the time, place, person nor cause of Christ our Redeemer, and therefore his
words on the cross could have no such reference, as you have riddled in this
place.

Defenc. page 108. li. 27.
Your expositions are six in number; the first is, that when Christ on the
cross cried out, My God my God why have thou forsaken me, by this word ME he
should mean his Church: for which you have no reason in the world, but the
bare names of Austen, Leo, Athanasius.] The more the senses may be of these
words, and every of them agreeing with Christian piety, as I professed of
them, the less soundness is in your conclusion, that would infer upon a
strange and needless sense of these words your pains of the damned to be then
suffered in the soul of Christ. And in denying your direful exposition of
Christ's words, I have all the Fathers of Christ's Church for 1400 years of
the same opinion with me. And if your chief and capital proofs were such
news to them, what think you was the rest of your new faith? [ They are six
in number, you say, and they all can not stand together.] You are nimble in
trifles, and in substance no body. Nor I, nor any man living may take upon us
to determine, which shall be the meaning of Christ's words, when the words
themselves admit and allow many senses. In this very case the persons and the
parts forsaken; the graces and degrees wherein, and how far that dereliction
might extend, receive diverse opinions; and though they be different, they are
not repugnant the one to the other. And yet it is no news in many places of
holy Scripture, by reason of the different or repugnant significations of the
words, circumstances of the sentence and degrees of extension and intension in
many things, to find contrary judgments of men even of the same words and
things in holy writ. Neither do diverse expositions disgrace the word of God,
so long as they contain nothing repugnant to the text it self in that or any
other place; but show rather the depth of Gods wisdom, which incloseth many
things in few words, and often passes the reach and search of man's wit. But
you, that carpe at every thing besides your own conceits, would feign make
your Reader believe, that sieve fingers and one hand, ten toes and two feet can
not stand together.

For the matter it self, as dereliction is confessed on all sides, because it
is mentioned in the words of Christ, so it may be questioned; of what persons,
to what part, and in what things Christ conceined and intended that for saking
of which he spoke. For as God is said in the Scriptures to be present with us
diverse ways and to diverse effects, namely when he lightneth, strengthens,
and inwardly guides us with the grace of his spirit, or outwardly blesses our
ways, and hears and helps us in time of trouble; so when he withdraws or
with holds any of these things from us, whether it be his help, his
blessing, or his grace; he is said to depart, and to forsake us. Now if we take
forsaking in Christ's words for the losing or lacking of Gods What forsaking
could not be found in Christ.
favor, grace, or spirit; it was not possible that any such forsaking should
at any time be found in Christ our head, though the members of Christ do all
well deserve to be deprived of all these things, and were deprived of them,
till by Christ they were restored. Since then this kind of forsaking could
never be verified of Christ's person, but only of his members, and he suffered
for us, Ephesians. 2. 16.
to reconcile us to God by his Cross; these words of Christ on the Cross some
learned Fathers have expounded to contain the reconciliation of man to God,
who for sin had before forsaken us, and was now pacified by Christ's blood, and
an entrance given us to the Father by virtue of Christ's oblation and petition
for us. Wherefore in their judgments, as Christ then suffered for us, so he
prayed in these words for us, and the near conjunction of Christ with us, as
the head with his members, made him cover us, and present us to God under his
own name, who was then and there no Redeemer of himself, but of us. Examples
of this speech they have many and good: as where Christ said to Paul, Acts 9.
Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me; that is, my members? And again; I am
Jesus whom thou persecutest; that is, whose members thou pursuest. And in one
Matthew. 25.
Chapter, where Christ foresheweth the separation that he will make between
the sheep and the goats, he calls his brethren and servants by the name of
himself no less than two and thirty times, saying: Ibid. verse. 35.
I was hungry, and ye gave ME meat; I thirsted, and ye gave ME drink; I was a
stranger, and ye lodged ME; verse. 36.
I was naked, and ye clothed ME; I was sick, and ye visited ME: and so forth
to the number that I named. And when the good marvelled how ever they affourded
any of these things to him, he answers them; verse 40.
Verily I say unto you, in as much as ye did it unto one of the least of my
brethren, ye did it unto me. So that this exposition of Christ's speech
concerns directly the work that Christ had then in hand for us, and wants
not Christ's warrant for the use of his own words; and this sense of that his
prayer presenting and commending us to God, that were forsaken of God, was of
no less weight for us than the rest of his sufferings.

Defenc. page 108. li. ^0.
Show me their reasons, press not their authorities.] So says he, that has
neither reason nor authority, and yet presses his fancy upon the whole
Church against all reason and authority. Their reasons I have showed to stand
on a better foundation than your direful and infernal pains, or your
astonished confusion and destitution of all inward and outward joy and comfort.
And could you with half that soundness make good your hellish exposition, you
should not show so great pride as you now do. For I utterly deny, that your
exposition has any ground in the word of God, but rests only on your single
and silly surmises in favor of your own fancies. And since you demand of all
the Fathers a reason of all their expositions, how come you against all reason
and truth to conclude the pains of the damned to be suffered in Christ's
soul by pretense of this dereliction, when as the word thorowout Dereliction
in the Scriptures never implies the pains of the damned.
the Scriptures never implies the present state or pains of the damned? What
defense can you have for your desperate adventure to plunge Christ's soul into
the second death, which the Scripture calls the Lake burning with fire and
brimstone, since you want all, as well divine, as humane reason and authority?

Defenc. page 1. 8. li. 31.
Your self reject them when you list, though when you list again, they must
be your best, yea your only reason.] A lie is a good shift with you, or else you
would often lie in the mire. I do no where refuse the faith professed and
preached in the primitive Church of Christ by the learned and ancient Pastors
and Guiders thereof; I openly confess Wherein we should follow the Fathers.
to God and this Realm, I should never sleep quietly, if I saw my self to be
of another faith than they were. In other things not pertinent to our salvation
and redemption, where they themselves took liberty, either to dissent each
from other in some questions, or sometimes upon better advice to correct or
moderate their former opinions, I think my self not burdened in conscience,
if I with modesty make choice, what I like best. Neither do I account it any
disgrace, to make their faith deduced and confirmed by the word of God my best
or only reason, since all heretics have subverted themselves and their
followers, whiles they would show their inventions, and with plausible reasons
fasten their fancies on the sacred Scriptures, not contenting themselves with
those sober and sound interpretations of hard places, which the Church of
Christ with long experience and great diligence had examined and tried. And
howsoever for want of knowledge in the Hebrew tongue they might sometimes come
short, yet this was their general care in all their expositions and
applications, never to swerve from the Canons of the Christian faith, I speak
of those, whom the Church accepted and allowed for truly Catholic. Yet to
their interpretations I bind no man's conscience, farther than evident truth
shall appear to be in them; only I wish others, and even you, Sir Inuentour,
not ouerhastily to despise their judgments, which the Church of God has so
many hundred years reverenced and followed. Howbeit, this is a bar sufficient
to your bold devices, that where you would derive your hell pains from
Christ's complaint. on the Cross, I bring you five or six expositions of those
words out of the ancient and catholic fathers, whereof you shall never be
able to refute one, which no way touch your hellish torments, and thereby teach
you, if you be capable either of verity or sobriety, that your conclusion more
then halteth in the highest mysteries of christian Religion.

Def. page 108 li. 33. li. 38.
If these Fathers be understood, as before I have showed Cyprians meaning to
be, then they agree just with our mind herein: for then doubtless it was for
the infinite pains, which now he felt in our stead, that he so cried out, My
God my God why have thou for sakenmee.] After you have played your part with
reuelling at their expositions, will you now flatter them afresh, and join
hands with them, so they will be of your mind? In vain do you strive to bring
them to that which they never intended, but ever detested. What kind of
dereliction Cyprian confesses to have been in Christ, is evident by his
words: Cyprianus de passione Christi.
Quod pro eis voluisti intelligi, qui deseri a Dea propter peccata meruerant,
quorum reconciliationis causam agebas, in qua all gator subtilis pro seruis
seruilem non dedignaris accipere personam, ET IN TANTVM infirmis compatcris, vt
nec crucifigi, nec mori, nec crubescas, nec for^ides, altitudinem tuam
derelinquens ad tempus, gloriae tuae maiest^tem euacuans, vt redeant dispersi,
and respirent derelicti. The words of thy complaint on the Cross (says
Cyprian to Christ) thou would have to be understood for (...), who had
deserved by their sins to be for saken of God; whose cause, to reconcile
them, (...) then vndertookest; and as a most skillfull Patron for servants thou
did not disdain to take the person of a servant, and SO FAR thou did
compassionate the weak, that thou wast neither afraid, nor ashamed to be
crucified and to die, leaving for a time thine own higth, and emptying the
majesty of thy glory, that the dispersed might return, and the forsaken might
take breath, (or comfort). The forsaking, which Cyprian here describes in
Christ, consists in leaving of his divine power and glory for a time, and in
abasing himself SO FAR, as to die the death of the Cross for their sakes,
but no farther. And these words he says Christ would have understood to be a
cause of their Reconciliation to God, who had deserved for their sins to be
forsaken of God, and therefore he adds presently (...).
I consider thee Lord, on that cross, where thou seemedst without help (or
forsaken), how with an Imperial power thou did send the thief before to thy
kingdom by assuming of whom it is manifest how much thou had prevailed for
those, that were forsaken. You would feign so wrest Cyprians words, that he
should say Christ undertook our cause and no more, but he withal affirms,
that Christ took upon him our person, and that his careful complaint were the
words of his beloved. If the words were spoken as well in our person, as in
our cause, then we were indeed forsaken, and Christ by laying down his glory
for a time, and obeying his fathers will, did by those words declare, that he
reconciled us to God, when we were forsaken, and in sign thereof with full
power made the thief partaker of his kingdom, that had deserved, and was
condemned to die the death of a for lorne and forsaken malefactor.

Defenc. page 109. li. 2.
If you think they meant that Christ spoke this by some strange metonimy,
naming himself, but meaning his Church, that can have no good sense.] I shall
not need to tell you The first sense of (...) complaint on the Cross.
what I think, let them speak themselves, what they meant, and when you have
heard their meaning out of their own words, you shall see how much you abused
Cyprian to make him speak that he neuerment. It is plain enough which
Athanasius says. Athana^ius de incarnatione Christi.
Christ spoke those words in our person, for he was never forsaken of God. and
Austen is as evident. August epist. 120.
why disdain we to hear the voice of the body by the mouth of the head? to
me, that is to my body, my church, and my little ones. So was it said, why have
thou forsaken me; even as it was said he that receaueth you receaueth me. No
doubt we were in those words, and the head did speak for his body. And
likewise Leo Leo Sermon. 16. de P^ss. Dom.
Christ spoke those words in the voice of his Redeemed. Neither are they alone
in this opinion. Theodoret satith Theodoret. i^ Psalm 21.
because Christ was the head of man's nature, he speaks for the whole nature
of man. So Bid (...) a in Psalm. 21.
Quare dereliquistime, idestmeos? ideo scilicet quia long te fecerunt peccata
esse a salute mea, id est meorum. Hec verbaplane innuunt caput non in persona
sua hic loqui. Quomodo enim derelictus, vellonge a salute factus posset esse
ille? Why have thou forsaken me, that is mine? because sin did put thee far
from saving me, that is mine. These words do plainly prove, that the head does
not here speak in his own person. For how could he possiblely be forsaken, or
removed from salvation? And Euthymius (...) in Psalm. 21.
The Lord takes unto him the person of man's nature, as lincked to him; and
says, why have thou forsaken me (now) a man, that is the whole nature of man?
And Damascene. (...) Orthodoxe fidei. li. 3. ca. 24.
Christ was never forsaken of his own Godhead, but we were those that were
forsaken and despised. Wherefore appropriating our person, he prayed in that
sort. And expressing what it is to appropriate, or assume an others person, he
says. As when a man does put on an others person of piety or charitic, and in
his steed uses speech for him (...), which agrees not unto himself. If then
we take dereliction for the want of Gods favor, spirit, and grace, as these
Fathers do; it is evident Christ could not so be forsaken; and consequently
these words in that sense, which is proper to the Children of Gods wrath,
could not agree to the person of Christ, though it were true in his members,
that they by nature were forsaken and destitute of grace, till he reconciled
them to God, and diffused his spirit into their hearts to make them partake^s
of his holiness. And as for the strangeness of the metonimy, count you that
strange, which Christ uses in one Chapter more then thirty times, and find you
no strangeness in your conceits, which are no where throughout the Scriptures
either expressed, or so much as coherent with the continual speech and plain
rules of the Scriptures?

Defenc. page 109. li. 5.
That can have no good sense. For how can it be that we were forsaken of God,
when Christ was on the Cross? Nay even then and there we were purchased unto
God, not forsaken by God. Does any man use, when he would make reasons for his
opinion, to refu^e himself, as you do, we were purchased you say on the
Cross unto God; you must add, by the blood of his son, which was also God,
for that Saint Paul in the pl^ce, which you cite, names as the true and right
price of this purchase. God purchased (his Church) with his own blood, and not
by the direful pains of hell, as your brain has lately broched. Now if we
were purchased on the Cross, then till we were purchased, we were enstranged
from God, and so forsaken of him. And what hinders this complaint or prayer of
Christ's to bear witness, that we were now reconciled and purchased unto God,
which before were forsaken and separated from God? For those words do not
imply, that we still continued forsaken, but that formerly without Christ we
were utterly forsaken, and now by him restored to favor. And the goodness of
this sense, I do not think but any man of mean capacity will soon
conceive, and judge it more fruitful for us to know, that by Christ's mediation
and oblation on the cross we are now no longer strangers unto God, nor
forsaken of him, as before we were for our sins; then that Christ suffered
the direful and infernal pains and death of the damned in his Soul, before
we could be freed from our sins. For of the first there can be no question,
and of the second, you neither have, nor ever shall be able to bring one line
or letter of holy Scripture.

Defenc page 109. li. 7.
Again your own rule is, which I like well, that no figure is to be admitted
in Scriptures where there is no ill nor hurtful sense following literally.
But I have showed a little before a plain, easy and Christian sense hereof
taking it literally.] The rule is most needful to preserve the right sense of
the Scripture. For if every man may elude with figures that, which likes not
his humor, we shall have little truth left in the word of God. But even by
that rule your sense of Christ's complaint is quite overthrown, because your
exposition plainly fastneth desperation for the time to the Soul of Christ.
For all hope has joy and comfort in it. Romans 12.
Rejoicing in hope, says the Apostle. If then Christ never forsaken of hope
and comfort.
Christ for that season of his Passion were all comfortless, as you pretend,
and had no sense nor feeling of any comfort or joy, he had no hope; for hope
brings joy and comfort. And what is no hope, but despair? that therefore the
litterall sense of these words neither is, nor can be true, taking dereliction
for the inward forsaking of Gods grace and spirit, as well the Scriptures, as
the Fathers, whom I have produced, do with one voice confirm. Saint Austen
may serve to show the reason, that led him and the rest so to think. August.
in Psalm. 43.
Ille caput nostrum, vocem de cruce non dixit suam, sed nostram. non enim
vnquam dereliquit eum Deus, sed propter nos dixit hoc, Deus, Deus meus vt quid
me dereliquisti. Christ our head uttered not his own words, but ours. For God
never at any time forsook him. But for us he said, My God my God, why have
thou forsaken me?

Defenc. page 109. li. 19.
Finally this first sense is contrary to your second and third following: also
to your fifth and sixth senses. If either of these be taken as the true meaning
of this place, it cannot possibly stand with the rest.] I did not profess to
discuss the likeliest sense of those words; It sufficed me to let you see the
weakness of your cause in deriuing your hell pains from Christ's complaint on
the cross, by this that twelve ancient and learned Fathers did diversely sift
and examine those words, and yet none of them ever lighted on your second
death, or on the forsaking, which you labor to establish in the soul of
Christ. Now if the words do tolerably bear so many interpretations, what
assurance had you thence to conclude your hellish confusion, which you imagine
in the Savior of the world? yea grant the expositions were contrary, which
indeed are somewhat different, according as the word of dereliction is applied
and intended, that makes the more against you, and hinders not me. For still
I urge the words, which you stand on, do necessarily infer no such sense, as
you would fasten to them. The thing, that I press, is this, that there are
many other senses of these words approved and preferred by the consent of the
best writers old and new; and yours of all others, as it has no consent of
Christ's Church, ne was ever heard of before our age, so has it no foundation
in the Sacred Scriptures. You would disgrace the Fathers as iuuentors of
strange and new senses, but you little remember all this while, that of all
others yours is the latest, absurdest, and least likely sense of that
complaint. And yet if you wrest it to the lowest step of dereliction, that this
life knows, or the Scripture here (...), it may amount to desperation, but
never to real and actual damnation.

Defenc. page 109. li. 23.
Your second sense what is it? even this that Christ's humane Nature was left
helpless to the rage of the Jews, which is a kind of forsaking. This seems
to come nearest indeed to your liking, but as I said thi^ is directly
contrary to your first sense, and to the rest following.] They that give
diverse senses of any places in Scripture, do not mean they The second sense
of Christ's complaint on the cross.
shall be wholly like, or the same; for then they were not diverse; but
according to the variety of significations, and circumstances offered by the
words, they vary their expositions. So here, if we take dereliction for loss
of grace, then that sense of the word could not agree to Christ, but to the
reprobate without Christ, or to the rest before they be engraffed into Christ,
and consequently me in Christ's words must signify my Members, that were one
body with him. If we take it for lack of help in time of trouble, then it
might well agree unto the person of Christ, who was forsaken, that is left in
his affliction, and not delivered from it, till he died, that we might ever
after be restored, and reconciled to the favor of God. Which comes nearest
to my liking, I never acquainted you; the places which you quote, prove no
such thing; they only show, that this exposition has sufficient foundation in
other places of Scripture, where the word forsaking is used to the like intent.
Howbeit there is no cause that I, or you should mislike this exposition; and
the trifles, which you object against it, will confirm as much.

Defenc. page 109. li. 29.
There is surely no reason, nor show of Reason, that Christ should here so
mournfully and so ^ncomfortably complain, that God had forsaken him, if it
were only, but for such distresses as the godly also do equally suffer at the
hands of evil men.] Had you but perused the places, by which you conclude my
liking of this Exposition, you should have seen Reason, and reason enough for
Christ to be thus affected in his extreme miseries, as well as his Church is
in the like, or less. Had the Church of God no reason to say in the Prophet
Esaias. Esa. 49.
The Lord has forsaken me? or did God want reason in his answer, when he
said; Esa. 54. ver. 7.
for a while I forsook thee, for a moment in (mine) anger I hid my face from
thee? If then God had Reason to say to his Church, Ibid. ver. 6.
the Lord has called thee a woman forsaken, and afflicted in spirit, could
Christ want reason in his intolerable pains on the Cross to complain, that
he was now a long time left in them without help or ease? as for the equal
sufferings of the godly at the hands of men, on which you would take advantage.
I have showed the difference before. When pains in others grow sharpest, then
sense decaieth, and'death approaches; in the pains whereof men cannot express
how much nature misliketh and abhors the pain. In Christ it was otherwise:
his body being in exquisite pains on every side, and in every part from
Christ's patience was at the highest proof before he complained on the cross.
top to toe, and hanging in that plight now three hours on the cross, when
the pain was greatest, and himself weakest, his sense was quickest, which
could not be overwhelmed in him, as it is in us; but he endured most horrible
anguish all that time, and therefore when his patience was at the highest
proof, he had more than reason to complain, that he had long been left in
that extremity without assistance or deliverance; and he that doubts
thereof, shows that his fancy does ouerrule his reason, and his will does
undermine his wit.

Defenc. page 109. li. 35.
Note this well, that no godly (...) nor martyr did ever ascribe thi^ forsaking
of themselves to God in the time of their martyrdomes.] But note this better,
that you avouch a notable ^alsehood even against the express witness of the
Holy Ghost. When the Angel of God Judge. 6. v. 13.
appeared to Gedeon, and said unto (...), The Lord is with thee thou valiant
man; Gedeon answered, A^ my Lord, if the Lord be with us, why then is all this
come upon us? did not the Lord bring us out of Egypt? but now the Lord has
forsaken us, and delivered us into the hands of the Midianites. So the godly by
the mouth of Jeremy; Ier. 14. v. 8. 9.
O the hope of Israel, the (...) thereof in the time of trouble, why art thou
as a stranger in the land, and as a strong man that can not belpe? thy name is
called upon us, forsake us not. And speaking of the captivity of Gods people,
says, Lament. (...). verse. 5. 20.
Our necks are under persecution, we are weary and have no rest. Wherefore
do thou forget us for ever, and forsake us so long time? Yea the godly in
far less afflictions than was Christ on the cross, have used far more
grievous complaints. Psalm. 89.
Thou have rejected and abhorred thine aneinted, thou have broken the covenant
of thy servant, and profaned his crown to the ground. Lord how long will thou
hide thy self, for ever? shall thy wrath burn like fire? Now if martyrs do
not confess before their enemies and persecuters, that God has forsaken them,
what is that to this purpose, so long as they in their prayers to God desire
him not to forsake them; and their flesh in their torments strugleth and
strives, as neither willing nor able to bear the burden?

Again Christ's prayers made with so loud a voice in the ears of all his
adversaries, had an other meaning, then to acknowledge, as they objected unto
him, that he was indeed forsaken of God; which was to hasten now the time of
his death for an end God showed by the present (...) that he had not forsaken
his son.
of his pains, and to besecch his father, that had all this while forborne to
show any open sign of liking and love toward him being so much afflicted and
reproched by the Jews, now when he should leave this life, to let them all see
how much God regarded and glorified the person of his Son: both which God
accordingly performed: for straightwayes with a second prayer Christ commending
his spirit into his Fathers hands, did voluntarily, but miraculously breathe
out his soul; and Matthew. 27. verse. 51.
BEHOLD (says the Scripture, that is, immediately, and to all their
admirations) the veil of the Temple did rent in twain, the earth did quake,
the stones did cleave, 52.
and the graves did open; which things were so fearful and wonderful, that
when Verse. 54.
the Centurion, and they that were with him watching Jesus, saw the earth
Quake, and the things that were done, they greatly feared, and said, truly
this man was the son of God. Here is the intent and effect of Christ's
complaint on the cross expressed, that when he had now three hours endured
most extreme pains in all parts of his body, and heard the insolent and
pestilent reproaches of his persuers obiecting to him, that he did falsely call
himself the son of God, since in his greatest necessity God did neither
deliver him, nor any way regard him; he at the time appointed by his father,
made his complaint to God with a loud voice, that they all might hear him,
that he was now a long time forsaken, that is LEFT in this anguish and
ignominy without any show of his fathers love toward him. Whereupon presently
Christ before John 18.
Knowing all that should come unto him, and so knowing what should be the issue
of this his prayer to his no small comfort was permitted to breath out his
soul with great power, and the temple, the earth, the Rocks renting, shaking
and cleaving asunder gave manifest testimony to those that watched him, that he
was the son of God, for so much as all these things were done at his petition,
to declare that God had not forsaken his son, though he suffered him to die
that death on the cross for causes then to them unknown. And so this prayer,
which you would have to be a most mournful and uncomfortable complaint of
inward forsaking in soul and spirit, was an effectual and powerful prayer
provoking God his father to demonstrate by most maruailous signs and wonders
the exceeding love and honor, that he bare to the tormented and despised
person of his son. This Athanasius observed before me. Lo (says he)
Athanasius contra (...) oration 4.
upon Christ's speech, why have thou forsaken me, the father showed himself to
be even then in Christ, as ever before. For the earth knowing her Lord to
speak, straightway trembled, and the veil rent in twain, and the Sun did
hide himself, and the Rocks claue insunder, and the Graves were opened, and
the dead in them rose. And that which was (no les^e) maruailous, the standers
by, which before denied him, seeing what came to pass, confessed him truly to
be the son of God. This Bernard says was the dereliction, that Christ meant
in his complaint. Bernardus d^ verbis Esai^ Sermon. 5.
Quasi qu^dam ibi derelictio fuit, vbi nulla fuit in tanta necessitate virtut
is exhibitio, nulla maiestatis ostensio. There was (on the Cross) a kind of
forsaking (of Christ,) where there was in so great necessity no demonstrance of
his power, no declarance of his majesty.

Defenc. page 110. li..
It is a great shame to imagine that Christ was less able to endure such a
dereliction, or that he would thus complain and mourn for it only.] It is a
greater shame and sin first to mistake, and then to disgrace the words of
Christ. What rule either of reason or piety could hinder our Savior (when his
time drew near, that he would die, and ease himself of his exceeding pains
on the cross,) earnestly to call to God, even now to declare, which he had all
this while refrained, what account he made of that person, whom the Jews and
Gentiles so much despised and oppressed? was it any shame for the manhood of
Christ to say, my God, my God, why have thou (so long) forsaken me; without any
public sign or show, that thou love and fauourest me, whom this nation had
so much wronged and blasphemed? or is it of late become so shameful a thing
with you, that Christ should complain he was forsaken and left in the hands of
his persuers without help or ease? both old and new writers even of the best
learned, that have been in Christ's Church, have thought it no shame for Christ
in that very respect so to speak. Hieronym. in Matthew ca. 27.
Marvel not (says Ierom) at Christ's complaint of being forsaken, when thou
see the scandal of his cross. (...). de fide li. 2. ca. 3.
He speaks as a man, says Ambrose (which was no shame for him to do)
because being in danger we think our selves forsaken of God. The same words
(...) in Mar. ca. 14.
Bid, (...) in (...) ca. 27.
Rabanus, and (...) in (...) ca. 27.
Aquinas repeat and follow. Theodoret says; Christ (...). in (...). 21.
calls that a dereliction, which was a permission of the divinity, that the
humanity should suffer. Christ would endure (says Austen) this unto death in
the sight of his enemies, that they might take him as one forsaken. Lyra. (...)
Mat. ca 27.
Dixit (...) derclictum a deo (...), quia dimittebat cum in manibus
occidentium. Christ says he was forsaken of God his father, because he was
left in the hands of those that slew him. And so our new writers. August epist.
120
(...) in Mat. ca. 27.
Hic questus est se in manibus impiorum adomnem ipsorvm libidinem a patre
derelictum. Christ here complained (says Bucer) that he was forsaken of his
father (or left) in the (...) of the wicked to endure all their rage.
Bullinger. Bullingerus in Matthew. ca. 27.
Derelinquere sieve deserere in (...) est permittere. To forsake or leave (in
Christ's words on the Cross) is to permit. So that this was Christ's meaning,
why do thou suffer me to be thus afflicted? why do thou permit these
things to mine enemies? when will thou deliver me? Munster: Munsterus in Psalm.
21.
haec Christi verbanon impatientiam aliquam, aut diffiden^tiam prae se ferunt
etc: these words of Christ, (My God my God why have thou forsaken me?) show no
impatience, or diffidence, but declare that he was a true man, and that he had
truly suffered.

And what if, as some learned Fathers conceive, Christ did not grievously
complain in those words, that he was forsaken, but thereby led his enemies to
look and search in the Psalms and Prophets for the cause, why the messiah
should be so forsaken and delivered into the hands of sinners, as they saw he
was? August. epist. 120.
Christ does not say (says Austen) my God, my God, why have thou forsaken me,
sed causum commonuit requirendam, cum addidit, vt quid dereliquisti me, id est
propter quid, quam ob causam? but he admonished the cause to be searched, when
he added, why have thou forsaken me, that is to what end, and for what cause?
for truly there was a cause, and that no small cause, why God would not
deliver Christ from the hands of the Jews, but leave him in the power of his
persecutors, till he died. Leo likewise. Leo de Passione (...) (...) 17.
Therefore Christ cried with a loud voice, why have thou forsaken me, that he
might make it known to all, for what cause he ought not to be delivered, nor
defended, sed saeuientium manibus derelinqui, but to be left in the hands of
his pursuers, which was to be made the Savior of the world, and the Redeemer
of all men, non per miseriam, sed per misericordiam, non amissione auxilij, sed
definitione moriendi; not by any miserable necessity, but of mercy; not for
lack of help, but of purpose to die (for us). Whether then Christ's meaning in
those words (if we apply them to his own person) were to hasten the time of
his death, which he knew was at hand, and should bring him case of his
excessive How many meanings (...) words on the (...) (...) have.
pains, or to move his father to demonstrate by those signs, which followed,
what favor and affection he bare to the person of his son, though for our
sakes he suffered him thus to be used: or to teach his persecutors, that there
was a cause, which they knew not, why himself being their messiah should die
this death on the cross, or last whether his manhood conformed it self to the
desires and groans of his church and members, whom the Prophets teach in this
wise to pray, when they were oppressed with any great calamity or misery: none
of these ways I say are the words of Christ on the cross chalengeable, but
they stand well with the piety, patience, confidence and expectance, that were
in Christ, and have better foundation in the sacred Scriptures then your pains
of the damned, or your second death to be then and there suffered in the soul
of Christ.

Defenc. page 110. li. 7.
The bare names again of Austen, Ambrose, Ierom do here likewise no good,
this is but a weak kind of reasoning for so learned a Divine as you are.] I
like better this kind of weakness in matters of faith to have the consent of
the learned and ancient fathers for that I teach, then your kind of strength,
which is to be so stiff in your private conceits, that you will delude the
Scriptures with your figures, and deride the fathers as seely fools not
understanding the first principles of Religion, rather then you will forgo the
least of your fancies. If you light on any Reader of the same mind let him
know, that the choice will be hard for him to make, whether all the fathers in
Christ's Church did err in the chief grounds of their faith, or he himself
be out of the truth. If Christian Religion were not since Christ's time before
our age, this is a greater forsaking of Christ, then any was on the Cross. For
then has God forgotten all his purposes and promises so often mentioned in the
Prophets, and confirmed to Christ; if there were never Church of Christ since
the Apostles death till our days. And he that is of that humor, it skilleth
not greatly of what side he be, for certainly he can be no member of Christ's
Church, that rejects all persons, places, and ages before his birth, as none
of Christ's. I wish no wise nor sober Reader so far to venture his soul. If
then to the Primative Church of Christ next after the Apostles we yield but
ordinary knowledge of the Christian faith, we may not take from so many learned
fathers and Pastors, as God has for so many hundred years adorned his Church
withal, the common understanding of their Catechism and Creed, how we were
saved, and what is the price of our Redemption, specially the Scriptures going
so clear with them, and they teaching so closely and soundly the truth there
expressed.

Defenc. page 110. li. 9.
These very sentences of the fathers I can easily admit, if they import no
more, then that those outward afflictions on the Cross were SOME CAUSES (AND
THAT NO SMALL) of his complaint, always remembering that some greater cause also
did concur and was conioined with them.] Then by your own confession have
the fathers spoken truth, and there was small or no cause, given you, to make
so light regard of them. As for your other greater cause, when you prove by
Scripture, as you intend, that Christ's soul on the cross suffered the second
death, and the pains of the damned, you shall have a special reservation,
that your fancies may be conioined with Christ's prayers: otherwise your reasons
be like your resolutions, they have neither proof nor strength besides your
own private and presumptuous persuasions.

Defenc. page 110. li. 14.
Your third sense if I conceive it aright, is; that his being left to bodily
death caused him thus to mourn, which is but as the last before. And yet you
seem to mean not only that, but also because his flesh now should want all
feeling of his heavenly comfort for that while that it should remain dead. A
maruailous exquisite and far fet cause.] The sense is neither mine, nor so
far fet as you would make it. I took it out of Tertullian, Hilarie, and The
third sense of Christ's complaint on the cross.
Epiphanius, whose words I produced to that purpose; and howsoever you gibe at
it after your scornful manner, I suppose it will prove sounder then your
hellish death, which you have so learnedly devised out of their words. The
difference betwixt this and the former sense is not great. For there the
fathers meant Christ was forsaken, that is not delivered from the rage of his
persecutors, whiles he lived; and these do add, that he was left unto death,
presuming death to be the greatest and most grievous of all outward
afflictions, which in this life befall the nature of man.

Defenc. page 110. li. 19.
Yet me thinks as this crosses your other expositions here, so it is flat
contrary to the Scripture also.] If the expositions were contrary each to
other, so long as they be sundry men's, and repeated only by me to show how
many senses have been delivered in the Church of Christ by learned and
ancient Fathers touching that complaint or prayer of Christ, which you would
feign abuse to hatch your hell-paines; what else note you by their contratiety,
but the diversity of men's judgments upon these words; all which conioined in
this against you, that Christ's complaint on the cross may diversely be
conceived according to the different acceptions of forsaking, and yet your
pains of the damned have no place in that variety or contrariety of ^enses?
But this third sense you say, is flat contrary to the Scripture.] That were
worth the hearing indeed, if your foolish conceits were not far more likely
to cross both themselves and the Scriptures, then justly to control the
judgments of so learned fathers. But what is this great oversight, that is so
much repugnant to the Scripture? the Scripture Ibid. li. 21.
gives after a sort to Christ's dead flesh this LIVELY AFFECTION, my flesh
shall rest in hope.] The soul of Christ, which was replenished with life,
truth, and grace, as being personally united unto God, and of whose fulness
we all have received, you affirm died on the Cross, and none other death then
the second death: and Christ's flesh lying dead in the grave you imagine not
only to have life, but to be a living spirit. For you give unto it the lively
affection of hope; which nothing has, that is not a living and reasonable
soul, or more. You do it, you will say but after a sort.] That sort is absurd
enough, of figurative speeches in the Scriptures to make positive doctrines.
For if you defend, that the dead flesh of Christ in the grave had indeed any
lively affection of hope in part or in whole, it is a brutish heresy denying
that Christ was truly dead, and that his body was truly flesh; since a lively
hope impo^teth not only life, but understanding and faith. If you grant these
speeches to be figurative, then do you betray your folly, to thwart the
fathers assertions with figurative florishes, as if they were proper; and to
pronounce their sayings flat contrary to the Scriptures, because you can pike
out a word, that in outward show sounds somewhat strangely. Hope in these
words of David is either applied to the soul of Christ in respect of the
resurrection of his body, which he believed and hoped for as most assured; or
if we apply it to the body, it notes safety from corruption, and promise made
by God of speedy resurrection, which was the thing wherewith Christ's body
might be invested. But we shall have mainer proof for this matter.

Defenc. page 110. li. 24.
Is it likely, is it possible, that he should so dolefully mourn that either
he should bodily die, or that his body should want the sense of his divine
presence so little a while, when as in HIS MINDHE SPEAKS SO TRIVMPHANTLY of
his CONSTANT and CONTINVALLIOY IN GOD: yea not excluding even his body though
dead from participating in some sort therein: as we read in the former place at
large? I Act 2. 26 27.
BEHEID the Lord always The Defender (...) contradicts his own doctrine.
before me, for he is at my right hand, that I should not b^ shaken. Therefore
did mine heart rejoice, and my tongue was glad, and moreover my flesh shall
rest in hope. Now can a man in this EXCEEDING GENERAL and CONSTANTIOY so
uncomfortably mourn in that sense as you urge, My God, my God why forsakest
thou my flesh? it cannot be.] I would not think it likely, nor possible, if I
did not see it before mine eyes, that such a pert Proctour should so proudly
despise all ancient writers and fathers, that favor not his faction, and yet
so palpably confound himself and his whole cause with overmuch prating. For
(Christian Reader I pray thee) take no more but his own confession or
assertion in this place, by which he thought to ouerbeare all that stood in his
way, and observe both how desperately he contradicts himself, and how
sensibly he subuerteth his whole doctrine and his device of this new found
hell. But the lease before he told us peremptorily, that Pa. 108. li. 8.
Christ's Godhead as it were withdrawing and hiding it self from him for that
season of his passion gave him NO SENSE, NOR FEELING OF COMFORT OR JOY in
spirit, soul, or body. Now suddenly whiles he eagerly hunteth after his hell
pains, he not only falls over head and ears into the mire of
contradictions, but he clearly confesses before hand, that all which himself
will say touching the second death of Christ's soul on the cross, is
apparently false doctrine, and evidently repugnant to the sacred Scriptures.
Thou will marvel much at this, and so do I; but that Liars are often so
earnest to serve their turns and not the truth, that they forget their former
tales, whiles they invent newer. As here for example.

He that would before allow to Christ on the cross NO SENSE NOR FEELING OF
COMFORT OR JOY, in spirit, soul or body; Now urges, to promote another
purpose, Christ's EXCEEDING GENERAL AND CONSTANT JOY even at the same time,
when he spoke these words, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me: and not
content with this, he adds, that Christ even then IN HIS MIND SPOKE
TRIVMPHANTLY OF HIS CONSTANT and CONTINVALL JOY in GOD; and proves it by the
words of the holy Ghost, where David being a Prophet spoke concerning Christ on
the Cross, that he Acts 2.
beheld the Lord always before him at his right hand, that he should not be
shaken. And therefore did Christ's heart rejoice, and his tongue was glad.
Understand you, sit faith-maker, the difference or repugnance between NO SENSE
NOR FEELING OF COMFORTOR JOY, in spirit, soul, or body, A most shameful
contradiction.
and EXCEEDING GENERAL, CONSTANT, and TRIVMPHANT JOY in GOD in the mind of
Christ? can you read this, and not think you reele, as your reasons do to and
fro? can you salve this sore without sweating? or make up this breach without
blushing? and I pray you since the ground of these words is true, in that it
is the holy Ghosts, and you may not fly from your own inference, which you
press so violently against the fathers to beat down their exposition, how
could Christ's Soul on the cross IN THIS EXCEEDING GENERAL, CONTINVALL,
CONSTANT, and TRIVMPHANT JOY OF MIND suffer also the pains of the damned and
the second death, wherein IS NO SENSE NOR FEELING OF ANY COMFORT OR JOY IN
body, soul, or spirit? Can you hang these gymmoes together, that the one shall
not cry shameful and intolerable falsehood against the other? the best
excuse, that I can make for your, to save you from ebriety or frenzy, is that
these things were posted over to you from diverse, that saw not each others
fancies, and so without due perusing or remembering, where they crossed each
other, you patched their papers together with more have then good speed. How
beit surely I take it to be a just judgment of God, when you are divided from
the truth, to divide either your tongues from your hearts, or your hearts from
themselves, that all men may learn to take heed how they dally with the
Christian faith, or delude the Scriptures. I thank God I hate you not so much,
but for your own sake I could wish, you had been silenter, or circumspecter.

And see how evil you luck, or at least your cause is. For here have you
spoken enough to confute all that you formerly have said, and afterward will
say, and yet you have brought nothing to infringe that which I said. For a
natural sear and mislike of death, as also grief and sharpness of pain in
the body may well stand with a continual and constant comfort in God; yea
where grace is present and prevails, the 2 Cor. 4.
perishing of the outward man brings the renewing of the inward man, and
bitter affliction makes us seek after God, and call upon him the more
earnestly for his assistance; in which case it is most true, that Gods 2. Cor.
12.
power is perfected in our infirmity. For, when I am weak (says the Apostle,
in body,) then I am strong, in spirit. And if Paul could 2. Cor. 12.
delight in reproaches, persecutions and anguishes for Christ's sake, and yet
feel the smart of them, could not Christ retain comfort in his afflictions,
though his flesh were pressed with extreme pain?

Many things more may be strongly alleged against this opinion.] With such
strength as you have already showed, whereneither words nor matter shall hang
together.[ Defenc. page 110 li. 37.
As first: that seeing he perfectly knew that as his flesh should now quietly
rest, so his soul should enjoy perfect glory and comfort more then before it
did.] That does not quench the detestation, Was there no comfort in all this?
which man's nature has of death even by Gods ordinance; though it comfort and
courage the soul in hope of future bliss to endure the pain and horror of
death. S. Austen says, August. epistola 120.
Nemo vnquam carnem suam odio habuit, et praeterea non vult anima vel ad tempus
abeius etiam insirmitate descedere, quamuis (...) se sine infirmitate in
aeternum recepturamesse confidat. Tantam habet vim, carnis and animae dulce
consortium. No man ever hated his own flesh, and therefore the soul is not
willing to depart even from the weakness of the body for a time, though she
believe, that she shall receive her flesh again for ever without infirmity. Of
so great (...) is the sweet (...) betwixt the soul and the body. And so again
(...) tract. in (...) 123.
This affection of man's weakness, whereby no man is willing to die, is so
natural, that age could not take it from blessed Peter, to whom it was said
(by Christ,) when (...) (...) old, thou shall be led whither thou would not.
And to comfort us our (...) himself (assumed and) showed this (affection) in
himself, when he said, Father if it be possible, let this cup pass from me.
So that these respects made Christ the more comfortable in death, but by no
means did utterly quench the natural dislike, that Christ's manhood had, and
lawfully might have of death, knowing it to be the punishment of sin, and
dissolution of our creation, though by Gods goodness it be now made a pass^ge
in his to a better life. Your next reason is of the same stamp. The
resurrection of the body makes no man willing to die, if he could with Gods
liking decline death, but obedience ouerruleth the natural instinct, that God
has impressed in us to abhor death. And where you take it for a
mighty'pillar in your building, that Christ Pa. 111. li. 6.
would not so extremely mourn and complain only for this cause, as my fancy
imports, you build but on sand, which will have the greater fall. For I show
you many more causes and senses of those words, then this only; all which you
kindly skippe, and pretend this only which I never professed, calling it my
fancy, that I cited out of ancient and reverend writers.

Defenc. page 111. li. 8
Further he knew perfectly, that this was the very appointment of God for the
obtaining of his most desired purchase of our health, for the more advancing of
Gods glory, and for the advancing of his very manhood. Finally, it was his
own most free and fore-determined will: would he then so mournefully grieve
and complain thereat? It has no reason nor likelihood in it.] You run your
self out of breath, and quite besides the way. You shall not need to persuade
me, that Christ was resolved and willing to die; I perfectly believe it, and
easily confess it: but how? as he himself declared, the spirit was willing,
the flesh was weak. The mind of Christ apprehended and persued all these
things which you mention, but that excludes not the natural dislike which
Gods will is all men should have of death. This imperfection of man's nature,
since it pleased Christ to taste, as well as the rest of our infirmities and
affections, you may by no respects nor rewards, make the weakness of Christ's
flesh, to which he submitted himself, the Weakness appeared in Christ's flesh,
but willingness in his spirit.
same or equal with the willingness of his spirit, which had and showed the
abundance of all grace. Wherefore I maintain both in Christ, a voluntary
sense of the weakness of our flesh, and an heavenly strength of the inward
man, which expressed, but ouerballanced the natural desire of the outward man
in Christ. And still you harp on that one string, which is utterly out of
tune, that he would not do it So extremely and So mournefully. This extremity
is only your fancy; for I say Christ did it meekely, obediently, and
faithfully, assuring himself, that his Father, who all this while had tried
his patience, would at his prayer not only end his pain, but make heaven and
earth to witness, what account God made of him, though for a season he left
him in their hands to be made a sacrifice for our sins.

Defenc. page 111. li. 15.
Lazarus when he was returned from the joys of heaven to take again his
rotten carcass, yet he grieved not at it, nor ought he so to have done.] When
you sincke in reasons, you ascend to revelations. Who told you, that the soul
of Lazarus was in the joys of heaven, when Christ raised his body from the
grave? Christ places the soul of the other Lazarus, that died at the rich
man's door, in Abraham's bosom to be comforted; and do you take upon you to
place this Lazarus, that was brother to Marie and Martha, in the very joys of
heaven? Where was his soul those four days, you will ask? It is not for you
to ask, nor for me to answer. The things after this life, and out of this
world, it is not lawful for me or you farther to enquire, then the Scripture
reuealeth. That such as are raised from the dead should be able by experience
to report the ioies of heaven or the pains of hell, or the secrets of Gods
kingdom; is a thing not permitted by God, as we find by Abraham's answer to
the rich man praying that Lazarus might be sent to his fathers house. God has
places and Angels enough to keep the souls of such, as he means shall be
returned to this life, though it be neither in hell nor in heaven. From hell no
man is released, and from heaven no man is dismissed that has once seen God
face to face. When 1. Cor. 13.
that which is perfect is come, then that which is in part shall be abolished,
says the Apostle. And will you adventure to abolish perfection after it is
come, and to bring men back to this mortal life, that have seen God in the
fullness of his glory, whom no man living can see, depriving them of that
vision, perfection, and brightness, which the joys of heaven have in them? It
is an enterprise meet for such an encounterer as you are. Paul living was taken
up into 2. Cor. (...)
the third heaven, even into Paradise, where he (...) (...) which he might not
utter. Was Paul then in the joys of heaven? I trow not. For he says; Lest I
should be exalted out of measure through the abundance of revelations, there
was given unto me a sting in the flesh, even the messenger of Satan, to ^uffit
me. If the abundance of revelation would so exalt Paul when he was but taken up
into Paradise, that he needed the messenger of Satan to humble him, how would
the joys of heaven, and cleercnesse of Gods face beheld in his glory, exalt
men that should afterward live again in this wretched world? And therefore
this is like the rest, even a bold assertion of things unknown; whereas God
wants no means nor places extraordinary to detain the souls of such as
shall in his counsel return to this life, without knowing the secrets or
possessing the joys of heaven.

Defenc. page 111. li. 22.
If your Fathers prove any thing toward your meaning, it is this, because that
he complained of his bodily dying. Howbeit, they say not, that he thus
complained only and merely The Defender (...) the Fathers prove my meaning.
for that. Neither do I think will you plainly hold this, NEITHER DO WE
DENY THE OTHER.] If the Fathers meaning be, which you now consesse, that
Christ on the cross complained because of his bodily dying, then prove they as
much as I produced them sor: and your admitting this exposition of theirs
shows, that all this while you idly sought to subvert their assertion with
your strong allegation (as you supposed) to no purpose, since now you deny it
not. And where you pretend, they say not ONLY and merely for that, you come
too late with your exception: For since Christ made no complaint on the cross
but this, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me; if in that he complained
because of his bodily dying, as you do not deny; then all proof for your hell
pains out of those words is quite excluded, as well by their opinion, as by
your own confession. And your making Christ's complaint on the cross to be Pa.
111. li. 22
improbable, yea unlawful, conuinceth you by your own mouth, that within the
compass of five lines you are contrary to your self, and charge Christ with
unlawful mourning, which amounts to as much as sinful. As for mine opinion,
what respects Christ might have in that complaint of his, I have before
delivered, so that your so grieuing and so mourning only and merely for that,
is but a silly refuge, when you can not otherwise resist the truth.

Defenc. page 111. li. 32. and 28.
These Fathers had no purpose here to exclude the suffering of Christ's soul,
but only to deny that his Godhead suffered. They strove here with heretics,
whose controversies were far from our question.] Indeed the heretics against
whom they wrote, took great hold of these places on which you build your hell
pains; and because they were Heretics always urged the same places which the
Desender does.
somewhat dark and doubtful, they stumbled many weak Christians with them
even as you do. Their purpose I know was to prove Christ no God in nature,
because he feared and sorowed in the Garden, and complained on the Cross, as
if he were forsaken; which things they thought unfit for him that was God. The
Fathers to repel their heresy, and to open this obscurity, insist plainly on
these points, that the Mediator must be God as well as man, and that the
Godhead of Christ incarnate was impassible, and could not suffer any violence
or change; but his manhood might and did suffer somethings in soul, as fear
and sorrow; and somethings in body, as pains and death. But generally when
they speak of death, they never intend as you doc, the death of Christ's soul
as well as of his body, but they mean plainly the death of the Cross
described by the Evangelists, which is far from the second death or the death
of the damned.

Defenc. page 111. li. 36.
The very same does Hilarie also, where he says, that this in Christ was
Corporis vox, The outcrie of his body, he plainly means it of his whole
manhood, the opposition being between it and his Godhead, as the Scripture
often does.] If your authority be such, that you may take body for soul, and
life for death, where you will, you may soon make a show, that the Fathers
intend nothing against your doctrine: but if you must prove it as well as say
it, then is it the most riotous and most ridiculous course that can be, to take
one contrary for another: for so you may prove darkness to be light, vice to
be virtue, falsehood to be truth, and infidelity to be faith. What the Fathers
taught touching the death of Christ's soul, when we come to the place we shall
plainly see by their own asserting, and not by your perverting; in the mean
time you were best bring stronger proofs than these, that you will take the
body for the soul, if you mean to conclude any thing out of the Fathers for
your croslegged doctrine.

Trea. page 9.
The Scripture often does the like, you say, as you have showed in your
Treatise.] There you have childishly abused a number of Scriptures, and yet no
way proved, that any where the body signifies the soul, or stands for the
soul. That the soul is a consequent to the body, and the body likewise a
consequent to the soul, wheresoever The s^ule is a c^nsequent to (...) (...)
(...), but no part of it.
the Scripture speaks of men living here on earth, is a sure and safe rule;
because no man here lives, that does not consist of soul and body: yet
that is no proof, that what is attributed to the body, must be verified of
the soul, much less that the one must be taken for the other. Look but to
your own examples, where body is named: Romans 6.
Let not sin reign in your mortal bodies, says the Apostle. If here you
will comprehend the soul under the name of the body, you must grant in exact
words, that the soul is mortal, which is an open heresy destroying the sum
and effect of the Christian faith. Again: 1. Cor. 6.
Every sin that a man does, is without the body, but the fornicato-sinneth
against his own body. If in this place the body conclude the soul, then
every sin (save fornication) is without soul and body, and consequently no
sin; which is a doctrine a man would think meet for no Divine. The third
instance which you bring, has not so gross sequels, but as plain falsehoods:
Hebr. 10.
Sacrifice and burnt offerings thou would not, but a body have thou
ordained me; whereof the sacrifices offered by the Law were Ibid. verse. 1.
shadows. Now did the bodies of beasts slain, or their blood shed, prefigure
the Soul of Christ, or the death of his body? These be the places, on which
you build your unsound observation, that the Scripture does often take the
body for the soul, which are so sensibly false, that they need no Refuter.
But we reason of death, which seuereth the soul from the body, and therein to
say the body must be taken for the soul, is a very sincke of sottish
absurdities and falsities. For what can be more repugnant to truth and sense,
than to take a dead body for a living soul, and when they are so far
severed by nature, to say they must agree in name, and the one be called the
other?

Peruse now the Fathers, which you would feign wrest to your purpose, and see
whether they do not flatly contradict your device, that the body in their
speeches must be taken for the whole man, and so the death of Christ's body for
the death, as well of soul, as of the body. Epiphanius is the first, that you
would frustrate with your devices, and the first that shall convince your
falsehood. He says the manhood of Christ spoke these words, Now seeing the
deity together with the soul moving to forsake his sacred body. What death
call you that, where the soul moves and forsakes the body? then in that
complaint of Christ's the thing forsaken was his body alone by the judgment of
Epiphanius, and the deity Epiph. contra (...) (...). 69.
(...) together with the soul did move (...), to forsake that sacred body.
Which way does this prove the soul or the whole manhood of Christ to be
forsaken, when Epiphanius expressly says, the deity with the soul did move to
forsake the body? Hilarie is the next, whom you would infect with your fancy,
but finding no words in him meet for your matter, you are forced shamefully to
misconster the body for the soul, and the death of the one for the death of
the other, which is all the hold you have in Hilarie, though you lustily would
bear out the rest with the copy of your countenance. Notwithstanding Hilarie
does not only prevent, but also refute your mistaking. For in plain words he
says (...) (...) (...). 10.
Querela derelicti morientis infirmit as est, traditio spirit us morientis
excessio est, The complaint (of Christ) that he was forsaken was the infirmity
of one dying, the yielding up his spirit was his departure hence, when he died.
And again, Tradens spiritum mortuus est; Christ died by delivering up his
spirit. Sepultus est Christus, quia and mortuus est, mortuus autem est, quia
and moriturus locutus est, Deus, Deus meus, quare me dereliquisti. Christ was
buried because he was dead; and ready to die, he said, My God, my God, why have
thou forsaken me. So that Christ's death, when he spoke those words, was not
past nor present, but then to come, as Hilarie notes by the future tence, and
was the delivering up of his spirit into his fathers hands. I trust you dare
not defend, that Christ in or after the delivering up of his spirit, suffered
the pains of hell or the second death, and yet says Hilarie those words
Christ spoke of his death, that was to come.

Tertullian is the last, whose words though you mightily mistake and
mistranslate, yet make they nothing for you, but against you directly. Writing
against Praxeas, that denied the Father and the Son to be two distinct
persons, and taught that the Father became son to himself, (...) (...)
(...). ca. 2.
and was made man and crucisied, after many proofs to show the person of the
son to be different from the person of the father, he cites those words of
Christ on the cross, My God, my God why have thou forsaken me; and says,
Ibid. ca. 30.
h^c vox carnis and animae, idest hominis, non sermonis, nec spiritus, id est
Dei propterea emissa est, vt impassibilem Deum ostenderet, qui sic filium
dereliquit, dum hominem eius tr^didit in mortem. Caeterum non reliquit Pater
Filium, in cuius manibus Filius spiritum suum posuit. Denique posuit, and
statim obijt. Spiritu enim manente in carne, caro omnino mori non potest. Ita
relinqui a Patre fuit mori filio. This voice of the flesh and soul, that is of
the man, not of the word, nor of the spirit, that is not of God, was therefore
spoken to show that God is impassible, who so left his son, whiles he
delivered his manhood to death. Yet the Father did not (altogether) forsake the
son, into whose hands the son breathed out his spirit. For he breathed it
out, and straigh^way died. Whiles the spirit remained in the flesh, the flesh
could not die at all. So that to be forsaken of the Father, was in the son to
die. Here are the words of Tertullian in order as they stand. Where it is
evident, that he affirms no death nor forsaking in Christ, but only that,
when the spirit left the body. His words are plain. The Father forsocke not
the son, into whose hands the son deposed his spirit. For he laid it down,
and died. So to be forsaken of the Father was (this) for the son to die, by
laying down his spirit or soul, as before he proves Christ did. Then
suffered Christ no death of the soul, since he died not, till he breathed out
his spirit into his fathers hands; and other forsaking the son felt none,
then so to die by the separation of his soul from his body.

Now touching the voice of the soul and the flesh, whereof Tertullian
speaks; What forsaking (...) (...) of.
either he makes three parts in man, as the Apostle does These: 1: 5. verse:
23. the spirit, the soul, and the body, and then the soul notes the
operations of life and sense, which were to cease for the time by death; or else
he affirms this voice came from both soul and body, because the soul was to
be separated from her body by death, as well as the body to be left dead; both
which are a kind of forsaking. Other death he names none here, then to die by
breathing out the spirit. And so long as the spirit abides in the flesh, the
flesh he says cannot die at all. Christ therefore endured no death whiles his
spirit did abide in his body, and consequently no death of the soul; and when
he breathed out his spirit he straightway died, which was the forsaking, that
he complained of in those words. So that all your collections here out of
Tertullian are your additions to Tertullian, and not so much as one of them to
be found or fet from his text. He speaks not a word that Christ Defenc. page
suffered in both these parts from his father, nor that this (death or
forsaking) li. 15.
was meant of the flesh and of the 1 12. li. 20.
soul, as you falsely translate him. And as for Tertullians confirming that li.
26.
heresy of Christ's being no true natural man, except Christ suffered li. 23.
the stroke of Gods hand in his soul, as the proper vengcance of sin, this
is your blind device absurdly foisted into Tertullian, without any word or
letter sounding that way.

Defenc. page 112. li. 31.
This dereliction of which he speaks, is more (...) the separation of the
soul and body: even the separation of the deity from the whole manhood,
which is the death of the soul. I speak nothing here but the Fathers words,
yea the Scriptures.] Your setting unto Tertullian Tertullian names no death
but of Christ's body.
your own sense, is an impudent attempt, and the weakest argument that can be,
when you tell us he means so, though he speak not one word touching the
death of the soul, but as exactly as he can or should, names the death of the
body, by this that he says: Denique (spiritum) posuit, and statim obijt.
Spiritu enim manente in carne caro omnino mori non potest. Christ laid down
his (spirit) and straightway died. For whiles the spirit remained in the flesh,
the flesh could not die at all. What was it to lay down his spirit into his
fathers hands, as the Scripture speaks of Christ on the cross, but to die
the death of the body? Those very words Tertullian here cites and uses, and
thereby proves the Father had not inwardly forsaken the son, since the
son by the manifest words of himself reported in the Evangelist, commended
and yielded his spirit to his fathers hands. So that against the death of the
soul, Tertullians words are pregnant:) for how did the soul die, that was
commended into Gods hands?) and other death Tertullian names nor means none,
but only this. Denique (spiritum) posuit, and statim obijt. Christ laid down
(his spirit into his fathers hands) and straightway died. As for your speaking
nothing here but the fathers and the Scriptures words, beware you take not up
the Devils trade, to keep their words, and pervert their sense. It is no great
mastery to abuse men's words, yea the word of God, which all Heretics have ever
drawn to their own false and wicked purposes.

Defenc. page 112. li. 34.
Your own place of Epiphanius says, that now his deity departed from his
manhood. So says your own Hilarie also. Corporis vox contestata recedentis a
se Dei dissidium. So says Ambrose, clamauit homo diuinitat is separatione
moriturus. The man Christ did cry being about to die by the separation of his
Godhead. You allege three places to this purpose, and either corrupt, or
pervert all three most apparently. ^piphanius says, that Christ's deity
TOGETHER WITH THE SOVLE departed from his sacred body, which is as plain a
description of bodily death, as may be uttered. You leave out the words,
TOGETHER WITH THE SOVLE, as crossing your course, and turn the body into the
soul, meaning by this corruption to load Epiphanius with a sense clean
contrary to his own. Hilaries words spoken of Christ's body, you enlarge to
the whole manhood of Christ, and thence conclude directly against Hilaries
meaning and words, that the deity departed from both, where as Hilarie
professes of Christ; Hilarious de Trinitate li. 10.
Derelinqui se ad mortem questus est, sed TVNC confessorem suum secum in Regno
Paradisi recepit. Christ complained that he was (forsaken or) left unto death,
but EVEN THEN he received the Thief that consessed him, into the kingdom of
Paradise jointly with himself. Ambroses words are Ambros in Luc. li. 10. de
commendatione spiritus in (...) Patris.
Clamauit homo diuinitatis sep^ratione moriturus. The man Christ cried (not
then dead in soul, when he cried as you would have it, but) ready to die, or
that after should die, when he yielded his spirit into his fathers hands. The
very next sentence before shows that this departing was of the divinity from
the body, to leave that unto death. Ibidem.
Euidens manifestatio contestantis Dei secessionem diuinitatis and corporis. A
manifest speech of God witnessing the departure of his divinity from his body.
So that by no means Ambrose ever imagined that Christ's soul died, but as he
expresses himself in the same Chapter; Ibidem.
Caro moritur, vt resurgat, spiritus Patri commendatur, vt pax fuerit in Caelo.
The flesh dies, that it might rise again; the spirit is commended to (God)
the father, that peace might be established in the heavens. Thus shortly have
you taken the pains to produce three Fathers for the death of Christ's soul,
and have as shamefully perverted and inuerted every one of them, which is no
news with you; and yet all that you can conclude out of them may amount to a
pestilent heresy, if you will, that the union of Christ's person was dissolved
for the time of his death, but it can never infer any thing pertinent to your
purpose.

Defenc. page 113. li. 4.
Here the Fathers do s^ew indeed that Christ died, but more than a mere bodily
death; even the death of the soul also.] Here the Fathers are exquisitly
belied and falsified, otherwise that Christ's soul died, they offer neither
word nor syllable sounding that way. And though you can not speak truth in so
false a cause, yet you should learn to spe^ke coherently. You grant they
avouch here, that Christ died the death of the body, and more, even the death
of the soul also; whereas it is evident by the words of the holy ghost, as
also by your own positions, that Christ neither did nor could die these two
deaths at one time. For by the manifest witness of the Evangelist, Christ Luc.
22.
(...) his spirit into his Fathers (...), and so died. Then most certainly the
soul of Christ was accepted and received into the hands of God, which I trow
is life, and not death, when the body was left to death. Wherefore if their
words concern his bodily death, they by no means admix the death of the
soul, since they all affirm a^ the Scripture does, that Christ committed his
soul to his Fathers hands, and so died; of which death they say he spoke in
those words, Why have thou left me, that is, to die, as they expound it. Now if
you affixe any death to the soul of Christ, I hope you will free him from it,
before he commended his soul into his Fathers hands. And so the one must be
ended, before the other could enter; and consequently, if they spoke of the
latter, their words have no intent to implie the other. But what dispute we of
their meaning, when their words are so manifest, that you can not hale them to
your hell-paines, but by shameful corrupting of their sentences, and wilful
misconstruing the body for the soul?

Defenc. page 113. li. 6.
What is the separation of the deity from his soul else but the death of his
soul?] Which of these Fathers does avouch the separation of Christ's deity
from his soul? Is it so small a mote in your eye, that Christ's deity was
separated from his humane soul, that you may loosely and lightly surmise it by
disordering and altering other men's words? At this speech of Ambrose you could
not so grossly have stumbled, had you but read the Master of the Sentences, who
long since in one whole distinction of his third book examined those words,
and answered as the truth is, that separation in that place was taken for want
of protection, and withholding Christ's power, whiles the body died.
Sententiarum li. 3. did. 21.
Separauit se (...), (...) subtraxu protectionem. Separauit se foris, vt non
esset ad defensionem, sed non (...) defuit ad vnionem. Si non ibi cohibuisset
potentiam, sedexercuisset, non (...) Christus. The deity severed it self,
because it withdrew protection. It separated it self outwardly not to defend,
but if failed not inwardly to continue the union. If it had not refrained, but
exercised power, Christ could not have died. Theodoret calls this
dereliction, In Psalm. 21.
The permission of the deity, that the humanity might suffer. And Isychius
says, (...) in (...). li. 5. ca. 16.
Diuinit as abijsse dicitur, cohibens propriam virtutem ex humanitate, vt daret
spacium Passioni. Christ's deity is said to depart by withholding his own
power from his humanity, that he might give time to his Passion. Otherwise it
is a certain truth which ^ulgentius teaches: Ad (...) lib. 3.
Licet in Christi morte carnem morie^tem fuisset anima desertura, diuinit as
tamen Christi nec ab anima, nec a carne posset separari suscepta. Though in
Christ's death the soul were to forsake the body dying, yet the deity of
Christ could not be severed from the soul, nor from the body once assumed.

Defenc. page 113. li. 7.
Howbeit note, I pray, that neither the Fathers nor I do mean any separating
of the union of both natures in Christ, nor the separating of any holiness or
habitual grace of God from his soul, nor the separating of Gods love from
him, but the separation of all comfortable feeling and assistance of the
Godhead. This separation is meant and may be called the death of the soul.] If
you separate none of these, what then is it that you separate from the soul of
Christ to prove it dead? [ All comfortable feeling and assistance of the
Godhead.] He knew himself to be personally God and man, he saw his soul full
of all truth and grace, he was assured, the love of God toward him could
neither fail nor change; he knew that his obedience and sacrifice were
acceptable to his Father, and should be the redemption of the world, and he was
most certain, that the third day he should rise again into immortal and
celestial glory, having men, devils and angels, even all things in heaven and
earth subject to his manhood. Were all these no comforts? or was there no
assistance of the Godhead in these? Nay take but your own words a little
before, that Christ on the cross, even when he complained of his forsaking,
was in Page 110. li. 28.
exceeding general and constant joy, and had as David foreprophesied of him,
34.
constant and continual joy in God; was there no feeling of all this triumph
and joy so exceeding, constant, and continual? May a man be so frantic, as
to confess that Christ felt all this, and yet to say he had no comfortable
feeling? [ This may be called the death of the soul.] To him that calls
light darkness, good evil, faith fear, joy discomfort, this may seem death;
which by all the rules of the sacred Scriptures is called the life of the soul
here on earth; but by no man that understands or cares what he says, can
this be called or defended to be the death of the soul.

Defenc. page 113. (...) (...).
As it is life to the soul to feel and to enjoy the glory of God, Psalm: 16.
21. so it is death to feel the want and absence thereof utterly.] Having
abused the Fathers at your pleasure you offer now the like, if not worse, to
the Scriptures. The sixteenth Psalm verse: 11 not 21 as you quote it, shows
us, that there is a way to life revealed here on earth, but the fullness of joy
is in Gods presence, when we shall behold his face, as the Angels do in
heaven. The way to life is grace, wherewith Christ was replenished from his
mothers womb, and in greater measure then all his members. For he had the
fulness thereof in this life, where the perfectest men have but a measure
thereof, and we John 1.
all have received of his fullness. The plenty of pleasure, which is at Gods
right hand, is everlasting glory both of soul and body, into which Christ
entered after his Resurrection. How does this prove, that Christ's soul was
dead during the time of his Pa^sion? if a man would seek out a place to
confirm the contrary, he cannot light on a better. For these words pertaining
directly to Christ on the cross conclude, that even in the midst of his
sufferings Psalm 16. v. 11
the ways of life were made known to him by God, and that after his rising
again, God would Replenish him with the joy of his countenance, which was
everlasting glory in the heavens. The one he possessed, the other was promised,
more then which the soul of man cannot enjoy in this life. Now except this be
your rage rather then your reason, that all men's souls are dead, till they
come to behold God face to face in the heavens; I see not what you can hence
collect touching the death of Christ's soul. The contrary may be soundly
concluded out of this place. For the ways of life were made known to him here
on earth, and by him to all men living, since he prosessed himself to be the
John 14.
Way, and the Truth, and the Life; and the promises of God to him as far
exceeded all honor and glory reserved for men, as it was possible for the head
to excel his members.

Defenc page 113 li. 1^.
This heavenly life Christ tasted a while in his transsiguration, this death he
felt besides his bodily death on the Cross. If Christ never tasted an heavenly
life but in his transfiguration, then all the time of his conuersing here on
earth he felt your hellish death, and not in his passion only: but what
madness is this to affirm either of Christ, or of his members, that their
souls are dead, till they come to behold Gods face in the glory of his
Kingdom? If these be your best proofs for the death of Christ's soul, (...)
heed you be not estr^nged from the life of God through the ignorant
wilfulness or your heart, that thus confound heaven and earth, life and
death, to maintain your fancies against both Fathers and Scriptures. But of
the death of Christ's soul we shall have better occasion afterward to speak,
when we come to handle it at large, where I will by Gods grace let the Reader
see, how resolutely and absolutely the Fathers joining with the Scriptures
repel the death of Christ's soul as a pestilent point of false doctrine;
unless we take it as a figurative kind of speech, which is nothing to the
principles of our faith, nor to the true price of our Redemption, since we must
not convert the truth of Christ to figures and phrases.

Defenc page 11. li (...).
Your fourth exposition for any thing I see may be granted, for it seems to
be the same in effect that we hold.] If the fourth exposition be granted, then
two of your chief (...) (...) of (...) (...) on the (...).
grounds, on which you raise your hell pains suffered in the soul of Christ,
utterly sincke. For then Christ spoke these words of his members, not of his
own person, and it was no such doleful and uncomfortable mourning and (...)
his own soul as you suppose, but a prayer full of power, favor, and grace;
whereby the son of God auerted from us the separation, that was betwixt God
and us, and made peace in heaven and earth, reconciling man to God, that before
was forsaken of him. [ Page 113 li. 2^.
Was it removed from us? then surely it was laid on some body else. Now that
must needs be upon himself.] You fall to rouing in steed of reasoning.
Everlasting death and hell fire it self were removed from us. On whom then
were they laid? Desperation, confusion, reiection were likewise removed from
us. Were they therefore laid on Christ? (...) of sin, and corruption in the
grave shall be likewise removed from us. Were these also laid on Christ's
person, or did he suffer the very same, that we should? keep such reasons for
your hellish mysteries, they have no force in true religion, nor I think with
any sober or well advised reasoner. The punishments of this life imposed on all
mankind Christ suffered for us, and by them freed us from everlasting damnation
and destruction, which were the due wages of our sins. He therefore paid a
price for us, which was the shedding of his blood unto death on the Cross, and
by that ransomed us from the captivity and misery, that otherwise were
appointed for sin.

Defenc. page 113. li. 30.
Where you object Athanasius, that he could not be forsaken of his Father, who
was always in his Father, it is merely wrested. Athanasius speaks against
Arius also, that Christ's deity could not be for saken of his Father, and so was
not inferior to his Father.] What talk you of wresting, that never yet
conceived any Fathers words rightly, no more then you do that of Athanasius,
which I brought? You catch at a piece, and run your way, as though you were
clearly acquitted; but return to the text, and look on the rest with shame
enough. Who was he, that spoke those words, Why have thou forsaken me? I trust
he was the son of God, though now incarnate, who before his incarnation was
equal with his father in the form of God. Else Peter was much deceived, when
he said unto him, that stood there in presence, Thou art the son of the
living God; and Christ himself was more then deceived, when he answered, Matthew
16.
Blessed art thou, for flesh and blood has not revealed it unto thee; but my
Father which is in heaven. Then speaks not Athanasius of Christ's divine
nature, but of his person, which was Athanasius contra (...) sermon. 4.
ALWAYS in his father, that is before he spoke those words and after. And even
when he spoke those words, the father declared, says Athanasius, by the
miracles presently following, that he was THEN ALSO in his son (incarnate,)
as ever before. Does not this directly conclude, that Athanasius intended God
was in the speaker of those words, even when he spoke them, and that at no time
the father forsook the person incarnate, no not when he spoke those words,
since God to show that he had not forsaken him, who then spoke unto him, made
heaven and earth to witness, how much he esteemed the person, that so
complained?

Defenc page 113. li. 35.
Touching Christ's humanity Athanasius denies not, but God might for sake it:
for so the Scripture says.] The question is not for the word, but for the
sense. You finding the word of forsaking to be used in the Scripture, put what
sense you list to it, and thence would prove the death of Christ's soul with
as strange positions, as the maine error it self. For you grant Christ's
manhood was not forsaken neither of Gods FA^OVR, nor GRACE, nor of continual
and constant joy in God, much less of What contrarieties the Defender is
driven to.
the fullness of Gods spirit, which rested on him; and yet you say, he died the
death of the soul for want of comsort. As if there were no comfort neither in
the grace, nor in the favor of God, nor in the ioies of his spirit, nor in the
hope of his promises, all which were most assured to him to the highest degree,
that any creature was capable of. Did you mean, that he had no ease of his
pains, nor end of reproaches, whiles he lived, as also no deliverance from the
hands of his persecutors, nor protection from death, all these might be borne
with, since the Scriptures give manifest testimony, that these things he
suffered till he died; but these things, that are true, will not serve your
turn, you urge his soul died: because he had no heavenly life, such as he
tasted in his transfiguration, where Matthew. 17.
his face did shine as the (...), and the clothes were as white as the light,
which proves his soul to be no more dead in his passion, then it was all his
life long besides, and that will no man in his right wits avouch of Christ, or
of his Saints here in earth.

Defenc page 114. li. 1. and 4.
Your fifth exposition is Leos conceit, without warrant, far fetched, hardly
applied. Origin is also here as weak.] Prick on in your pride, despising all
the world besides your self, and skorning every man's opinion, that hitteth not
right with your fancy; though The fifth sense of Christ's complaint on the
cross.
few men speak or write so absurdly, and falsely as you do. Leos exposition
utterly subuerteth your hellish assertion, and that makes you fling it away
with such disdain as you do. Otherwise it has more vicinity with the
circumstances of the text, then yours by many degrees. For there is nothing in
Leos interpretation, which accords not with the Christian faith, and has his
foundation in the very words of the sacred Scriptures; in both which your
hellish and harrish application fails. He says; Leo de Pass. Dom. sermon. 16.
Vox ista doctrina est, non querela; those words were an instruction, not a
lamentation. And his reason is past your refuting. Cum in Christo Dei and
hominis vna sit persona, nec potuerit ab eo relinqui, a quo non poterat
separari, pro nobis trepidis and infirmis interrogat, cur caro pati metuens ex
audita non fuerit. Since in Christ there was but one person of God and man, and
he could not be for saken of him, from whom he could not be severed, he ASKS
for our sakes, that are fearful and weak, why flesh fearing to suffer was
not heard. Which of these things can you refell with all the wit in your
head? the conjunction and communion of both natures in one person of Christ you
were not best meddle with, lest you sow damnable heresies as thick, as you
have done notable absurdities. He says further, Cur for quare, and non
exandities for relictus. Ask the Boys in Paul's school, what difference
betwixt cur and quare, both signifying WHY, and being both interrogatiues, as
Leo rightly observes, concurring with that of Saint Austen, who said, as we
have heard before, August. epist. 120.
Causam commonuit requirendam, cum addidit, vt quid dereliquistime. Christ
warned (them) to search for the cause, when he added, WHY HAVE THOU FORSAKEN
ME? His exposition of the word forsaking, he takes out of the very Psalm,
whence Christ cited the rest. For so David joined them together. My God, my
God, why have thou forsaken me? and art so farrc from saui^g (or delivering)
me. I cry by day, and thou hear not. So that not to hear, and not to
deliver, is the for^aking which David meant in that place, and which in all
likelihood our Savior intended, (as Saint Austen thinks) if he spoke of his
own person. August. Ibid.
Quare me dereliquisti, tanquam diceret, relinquendo me, hoc est, non me
exaudiendo, long factus es a salute mea, praesenti scilicet salute huius
vitae. Why have thou forsaken me, as if he should have said, leaving me, that
is, not hearing me, thou art far from saving me, to wit from the present
safety of this life. So says Leo. De Passione sermon. 16.
In ipso tantae victoriae exaltatus triumpho, causam and rationem, qua sit
relictus, id est, non exauditus, inquirit. Christ exalted in the triumph of so
great a victory, inquireth the cause and reason why he is forsaken, that is,
not heard. The reason thereof he gives soberly, learnedly, and truly,
howsoever your humor like it not. Idem de Pass. Dom. sermon. 17.
That the Lord should be delivered to his passion, it was as well his Fathers
will, as ^is own; vt (...) non solum Pater relinqueret, sed etiam ipse se
quadam ratione desereret; That not only the father might leave him, but that
after a sort he should forsake himself, not by any fearful shrincking, but
by a voluntary cession. For the power of Christ crucisied contained it self
from those wicked ones, and to perform his secret disposition, he would not
use any manifest power. He that came by his passion to destroy death, and the
author of death, how should he save sinners if he would have resisted his
pursuers? And touching that kind of forsaking, which you dream of, he says;
Ibidem.
Iud^orum hoc fuerit, vt Iesum crederent a Deo relictum, in quem tanto scelere
saeuire potuissent, qui sacrilega illusione dicebant, alios saluos fecit,
seipsum non potest saluum facere. Let us leave this to the Jews, to think
Christ forsaken of God, on whom they could execute their rage with such
wickedness; who sacriligiously deriding him said, he saved others, he cannot
save himself. He was then forsaken of his father, when he was delivered into
the hands of the wicked, that is, he was not defended from them; yea he would
forsake himself, that is, he would use no manifest power against them, but
willingly yielded himself into their hands to suffer what they would. This is
the forsaking, says Leo, which the Scripture allows. That other sort of
forsaking, that God indeed had left him and would not help him in his good
time, that is rather the perfidiousnesse of the Jews, which objected so much
unto him, then the faith of Christians.

Origin, you say, is here as weak;] and why? because you say the word? you
take upon you like a Judge to set down your unwise censure on every man's
words, you take not the pains to refute them by any color or show of reason.
Origin says, that Orig^n (...) Matthew. (...). 35.
Christ was forsaken of his Father, when he took unto him the form of a
servant, and came to the death of the cross, which amongst men seemed most
shameful. Then may thou plainly understand, what he meant, when he said, why
have thou forsaken me; comparing that glory, which he had with his Father, to
this shame, which he despised enduring the Cross. Tell us not what you will
mislike, but what you can refute in this saying. And since you require the
reasons of all other men's speeches, and think your self privileged to speak
without all reason, what say you, which was the greater abasing or forsaking,
for God to lay aside the power and glory of his majesty and to take unto him
the shape of a servant, and therein to die the shameful death of the cross;
or for man to want comfort in his affliction? which was the greater emptying,
or humbling himself in Christ? If Origin in this point be weak, the Apostle
is as weak, who names this as the greatest Phil. 2.
EXINANITION, that Christ endured; saying, he being in the form of God (that
is equal with God) emptied himself, and took on him the form of a servant,
and humbled himself, and became obedient to the death, even the death of the
Cross. Origin goes right with the Apostles words, and says this was the
greatest dereliction, or humiliation that Christ suffered; and before you can
with any reason control this speech you must correct the Apostles text, and in
steed of the death of the Cross, put in the death of the damned, which is a
mystery the apostle never heard, nor spoke of. Origin therefore concludes.
Origin. v^ supra.
Vnde non estimes more humano Saluatorem ista (...) propter (...), quae
comprehenderat eum in cruce. Wherefore think not our Savior spoke this after
the m^ner of men for the calamity, which apprehended him on the cross. For so
if (...) take it, thou shall not seek for things worthy his divine voice.

Defenc. page 114. li. 6.
Also these senses be contrary to all the rest here observed.] If they were,
what is that to the goodness of your cause? Is it such news, that diverse men
should make (...) senses of some places in holy Scriptures? If there be so
abundant and different meanings of these words, then your conclusion of
hell-paines out of that complaint is more than cracked. What warrant have you,
but your own will, to make any such construction of Christ's words? And the
word forsaking having so many degrees, respects, and diversities, as we see by
these learned Fathers, you must proclaim your self more than a Patriarch,
even a Pope, that must have, and will have the sense of holy Scripture shut up
in the closet of your own breast, before your inference of hellpaines suffered
in the soul of Christ will be consequent to these words.

Defenc page 114. li. 7.
Your sixth and last sense is likewise contrary to the rest, and as improbable
in it self (or more) than the former: That Christ should here cite the
beginning of that Psalm, only to show the Jews, that their wrongs toward
him were prophesied of before. This already I The sixth sense of Christ's
complaint on the cross.
fully answered, which you refute not.] What should I refute a brainsicke
Presumer of his own ignorant conceit, and a proud despiser of all other men's
words and reasons? This, you say, you have already fully answered in your
Treatise.] If you had said foolely, I might the sooner have believed you: for
what is there in that answer, but extreme pride and folly? All your answer
is, Trea. pa. 66. li 31.
Which sense is most absurd. What patch can not presently give this answer to
any thing? But more fully, you say, Ibid page 67. li. 7.
This is too fond to be spoken. Such liquor does relish well your lips. All
men's sayings are fond to a fool, save his own, which are most foolish of all.
I brought you the judgments of Ierom and Chrysostom, and all the answer you
vouchsafed unto them, is that which I now repeat; which whether it savor of
any sobriety, I relinquish to the Reader. [But you add a reason thereof in
your Treatise.] Such as would make a man sick to hear an idle companion prate
so boldly and loosely. Your reason forsooth is, for so you will have it called;
[ Ibid. page 66. li. 32.
As if when they had mocked and reviled him at noone or before, he would then
three whole hours after tell them of such an answer in the Prophet.] As if
you stood by and kept the Register, when they left mocking and deriding Christ
on the cross. That he was crucified about mid-noone, and spoke these words
about the ninth hour, which was three of the clock after noone, the Scripture
does witness, but how long they continued their scorning and scoffing at him,
no Scripture does limit. Saint Matthew names the high Matthew. 27. verse 41.
Priests with the Scribes, Elders and Pharisees, the (...).
(...) that were crucified with him, and such as (...).
passed by reviled him, wagging their ^eads, and (...).
saying, Thou that destroyest the Temple, and buildest it in three days, save
thy self. If thou be the Son of God, come down from the cross. S. Luke
adds, That Luc. 22. v. 35.
the people which stood and beheld, mocked him, as well as the Rulers, and the
soldiers also mocked him, and came and offered him vinegar. How long this
continued from all sorts standing and passing by, if you take upon you to tell,
you must consult with Balaams beast; for no man can tell you, unless you find
by the stars how long that stir dured. For my part I think, as they were
never satisfied with his torments, so never left they taking all occasions to
deride him, as we may perceive by the very speaking of these words; upon which
some said, Let be, Let us see if Elias will come and save him. Now if the very
passengers did not refrain their tongues from (...) on him, shall we think the
standers by did so quickly leave with mouth to (...), (...) heart to disdain
him, and condemn him as forsaken of God, in the midst of so many shames and
miseries? And the poison of their hearts accounting him to be wicked and
rejected of God, was the thing which Christ respected, as well as the (...) of
their tongues. But what if their mocks did cease at twelve of the clock, as
you (...) presume with out all good ground, might not Christ therefore in this
(...) (...) their (...) words and hateful thoughts three hours after, when
now he was (...) to give up the ghost, though whiles life did last, he was
content with all quietness and silence to endure them? Was it so fond and
absurd as you talk of, to (...) them with the beginning of that Psalm, that
all these things which he had suffered, and they had used toward him, were
foreprophesied of the Messiah and Savior of the world? Who but a man destitute
of wit or sense would give such entertainment to two so learned and ancient
Fathers for so saying?

Defenc. page 114. li. 16.
Your authorities are bare arguments. Ierom brings no reason, but his own
word. (...) I see not what he says to your purpose at all.] Your absurdities
and contrarieties hatched out of your own head are far worse arguments.
Ieroms bare word is as good as your bare will, or bold face, in any place in
Christendom. Howbeit, Ierom is not alone in this mind: S. Austen says,
August. epist. 120.
Psalmum, cuius prophetiam (...) ad se (...) demonstrans, cius primum versum
exclamauit, cum pend^ret in ligno. To show the prophecy of that Psalm to
perteine to him, the Lord repeated the first verse thereof with a loud voice as
he hung on the cross. [You see not how Chrysostom makes to this purpose.
Christ spoke these words, says Chrysostom, that thereby the Jews might
learn he honored his Father to the last breath, and that (his Father) was no
(...) x (...). in Matthew. (...). (...).
to him. Therefore he spoke the Prophets words, confirming the ancient
Scripture, that they might perceive him to be of the same will with his Father.
Had he been forsaken (...) his Father, and convicted thereof by his own
confession, as you interpret Christ's words, he had declared by his speech, his
Father to be an adversary to him, since to (...) is no sign of love, but of
dislike. But he spoke these words of the Prophet, to prove that his Father was
not opposite to him, but of the same will with him. What else can Chrysostom
mean by this, but that the Prophet by this Psalm foreshewed the Son of God
and Savior of the world should speak these words on the cross, and thereby
not only affirm, that God was his God, and not his adversary, but ratify the
ancient Scripture, even that whole Psalm, as forespoken of him; whereby the
Jews might plainly learn, that nothing befell him, which the Prophet in that
Psalm did not before declare should befall the true Messiah and Savior of the
world.

Defenc. page 114. li. (...).
Finally, these kinds of dereliction which you mention besides, page 32, 33,
38, etc. are nothing sitter than the former.] You sit like a supreme Judge
over Fathers and Scriptures, and cassiere all besides your own conceits, upon
the warrant of your own will, without any farther trouble or proof. It is
urged in those pages which you pass over, that forsaking thorowout the
Scriptures never signifies the state or pains of the damned. You care not for
that, your will must have way, and your word must stand. It is there also
avouched, that whenever the godly complain in the Scriptures, as they often
do, that they are forsaken; they mean of help in time of need, and of
deliverance in the day of trouble. Nor Scriptures nor Fathers have any power to
prevail against your pleasure, you will have forsaking in Christ's words to
note the pains of the damned, though there be no example thereof in any divine
or humane writings. You are belike some Praetor or some Pilate, that what you
have written, you have written, and other reason you will yield none.

Defenc page 114. li. 22.
Six or seven diverse yea contrary senses you have brought of a few words, and
of them all you say, they are all godly expositions, and all these
interpretations are sound, and stand well with the rules of Christian piety.
How sound and fit they are, it has been scene.] And what have you found in
any of them dissonant from the rules of Christian piety, for which I commended
them? They fit not your fancy, I know it well; but they swerve neither from
the faith of Christ, nor from the word of God. For where all good Expositions
The true rules how to expound the Scriptures.
should have these four conditions; the right use of the words, the
circumstances of the place, the coherence with other Scriptures, and
concordance with the maine grounds of piety and charity, which by no pretense
of any speech in Scripture may be impugned; these expositions of the ancient
Fathers transgress in none of them. And where the Jews falsely, wickedly, and
blasphemously objected to Christ, that he was forsaken of God, you out of the
abundance of your wit and faith, will have Christ on the cross publicly and
plainly to confess and confirm their sacrilegious objections, and to justify
their impiety for truth, by acknowledging with a loud voice, that he was
forsaken of God. A worse exposition than which, the devil himself could not
devise. For whatsoever was inwardly between him and his Father, he would never
so openly ratify their impious and slanderous cogitations and imputations with
his own mouth, nor leave such a confession presently before his death in the
ears and hearts of all his enemies, as that he found himself to be truly and
inwardly forsaken of God; but rather calling that a forsaking, which they
misconstrued to be so, he complained that God had so long with such patience
left him in their hands without any show as yet of love and favor toward him,
which made his enemies think God had indeed forsaken him.

Defenc page 114. li. 26.
Verily you have a good head, if you can reconcile all these, and make them
stand together.] Does any man, that has so much as a head, require to have all
expositions reconciled, before they may be tolerated? When they are diverse, the
Reader may make his choice what he best likes; but there is no cause nor
reason to reject all that can not be reconciled. Neither did I tell you, they
might all stand together; but I said they stood well with the rules of
Christian piety. And since they had in them no contradiction to the text, nor
to the faith, I saw no ground to deprive the Reader of them, much less to
reject or disdain the authors of them, as you do. And yet truly it were no
such hard matter, as you imagine, to make the substance of them stand together.
For why might not Christ on the cross, as the head and Savior of his body,
in his own name make his complaint, or inquire the cause why both he and his
were so long and in this wise forsaken; as namely, the head to be left to the
pain, shame and death of the cross, and his members to the poison of sin,
and rage of Satan: and therefore pray that his members might be freed and
restored to Gods favor, and himself be eased of his anguish with deposing his
spirit into his Fathers hands, and honored with the signs of his Fathers love
and liking toward him, when he should depart this life, that all his enemies
might know there was a great and good cause, even the glory of God and man's
salvation, why he was thus martyred and mocked on the cross? Here are the
effects of those six or seven causes laid together; what so great repugnancie
find you betwixtthem, that because they are many, therefore your hell-paines
should be the likelier to be the true meaning of these words?

Defenc. page 114. li. 27.
A very badde opinion of the holy Scriptures you seem to have, if you think
they may be handled by Interpretations and Expositions thus, that a man may
take them in six or seven diverse senses, and all sustisiable.] I honor them
more in not rejecting the manifold expositions of considerate and godly
Interpreters, than you do in fastening them to the leaven of your sower humor,
and affixing such senses to them, as shall contradict the maine grounds of
faith and religion delivered in them. And who but you, did ever hinder
Expositors old or new, to labor in them, and scant to reach to the depth of
them; since, as you seem to be affected, no man may offer diversely to
interpret them for fear of having a badde opinion of them? But such is your
stiff and proud presumption, all things that like not you, are vain and
frivolous; and your fancies, be they never so unreasonable or irreligious, must
be weighty and holy.

Defenc. page 114. li. 34.
Now it rests, that I gather some reasons from the express Scripture, to
show you that indeed very pains, and the vehemencte of sorrows, namely, which
he now sustained by way of yielding satisfaction and sacrifice for sin, were
the principal and only proper cause of his most dreadful agonies and
complaint. Which trucly though it need no reason for proof of it (the matter
being so clear in it self) yet your unreasonableness is such, that it
draws somewhat from me about it. Your Art of carping has fayed but
ill-fauouredly with you; you will now proceed to your trade of proving, and
that by express Scripture: wherein you show your self to be right your self,
that is, take all your own fancies for express Scripture, and though your
conceits be such, that are more worthy to be derided than answered; yet the
matter, you say, is so clear in it self, that it needs no reason for proof
of it. The express Scriptures on which you so much stand, are the name of the
Agony, the Hour, and the Cup, with this one sentence, My soul is on every
side heavy unto death. About these you brabble, going neither backward nor
forward, but heaping up a few general phrases of mighty sorrows and excessive
pains, you iterate the very same that you often said before, and add not so
much as a piece of a reason, that should stumble a man of any understanding.
And touching your hell pains, or the second death, you lay that on soaking
till your proouing be ouerpast, and then we shall hear of it at Lands end,
when you are lightened of your burden.

Defenc. page 115. li 3.
First no Christian doubts ( I suppose) much less denies that Christ's most
woeful agonies and complaining, belonged properly and directly to his Passion
and sacrifice: and that they expressed a part thereof, yea as I think not the
least part, but his whole sacrifice consisted in afflictions. The prince of our
salvation was consecrated through afflictions. Therefore, afflictions, sorrows
and pains were the cause of his agonies and complaint: not his religious The
Defenders manner of reasoning is as illogical as his matter is false.
fear, not his piette or pity.] Somewhat it was, this gecre was Drawn from
you; it comes not so unwillingly, but it comes as untowardly from you.
First to the form, and then to the matter of your argument. Your conclusion is
a strange kind of creature, it has to much, and yet it has too little. For
before you can exclude religious fear, pity and piety from the cause of
Christ's agony or complaint, you must add ( only) to your inference, and say,
Afflictions, sorrows, and pains, were the only cause of Christ's agonies and
complaint. Otherwise with one part you exclude another, as if a man would say,
that your head is not part of your body, because your heel is; which would
put all your reasons in danger to be drawn out of your heel, and not out of
your head. And yet as defective as your conclusion is one way, it is as
excessive another way. For these words ( were the cause) are stolen into this
conclusion, of which there was no mention in your premises; and so your
precedent propositions are of one country, and your conclusion of another,
they have not so much as intercourse each with other; where by the rules of
reason and Art, there should be nothing in your conclusion, which is not
exactly specified in your premises. Your mayor begins with ( belonged to)
your minor proceeds to ( consisted in) and your conclusion huddleth ( was the
cause of) which are rather like forkes to skatrer, then rakes to gather the
parts of your syllogism together. If to hale in your conclusion, you will
amend your assumption, as you must; and say, that afflictions were the only
cause of Christ's sacrifice, we shall more wonder at this monster, then at the
former. For besides the falsenesse of it, in that it is utterly repugnant to
all truth, since the causes of Christ's sacrifice, were sin in us, needing it,
Love in Christ proferring it, and Justice in God requiring it; how come the
parts of any thing to be the causes thereof? Afflictions suffered were parts of
Christ's sacrifice, and not the causes. And therefore you must pray the Printer
to stamp you a new conclusion before any part of this argument will have
passage.

The premises be as good, as the conclusion. For they have neither any
certainety nor verity in them. [ Christ's agonies and complaint belonged
directly, you say, to his Passion and Sacrifice.] Belonged, what is that? as an
Antecedent, Adiunct, or Consequent? as a necessary, or a voluntary pertinent?
It will be long before you draw any good conclusion from this belonging.
Again, Christ's agony, if you take it for all that Christ did or suffered in
the Garden, how diverse and how different parts had it, as inward affections of
fear and sorrow, desire, and zeal; humble, often, and intentive prayer,
besides the comfort of an Angel, and sweat like blood, and sundry other
things which I have mentioned before? all these belonged directly to Christ's
action in the Garden. Wherefore hereafter, before you profess such cleerenesse
in your reasons, either vsesuch words as the Scripture does, or foretell us how
far you extend, and what you intend by the words which you bring. Your minor
is worse where you say [ but Christ's whole Sacrifice consisted in afflictions.]
For where is the purity of the Sacrifice, which must be unspotted; the
dignity, which must counteruaile the offense; the voluntary presenting
thereof to God, that it might be accepted as meritorious, and not inflicted as
ignominious? yea, where is the Sanctification of this Sacrifice, which required
not only prayer, but piety and charity, as also humility to commend it to
God? All these things were in Christ's Sacrifice, as chief and maine respects;
which you have blotted out with expressly falsifying the Scriptures, to make
room only for hell pains. For though we have no doubt, but God in his secret
wisdom and justice did Hebr. 2.
consecrate the prince of our salvation through afflictions, yet the Scripture
says not wholly, or only through afflictions, as if neither sanctity, nor
submission, nor piety, nor pity, nor obedience, nor willingness, nor any
thing else were requisite, but only to suffer affliction. The Scripture fairly
intends, that God, who had tried the obedience of his Son in all kind of
holiness and righteousness, would now try him by affliction, that the
perfection of his graces and gifts might be sacred, and showed to the uttermost
in these things, wherein it is hardest for the nature of man quietly and
willingly to endure the hand of God. Therefore God would also consecrate the
prince of our salvation by affliction, but not only by that, as if nothing
else were needful in the author of our salvation, but only affliction; which
assertion has in it an heap of huge absurdities and impieties. This is your
drawing of express Scriptures to serve your unlearned and unsettled fancies,
that where you would profess to be strongest, there every child may perceive
you to be weakest.

Defenc. page 115. li. 11.
If you say these were afflictions in him, I answer, they properly belonged to
his holiness as parts thereof, and were not immediately, directly, nor properly
in him as the wages and price of sin.] You be soon weary of your proofs,
that you since come to your answers, and there in steed of truth you run
for refuge to your wonted terms, of immediately, directly and properly, as the
wages and price of sin. But leave your terms for another time, and show us
some proof besides your own preface, that either the sacrifice for sin
might have nothing in it but only afflictions, or that the religious fear of
Gods power and wrath against sin, and hearty sorrow for displeasing God with
our sins, are no afflictions, or no necessary parts of Christ's sacrifice for
sin. For if you fail in those, your great promises of clear cases and
express Scriptures, are idle and empty florishes. Your replying, that these
properly belonged to his holiness, as parts thereof, is mere trifling. For
Christ's affections and submission in all his sufferings, were parts of his
holiness, neither could any pains make any impressions on his soul, were
they never so grievous, which were not also religious. And so much the very
words, which you bring in favor of your cause, confirm. For God did
consecrate him through afflictions to be the prince of our salvation. What is
consecration by God, but holiness derived from God, and accepted of God? if
then Christ were consecrated by his asflictions, they wrought no impressions,
nor af^ections in his soul, but such as were SACRED and religious.

If you doubt, whether the parts of holiness may be painful and grievous
unto the soul of man, look either on repentance, compassion, zeal or charity
in us, and see whether as well in our own causes as in other men's, they may
not be painful and grievous to the mind, even when they be also faithful and
religious. Repentance does or should work in us an inward, earnest, and hearty
sorrow, that we have displeased and provoked God with our sins. I ask
whether penitent sorrow be not painful, because it is religious and faithful?
Were it not painful, it were no sorrow, much less repentance, or an acceptable
sacrifice to God. Psalm. 51.
A troubled spirit is a sacrifice to God, a broken heart thou (God) wilt not
despise. When we do voluntarily afflict our own souls, because we have
displeased him, he is pleased in mercy 1. Corin. 11. verse. 31.
not to judge us, since we judge our selves. Saint James says, Iam. 4. v. 9.
Cleanse your hands ye sinners, and purge your hearts ye wavering minds; be
afflicted (inwardly in soul) and sorrow and weep; he means in respect of
their continual and manifold sins. Is this asfliction and sorrow not grievous
to men, because it is religious? [It is no punishment of sin, you will say.
Saint Austen says it is, whose judgment I far prefer before yours. Psalm.
90.
Iniquitas i August. in Psalm. 58.
omnis (...) magnaue sit, puniatur necesse est; aut ab ipso homine poenitente,
aut a Deo ^indicante. Nam and quem poenitet panit seipsum. Prorsus aut (...),
aut (...). Vis non puniat, puni tu. All iniquity, be it little or great, of
necessity must be punished, either by man repenting, or by God revenging. For
he that repents, punishes himself. Certainly then either thou must punish
it, or God will punish it. Will thou not have him to punish? punish it thy
self. Then in us sorrow for sin is a voluntary, but a holy punishment of
sin, and is in all the godly both grievous and religious, and the more
grievous the more religious. Since then voluntary sorrow for sin committed,
which is repentance, is an higher and acceptabler sacrifice to God then
vengeance, shall we think, that our Savior, who was to yield God his due for
us in all things agreeable to his person, Inward and voluntary sorrow of the
soul is a sacrifice to God.
did omit this excellent sacrifice of inward and infinite sorrow, for that our
sins so much displeases the holin^sse of God, and that it was not grievous
to him, because it was religious in him? It work^th both in us; and why should
either want in him, who was far better able to p^rforme both, then we are?
the like I say of the fear of Gods wrath when we have provoked it. We ought
not only to reverence that most excellent majesty, but when we have sinned, to
fear and tremble before that power, which can do with us what he will. And
though we hope in his mercy, yet that does not breed any neglect of his power,
which if we do not fear, when we have provoked, we do despice. And therefore
Moses gives this for a rule of true devotion and submission under the mighty
hand of God; Who knows the power of thy wrath? for according to thy fear,
(that is as thou art feared) so is thine anger. The lighter account we make of
his anger, the heavier shall his hand be to us. The more we fear it without
distrust, the less we shall feel it. For submission and sorrow do mitigate
the wrath of God, which carelessenesse and contempt do aggrauate. Since then no
man knew the power of Gods wrath against sin so perfectly, as Christ did; and
yet the infiniteness of Gods power did pass the reach of Christ's humane soul
to comprehend, why might not the manhood of Christ yield greater fear and
trembling to the power of Gods wrath against our sin, for which he was to
satisfy, then all men living were able to do, and yet together with the
fearful impression thereof retain a religious submission thereto?

In compassion, when we fear for other men's dangers, or grieve for other men's
harms, is not this affection painful to us, because it proceeds from mercy,
and (...) is aff^iction, though it be a vert^e.
pity in us? are you so hard hearted, as well as hie minded, sir defendour, that
you were never touched nor troubled with the sense of other men's miseries? Job.
30.
Did I not weep says Job, with him that was in trouble? Was not my soul in
heaviness for the poor? When the Apostle wills us to Romans 12.
mourn with them, that mourn; Does he mean we should make a pastime of it,
because it is an affection of mercy and charity? Does not daily experience
teach us, how much the miseries of those, whom we dearly love do bite and pinch
us? Can we forget David's 2. Sam. 19. ver. 1. and 4.
affection and affliction for Absolon? Does not the Scripture describe all
natural mothers in those words.? Matt. 2. v. 18.
In Rama was a voice heard; mourning and weeping, and great Lamentation: Rachel
weeping for her children, and would not be comforted, because they were not. In
godly zeal and care we shall find the like. 2. Cor. 11.
Who is weak, says the Apostle, and I am not (as) weak? who is offended, and
I burn not? yea the Psalm. 69.
zeal of thine house has consumed me, says David. Then are fear and sorrow
proceeding either from piety or charity no whit the less grievous, because The
highest degrees of religious fear and sorrow were in Christ.
they are religious, but rather the more inwardly we are touched with either,
the more acceptable is that affection to God, specially when it concerns his
own power or honor. And consequently as the highest degrees of religious fear
and sorrow were in Christ at the time of his propitiating the holiness and
justice of God for our sins, so were they in him as sharp and painful, as
any his afflictions, which otherwise he felt in his body.

Defenc. page 115. li. 15.
That these should or could afflict Christ so much above his strength and
patience, is more then strange. Easily they might above his strength, since he
would use no strength, but weakened himself of purpose to feel the smart and
burden of our sins; but not above his patience, since he did not repine at
any of these, but requested by prayer to have the punishment of our sin
proportioned to the weakness of his humane flesh, considering the infinite
power of Gods wrath most justly provoked by our sins.

Defenc. page 115. li. 17.
It were no virtue but sin in any, to give way to our affections (though
about good things) immoderately beyond our patience and strength of nature.] It
is no sin, but virtue, to press both our strength and patience to the
uttermost for Gods glory in things commanded by him. As in loving God,
Bernardus de diligendo Deo.
modus est sine modo diligere, the measure is to love him without measure; so
in all the duties which God requires, the most that we can do is not too
much. Fear and sorrow then, which are, as the Apostle speaks, 2. Corin. 7.
verse. 10.
(...), according to God, or for God, that is, obedient to Gods will, are never
immoderate, neither bring they danger of life, or defect of grace, as worldly
fear and sorrow do. But how comes your disc^etion to charge Christ's
affections with immoderation? For your hell-paines you are content to plunge
his body, and chiefly his soul into astonished and all comfortless
confusion; and for submission to God, and confession and apprehension of the
justness and greatness of his anger against our sins, you will not give him
leave being our Agent and Intercessour in his own person to present that to
God, which is due from us and for us; even inward sorrow for Gods just
displeasure, and an humble fear of his mighty power, thereby to honor the
one and prevent the other, when he now addressed himself to make full
satisfaction for our sins.

Defenc. page 115. li. 19.
Though they somewhat molest the mind, yet in truth they are most pleasing
and delightful to good men, not tedious, much less painful unto death.] The
Apostle himself answers this objection, and tells you, that Heb. 11.
no chastisement FOR THE PRESENT seems to be joyous, but grievous; yet
AFTERWARD it brings the quiet fruit of righteousness to them that are
thereby exercised. Our Savior by this example teaches the same: Verily, John
16.
Verily I say unto you, ye shall weep and lament, but your sorrow shall be
turned into joy. A woman when she trauelleth has sorrow because her hour is
come; but as soon as she is delivered of the child, she remembers no more
the anguish, for joy that a man is borne into the world. To say that pain is
pleasure, and sorrow is delightful, fights against Nature, Scripture, and
even against common sense; but God does diversely comfort the affliction of his
Saints with ending, easing, or otherwise recompensing them, whereby the
faithful 2. Cor. 4.
faint not, though their outward man perish, because our light affliction,
which is for a moment, works to us a far exceeding and everlasting weight
of glory. Though then our Savior was on every side pressed with sundry
sorrows, which would not end but in his death, yet that does not prove them to
be either irreligious, or utterly comfortless, since Heb. 12.
for the joy that was set before him, he endured the cross, and despised the
shame; and Revel. 3.
ouercomming sits with his Father in his throne. By which confession of our
Saviors we must learn, that he used no power to repel or rebate his pains,
but that he had as sensible and tender feeling of all his sufferings in the
weakness of his flesh, which he with obedience and patience subjected to that
burden, as any man could have, and rather more, in that he willingly laid aside
his strength, whiles he suffered for sin.

Defenc. page 115. li. 21.
You do very ill to make these parts of Christ's holiness proper parts of his
satisfaction, and the maine causes of his agony and complaint. And worse you
do, if you ascribe them not to any pains in him at all.] And what do you to
acknowledge no cause in Christ of his complaint or agony, neither religious,
nor natural, but only the pains of hell; and to sever the inward sacrifice of
an afflicted spirit from the outward sacrifice of his body, for the purgation
of our sins, since he wanted in no point that was required or accepted of
God, but yielded that to him, which was due from us, in far more excellent
and perfect manner than we can comprehend? It is therefore voluntary blindness
and deafness in you, to shut eyes and ears at all sorts of religious sorrows
and fears, when you read that Christ feared and sorowed in the Garden, and so
to pitch on the pains of the damned, which have no witness in holy writ, that
nothing can remove you or content you, but your own conceit.

Defenc. page 115. li. 25.
Secondly, the sum of these fore-noted texts must be considered, namely, that
Christ expressly wished sundry times in his dreadful astonishment, suddenly
even against Gods known will in one respect: and here are expressed (with his
strange astonishment) his mighty sorrows, and fear of them partly felt, and
partly further to come.] After a large promise of clear proofs and express
Scriptures for so great and weighty matters as these are, you trole out your
own false and absurd conceits no way gathered from the Scriptures, but
violently urged on them with more rage than reason, and now so often refuted,
that a man would be wearic, if not ashamed, to spend so much time in these idle
repetitions of the selfsame misapprehensions and misconstructions of some
words of the Evangelist. The sum of all these fore-noted texts is, that the
Evangelists say, Christ professed his soul was heavy unto death; that the
Apostle adds, he was heard in that he feared, that himself on the cross
said, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me. All these places are already
handled and cleared, and no pains of the damned or of the second death found
any thing near to any of these words. What means then this importunity to
obtrude them again as fresh and new proofs, without any farther pains
bestowed on them, then bar^ly the rep^ating of? only two poisened roots you
have added to them out of your own store, the one is the dreadful and strange
astonishment during all the time of Christ's prayer in the Garden; the other is
the sundry sudden wishes of Christ in that astonishment even against Gods
known will, which things, as your manner is, you prove by your own authority
painting them out with dreadful, strange, and mighty words, when your proofs
be weak and childish. That Christ prayed suddenly and sundry times against
the known will of God, is a false and wicked position, and as directly
repugnant to the Scriptures, as any thing may be. Saint Luke says his prayer
was Luc. 22. v. 42
Father, if thou will, take away this cup from me; And the Apostle says, he
was heard, in that he feared. So that not only you avouch this thing against
express Scripture, but you bring the son of God within the compass of
unadvised and faithless prayers, which you excuse with as false and lewd a
device, because he was past sense and memory what he did: whereas he well
remembered, mentioned, and reserved his fathers will in his prayers, and warned
his Apostles to Matthew. 26.
watch and pray, that they entered not into temptation; and constantly continued
his prayers, till he was Luc. 22.
comforted by an Angel from heaven, and Heb. 5.
heard in that he ^eared.

As for his astonishment, neither do the words used by the Evangelist Saint
Mark import any such strange and dreadsull want of sense and memory, as you
imagine; neither do the consequents declare any such continuance, as you
pretend; but in both these you prescribe your own will to be the rule of your
faith. First the word (...) signifies either admiration alone, or ^ls a
mixtion thereof with some fear upon any sudden or strange sight. When the
Creeple, that lay at the beautyfull gate of the temple asking alms, was healed
by Peter and John; the people seeing him walking, and leaping, and praising
God, were filled with admiration and astonishment, and flocked to Salomons
porch (...), even amazed. This affection in them Peter expresses in the next
verse after this sort. Acts 3. v. 12.
Ye men of Israel, says he, (...), why wonder you at this? (...), or why
look you so steadfastly on us? so that steadfast beholding, and inward admiring
are the force of this word in that place. When Christ returned from the
mountain, where he was transfigured, to his nine Disciples, that were
disputing with the Scribes; Mar. 9. v. 15.
All the people as soon as they saw him, (...) were amazed, and came to him,
and saluted him. In neither of these places can we imagine, the people were
stricken with such great fear, that should take their senses from them; and in
this last it is expressly written; they ran and saluted him: which argues,
that (...) imports a sudden admiration sometimes without fear, and sometimes
permixed with fear for the sight of some strange or unknown thing. So the
people when they saw him cast out unclean spirits with his word, Mar. 1. v. 27.
(...), were all amazed, and asked one of another, What thing is this? What new
doctrine is this? And the women that went early to Christ's sepulcher, and
Mar. 16. v. 5. and
saw a young man sitting clothed in a long white robe, (...), they were afraid,
and he said to them, 6.
(...), Be not afraid. In none of which places the word signifies any hellish
pain, or confusion; but either admiration, or such sudden fear joined with
some wondering, as a strange or unknown sight breeds; though we fear no
hurt toward our selves. And of these very words of Christ's sorrow, and fear
or astonishment used by the Evangelists, S. Ierom says; Hieronym. in Matthew.
ca. 26.
Caepit contristari: aliud est enim contristari, aliud incipere contristari.
Christ began to be sorrowful: for it is one thing to be sorrowful, and another
thing to begin to be sorrowful. And so Origin: Origin. in Matthew. tract. 35.
Capit pauere vel tristari, nihil amplius tristitiae vel pauoris patiens nisi
principium tantum. Christ began to be afraid or to be sorrowful, suffering no
more but only the beginning of fear or sorrow. And consider, says he, Ibidem.
the Evangelist says not he was afraid, or he was laden with sorrow, but he
began to be afraid and sorrowful. There is great difference betwixt sorrow,
and the beginning of sorrow. And so he expounds Christ's words; My soul is
heavy unto death; that is, Heaviness is begun in me, so that I am not
altogether without some taste thereof.

The continuance thereof the Scripture notes not to be such that either
bereaved him of memory, or hindered his prayers: for both he persisted in
earnest and humble Christ did not pray in astonishment.
prayer, wherein he was heard, and carefully warned his Apostles that were with
him, to watch and pray, that they entered not into temptation. Now prayer
requires not understanding and memory alone, but faith also. Of every man that
would pray, Saint James says, James 1.
Let him ask in faith, and waver not: for he that wauereth is like the wave of
the sea tossed with the wind. Neither let that man think he shall receive any
thing of the Lord. And where by these tastes and touches of fear and sorrow you
would insinuate your hell pains partly felt, and partly further to come; S.
Austen tells you that August. 83. qu^st. qu^st. 33.
cognitu facile est, nullum metum esse nisi futuri and imminentis mali; it is
easy to know there is no fear but of future and imminent evil. As also:
Ibidem.
Nihil erat inter omnia genera mortis illo genere execrabilius, and
formidolosius. Amongst all kinds of death there was none more execrable and
formidable than that kind of death on the cross, which Christ died. So that
what Christ feared, was to come, and not present; as also he might have a
natural mislike and fear of that kind of death, respecting as well the
pain, which would be intolerable, as the exactness of patience required more
in him than in all men living, because he might admit no declining nor
disliking the sharpness thereof in the weakness of his flesh, were it never
so grievous. This I speak of his bodily pains, besides the fear and sorrow
that his soul might apprehend for the weighty work of man's redemption then
in hand.

Defenc. page 115. li. 31.
You skip this kind of fear, when you reckon but four kinds: for this was
neither a religious care, nor doubtful fear, nor desperate, nor damned fear,
but a right natural fear in Christ.] As though the ground of all these were
not a natural fear and dislike of hell pains. For why do the faithful
decline them, the weak conflict with them, the desperate sink under them, and
the damned lie confounded in them, but because nature abhors and shunneth
all kind of pain, and consequently the greatest, which is hell, with the
greatest detestation that may be? You after your surly sort presume, that
Christ really felt in the Garden the pains of the damned; I admitting no such
device, did yet sufficiently comprise all kinds of fear concerning hell in
that division of mine, since if they were presently felt of Christ, as they are
of the damned, his fear of them must then needs be a damned fear, or rather
pain, because he had, as you defend, a present sense of them, as the damned
have. And therefore if you miss no more in your conclusions, then I did in my
partition, your reasons would pass without any just reproof.

Defenc. page 116.
David wanted sometime the present feeling of Gods comfortable spirit, and
mourned dolefully for the want of it, albeit yet he was not destitute of his
spirit inde^de: which also himself knew well enough. And thus did Christ even
in his greatest plunge of woe: for then he called God his God resolutely.] The
example of David makes nothing for your hell pains to be suffered in the
soul of Christ, but very much against them, and yet between David's case in
that Psalm and Christ's, there is no comparison. For David then was not pressed
with any outward affliction, but stricken with an inward doubt of Gods favor
toward him, whom he had so greatly offended with adultery and homicide, and so
long dallied with before repentance. Christ contrariwise was never pressed with
any doubt or distrust of Gods favor toward himself, but the weakness of
his flesh was burdened with extreme and intolerable pains. What affinity
then had David's fear of reiection with Christ's sense of affliction? and yet
were they like, what gain you by that? David was truly penitent, when he made
that psalm; and true repentance I hope puts not men into the pains of
hell. Again, David you confess was not then destitute of Gods spirit, which
also himself knew well enough. But the spirit of God is life to the soul of
man, and quickens it. Ergo David, though he wanted the full peace and joy of
conscience, which he calls salvation, yet he lived in soul, and was far
from the second death. How much more then was Christ's soul free from all these
things, in whom was the fullness of Gods spirit with all his gifts and graces
any way needful for the Savior of the world, though glory were differred, and
joy diminished for the time by excess of pain? To wish ease of pain, or to
grieve at the sharpness thereof, is natural unto man, and therefore may well
be granted to have been in Christ; as also to lack the fullness of joy and
comfort, till his sufferings were over past. But he never wanted the joy of
salvation, nor assurance thereof, and therefore he doubled his invocation on
the cross, saying not only, My God, my God, but Father forgive them, and
Father into thine hands I commend my spirit: and in the Garden he resolutely
pronounced as often, if not oftener, Mat. 26. verse. 39 42.
O my Father. Which words do most apparently prove, that Christ had never any
other persuasion, suspicion, or fear, but that God was his God, and his
Father, and therefore most certainly bare toward him a fatherly love and
affection; though he knew it was his Fathers will, he should inwardly and
outwardly grieve a while for our sins, and so receive ease by death, joy by
Paradise, and glory by his speedy and heavenly resurrection.

Defenc. page 116 li. 14.
Thirdly add hereunto Christ's own express words, when in this season he
prays that this hour, and this cup might pass from him. That which this
hour and this cup do signify, the same is the proper and principal cause of
this agony: but what can be meant by this hour, unless the pains of his
suffering set and appointed by God for him to be are at his determined time
from Gods justice for sin? What is this cup, but the bitter taste of the same
pains, aforsaid? this I hope was not his holiness and sanctification, which
so troubled and molested him, nor his piety, nor his pity.] If you permit our
Savior to be the interpreter of his own words, as he was the speaker, then
neither this hour, nor this cup import any thing suffered in the garden. After
his agony past, and prayers ended in the garden, Christ said to his Disciples,
b Sleep henceforth, and take your rest, behold THE HOUR draws near, and
the Son of man is given into the hands of sinners. And so to the Jews, that
came to approhend him, (...)
this is your very hour and the power of darkness. And when Peter would with
force have defended him, he said; (...)
Put up thy sword into thy sheath, shall I not drink of the cup which my
Father has given me? So that this ^ower and this cup were to come, when his
agony was ended; and were they not, why may not this hour and this cup
contain in them as well his painful affections o^ sorrow and fear, as his
other sufferings? Was not the Cup mixed that he drank; and the hour long
enough to comprise all that he suffered? But what makes either of those for
your hell pains? Was there no Cup for him to drink, nor time for him to
suffer, except your hellish torments were interposed? His sufferings then are
confessed, though no fear nor sorrow might besiege him, but such as was joined
with obedience and patience; and in the midst of his afflictions he neither
neglected submission to God, nor compassion to men. You with the one would
exclude the other; and I see no words nor cause, but both might be joined in
one hour and one Cup, whatsoever you pretend to the contrary.

Defenc. page 110. li. 23.
Nay finally he himself expresses the true cause, even his excessive pains,
his ouerabounding sorrows and anguish; saying, My soul is full of pains, or
full of sorrows even unto death. Here he names the cause.] You are a man of
much intelligence, that out of Christ's words would conclude his sorrow to be the
cause of it self. For where by Christ's agony, if it be largely taken, you
must mean his fear, and his sorrow confessed in that speech, My soul is heavy
(or sorrowful) unto death; You make no more ado but avouch, that Christ here
names sorrow to be the cause of his agony, that is of his sorrow. For if by his
agony you mean his bloody sweat, from these words to that part of his action
in the garden you shall never make any consequent. The Evangelist expressly
says, There appeared an Angel from heaven comforting him, and then falling
into an agony he prayed more earnestly, and in that vehement prayer his sweat
was like drops of blood. He was comforted before this last prayer, and therein
rather with the intention of spirits for zeal, then with the remission of them
for fear, he did sweat, as the Scripture notes. Now whereof received he
comfort, but of his sorrow? and what is comfort but a depulsion or mitigation of
sorrow? what sense then can it have, to say, that after Christ's sorrow was eased
and comforted from heaven, his sorrow decreasing, his agony of sorrow so much
increased, that he sweat blood for very sorrow? how hang these contraries
together, which you would hale out of Christ's own words? In the former part of
his action in the garden, wherein he prayed the cup might pass from him, he
said his soul was heavy (or sorrowful) unto death. We enquire the cause of
this sorrow. You answer, that Christ's own words express and name sorrow to be
the cause thereof. What is this, but to collude with Christ's words in making his
sorrow to be the cause of his sorrow, which in a more general and confused word
you call his agony? but with us the cause of his sorrow is in question; to that
you neither can, nor do say any thing out of Christ's words; out of your own
conceit you presume, that Christ's Pa. 116. li. 31.
excessive pains (then felt,) and the entire want of feeling of Gods comfort,
and nothing else was the proper and principal cause of that sorrow. But these be
your additions and expositions, they be no part of Christ's words, nor meaning.

And by what authority, to advantage your error, do you not only contr^le the
translation used by all the Latin Fathers; Tertullian, Cyprian, Hilarious,
^erom, Ambrose, Austen, Fulgentius, Bid and others, but even corrupt the words
of our Savior rendered by the Evangelists Matthew and Mark? Tristis est enima
mea vsque ad mortem, My soul is heavy (sad or sorrowful) unto death, say
all the Latin Fathers save Tertullian, who says, Tertullian. de carne Christi.
Anxia est anima mea vsque ad mortem, My soul is (...) unto death. The
Evangelists words are, (...) My soul is heavy (or on every side heavy and
sorrowful) unto death. You translate it, Pa. 116. li. 25.
My soul is full of pains, meaning by pains present inherent and absolute
pains, such as your hell-paines are; where the words import no such thing: for
neither tristitia in Latin, nor (...) in Greek, either in profane or divine
Writers, note any such actual and absolute impression of pain, as you would
have, but an affection troubling the mind, and rising upon opinion of evil
past or instant. Of sorrow Saint Austen says right well: Au^ust. in Psalm 42.
Dolor animae tristitia dicitur, molestia quae fit in corpore, Dolor dici
potest, tristitia non potest, The grief of the soul is called (heaviness or)
sorrow, the grief of the body is called pain, not sorrow. (...) in Greek
with profane Writers is (...); which Cicero translateth, Tuscul. quaest libro
4.
Opinio recens mali praesentis, A fresh opinion of present or instant evil.
The Scriptures in like sort use the same word, opposing it to the affection of
joy, and expressing by it not any actual or absolute pain, but grief and
sadness of mind, which we call sorrow. Ioh. ^6. v. 20.
The world shall rejoice, and you shall be sorrowful, (...), but your SORROW
shall be turned to joy. So Paul: 2. Cor. 2.
I would not come again to you (...), in heaviness: for if I made you sor^,
who is he that should make me gl^d, but the same that was made SORRY by me. And
this very thing I wrote unto you, lest when I came, I should have SORROW of
them of whom I should have joy. When the rest of the servants saw what the
evil servant, that was pardoned of his master the great debt of 10000 talents,
did to his fellow that ought him an hundred pence, Matthew 18. verse. ^1.
(...), they were very sorry. And when Christ said to his Disciples, One of you
shall betray me, Matthew. 26. verse. 22.
(...), they were exceeding sorrowful, and b^ganne every on^ to say, Master is
it I? As also when ^e told them of his departure and their troubles; he added,
^ohn 16.
Because I have spoken these things unto you, (...), sorrow has filled your
hearts. And generally thorowout the New Testament (...) does no where signifi^
actual and absolute pa^ne, but grief and sorrow of mind. And therefore your
wresting of our Saviors words with a false translation in saying, My soul is
full of pains, intending thereby the pains of the damned inflicted by Gods
immedia^e hand, is a false and lewd corruption.

Defenc page 116. li. 34.
Here we will remember again, what is taught by authority in England. The
rather for that you take on as a man impatient, because I do affirm, that our
doctrine (not yours) has the publi^e authority for it. You call it an
egregiou^ lie, an insolent and impudent speech, well becoming ^n alchouse,
etc. and yet in the very next page in plain terms you grant the same to be
taught in our h^milie of Christ's Passion.] The way to mend a lie, is not to
double it, and ^riple it, but to see your error, that you may acknowledge the
truth. I^ I had then cause to dislike the egregious lie, which I justly
challenged, I have now more, when to save your self from some impudency, you
show more then stupidity. You would needs in your treatise amongst other
untruths avouch, that your doctrine (...) the Treatis. pa. 89 li. 13.
public authorized doctrine of England, delivered in the book of homilies. I
told you then, which yet is true, that this as well as others, was an insolent
and impudent speech. You ask Defenc. (...) ^7. (...). 30.
who is that egregious lier now? Defenc. (...) ^7. (...). 35.
you hope you are clear from it.] Even he that was before, and you are clear
from it, as Judas was from betraying Christ, by ^aying is it I master? to
clear your self, you now say, your exposition of those words, My God, my God,
why host thou forsaken me, is found in the book of Homilies, and that I my
self in plain words confess so much. Then are you the verier liar to say,
this is your doctrine which I impugned, or that our maine question was about
the exposition of those words. Christ's complaint on the cross, I said, did not
proo^e your hell-paines, nor the second death to be suffered in Christ's soul,
which way soever you expounded it, so you followed any example of Scripture
using that word. To reprobation or desperation, if your conscience did thereto
stretch, you might apply this word by some examples of Scriptures, but not to
real and actual damnation, no not in the most wicked castawayes that ^uer
were. The sundry senses, which I gave out o^ the Fathers, show the w^aknesse of
your illation from those words, they directly touch not the maine point of
doctrine, questioned betwixt us; and amongst the^e senses this was one, which
the book of Homilies seems to follow. The direct cause of Christ's fear,
sorrow, and bloody sweat, since the Scripture concealed it, I said could not
be certainly concluded thence; what is that to Christ's complaint on the
cross, whose words though they may be extended to express his pains, yet
your doctrine is no whit the truer for all that, nor the more confirmed by the
laws of this Realm. So that the lie by your leave does lie where it did, only
you have furnished the former lie with two or three fresher, and as your use
is, you correct matters amiss by making them worse then they were.

Defenc. page 117. li. 6.
Here I am sure you think not that our Homily makes Christ's piety or
pity, nor yet his mere bodily pain to force him thus far. Nor in these
words next following there, O that mankind should put the everlasting son of
God in such pains for the grieuousnesse of our sins.] Are you sure what I
think? well fare your wisdom yet, that when you should prove your doctrine
to be received and authorized by the public laws of this Realm, you are
sure, I am of your mind. This is not only a childish fainting, but foolish
dallying, to clear your self from a notorious lie by assuring your self what
I think. If you will needs know what I think, first it is evident to him
that reads these homili^s, that the whole summ^ and mean of our redemption
being the^e purposely delivered, neither of these homilies speaks one word of
your hellpaines, nor of the second death to be suffered in the soul of Christ.
Again it is as evident, that the suffering of a shameful and painful death
in Christ's body is there taught to be the only sacrifice for our sins. The
words are. 1. Sermon of the Passion. pa. 5.
There is none other thing, that can be named under heaven, to save our souls,
but this only work of Christ's precious offering of his body on the Altar of
the Cross. What pains Christ suffered on the Cross, whether the pains of
the damned, or of his body bruised and broken on the Cross, the book it self
does plainly witness. c Christ being the son of God, and 2. Ser^on of the
Passion. pa. 9.
perfect God himself, who never committed sin, was compelled to come down
from heaven, and to give his BODY TO BE BRVISED, AND BROKEN ON THE CROSS for
our sins. Was not this a manifest token of Gods great wrath and displeasure
toward sin, that he could be pacisied by none other means, but ONLY BY THE
SWEET AND PRETIOVS BLOOD of his dear son? If you teach this, that the
bruising and breaking of Christ's body on the Cross, and the shedding of his
precious blood was the ONLY MEAN to pacify Gods wrath against sin, then I
did you wrong to call your speech impudent; but if this be the new doctrine
which I defend, and you impugn, then do you deserve not only the terms which
I gave, but worse, so openly and obstinately to resist, deface, and belie
public authority.

Defenc. page 117. li. 12.
Add her^unto the full and large declaration hereof in the authorized
Catechism. Christ suff^red not only a common death in the sight of men, but
also was thoroughly touched with the horror of eternal death, etc. When he did
take upon him and bear both the guiltines and just pain of mankind damned and
lost, he was afflicted with so grievous fear, trouble, and sorrow of mind or
soul, that he cried out, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me.] I make
good difference betwixt the Book of Homilies confirmed as well by the public
authority of Prince and Parliament, Anno Reginae 13. ca: 12; as by the general
subscription of the upper and nether house in the convocation Anno 1571 to In
the 35. article of Homilies.
contain godly, wholesome and necessary doctrine; and the Catechism then
licenced to be taught in Schools to young scholars, but without any such
authority as the former is. Show the like approbation. and you shall freely
call it the public autorized doctrine of England; till you do so, give me
leave to tell you, that the one is indeed by public authority received and
ratified, even as the articles are; the other was by private discretion
permitted and tolerated to be taught in Grammar schools, but public
authority of the whole Realm you may challenge none unto it. And therefore I
take my self in matters of faith not bound unto it, farther then it accords
with the manifest truth delivered in the ^acred Scriptures. Again your self
do^ more impugn the Catechism, then I do. For if your own words be true
that Christ, when he uttered those Defenc. page 110. li. 28. and 34.
words, spoke in his mind of his constant and continual joy in God, and was in
exceeding general, and constant joy. What place leave you for any of those
words, which you cite out of the Catechism, to have any truth in them, since
they speak of exceeding and horrible fears and sorrows, which I think are
contrary to your triumphant, general, and constant joy? And although I think
it no reason, that a thing privately permitted, should abrogate the full and
maine consent of the learned and ancient Fathers, as you would have it to do;
and therefore make it free, when the Carechisme swatueth from their sense and
interpretation, to be of another mind; yet I condemn nothing in it as wicked,
but wish that so^e few places had been more clearly and more particularl^e
delivered and expressed, to avoid such cauillers, as you and some others are.
But you with open mouth rei^ct even those places, which now you produce, as
passing strange doctrine, and simply impossible. For where the Catechism here
in these words, which you allege, says Christ was Aeternae mortis horrore
perfusus, perfused (or wholly touched) with an horror (which is a trembling
fear) of eternal death; you not only reason against it, that Defenc. page 9^
li. 13.
Christ could not fear that, which he perfectly knew concerned him not at all,
and by no means could ever possibly come near him; but you make it li. 12.
passing strange doctrine, and simply impossible, that Christ should fear, or
pray against the whole and entire cup of eternal death. And yet the Catechism
says, he trembled and was ouercast with the horror of it. You mis^ike that the
Catechism says, except you may pervert it to your pleasure; and in steed of
fearing eternal death, you say Christ suffered the second death, which is die
death of the damned; and so refusing the Catechism for saying so much, you say
more, and think the Catechism is of your mind. But sir, tell us, how Christ
could be stricken with the HORROR OF ETERNAL DEATH, for those a^e the words of
the Catechism, and not how he suffered your new made hell, which the
Catechism never speaks of. I have delivered two senses to salve the
Catechism, which you impugn. The first, that Christ in respect of his
members, to whom that death was due, might in love and piety toward them,
inwardly tremble at the punishment deserved by them, since mercy makes us
truly feel the very smart of other men's harms and dangers, and where we
heartily love, no less then if they were imminent over our own heads. The
second, that Christ fearing the power of Gods wrath against sin, which is
infinite, may in a sort be said to tremble at the effects thereof, by reason he
trembled at the cause thereof. And in this sense the consideration, and
apprehension of Gods infinite power and displeasure against sin might br^ede
those horrible fears and sorrows, which the Catcchisme talks of. Otherwise
I must be plain, the Catechism says more, then can be proved by any
Scripture, or any learned and ancient Father; and more then you your self
allow or like, save that you would out of his vehement speeches make some
advantage to your cause, though in substance you wholly dissent from the maker
thereof. For he speaks of fear and sorrow, you of re (...) al solute
suffering; he of eternal death due to sin, you of a new found hell from the
immediate hand of God, which is no part of the Catcchisers meaning, since he
plainly names future and everlasting death due to sinners, and not a present
and temporal hell, which is not the full wages of sin, nor of the damned.

The like I say for the notes added by the Printer or correctour to the great
Bible, whose text is authorized to be read in the Church, but not the notes to
be of equal credit or authority with the text. And if you may turn of the
whole a^ay of ancient and Catholic Fathers, because they diflent from your
conceits, how much less am I bound to correctours or Printers, adding often
times to other men's works and labors, what pleases themselves? Though the
note be not such, but that it may receive the former construction, and be
tolerated wel^ enough. Wherefore I mean even the same giddy spirit (which
before I did) buzzing in the ears of the people his own fancies against the
Scriptures, against the Fathers, and against the doctrine of this Realm
confirmed by public authority of Prince and Parliament. The recollecting of
your former reason so lately and largely answered, I omit as tedious trifling;
and since you say no more then is before refuted, what should I trouble my
self and the Reader with repeating the same things so often iterated?

Defenc page 118. li. 10.
You have yet here and there some exceptions against this our doctrine, which
are not to be clean neglected. First you say I extend Christ's agony to far:
because I will have is proceed from the intolerable sorrows and horrors of
Gods siery wrath equal to ^ell. I show not there the cause of Christ's agony
and fear, I showed it of purpose in the beginning. Why did you not refuse
that?] You extend it so far according to my words, yea your maine purpose is
to make that the cause of Christ's agony in the garden and on the cross; only
you would use some cunning in the carriage of it, first to make sorrows and
fears the cause thereof, and at the next step to ask what sorrows and fears
could those be, but the intolerable sorrows and horrors of Gods fiery wrath
equal to hell. And to this end you quote both the Catechism, and the notes in
the great Bible here, to show the cause of Christ's agony to be these horrible
sorrows and torments, as the Catechism says, of future and everlasting
death. Why then are you so nice, when you fully intend it, in show to deny it?
[ why did you not refuse that in the beginning?] The causes, that might
concur in Christ's agony, I showed in my sermons out of the ancient Fathers
agreeing with the Scriptures; why should I repeat it again in my conclusion,
you bringing nothing against it, but a few voluntary and empty words, which I
know no man so unwise as to regard without better proof? [ pa: 118. li. 32
There is no other sorrow in the world to be found, which can be imagined to be
the cause possibly.] You err as well in aggravating Christ's agony above that
the text avouches, as in assigning a false cause thereof out of your own
fancy. Fear and sorrow the Scripture affirms in Christ, if we so interpret
the words, as you do; but such fear, and such sorrow, as cannot be found in
the world, except the fears and sorrows of the second death, this is your bold
assertion no way mentioned, nor purposed in the Scriptures, nor grounded on any
sound reason or experience. For where the pains of some kinds of bodily deaths
be often greater then man's nature can endure, and therefore violently part the
soul from the body; what did hinder the pains of Christ's body on the cross,
to be such, that they pressed his patience to the highest degree, since he
would not strengthen his flesh to sustain the pains of hell, as you pretend,
but laid down all power, that he might feel the smart and anguish of his
bodily torments as tenderly, as any man could? Now what pains in others
ouerwhelme the senses, and hasten death, as passing the strength of man's
nature, why might not even the same bodily pains in Christ so press his
humane weakness; that he felt himself able with patience to support no more,
and so prayed on the cross for an end thereof; and foresaw so much in the
Garden, which made him earnest, if it were possible, to decline it? What can be
said against this sharpness and bitterness of bodily pain, since in all
Martyrs and malefactors their deaths declare, that pain in the end does so
prevail, that the rage thereof is utterly intolerable to man's nature, and
therefore sundereth the soul from the body with extreme violence, as exceeding
all human^ patience and strength?

Defenc. page 118. li. 34.
My other words also, which here you cruelly condemn, shall stand well enough,
that Christ as touching the vehemency of pain, was as sharply touched, as
the reprobates themselves, yea, if it may be, more extraordinarily; though you
labor with might and maine to make them amount to heresy and open
blasphemy.] My words were more moderate, then your dangerous comparisons
deserved. Conclus. pa. 290. li 35.
I prayed you in so weighty matters, as might amount to heresy and open
blasphemy, not to play with general terms, such as you neither understood
your self, nor any man else could conceive your meaning. You would needs tell
us, that Christ in soul was as sharply touched, and with as great vehemency
of pain, even as the reprobates themselves, and more if it might be. I asked
you not where you found this written in the word of God, which is the rule of
our faith; an unwritten cre^de must needs have unwritten conclusions; nor how
you proved it, for your own will is your best warrant for your new faith: but
what you meant thereby. The terrors of the reprobates in this life, which we
might collect by the Scriptures, were Ibid. pa. 291.
remorse of sin, reiection from Gods favor, desperation of mercy here, and
of all joy and blisle in the world to come, and a dreadful expectation of
horrible confusion, and everlasting fire. Ibidem.
I thought you durst not, I hoped you would not offer so much as the mention of
the least of these to be found in the son of God. What wrong did I here unto
you, were it not with too much sparing you? and how plainly did I provoke you
to express your self, but that your cunning is such, that then you did, and
yet you do forbear to unfold your general and ambiguous speeches. You
persist still in your old song, and say that touching the vehemency of pain,
this is true. As though remorse, reiection, desperation, and expectation of
everlasting confusion, and fire were NO PAINS to the souls of the reprobates.
Why play you with the name of pain to and fro after this sort? Why role you
sometimes to fears, sometime to sorrows, sometime to pains, as the causes of
Christ's agony; and those sometime apprehended by the mind of Christ, sometime
really inflicted by Gods immediate hand? what Christ did, or might apprehend,
you never declare; you think it enough to tell us, his Defenc. page 52. li. 35.
understanding chiefly conceived the fury of that hand, which principally
struck those blows upon his humane nature: and thus with Metaphors you delude
us, when you should distinctly deliver, what Christ conceived of those
afflictions, which he suffered from the counsel and power of God determining
them for man's redemption. Yea besides apprehension and conception of mind, you
bring in your hell pains at your pleasure, as an inherent and absolute torment
really inflicted on the soul of Christ by Gods immediate hand, as it is on all
the damned after this life for the vengeance of their sins; and when you are
asked the proof of these things, you affourd us figures and phrases to stuff
out your wallet.

Defenc. page 119. li. 1.
Why do you not bend your odious outcries and accusations against the
authority before truly cited, which maintains the same so fully and amply,
as I deliver it?] The Catechism has some general words, that Christ
conflicted with all the powers of hell, not as suffering them, but as resisting
them, and that he endured horrible fears and griefs of mind to satisfy the
judgment of God, and to pacify his wrath. These words if you will stretch to
what please you, they may seem to have some seeds of your error, though not
the buds and branches thereof: but as they be general, so if we revoke them to
the grounds of the sacred Scriptures, which was no doubt the writers and the
allowers meaning, then may we extend them no farther, then we have warrant in
the word of God to justify them. The fears and horrors, which you would
convert to the real suffering of the temporal hell, the Catechism refers
to the fear and horror of everlasting death; which you confess Christ Defenc
page 99.
most perfectly knew concerned him not at all, and by no means could ever
possibly come near him. How then do you concur with the authority, which
you cite, save that you pervert some general words there used by misapplying
them to your fancy? Otherwise fears and sorrows, to satisfy and pacify the
wrath of God against our sins, Christ might have, and yet be far from the
pains of the damned, and the second death, yea from the terrors and confusion
of the wicked; since he knowing the justness and greatness of Gods anger
against sin, and how impossible it was for him with patience to support the
power thereof, either in soul, or in body, might give God his due by inward
and evident sorrow for sin, and fear of Gods power, by which the fierceness
of Gods indignation against sin was rebated and calmed, and so much pain
proportioned to the weakness of Christ's flesh, as should not exceed the
patience of his humane nature. But this does no way further your hell pains
suffered in the soul of Christ, since these religious fears and sorrows,
which mitigate the wrath of God, though they be painful in themselves, yet
have they no communion with the fears and sorrows of the reprobate, much
less of the damned.

Defenc page 119. li. 5.
What reason have you against our assertion? Verily only this you oppose,
because all the sorrows of the reprobate are but sinful guiltiness of
conscience, or fears of judgment foreseen, which is executed only in the
next life; you mean only in the definite and local hell. Which is no
refutation of my assertion, that Christ was as sharply touched with pain, as
the very reprobate.] When men affirm strange and new positions in Christian
religion, they must not ask what reason can be brought against them, but they
must show where that they teach is written in the word of God, or ineuitably
concluded from that which is written: for Romans 10.
faith is by hearing, and hearing by the word of God. So that if you take upon
you to be a Coiner of new Creeds, we must not believe you, till by reason we
can refute you, but you ought Prou. 30.
not to add to the word of God, lest you be found a liar. Show then, where
these comparisons and positions are written; if not, fear the plagues
appointed for such as add their lies to the Truth of God. And yet to exclude
all comparison between Christ and the reprobate in this case, what better
reason can be brought, than that Christ's fears and sorrows had no soci^tie
nor affinity with the fears and terrors of the reprobate? for no rule of
reason allows you to compare things together, that have no likeness betwixt
themselves. You make Christ and the reprobate, yea and the damned, equal in
pain, and Christ's pains superior to the sharpest of theirs, and yet when
all is said, there is no kind of likeness betwixt their pains.

Defenc page 119. li. 11.
Though the wicked in this world did never suffer any real effect of Gods
burning wrath working actual vengeance on their souls for sin, but only
some guilty remorse or fear, and nothing else, yet this lets not but that
Christ whom God ordained extraordinarily and alone to be in this life a whole
and absolute burnt sacrifice for all sin, did feel and suffer the same
truly, properly, and perfectly.] You were of opinion in your Treatise, and set
it down resolutely for one of your new-made Maxims, That the Trea. pa. 77.
li. 5.
pains and sufferings of Gods wrath did ALVVAYES ACCOMPANY THEM that are
separated from the grace and love of God. And even there you also affirmed, li.
9.
Christ suffered the horror of Gods severe justice LIKE THEM, who be separated
indeed from the grace and love of God. If you stand to these words, you must
confess that Christ suffered the horror of reiection, confusion, and
desperation, LIKE to the reprobate, which is even as the reprobate do suffer
it; and then ineuitably you fasten on the soul of Christ a plain persuasion,
and inward feeling, that he was for the time rejected, confounded, and severed
from God, as the reprobate be, which whether it will amount to open impiety, I
leave to the Christian Reader to judge. Your cunning in two leaves after, with
as touching the vehemency of pain, is a giddie device, when you have made
their horrors like, then to restrain it to the sharpness of pain: for
thereby you do not intend to make their horrors unlike, which before you
pronounced to be like, but that their horrors being LIKE, their pains can not
be unlike. Since then pain and grief of mind is a necessary consequent to
horror, as it is to fear and sorrow, you do not recall, but confirm your
former imp^etic, That Christ having the same horror of Gods justice and wrath,
which the reprobate have, must needs have the same pain; for so much as that
horror is not without pain answerable to it in the soul of man despairing
the goodness of God, and beholding nothing in God but his terrible and fiery
indignation against sin. That the wicked have ALVVAYFS these horrors
accompanying them in this life, is a great and gross untruth; the 73 Psalm
does avouch the clean contrary: Psalm. 73. ver.
Lo these are the wicked, yet prosper they always. So that they for the most
part live here in pleasure and abundance, neither are they plagued with (other)
men, but Luke 16.
receive their good things in this life, save when the wisdom and justice of
God is pleased to make some of them examples unto others: for then these inward
terrors of mind raised with remorse of sin, and fear of judgment to come,
do desperately, finally, and utterly ouerwhelme them. This now you begin to
see, which before was not within your thoughts, and therefore you now affirm,
that though the wicked did suffer no such thing as you before said they
ALVVAYES suffered, yet this does not hinder, but Christ did feel and suffer
the same. What does not hinder, is not the question, but what does help you to
prove that Christ did suffer your new-made hell from the immediate hand of God
in the garden, or on the cross. I hope you bring it not for an argument, that
the wicked do not suffer it in this life; ergo Christ did suffer it. That were
very strange both Logic and Divinity.

Defenc. page 119. li. 18.
Second: how I have always expressly excluded from Christ all sinful adherents
and consequents in pains and fears which are in the wicked, and do resemble
his to theirs only in sharpness and vehemency of pain, I have often
declared before.] In general words you would seem to exclude them, but by
your positions and comparisons you conclude the contrary: for if you exempt
from Christ all fear and doubt of his Fathers love toward him, and confess
he had perfect and full assurance of all Gods promises in the midst of his
pains; tell us then how the horrors of the reprobate could invade his soul?
Show us how the fullness of truth and grace always dwelling in him, he could
be so confounded and amazed, as to feel or think himself forsaken of God,
when he neither was, nor could be s^uered from the love, life, favor or spirit
of God? Absolute and inherent pain not derived from fear or sorrow, but only
discerned by the natural powers and faculties of the soul, if you put in the
mind of Christ, it must neither exc^ed his patience, nor euert his obedience:
for if you make him fail or saint in either of these, you presently close him
within the compass of impatience and disobedience, which are more than sinful
consequents. Now that the true pains ^emency of hell pains pass the patience
of men and angels.
o^ hell or of the damned may be suffered of men or angels, or of Christ
himself with patience, you must look to prove, before you take liberty to
affirm. You may suppose what you list, but before any Christian man may give
credit to your dreams, he must see them soundly prou^d, not by your own
headie and hasty positions, but by the undoubted word of Truth, which only
is the meet measure to direct things in and after this life. And for fears and
sorrows, which sometimes beset the godly by the weakness of their faith, and
remembrance of their sins, and subvert the wicked in the midst of their
peace and pleasure, when their destruction draws near; neither of these can
be either in the Elect or Reprobate in this life without so^e sinful defects
in Gods servants, and desperate impieties in his enemies: for these fears and
sorrows do shake the faith and hope of such as should believe and trust in
Gods promises and mercies; and in the wicked they work an utter relapsing and
recuiling from all affiance and expectance, that God will be gracious unto
them. In Christ then these were more sinful than in any other, if after so
clear and constant promises and oaths secretly decreed, formerly revealed, and
lastly proclaimed by God from heaven, the Son of God should stagger, and
waver in the full and immovable persuasion and resolution of Gods most
gracious purpose and promise, faith and favor toward him. Wherefore his
apprehension of Gods wrath against our sins must be such as might not call
the love that God bare toward him in any question; but he might well behold
the justness and greatness of Gods displeasure against our uncleanness, and
knowing full well the power of Gods wrath to exceed infinitely the strength of
his humane nature, with sorrow and fear due to so great, and yet so str^ngth
indignation against our sins, he might assuage and pacify the fierceness of
that anger, which we had provoked; and by most humble confession and submission
quench the flame thereof, which otherwise would burn to everlasting
destruction of all resisters and neglecters of Gods holiness and
righteousness.

Defenc. pa^. 119. li. 21.
Thirdly the case is clear enough that the reprobate many times in this life
do not only fear the judgment to come, but also do feel some real and
actual impression of Gods burning wrath, and even of hell torments, though not
being yet in the local hell.] Is it clear enough, that the pains of the
damned are sometimes executed here in this life on the reprobate, and that by
Gods immediate hand? what Scripture have you for it? that horrible fears and
terrors do sometimes besiege them, and that the Devil does now and then
possess and torment some of them, who are out of Gods protection, the
Scripture witnesses, as well by rules, as by examples: but that the pains of
the damned are no greater, then are felt in this life, or that this mortal
flesh is able to endure the true torments of hell, under which the Devils
themselves do sink, what rule or reason leads you to that presumptuous
error? Cain was afflicted with the terror of his own conscience, Saul was
vexed with an evil spirit sent from the Lord, and into Judas the devil
entering drove him with desperation to confess his sin, and to hang himsel^e.
Other examples of men possessed and tormented by Devils, are many in the
Gospel. Which of these whom you name, did not eat, sleep, and manage other
affairs of this life, as time did permit them, notwithstanding their inward
torments of mind? Saul was eased with music, when the evil spirit of God
vexed him, and lived as king of Israel in that case almost forty years. Cain
lived a long time after he was cast from Gods presence, and begat children on
his wife. Can men have leisure or list to do or desire any of these things in
the true torments of hell? You will make an easy hell, if the torments there
be no greater, but that men may eat, sleep, beget children and delight
themselves with melody. The greatest fear that ever afflicted Saul for ought
that we read, was when he that appeared in show of Samuel, said to Saul, 1.
Sam. 2^.
To morrow shall thou and thy s^nes be with me, and the Lord shall give the host
of the: Israelites into the hands of the Philistines: for then be feli
straightway all along on the earth, and was sore afraid, and at first refused
to eat, but after at the persuasion of the witch and his servants, he Ibid.
ver. 23. ^ 25.
arose from the earth, and did Heb. 10.
eat. Prate of this so long as you will, no wise man will wander so far from
the truth, as to think they have such leisure, and ease in the pains of hell.

Defenc. page 119. li. 25.
For proof whereof that which before I alleged out of Job and others, that
even the godly here want not experience of the sorrows of hell sometimes, you
pass over answearing nothing thereunto. Which being so in the godly, it must
needs be in Cain, Judas, and the reprobates, far more direful and
intolerable sometimes.] Such proofs do well become such a cause. The godly
are sometimes afraid of Gods displeasure, and are persued with the tentations
and snares of Satan. Ergo they feel the very torments of the damned. What show
of reason is in this which is worth the answearing? and yet how often have I
repelled this peevish presumption; and observed, that if desperation which is
the greatest torment of this life, be but a Heb. 10.
fearful looking for of judgment and violent fire, which shall devour the
adversaries, The difference is great betwixt the expectance, and the experience
of that terrible judgment, at which the Devil himself trembles. Which may
soon be gathered, though not so soon be measured. For the destruction and
confusion of the damned may better be feared then known, for so much as the
Scripture threatens that, as the full wages of wickedness, and highest degree
of Gods displeasure against sin. But you are vnansweared you say.] Some
weighty reasons belike, that require so exactly an answer. Every trifle with
you must have a special answer, when you skip leaves by the dosen, and
speak to no more then you mistake, or misconster. But let us hear your
proofs, which want answer, as you pretend.

Treat. pa. 46.
The members of Christ do wrestle with the power of darkness, and endure the
fiery darts of the devil.] A learned reason, and like the maker. Does the
Apostle there speak of hell torments, or of the temptations to sin, busily
offered by Satan to all the godly? if your conceit of hell pains be true, we
must wrestle, not with the powers of darkness, but with God himself, by whose
immediate hand, as you imagine, the pains of hell are inflicted on all men's
souls. As wisely you quote, that the members of Christ endure the fiery darts
of the devil, where the Apostle wills them to take the shield of faith,
wherewith they may quench all the fiery darts of the Devil. Whence if your
corruption and misconstruction of the text were true, may be drawn a good
argument against your hell pains to be suffered in the soul of Christ. For
the shield of faith (as the Apostle notes) quenches all the fiery darts of
the Devil, which you presume to be the fiery pains of hell. Christ then, who
wanted no perfection of faith, endured none of these fiery darts of the Devil,
since they are all quenched by faith. Choose now, whether by your own reason
you will charge Christ with infidelity, or discharge him from enduring your
fiery darts of the Devil, which you suppose to be the pains of hell, except
you play with this place to no purpose. Howbeit in these words the fiery darts
of the Devil are not the torments of hell, but either dangerous tentations,
which quenching our faith consume and wast our consciences, as fire does where
it takes hold; or else sins, which inflame our hearts with wicked and worldly
desires, making them burn with unlawful and ungodly lusts.

Treat. pa. 46 li. 2.
Job cries out, The arrows of the almighty are in me, the venom whereof does
drink up my spirit, and the terrors of God sight against me.] Out of these
metaphors, wereby Job describes the vehemence of that disease, wherewith the
Devil struck him Job. 2.
from the sole of the foot unto the crown, You shall never conclude any thing
for the pains of hell. Metaphors make no direct conclusions in doctrine, but
serve to resemble, or amplify the things, to which they are applied. Then as
venomous arrows do not only tear and wound the flesh, but the poison added
does inflame the whole body, and consume the vital spirits; so Job complains,
that his disease did not only rot, but burn his flesh, and wast his spirits,
so that the pain thereof was intolerable. By the terrors of God, he means
the terrible and bitter affliction sent from God, and not the pains of hell,
as you fondly conceive. For that these words are applied to the greeuousnesse
of his disease, appears both by Jobs speech and wish. Job. 6. ver. 12
Is my strength, says he, the strength of stones? is my flesh of brass, that
it can endure the rage of this disease? Wherefore he wishes, Job. 6 ver. 9.
that God would destroy him (with this sickness) and cut him of (by death,)
verse. 10.
then should I yet have comfort, though I burn with sorrow, let him not spare.
verse. 11.
What is mine end, that I should prolong my life? Job wishes not here
destruction of body and soul, that were more madness; but he desires an end
of his life, that he might have rest and comfort. Then does he not mean the
terrors of conscience, which bring with them a most uncomfortable end, but the
terrors of his Ibid. ver. 21.
fearful plague, which death would ease, and not augment. Not that I think
Job wanted dangerous tentations in his grievous afflictions; but that this may
be referred either to the greatness of his plague, or to the unquietness of
his mind, though he always trusted in God, and was forced with extremity of
pain to desire ease. He may also mean, as he after says, Job. 7. v. 14.
Thou fear me with dreams, and astonishest me with visions; but none of
these three terros were the pains of hell, neither did Job desperately rage in
his mind, but felt violent torments in his flesh, as he himself confesses.
Job. 7. ver. 5.
My flesh is clothed with worms, and filthiness of the dust, my skin is
rent, and become horrible.

And touching the terror of God, that word in the sacred Scripture does not
necessarily import the pains of hell, nor the conflict of conscience with
doubt or despair of Gods favor, but the greatness of his power, and
righteousness of his judgments, which we must confess with fear and
trembling. Psalm. 88.
From my youth (says the Psalmist to God) I suffer thy terrors. Shall we
think, that he was all his life long in the pains of hell, or that he lived
in perpetual affliction, which continually humbled him, and made him afraid of
the mighty hand of God? Prou. 28.
Blessed is the man (says Solomon) that is always afraid (of God): where he
does not account the pains of hell to be blessed, but he means as the
Apostle does, that we should work our salvation Phil. 2.
with fear and trembling. And so the Saints at the sight of Gods presence are
afraid, not with an hellish pain, or perfidious fear, but with a quaking and
trembling at so great Majesty, knowing that power and Job. 25.
terror is with him, though they trust in his mercy.

Treat. pa. 46.
The like terrors does Jonas seem to feel in the fishes belly, when he cried
to the Lord out of the bottom of hell.] You do well to say it seems, for
indeed neither have the words any such force, neither had Jonas any such
meaning. The word Sheol notes the grave as well as hell as I have else where
sufficiently proved; and in this case the Whales belly may resemble the grave
by the very direction of our Savior. Matthew. 12.
As Jonas (says he) was three days and three nights in the Whales belly; so
shall the son of man be three days and three nights in the heart of the
earth. Where Christ expresses his burial, and not his descent to hell, by the
Whalles belly, in which Jonas lay. And Jonas himself shows by his prayer,
that he meant the present danger of death, wherein he was, and not the pains of
hell, of which he speaks not. For besides the description of his danger, when
he says, Jonas 2.
The floods compassed me about, all thy surges and all thy waves passed over
me, the weeds were wrapped about mine head, and I went down to the bottom of
the mountains: His prayer declares his faith in the beginning, middle, and
ending thereof. I cried in mine affliction unto the Lord, and he heard me; I
said, I am cast out of thy sight. (not to be amongst the living any more) yet
will I look again toward thine holy temple. Thou have brought up my life from
the pit, o Lord my God. Ibid. ver. 7.
When my soul fainted, I remembered the Lord, and my prayer came unto thee into
thine holy temple. So that Jonas sainted with fear of death, but not with the
pains of the damned, who I troe do not pray in their pains, much less trust
in God, or are heard of him, as Jonas was.

Trea. pa. 46.
David wanted not the like in his manifold and fearful agonies many times.]
Though I exempt neither David, nor any of Gods saints here on earth, from 2.
Cor. 7.
fears within, and sights without, and troubles on every side, as the Apostle
speaks of himself, yet is there no proof, that David ever suffered the
pains of the damned; his words convince no such thing. Sheol which you would
now turn to signify hell, though in the words of David applied to Christ by
Peter in the acts you stiffely refuse it, stands indifferent to note the pit
provided for the body, which is the grave; or prepared for the soul, which is
hell. So that out of a word admitting this double signification, you can never
infer which sense you please, but by some other sound and sufficient
circumstances. Again, there are but two places, which clearly confess, that
David was compassed or overtaken with the snares, dangers, or troubles of
Sheol, the 18 Psalm, and the 116. In the first of which it is more then
evident, as well by the occasion of the Psalm, as by the variation and
conjunction of other words, that David meant the danger of death, which often
beset him under the persuit of Saul, and other his enemies, as the manifest
words of holy writ do witness. For this is the inscription of the Psalm. 2.
Sam. 22.
David spoke unto the Lord the words of this song in the day, that the Lord
delivered him from the hand of all his enemies, and from the hand of Saul. So
that the snares and ropes of death, which he speaks of in that Psalm, were
apparently the manifold dangers of life, which his enemies, and chiefly Saul
put him in. Secondly, the titles, that he there ascribes unto God, prove that
in his persecutions David never doubted of Gods goodness toward him, but in
all his troubles held that for his chief hope and help. Psalm. 18. v. 1.
I will love thee deerly (says he) o Lord my strength. 2.
The Lord is my Rock, and my fortress, and my deliverer, my God, my Rock, in
him will I trust; my shield, the horn of my salvation, and my refuge; 3.
I will call upon the Lord, which is worthy to be praised, so shall I be safe
from mine enemies. Thirdly, the words there declaring his dangers, and yet at
last the destruction of his enemies, argue as much. For he says, Ibid. verse. 4.
The ropes of death compassed me, the floudes of ungodliness (that is of the
ungodly) made me afraid. The 5.
ropes of Sheol environed me, the snares of death ouertooke me. And so for the
persons of his enemies he says, Ibid. verse. 18.
They prevented me in the day of my trouble, but the Lord was my stay; the Lord
rewarded me according to my righteousness, because I kept the ways of the
Lord. His seuering his enemies from God, and justifying himself, not in the
sight of God, but in respect of them, proves all his intention in that Psalm
to be touching his enemies, whom by Gods aid and might he verse. 37.
persued and consumed, wounding them, that they fell under his feet, and whose
necks were given him, that he might destroy them that hated him. verse. 41.
They cried unto the Lord (says he) but there was none to deliver them. This
no way concerns the devil nor his tentations, much less any pains of hell
from the immediate hand of God; but most evidently the plots of men that were
his enemies, and sought his destruction. The other Psalm makes the like
profession upon the like occasion, and affirms, that God heard David, and
inclined his ear unto him, when the Psalm. 116.
snares of death compassed him, when the straights of Sheol found him out, when
troubles and grief took hold on him.

In other places, where David says, that his life or Soul was delivered and
saved from Psalm. 30. and
Sheol, and even from the 86.
lowest Sheol; it is indifferent, which sense we follow, since no doubt he did
ascribe the everlasting Salvation of his Soul from Hell unto Gods goodness and
mercy, no less then he did the preservation of his life from the Grave. And
therefore I shall not need to discuss any of those places, which admit both
constructions, and yet bring not your hell-paines into this life any whit the
sooner. Again when David speaks of fears, ropes and snares of hell, if it
were granted, that David intended as well the inward assaults of Satan to
subvert his soul, as the outward perils of his life to shorten his days, it
helps not your cause. For the gates even of hell, (that is the power thereof)
prevail in this life against all that are not of Christ's true church, and
often compass and besiege the faithful; and 1. Pet. 5.
the roaring lion, (that) goes about seeking whom he may devour, is neither
idle, nor unable to take hold of men's souls by sundry sins, tentations,
deceits, and snares, (if he be not steadfastly resisted by faith) and to make
them the children of hell, not by the present suffering thereof, but by
preparing, and obliging them to the wrath to come. Of the Scribes and Pharisees
Christ says, Matthew. 23. verse. 15.
You compass sea and land to make one Proselyte, (that is a nouice of your
profession) and when he is gotten you make him, filium gehennae, the child of
hell double to your selves. Shall we hence conclude, that the Scribes, and
Pharisees, and all their Proselytes were here on earth in the true pains of
hell, and of the damned, because our Savior, who can not err, pronounces
them THE CHILDREN OF HELL? or shall we rather accept Christ's own Exposition,
where he says, Ibid ver. 33.
O Serpents, generation of Vipers how should you escape the (future damnation
or) judgment of hell? Lastly as the name of God is added figuratively to many
things, to signify the beauty and excellency thereof in their kinds, as the
Psalm. 36.
hills of God, and the 80.
Ceders of God, for fair and goodly hills and trees; so the name of hell is
used in detestation for that, which is fearful and intolerable, as the
sorrows of hell and straights of hell and such like. Whereby it is evident,
that you may dream of David, as you do of others, that he felt in this life
the pains of hell or of the damned, but if you set your self to prove it,
you must bring stronger stuff then such words, as besides their diverse
significations, have many figurative translations and applications, which will
not serve you to conclude any thing for your hell pains suffered in this life.
These are the mighty proofs, that were unanswered, which indeed I neglected,
as proving nothing, and so would yet have done, had not you so mouthly called
for an answer, as if the things had been very material, which in truth are
weak and faint.

Defenc. page 119. li. 31.
The confession and behauior of the reprobate do sundry times in this life
testify so much.] What is their confession in things, which they know not?
even as much as your assertion. That they are sometimes inwardly and fearfully
either tormented by satan, or by their own consciences, I easily admit; but
what is the fear of hell either in the elect, or in the reprobate, to the true
pains thereof, which the wicked after this life shall feel? that they feel
an horror confounding them, I never denied; as also the godly may feel a
terror pursuing them; but if you determine this to be all the torment the
wicked shall find in hell, you were best take heed of deluding Gods judgments
against sin, and playing with fiery words in steed of everlasting fire. It is
another manner of torment, that there abides the damned, then this guilt of
conscience, remorse of sin, and a fearful expectation of judgment and
fire; in which the wicked sometimes lead their lives with horror and confusion;
and yet it is open blasphemy to ascribe any of these horrors or fears of the
reprobate unto Christ, since they utterly quench all persuasion of Gods favor,
love, and patience toward them, which if we affirm of him, we wrap him within
their reprobation.

Defenc page 119. li. 32.
The Devils are many times out of the local hell, as when they are in this
world. But Devils are never released of hell sorrows. Therefore the true
sorrows of hell are even in this world: and then possibly may be inflicted on
wicked men as they are on Devils which are sometimes out of the local hell.]
We speak of men here living on earth, and you run to Devils ranging in the
air, or compassing the earth, for proof of your hell-paines. Which is as
much, as if you did plainly confess, you can find no Scripture to prove that
mortal men in this life may endure the torments of hell. For the example of
Devils infers no more the pains of hell to be suffered of men in this life,
then the presence of elect Angels here on earth does prove, that men in this
life may enjoy the perfection of Gods heavenly ioies and glory; since the
angels of God whithersoeuer they go, or wheresoever they are, cannot be
deprived or diminished of that inward power and light, blessedness and glory
in which they are confirmed for ever. With Angels elect or reprobate men after
this life shall have a resemblance and conuenience; the faithful (says
Christ) shall be Matthew. 22.
as the Angels of God in heaven, and the cursed are cast Matthew. 25.
into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his angels: But in this
life, except we will wax mad, we must make no equiualence betwixt their
estates and ours. So that from the devils condition to man's in this life there
is no consequent, more then the imitation and communion of his wickedness in
the reprobate, whose children they are because they fulfill his desires, and an
expectation and fear of his punishment. Otherwise as the earth is neither
heaven nor hell, no more is man's life on earth matchable with the joys of the
good, or pains of the bad Angels; which have the place of their abode
determined, and assigned them in heaven or in hell, save when they are sent, or
loosed by God, to attend the execution of his will. And yet if the place of
hell had no greater nor other pains then the devils always carry with them
and in them, why should they so much fear to be Luc. 8. v. 31.
sent into the deep, or Iudae epla. v. 6.
be reserved unto the iugdement of the great day, and Peter 2. ca. 2.
kept unto damnation? fear they without cause, or are they kept and reserved
to no more, nor worse pains then already they feel? That is no reservation,
where there is nothing but a continuation of the very same that was besore. It
is certain therefore, howsoever you presume the contrary, that the place of
hell has greater pains even for the devils, then they feel any here on
earth, or before the last day, and howsoever their inward confusion and
desperation do horribly pursue them in all places since their fall, yet a more
fearful torment abides them in hell, and especially when the last judgment
comes, which is the set time that shall torment them by addicting and
fastening them to eternal and intolerable fire.

Yet the sorrows of hell are in the world.] By such logic you may prove the
pains of hell to be in heaven, and the joys of heaven to be in hell; and so
make a full confusion of all things, which well becomes your new found
faith. For the Scriptures bear witness, that Satan not only Luc. 10.
fell from heaven, but made his Revel. 12.
battle (or rebellion) in heaven, and after his fall Job 1.
stood among the children of God, and even with 1. King. 22.
the host of heaven. Revel. 12.
There was a battle in heaven, (says John) Michael and his Angels fought
against the Dragon, and the Dragon fought, and his Angels. But they prevailed
not, neither was their place found any more in heaven. And the great Dragon,
called the devil, was cast into the earth. Therefore rejoice ye heavens, and
ye that dwell in them. Woe to the inhabitants of the earth, and of the sea: for
the devil is come down unto you with great wrath knowing that his time is
short. 1. King. 22.
I saw the Lord sit on his throne, (says Michaiah the Prophet) and all the
host of heaven stood about him on his right hand, and on his left hand. Then
there came forth a (lying) spirit, and stood before the Lord, of whom the
book of Job testifies, that Job 1. v. 6.
when the children of God came, and stood before the Lord, Satan came also
among them. Certain it is, that Satan and his angels sinned even in heaven,
and were cast out of heaven after their defection from God, carrying always
with them, and within them, the loss of their original brightness, and the
chains of inward and fearful darkness, whereby they find themselves
rejected from Gods savor, despoyled of their former light and glory, and
reserved for the judgment of the great day, at which they tremble, as well as
at the place of their perpetual imprisonment, where their torments are, and
shall be increased, though they be never freed from that horrible confusion, in
which they lie. And therefore they scare the place provided for them, and
besought Christ neither Luc. 8.
to send them into the deep (and bottomless pit) nor to Matthew. 8.
torment them besore their time. Neither was there only transgression,
reprobation, and confusion in the place of heaven, where the Angels sinned, and
whence they were cast, but of the blessed Angels S. John says, that one of
them Revel. 20.
came down from heaven, having the key of the bottomless pit, and a great
chain in his hand, who took the Dragon, which is the devil, and bound him,
and cast him into the bottomless pit, and shut him up, and sealed upon him.
And were it doubtful of Angels, how they could retain the measure of their
brightness and blessedness in the place of hell; yet hear we David confess
of God himself, and of his spirit; If I ascend to heaven, thou art there; if I
get down to hell, thou art there. So that the very fountain of all holiness
and happiness is in heaven, earth, and hell, and yet the states of these three
places are not confounded, because the perfection of all goodness is present
in every of them. The goodness and glory of God is not so fastened unto places,
that either Paradise or heaven did privilege men or Angels from sin, as
heaven did not the devils, nor hell it self can hinder the happiness of the
blessed Angels, when they are sent with power from God to execute his pleasure.
And yet this does not confound the distinction of places, or states in heaven
or hell, but that heaven is now the place, where the brightness of Gods glory
is revealed to his Saints, besides their internal and continual vision of
God, which makes them most happy, and never leaves them, whethersoeuer they
go. And therefore the Angels that sinned, were cast thence, that they should
not defile the place of Gods presence with their wickedness; and hell is
likewise the prepared mansion for the devils, where vengeance from God is
powered on them, and greater shall be, when after judgment they shall be closed
in perpetual prison, though till that day some of them be suffered to bear
rule in the air, and to work in the children of disobedience, for the trial
of the saints and farther setting forth os Gods most glorious wisdom, power,
and rightcousnesse.

Defenc. page 119. li. ^7.
Lastly the true joys of heaven may be out of the local heaven, as when the
glorious Angels have been and tarried some while here on earth with men. Yet
did they never for a moment want the toys and glory of heaven.] From Angels
endued with inward and heavenly light, power, holiness, and happiness, and by
grace everlastingly confirmed therein, no argument can be drawn to our weak,
sinful, and variable condition; neither do we dispute of Gods power, what he
can do, but of his will and ordinance, whereby he has appointed heaven to be
his seat, that is the place, where his glory is (...) (...), and eternal and
perfect blessedness bestowed on all the inhabitants thereof, be they men or
Angels. And though the Angels, whethersoeuer they go, or whatsoever they do,
retain the clear sight of God, and the perfection of their (...) all
happiness, yet that is no proof, that we living here in mortal and miserable
flesh can have that on earth, which they have. For example, take some parts or
consequents of that heavenly joy and bliss which the Angels being here on
earth keep immutable, and you shall soon see, how grossly you err in
communicating their glory to men yet dwelling in houses of clay. The Angels of
God (...) here on earth can neither err, sin, nor die; they can feel no
necessity, infirmity, nor misery; they need not eat, sleep, nor rest; they
are endued with light, that cannot be obscured; with holiness, that cannot be
defiled; with joy, that cannot be diminished; with power, that cannot be
resisted by men or Devils. Can these things be attributed to mortal men here
on earth without open and palpable heresy? Wherefore it is an erroneous and
presumptuous inference, that Defenc pa. 120. (...). 2.
If Angels may enjoy heaven really being in the world, that men here living
may do the like.

Defenc. page 120. 3.
It is possible for Gods goodness to communicate some real foretasie thereof
unto some blessed men also.] A taste of glory, which neither continues nor
satisfies, can not be called heaven, which is the perfect and perpetual
fullness of all kind of bliss, and want of all kind of misery. S. Peter
teaches us that God 1. Pet. 1.
begetieth (us) into a lively hope, to an inheritance incorruptible, undefiled,
and unchangeable, reserved in the heavens for us, who are by the power of God
kept by faith unto salvation, ready to le showed in the last time. If the
taste of glory, which you talk of, be not immortal, immutable, and undefiled
with any defect or misery, it may not be called heaven, nor be said to be the
inheritance reserved for us in heaven. And therefore though some blessed men
have had a sight of some glory, which you call a taste thereof, as Moses, Esaias,
Steven, and others; yet that does not prove them to have been really in the
joys of heaven. How osten is it written of the Israelites, that they saw the
glory of the Lord; and yet they were overthrown in the wilderness? Exodus 24.
ver. 16. (...) 17.
The glory of the Lord (says Moses) abode upon mount Sinai, and the sight of
the glory of the Lord was like a consuming fire on the top of the mountain in
the eyes of the children of Israel. So when Aaron offered his first offering
for his Priesthood, and blessed the people; Leu t. 9. v. 23
The glory of the Lord appeared to all the people: of whom God says, Numb.
14. verse. 22.
All these men, which have seen my glory, and my miracles, which I did in
Egypt, and in the wilderness, and have tempted me these ten times, certainly
they shall not see the land, whereof I swear to their Fathers. When Solomon had
builded and consecrated the temple with prayer and sacrifice, (...) (...)
The glory of the Lord (...) house so that the Priests could not enter into the
house of the Lord, because the glory (...) (...) Lord had filled the Lords
house. And when all the children of Israel saw the fire, and the glory of the
Lord come down upon the house, they bowed themselves with their faces to the
earth upon the pauement, and worshipped, and praised the Lord. I trust the
King, the Priests, and the People were not all in the ioies of heaven; and yet
they all with their eyes saw the glory of God there presented before them; and
such as were religious and obedient, saw it to their exceeding joy.

Defenc. page 120. li. 5.
That God does indeed reveal some real taste of his heavenly ioies to his
children even in this life, I have already showed, but am not answered.] You
slide from some blessed men to all the children of God; to whom, you affirm,
God does reveal indeed some real taste of his heavenly ioies even in this
life. What you mean by a real taste, we must learn from your own mouth; by
such doubtful phrases, which you may after wrangle about, you use to deliver
your doctrine. If you mean joy in the holy Ghost, whiles by hope we expect the
promises of God at his determined time, that indeed is common to all the
children of God in their measure; but that teaches a maine difference betwixt
the things here enioined, and reserved for us in heaven; and quite crosses
the new heaven, which you would establish. For we learn by the Scriptures,
that our Coloss. 3.
Life is hid in Christ, and when Christ, who is our life, shall appear, then
shall we also appear with him in glory. 1 John 3.
Now we are the sons of God, but yet it does not appear, what we shall be: and
we know, that when he shall appear, we shall be like him: for we shall see him,
as he is. Our knowledge, love, and joy of God and in God, begin here by the
preaching of the Gospel, and the working of his spirit; but the Scripture
never calls those the ioies of ueauen, though they shall there continue, yet
so augmented, and accompanied with heavenly brightness and glory, that they
shall not be the same, they were. For as our natural understanding and sense,
and corporal life and flesh shall not be abolished in heaven, but abide and be
glorified, and yet no man is so senseless, as to think or say, the glory of
our creation is the glory of our resurrection: so our knowledge, love, and joy,
which here are weak, and wanting all perfection, as being mixed with
ignorance and error, lust and unlawful desires, fear and grief, and often
obscured, and almost overwhelmed with infirmity, iniquity, and misery, no wise
man will defend to be the ioies of Gods heavenly kingdom where is no want, nor
defect of any good, nor fear, nor doubt of any evil inward, or outward; but
as God shall then be all in all, so shall we be filled with the sight and
fruition of God; our love and joy increasing according to our knowledge, which
then shall be the manifest vision of God face to face, who is the vnceasing and
unsearchable fountain of all goodness and blessedness.

The Treatis. pa. 80
proof, on which you stand as yet not answered, is a place of the Apostle to
the Corinths, applied by many men to the preaching of the Gospel, and then it
makes nothing for your purpose; but if it be referred to the joys of heaven,
as you would have it, it makes quite against you. For 1. Cor. 2.
eye has not seen, says the Apostle, neither ear has heard, neither has
man's heart conceived, the things which God has prepared for them, that love
him. If those be the joys of heaven, which the Apostle there means, then is
it evident, that men are not capable of them, whiles they are compassed with
sin and infirmity, but God has reserved them in the heavens for us, when we
shall come to his presence, though in the mean time 1. 2.
he has revealed to us by his spirit, that such things are kept in store for
us, which then shall appear, that is, be apparently and perfectly bestowed on
us, and we everlastingly invested with them. The Revelation which the Apostle
here speaks of, is the revelation of knowledge, whereby these things are
promised and assured unto us, not the revelation of glory, whereby we shall see
that, which we now hope for; and enjoy that, which we now expect.

This doctrine, howsoever you would delude it with your real tastes, is
plainly delivered in the Scriptures. When Moses besought God to show him his
glory, God answered; Exodus 33. ver. 20.
Thou CAN NOT SEE my face, and live; for there shall no man see me, and
live. Where God does not mean, that men shall not see him in heaven, when they
come to be Matthew. 22.
as the Angels of God, who Mat. 18. v. 10.
always behold the face of God in heaven; his own son has said, Matt 5.
blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God; and his Apostle
likewise, 2. Cor. 13.
Now we see through a glass darkely; then (shall we see) face to face: But he
means, that no man living in this mortal flesh can see his face. Otherwise
it is the clear resolution of the Scriptures, that we 1. John 3.
shall see him as he is, that is, not by faith, as now we do; nor by some
created show of his glory, as Moses, Elias, Esai and other the Prophets and
Patriarchs did see him for the confirmation of their callings, or consolation
of their miseries, but as the Apostle speaks face to face. Upon these words
of S. John, we shall see him as he is, S. Austen learnedly and truly says.
August. in (...). Johan. Tract. 101.
Ista visio non est huius vitae sed futurae, non temporalis sed aeterna. Hunc
totius laboris sui fructum Ecclesia nunc parturit desiderando, tunc paritura
cernendo. This vision (of God as he is) is not in this life, but in the life to
come; not temporal, but eternal. This fruit of her whole labor the Church
now trauelleth with by desiring it, but then shall attain by beholding it. Now
if the sight of God himself face to face, that is of his substance and glory
in plain, full and perfect manner and measure, be the same with the dark and
enigmaticall beholding his graces and promises by the glass of faith, then
have you some reason to say the joys of heaven may be had in this life; but if
in the manner, measure, objects and effects of our sight of God in this life
and the next there be so great difference, then you deceive both your self and
your Reader to affirm, we have the joys of heaven here in this life, when
not only our sin, our ignorance, our misery, mutabilitie and mortality,
but even our faith and hope do clearly prove, that we have not that, which we
desire, nor as yet enjoy that, which we expect, and believe we shall have.
August. epist. 112.
Non corda munda suae substantiae contemplatione fraudauit, cum haec magna and
summa merces Deum colentibus and diligentibus promittatur, dicente ipso Domino,
quando corporalibus oculis visibiliter apparebat, and inuisibilem se contuenau^
mundis cordibus promittebat: qui diligit me, diligitur a Patre meo, and ego
diligam eum, and ostenda^ meipsum illi. God has not defrauded clean hearts of
the sight of his substance, since that is promised to those which serve and
love God, as the great and chief reward; the Lord saying, when he appeared
visible to the eyes of their bodies, and promised himself invisible to be
seen of clean hearts; he that loves me shall be loved of my Father; and I will
love him, and will show mine own self unto him.

Defenc. page 120 li. 7.
The transfiguration of Christ on the mount declares, that some real part of
heavenly glory may be here on earth, which you your self somewhere confess
clean against your self.] You would needs tell us in you Treatise, that
heaven was some foretaste of the infinite joy prepared for the godly, which you
attempted to prove by the Apostles words common to all the children of God,
and thereupon concluded; thus you pa. 80. li. 23.
see that as there is heaven in this life in some measure, even so there may be
hell. I replied that if you Conclu. page 337. (...). 34.
affirmed of heaven, as you did of hell, that the VERY SAME JOYS which are in
heaven, or EQVALL with them, are here sometimes found (in us living) on earth,
it was a wicked error flatly repugning to the truth of Gods promises, and to
the very nature of our Christian faith and hope. We reasoned not of Christ's
manhood, which Colos. 1.
in all things had the preeminence above and before all the sons of God,, but
OF THE CODLY, whom you expressly named, and of whom I accordingly replied, and
to whom those words of the Apostle cited by you for proof of your purpose do
precisely pertain. For of Christ they are most false, that his eye never saw,
nor his ear never heard, nor his heart never conceived the things, which God
has prepared for them, that love him. Now when you should prove that mortal
men, and no more then men, though the members of Christ, living here on the
earth have THE VERY SAME JOYS, which are in heaven, or EQVALL with them; you
run to Christ's transfiguration on the mountain, and by that you would
infer, that there was heaven even in this life in some measure. But first
where can you show, that Christ's transfiguration on the mountain is called
heaven in the Scriptures. Next, what deriuation can you make from Christ's
power, knowledge, and glory, to ours here on earth? Christ's soul had many
parts and degrees of heavenly perfection in this life, which ours have not; he
was free from sin and error, which abound in us; he was full of truth and
grace, which want in us, save what we receive from his fullness; he was the
way, the light, and the life, that leads, lightneth and quickens every man
coming into the world; yea the cross of Christ was the wisdom and power of
God. These and many other maine differences the Scriptures express betwixt
Christ and us; so that from his perfection and preeminence to our weakness,
wickedness, and wretchedness in this world no comparison can be made, nor any
consequent, but that believing in him, loving him, and obeying his
commandments, as we are here regenerate and renewed by his spirit, so we
shall be conformed to his image, to reign with him in the next life, if we
suffer with him in this life. Christ's transfiguration then is not called heaven
in any Scripture, neither had it the perfection or condition of heaven; since
heaven is not a transitory taste of mutable joy or glory, but a full and
everlasting possession of all power, honor, and bliss communicable from God,
and proportionable to the receauer. But if Christ had the real fruition of
heaven in his flesh here on earth, how much more in his soul, which was
always full of truth and grace, light, and life; and having so real a taste
as you speak of, and so immeasurable a fullness of life and grace, as the
Scriptures speak; I greatly marvel how you come really to place hell and
heaven in one soul together, and specially in the soul of Christ, on which
you inflict the very substance of hell pains, when yet the abundance and
continuance of heavenly joy could not want in him.

As for my somewhere confessing clean against my self, that Christ
transfigured in the mount tasted of that heavenly glory prepared for him; I see
not how that crosses any thing avouched by me in the 337. and 338. page by you
noted. You shall do well when you challenge contrarieties, not to let the
report rest on your cracked credit, but produce the words, that your Reader may
be judge of both. You are sharp enough to catch hold of any thing, if there
were any cause. I called indeed Christ's transfiguration on the mount a taste of
that heavenly joy prepared for him, I called it not heaven. A taste of things
neither abides, nor suffices, which heaven fully does; and therefore it is
rather a contradiction, then a confession of your conceit. For if you think
that Christ's heavenly glory may be defective or mutable, as his transfiguration
was, you broch a wicked and impious error. Christ's transfiguration did not
exempt him from fear, sorrow, shame and death following, which if you imagine
of his glorification in heaven, it is a right hellish impiety. And whatsoever
we affirm of Christ touching his preeminence above all the children of men as
that he was free from sin, and full of grace, and had the perfect knowledge
of Gods truth and will above men and Angels, I hope you will not derive it to
his members here living in the flesh, least you leave no ground of Christian
religion unshaken.

Defenc. page 120. li. 10.
Only this you have to object touching men, that faith and hope is the
evidence of things not seen: neither are our greatest joys the same, nor
equal to them which we shall possess in the next world.] I have also to
object, that it is not lawful for you nor for any man living to determine of
Gods kingdom without his warrant, nor to avouch that to be heaven, which the
Scriptures do not. Take heed, it is no pastime to play with heaven and hell,
as you do, without better aslurance than you have. Know you not what that
learned Father says? Tertullianus de praescrip aduersus haereticos.
Nobis nihil ex nostro arbitrio indulgere licet. It is not lawful for us (that
be Christians) to devise any thing of our own heads: But Cyril. de fide ad
Reginas. li 2.
it is necessary for us (as Cyril says) to follow the divine Scriptures, and
in nothing to depart from their praescription. [ Defenc page 120 li. 14.
I answer our reasons before do prove more than only hope in the faithful
sometimes.] And I reply that none of your reasons do any way prove the joys
of heaven. Gods answer to Moses must stop your mouth, and the presumption of
all such as you are; Exodus 33.
Thou can not see my face, for there shall no man see me, and live. Moses saw
as much as in this mortal life any man compassed with sin is able to see. He
saw posteriora Dei, the back parts of God; for so God said unto him: Exo. 33.
v. 22
I will cover thee with mine hand, whiles I pass by. 23.
After I will take away mine hand, and thou shall see mine hinder parts: but my
face shall thou not see. Whereupon S. Austen says very advisedly: August. de
Symbolo a^ Cateth^menos. li (...) ca. 3.
Ipsa sunt illa posteriora Dei, Christus Dei. Those hinder parts of God, were
the Christ of God. Which exposition Christ confirms, when he says: John 8.
Your Father Abraham rejoiced to see my day, and he saw it, and was glad. Other
shows of Gods glory some others had, as Elias in the Cave, the People in the
Wilderness, Solomon in his Temple, and John Baptist in Jordan, when he saw the
Holy Ghost descend like a Dove, and abide on Christ; but none of those was the
sight of Gods face, which no (mortal) man can see, and live. And that is the
true and essential joy of heau^n, to which all other degrees of perfection and
happiness are consequent. August. d^ ciuitate Dei. li. 16. ^a. 9.
Videns Deum, quod erit in sine praemium omnium sanctorum. The sight of God
(says Austen) shall in the end be the reward of all his saints. Which doctrine
he learned from S. Paul and S. John the Apostles of Christ, and they from their
Master. 1. Cor. 13.
Then (we shall see him) face to face, and then shall I know, says S. Paul,
even as I am known. When Christ shall appear, says S. John, 1. John 3.
we shall be like to him, for we shall see him as he is. And so our Savior:
John 14.
I will love him (that loves me) and show mine own self unto him.

Defen^ (...). 120. li. 15.
Secondly, it is true the Apostle says, that here we walk by faith, and live
by hope; yet some rare exceptions do not overthrow this general course.] The
Scriptures are true with you, save where you list to make exceptions of your
doctrine as not contained in them, nor agreeing with them. No man in this life,
Christ Jesus only excepted, had ever any such vision of God, or possession and
fruition of his heavenly kingdom, that he did not walk by faith, and live by
hope. Paul was 2. Cor. 12.
taken up into the third heaven, and heard words not lawful (or not possible)
for man to utter. Did he then cease to walk by faith, who after and always
prosessed of himself; 1 Cor. 13.
Now I know in part, but then I shall know as I am known? And including
himself with the rest; 2. Co^. 5.
We walk by faith, not by sight: And ^xactly speaking of himself; Galat. ^.
That I now live in the flesh; I live by the faith of the Son of God; Phil. 3.
that I may know him, and the virtue of his resurrection, and fellowship of his
afflictions, not as though I had already attained to it, but I endeavor my
self to that which is before, and follow hard toward the mark, for the price
of the high calling of God in Jesus Christ. If you dare defend, that Paul in
Paradise did see God face to face, then may you say, that at that time he
walked not by faith, but by sight; but if that be a plain error, then Paul as
yet attained not the sight of Gods face, nor the crown of righteousness laid
up for him, which should be given him by the just Judge at that day; and
consequently neither faith nor hope ceased in Paul, notwithstanding his being
in the third heaven. The like I say of S. John, who Reu^l. 4.
saw a door open in heaven, and was willed to come up thither, and of all the
Saints that either talked with God, or had any manifest revelation of his
glory, whiles here they lived.

The transfiguring of Christ in the mount, was to him not only a joyful hope,
but a real taste of his very heavenly joys.] That transfiguration of Christ,
whether it were for himself or for the confirmation of his Disciples, the
Scriptures do not precisely determine. When a voice came from heaven to Christ
in the audience of all the people, Christ answered; This voice came not because
of me, but for your sakes. S. Peter, who was one of those Disciples that saw
him transfigured, writes thus of it: 2. Pet. 1.
We followed not deceiuable fables, but with our eyes we saw his Majesty: for
he received of God the Father honor and glory, when there came such a voice to
him from the excellent glory, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well
pleased. This voice, which was greater glory than his transfiguration, came in
respect of them, to confirm them in their faith and obedience to the Son of
God then incarnate; and yet to assure their eyes by sight, as well as their
^ares by that voice, he was transfigured before them: but this transfiguration
did not fr^e Christ from fear, sorrow, shame, violence, and death, which
followed; and therefore this was not heaven to him, nor all the glory prepared
for him, but an outward show thereof, to establish rather his Disciples, then
himself. For his soul within him had here on earth greater glory continually
then a transitory change of his body, as namely the personal union with God,
which no creature, man, nor Angel, in earth or heaven, had or has besides
him; the fullness of Gods spirit resting on him, by which he knew all the
counsel and will of God, and all the secrets of men's hearts; power over all
flesh, and command over all creatures, which neither Saint nor Angel in heaven
has. In the glory of his body Moses and Steven did here on earth in part
communicate with him. 2. Cor. 3. Moses face did shine when he knew it not.
The children of Israel could not behold the face of Moses for the glory of
his countenance, which so glittered, that the children of Israel were afraid to
come near him, and he forced to put a veil upon his face, when they spoke
with him; and yet Moses Exodus 34. ver. 29.
wist not that the skin of his face shone bright. And likewise Acts 6.
all that sat in the council, where Steven was conuented and condemned,
looking steadfastly on him saw his face as the face of an Angel, that is,
bright and glorious, though Steven knew it not no more than Moses, for ought
that the Scripture notes of him; save that in the end Steven Acts 7.
looking steadfastly into heaven saw the glory of God, and Jesus standing at the
right hand of God. But the inward and continual glory of Christ's soul here
on earth was proper to him, no man nor angel matching him therein. How come
you then to attribute heaven unto Christ for the momentarie transfiguration of
his body, and to neglect and ouerskippe the constant and continual joy and
glory of his soul, which far better deserved the name of heaven, than the
change of his body?

Defenc. page ^21. li. 2.
We grant the joys of heaven here are nothing equal to those hereafter: only
we say the very same in nature may be and are by the effectual working of Gods
gracious spirit in his elect revealed in some measure and sometime even in this
world. Neither is this, as your charity speaks, any lewd or wicked error.] My
charity serves me, and my duty binds me to tell you, that if you, of your
own head without the word of God, will make an heaven, or defend that to be
heaven, which is imperfect, mutable, and often defiled not with misery and
death only, but with weakness and wickedness also, you maintain an evident
and pestilent error. The graces of God are heavenly, as well because they are
given from heaven, and direct to heaven, as also they assure men of heaven; but
the measure of grace or joy, which we have here on earth, is not the heaven,
which we are willed to believe and expect, where our reward is, and where an
incorruptible, undefiled, and immutable inheritance is reserved for us, and
whence we look for our Savior.

Your distinction, that our joy is the very same in nature, though not in
measure, which is in heaven, is not only false, but a void and idle refuge. For
the joy of heaven The name of Nature in the graces of God and joys of heaven
is a vain distinction.
is the plain vision of Gods face, which brings with it a present, perfect,
perpetual, and plenary possession of all light, power, love, holiness, and
happiness deriueable f^m God; which in this weak, frail, sinful and
wretched life no man has, nor can have. And therefore though there be the
knowledge, love and joy of God, both in this life and in the next; yet the
differences are so many, and so great, that no man of any reason or
understanding will make the one to be the other for some agreements in some
points, whereas in the whole there is not only a substantial difference
betwixt them, which is the sight of Gods face, but so many parts, effects, and
conseque^ts in the one, which are not in the other, that it is more then folly
to make the one by pretense of nature to be the same with the other. All joy in
nature is the same, if by nature we mean the general definition thereof; for
joy is the impression or inward sense of good present, or instant; yea hope is
in nature all one with joy, since in hope there is joy, as in fear there is
pain, and in hope we rejoice: yet no considerate divine will confound hope and
joy together, because they differ but in time, much less make the ioies in
this life, which are defective, mutable, and permixed with our infirmity,
misery, and iniquity, the very same in nature with the ioies of heaven, which
are abundant, constant, and sincere in all parts and effects, of brightness,
mightfulnesse, righteousness, and blessedness, which men can possibly
comprehend, when they come to the presence of God. The sight of God by his
creatures, by his judgments, by his word, and by himself, is the same in the
general nature of knowledge; yet are there as great differences betwixt them,
as betwixt darkness and light. The Apostle says, Romans 1.
The invisible things of God, that is his eternal power and godhead, are
seen by the creation of the world, considered in his works, and that which
may be known of God, is manifest in them. Shall we then say, the heathen have
the very same knowledge of God by his works, which the Angels in heaven have
by the sight of himself? the Devils know him also by his works, by his word,
and his judgments. Jonas 2.
Thou beleeuest, says James, That there is one God, thou do well. The
Devils also beleeue^t, and tremble. Yea they know Christ to be the son of
God. Luc. 4.
I know who thou art, said the Devil to Christ, even the holy one of God.
Shall we then think that the Devils faith is the very same in nature with our
Christian faith? of many castawaies, which fall away from the grace of God, and
receive it in vain, the Apostle says. Heb. 6.
They were once lightened, and tasted of the heavenly gift, and were made
partakers of the holy Ghost, and tasted of the good word of God, and of the
powers of the world to come. Shall we avouch these reprobates were in heaven in
this life, because they had once the very same graces in nature, which the
elect have? If our knowledge do differ in this life and the next, Our love and
joy do follow our knowledge.
then does our joy likewise differ. From our knowledge of God rises our love
of God, and our joy in God. For we can neither have love, nor joy of that,
which we know not: but as our knowledge increases, so does our love and joy.
And therefore when we see God infallibly, as he is, then shall we love him
unfeignedly, as we ought, and rejoice in him unspeakably, even as much, as we
are capable of, not by the strength of our nature, but by the working of his
power. Till then as our knowledge is dark, and in part, so our love is weak,
and our joy is faint; but then shall these very things not only rise to an
higher degree, and be of another nature, but be replenished with all parts of
light, power, and bliss, without which we may defend nothing to be heaven
indeed, howsoever we may use figurative speeches to comfort, or encourage the
godly. As then work and wages, labor and rest, sowing and reaping, running
and obtaining, striving and crowning, abroad and at home, do differ even in
nature, so faith and sight, hope and haning, promising, and performing, that
is, our state in earth and heaven, does likewise differ; though it be one and
the same thing, which is now promised, believed, and hoped for, and which
hereafter shall be received, attained, and enjoyed.

Defenc. page 121. li. 7.
Now then if more then hope only even heavenly ioies may be on earth, surely it
follows, that likewise more then fear, even hellish pains themselves may be
in men on earth also.] If the ioies of heaven be not only constant in nature,
but perfect in measure, and consist in the sight of Gods face, which no man
shall see, and live; then certainly the ioies of heaven are not in this life
imparted to any mortal and sinful man. And though that might be, which yet
God expressly denies shall be; yet the other is no con^quent, that the pains
of the damned may be likewise in this weak and fainting flesh; because joy is
an affection, that preserves this life; and pain, if it be violent and above
our strength, presently seuereth the soul from the body. Take an example of
this fire, which we see and know. If it be not possible without a miracle from
the mighty hand of God for flesh to abide, or life to dure in the pain of
burning and flaming fire; how less possible is it for the wicked, on whom God
shows no such wonders, to live and continue in the pains of the damned,
whiles they are here fastened to the flesh? Chrysostom. ad Theodorum lapsum
ep^st. 5.
Hic quidem non simul contingit vehementia poenarum, and earum diuturnitas.
Altera enim cum altera pugnat, propter conditionem corruptibilis huius corporis
non ferentisea. In this life (says Chrysostom) the violence of pains, and
the continuance thereof cannot stand together. The one fights with the other,
by reason of this corruptible body, which cannot bear both. And again Idem ad
Populum Antioch homil. 49.
Name fire, or sword, or any thing that is more grievous then these, yet these
are scant a shadow to those torments.

Defenc. page 121. li. 16.
And if hell pains in this world may be in any, much rather may they be in
Christ, whom God purposely sent through pains and afflictions (the extremest
that might be) to be consecrated the Prince of our salvation.] If the true
pains of hell might be in others here living, yet in Christ's soul they might
not be, since his soul had always greater inward joys of the holy Ghost,
which you call heaven, then any man here living on earth could have, except
your learning serve you, to put both the joys of heaven and the pains of hell
at one and the same time in the soul of Christ. As for your proof, when you
show that the pains of hell are sacred and holy, then bring them to consecrate
the Prince of our salvation. Till then, refrain this apparent collusion, to
make Christ both obedient and astonished, patient and overwhelmed in the pains
of hell; and learn that God tried the obedience and patience of his Son by
the things which he suffered, and so consecrated or consummated him to be the
Prince of our salvation; who must be conformed to his image to suffer with him,
not the pains of hell, but the miseries and afflictions of this life, with all
obedience to the will and counsel of God, if we will reign with him.

Defenc page 121. li. 14. and 19.
If you say yet thus it will follow, that the extremest pains of hell are not
to be found in this world, as the hiest joys of heaven are not likewise by my
confession: I answer I know not, neither mean I to determine the measure and
depth of sorrows, which Christ in his Passion suffered.] Either you change
minds with the winds, or he that wrote this, wrote not that which went
before. In the 52 page of this book li. 25. you prated apace, that Christ
suffered a sense of Gods wrath EQVALL to hell it self, and ALL THE TORMENTS
thereof. And in the 15 page li. 16. you solemnly concluded, whence it must
follow, that the pains of Christ's suffering were the same in nature and
ALTOGETHER AS SHARP, and as painful as they are in hell it self. Now you
know no such thing, nor mean to determine it. It were good you took upon you
to know less of your hellish mysteries, till you were more assured of them, or
better learned in them. This floting up and down like the waves of the sea,
show that either diverse men's pens have been in your papers, or that unquiet
buzzes are in your own brains, who sometimes can not nor will not, and yet
sometimes can and will determine, and pronounce the pains of hell suffered by
Christ to be EQVALL to hell and all the torments thereof, and AS SHARP as the
sharpest in hell. But your Reader, if he be wise, will see you more constant in
your own conceits, before he give any credit to them; and less marvel that
men fallen from the truth thus reele to and fro.

Defenc. page 121. li. 22.
Only grant this plainly, that Christ suffered in his soul the true effects of
Gods proper justice and wrath, and we seek no more.] Tell me first, what you
mean by the effects of Gods proper justice and wrath, and then from what
Scripture you derive it, and you shall soon see what I grant. Only say you no
more than you have express warrant of the holy Ghost to believe, and I ask
no more. With the name of Gods proper wrath you have played a long time, and a
number have deceived them selves. For as it is most true, that God would have
laid none of these things, which Christ suffered, on his own son, but
displeased and angry with our sins; for which he was to satisfy the Justice
of God, least our iniquity should seem a matter of dalliance, and easily
^uerpast: so it is as true, that God neither was, nor could be wroth and
offended with the person of his own son, in whom he was well pleased, and
for whose sake he was reconciled to us; but that the chastisement of our peace
being imposed on him, who for the innocence and excellency of his person was
able to tolerate and mitigate the wrath of God provoked by our sins, he made
the purgation of them by that kind of satisfaction, which was convenient both
to the dignity and safety of his person, and argued apparently the love of
God toward him, and his love toward us; whiles he put him self in the gappe,
by his own smart to auert and appease the just wrath kindled against us. Now
what this chastisement was, we may neither of us, nor any man else seek
farther, then the holy Ghost has delivered, that 1. Cor. 15.
Christ died for our sins according to the Scriptures, and Philip 2.
became obedient to the death, even the death of the cross; which is plainly
described by the Evangelists, and should not be questioned by any, that is not
more wedded to his conceits than to the word of God.

Defenc. page 121. li. 31.
Though Christ suffered all (which he did suffer) here in this world, ye^ for
any thing I can see, there is cause why Christ should be an extraordinary
person in the case of suffering for sin in this life, and that therefore as
touching sorrow and pain, he might feel more than ever any else has or could
feel for the time.] He was an extraordinary person indeed, as being the true
and only Son of God, that is, both God and man in one person, bearing the
burden of our sins in his body, but appropriating or accounting the same to
the dignity of his person, that by his death he might abolish him that had
rule of death, and restore us to life by his humility and obedience, which was
so precious and glorious in the sight of God, that he accepted it as a full
sacrifice and satisfaction for all our sins, and made him the author of
eternali salvation to all that obey him: but that he must be God as well as man,
to be able to suffer the pains of hell and the second death, that is a new
device of yours, not converting the Godhead of Christ to the infiniteness of
his merits, but abusing it to the infiniteness of his pains, to make place
for your newfound hell from the immediate hand of God, where Scripture
mentions no such thing in the work of our redemption, but plainly and
fairly teaches us, that we are Romans 5.
reconciled to God by the death of his Son, who Coloss. 1.
by the blood of his Cross procured perfect peace in heaven and in earth, and
restored us to the favor of God, through death in the body of his flesh, in
which he Romans 8.
condemned sin, that we might be Heb. 10.
sanctified by the offering of his body once made on the altar of the Cross.
And this doctrine so evidently and frequently delivered by the Holy Ghost in
the sacred Scriptures, is so sufficient, that I see no cause, nor need of your
hell pains, besides no warrant nor witness of them; except we dream, that
the spirit of God did not well understand, or could not aptly express your
hellish mysteries, which he always ouerpasseth with silence, when he speaks
of the purgation of our sins, and our redemption by the precious blood of the
Lamb unspotted and undefiled. If therefore it be not lawful in the highest
points of faith to add ought to the word of God, nor to think that the spirit
of Truth fails or defecteth in his instruction unto truth, I do not see
with what duty to God you and others may be so bold with the Son of God, as
to subject his soul to the second death, and to the pains of the damned, when
the Scriptures offer us no such part or point of our belief.

Defenc. page 121. li. 36.
You seem to grant unto Christ all natural sorrow and fear, neither do we
seek any more: but you trust the pain of the damned is more than a natural
oppressing and afflicting of the heart with humane fear and sorrow. For sooth
it is not. It is no more than a very natural humane fear and sorrow. It
proceeds immediately and principally from God himself, who is the Nature of
Natures. Also man's nature is apt to receive such sorrow and fear from him. Thus
the very pains of the damned are merely natural.] If you make us many such
conclusions, you will prove your self a mere Natural. For if all things be
merely natural to man, that God either bestows or inflicteth on man, then
grace and glory are merely natural to man, yea heaven it self is as
natural to man as hell, and the Holy Ghost himself shall become merely
natural to man; for God does give, and we Romans 8.
receive the spirit of adoption, whereby we cry Abba Father: yea the second
person in Trinity is inseparably joined to man's nature, and as well the ^ather
as the Son 1. Ioh. 4.
abide and 2. Cor. 6.
dwell in all the Saints. So that the conjunction, communion, and inhabitation
of the godhead in man is merely natural unto man by your doctrine; and not
only God, but the Devil is as natural to man, and so are those things, which
are most unnatural, and most repugnant to man's nature. For man does, and
suffers them, by and from God, or the Devil. As corruption and incorruption,
mortality and immortality, righteousness and unrighteousness, salvation and
destruction, eternal life and eternal death, are merely natural to man by
your learned discourse, which if you persist to defend, take heed least men
doubt, whether frenzy be natural to you or no. Natural I called, not
whatsoever is any way incident to men in this life or the next, but that which
is general, and necessary to all men, in that they are men. Wherefore I make
neither hell, nor heaven natural unto men, since the one God gives by his
power and grace above our nature, for our nature is not to be, as the Angels of
God; and in the other by justice and wrath God works against our nature. For
that fire should everlastingly burn, and flesh everlastingly dure therein, and
souls be extremely tormented therewith, are to my understanding far beyond
nature, except you be^eaue God of his almighty power and will, which the
Scriptures confess in him, and call him by the name of nature, which is no
more, but the condition and operation, that he has assigned in this world to
every creature. If you would needs know, whence I took the word natural, read
either Fulgentius or Damascene, and you shall soon see, what they and I mean
by nature. Tulgenti^ ad Trasimundum li. tertio.
Because Christ, says Fulgentius, took upon him to be a true man, ideo cunct
as naturae humanae infirmitates ver as quidem, sedvoluntarias sustinuit,
therefore he sustained all the infirmities of man's nature, truly but
voluntarily, and so Damascene. Damas. li. 3. ca. 20.
We confess that Christ undertook all natural and sinlesse passions.
Natural and sinlesse passions are those, which entered into man's life by the
condemnation of (Adams) transgression; as hunger, thirst, weariness, labor,
weeping, shunning of death, fear, agony, and such like, which are naturally
in all men. So that what is gene^all and necessary to all men in this life, is
natural to man, which I trust neither hell nor heaven is, though by justice or
mercy all men after this life shall feel the one, or enjoy the other.

Def^nc page 122. li. 6.
Supernatural I grant they are, if we mean this, that they are above our
natures state to bear or to comprehend them.] If your rule be true, that men
naturally receive the pains of h^ll, why should not man's nature as well bear
them, or comp^ehend them, as receive them; except you mean the bearing of them
with patience, or comprehending the end of them? what punishment men receiu^,
that they bear. Gala 5.
He that troubles you, shall be are his condemnation, whosoever he be. And
again, Gala 6.
every man shall be^re his own burden. And so elsewhere. Ephesians. 3.
I bow my knees unto the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, that he will grant
you, that ye may be strengthened by his spirit in the inward man, that ye may
be able to COMPREHEND with all Saints, what is the breadth and length, and
depth and height, and to know the love of Christ, which passes (the) knowledge
(of man.) And if men shall feel the pains of hell, why shall they not
comprehend that, which they feel? They shall apprehend no end nor ease
thereof, but feeling is a comprehension of the pain, though it shall be so
great, that they cannot endure it with any patience. And yet since you strive
for the pains of hell in the soul of Christ, advise you whether Christ shall
comprehend them, or want patience in them, and not see an end of them. For if
he did suffer them, he did bear them, and comprehend them, except you make him
impatient in his pains, and the pains everlasting in him.

Defenc. 122. li. 10.
The next is as vain, where you think it not tolerable, that I say Christ in
plain words prayed contrary to his Fathers known will; I pray have patience:
I say no harm, nor I mean Chris^s prayer was not contrary to Gods known will.
no ill.] A plain pattern of vanity if a man would seek for, he shall need
go no farther, then these eight pages spent in excusing your bold and saucy
assertion, that is, Trea. pa. 59. li. 4.
It is manifest in plain words, Christ prayed contrary to Gods known will.
And the consequents, which you hang to it, are worse then the words themselves;
that Ibid. pa. 58. li. 11.
he plainly corrected his will by Gods will, and in correcting it was
contrary, yea he knew it to be so; and Ibid. pa. 59. li. 6.
unless it were in astonishment, Ibid. pa. 59. li. 8.
he could not have wanted sin. For none of all these positions have any
truth in them, or proof for them, besides your wilful mistaking and wresting
the Scripture. The wo^ds of our Savior, as I have showed before, have four
expositions with the ancient Fathers, every one confirming, that there was no
contradiction indeed between the will of God and the prayer of Christ. The
first that Christ prayed upon a condition, if man might possibly be otherwise
saved, and the Jews not perish by his passion, which Origin, Ierom and Bid do
follow. They put a special Emphasis in the words, THIS CVP, which should be
the utter desolation and reiection of the Jews. The next limiteth the word
PASS to POSSIBLE, as if Christ had said, let this cup pass from me, as much
as is possible; by which he desires a moderation of the punishment provoked by
our sins, and yet referr^th it to his Fathers will. This Euthymius embraces.
A third is, that Christ confessed a natural dislike of death and pain in the
weakness of his flesh, though his spirit did readily submit it self to the
divine will of his Father, and of himself, even touching the death of the
cross. This sense Chysostome, Damascene and others do bring. The fourth, that
Christ here assumed and declared the weakness of his members, who being no
more then men, should fear death; but he by suffering that affection to rise
in himself, and repressing it, did by his grace cure it in his, when, and as
he sees time and cause. This Hilarie, Cyrill, and Austen do like. So that
Christ's words being every way free from plain and manifest contradicting
Gods known will, as you would make them to advance your hell pains by them,
who but you would ship out such wine-shaken stuff, that Christ Treat. pa. 53.
li. 32.
was astonished, forgetful, and all confounded in his whole humanity both in
all the powers of his soul, and senses of his body, that he knew not what he
said, or did; or else he could not have wanted sin?

Defenc. pa^. 122. li 19.
Never skoffe at it, nor reproach it, nor wrest it. We ought not to be ashamed
to acknowledge the weakness of humane nature in Christ; which Christ was not
ashamed of for our sakes to vndergo^.] It is you that are ashamed of humane
weakness in the flesh of Christ; and therefore you devise the torments of
devils in the soul of Christ, and the pains of the damned, because you think
it a shame for him, to have his flesh afraid of pain and death. Right your
self therefore by your own rule, and then you may well be ashamed of these
monsters devised by you, whiles you shun to acknowledge man's weakness
voluntarily received in the flesh of Christ, as well to prove the truth of
his own manhood, as the comfort and cure the infirmity of our nature. But why
do you not first prove it, and after presume it? this pretending it to be
plain, before any such thing does appear, is no more but dreaming of a noble
conquest, when you have received a shameful foil.

Defenc. page 122. li. 22. and.
Did not Christ in plain words pray, that if it were possible this hour might
pass from him, and before, save me from this hour? does he not then pray in
plain words contrary to Gods know^ ill?] Who but a man confounded in all the
powers of his sense and vnd^rstanding, having so many expositions brought him
out of learned and ancient Christ prayed with condition and reservation of
Gods will.
Fathers, would in a rage rei^ct them all without any regard, and leaning only
to the wilfuln^sse of h^s own imagination, conclude with such confidence his
own untoward conceits to be the true meaning of the sacred Scriptures? If
Fathers be but sathers with you, do you not here three Evangelists, Matthew,
Mark and Luke evidently and exquisitely witness, that Christ prayed with
reservation and submission to the will of God? how then prayed he contrary to
the known will of God? [ Treatis pa. 85. li. 12.
In correcting it, it was contrary: yea and he knew it to be so.] It is a
sign you swell with no small liking of your self, that little care to cross
all writers old and new, without any cause, but only ^or the good opinion you
have of your self. M. Beza, from whom you would seem to borrow some points of
your hell pains, though you leave him, when you list, as not worthy to teach
you any thing, directly and tru^ly refureth your error. Beza iu annot.
Obs^ruandum est hac particula non corrigi superiorem pe^ionem, (ita enim
fuisset in Christo vitium) sed explicari, qua condition id peteret. We must
mark by this speech, (yet not as I will) the former prayer is not CORRECTED,
(for so it h^ been a fault in Christ) but it is declared with what condition
Christ desired it. So that your correcting Christ's prayer by the plain
confession of M. Beza charge Christ with corruption of sin, yea and
Christ's knowing it so to be, as you affirm, that is, to be contrary to Gods
will, notes a manifest and advised contradiction in Christ to the will of God
his Father; which whether it be sin or no, let any that is but half a divine
i^dge. S. John, you say, reports Christ to have said absolutely, John 12.
Father save me from this hour.] First Hilari^s rule is of necessity to be
retained in expounding the Scriptures. Hilarious de trinitate li. 10.
Prestant sibi m^tuam Euangelia plenitudinem; dum alia ex alijs, quia omnia
vnius spiritus predicatio sunt, intelliguntur. The Gospels make up each others
fullness, whiles o^e is understood by another; all being the preaching of one
spirit. Since then it is expressed in three Evangelists, that Christ's prayer,
for avoiding this cup and this hour, was conditional; his words in S. John to
the like purpose, must have the like construction, though they do not exactly
specify so much. Again your own confession imports no less, where you
say; Defenc. page 126. li. 7.
who knows not, that all good prayers and d^sires for temporal things must
be conditional, that is with reservation of Gods will always implied, though
not always expressed? Christ pra^ers then, to escape this hour, must have
that condition understood, though it be not mentioned in the words, since his
prayers were not only good, but hea^d of God, and the ground of all our
prayers in the time of trouble. Thirdly, the best Greek expositours that we
have, as Chrysostom, Epiphanius, and Theophylact, have conceived the force and
order of Christ's speech to be such, as if that part, which you avouch to be
repugnant to the rest, were excluded and denied by the words antecedent and
consequent, and so to have rather the power of a negation, then an affirmation.
Lastly, many new writers acknowledge the words, though they were affirmative,
may receive an other sense: as if Christ did not desire to be free from
suffering, but to be kept from fainting, under the burden of his passion. So
Bucer. Bucerus in Johan. ca. 12.
Patrem Christus or auit, vt liberaret eu^ a supplicio, non ne illud perferret,
sed vt forti^r perferret. Christ besought his Father to save him from (the
hour of) punishment, not that he might not suffer it, but that he might suffer
it patiently, (or without fainting.) So Aretius. Aretius in Johan. ca. 12.
There may be an other sense of this place, which is, that Christ does not
entreat to escape death, but prays his Fathers aid against the horror
thereof. So that to be saved from this hour, is to be preserved in it, that it
prevailed not against him. The words then of our Savior in S. John admitting
so many limitations and constructions, who but a wilful neglecter of all
learning and truth, would so peremtorily by pretense of them conclude, that
manifestly in plain words, Christ prayed contrary to Gods known will?

Defenc. page 122. li. 22.
If this could not be possible in Christ's manhood without sin, then I were a
wretch to affirm so much of him; especially still to affirm it. But if it be
possible by any means, through the mere instinct of man's nature (as it is
Gods creature and free from all sin) thus to speak and to wish suddenly,
and suddenly to control it again, as Christ did, then what mind bear you,
and how may we judge of this your striving, which is not to clear Christ from
all sin in his agony?] A goodly clearing from sin you make in Christ, that
in a maze he prayed he knew not what. You suddenly take Christ's memory from
him, and suddenly restore it again with the twinkling of an eye; and thus
you play with Christ's sense and memory, as men do with tennis balls. But
understand you sir, howsoever you please your self with amazing Christ after
this manner, the Scriptures allow no such thing, nor any circumstances of the
text, where the words seem most plainly repugnant as you say, to Gods known
will, as in the 12. of John. Read that Chapter who will, where are no words
nor signs of any maze, but a perpetual course of most excellen^ speech; in
the midst whereof he confessed, that his soul was (then) troubled with the
remembrance of his death. And as doubting what to desire, through the dislike
that man's nature in him had of death, he yet resolves to desire not his own
safety from death, but the increase of his Fathers glory by his death. What
sign or proof of amazement is in this? why take you this pestilent liberty
to put Christ into a sudden maze, when pleases you; and as suddenly, least
all the world should cry shame on you, to clear him from it, though the cause
of his maze, if there were any, still continued? you say, if it were not by
some means possible, you were a wretch to affirm it: but you must not devise
what means please you, to wave the Son of God to and fro with sudden and
often desires, which needed correcting and controlling, and then to warfe them
with want of memory. My striving is not against any words in the text, or any
thing that may be justly deduced from the Scriptures, but against your
forgetful and faithless prayers, which you purposely impute to Christ,
because you would hemme him either within sin, or astonishment; and then
excuse him with loss of sense, and lack of memory. This is the maine plot,
that here you undertake, not by proouing, that it was so; but by pronouncing,
that you will have it so; and therefore you still answer in steed of arguing,
knowing that your proofs be as weak, as your proiects strong. For first you
Defenc. page 122. li. 37.
answer, Christ knew (his Fathers will) but at this instant he thought not on
it. And why thought he not on it? you pa. 123. li. ^.
answer again, his pains and sorrows were so great, and so infinite, that
it was no marvel he thought not on it: but fall once to proouing, and you
shall see how much you fail of your purpose.

Defenc. page 123. li. 9.
First he was now astonished, as the text says, and you acknowledge that he
might be.] First in the twelfth of John, where you make Christ's prayer more
absolute than in any other place, there is no mention nor signification of any
astonishment; but on the contrary, the tenor of Christ's speech and doctrine is
not only coherent, but full of eminent power and grace. Again, the word
(...), which you take hold on, signifies either admiration alone, as I have
formerly showed, or fear mixed with some wondering. Phauorinus says: Phauor.
Dictionarium in verbo (...).
(...); Thambe^sa, properly is to fear and fly at the sight of God. So that
the word neither in the Scriptures, nor in any Grammar, signifies your hellish
astonishment for intolerable pains and torments, but suddenly to stand
defixed, or somewhat afraid at an unwonted sight. Thirdly, the circumstances
and consequents in the text, declare that Christ's astonishment or fear was
not such, that it took from him either sense or memory. For where all
vehement amazing for the time depriueth a man of motion, sense, and speech,
Christ felt utterly none of these. The very place of S. Mark, which you quote
for the word ekthamb (...) thai, proves the rest which I affirm. For Christ
after he Matthew. 14.
began ((...)) to be afraid, presently said unto his three disciples, My soul
is very heavy unto death: tarry here and watch. So he went forward a little,
and fell down on the ground, and prayed, that if it were possible, that hour
might pass from him. Then he came, and found them sleeping, and said to Peter,
Could not thou watch one hour? Watch ye, and pray, that ye enter not into
temptation. What signs or words are here of astonishment continuing?
astonishment stops speech and motion, as well as sense. Rhetoricorum ad
Her^nnium li. 4.
Omnes stupidi timore obmutuerunt; They all amazed with fear were mute, says
the heathen Orator. And so the Poet; Plautus in Epidi^o.
Quid stas stupida? quid taces? Thou amazed thing, why flandest thou still? why
art thou tongue-tied? Yea Galen himself gives evident testimony, that men
amazed with fear, neither speak nor do any thing, but stand still with their
eyes open: Galenus in Aphorismos Hippocratis. li. 7. apho. 14.
(...) Amazedness is, when men neither speak nor do any thing, but abide
silent with their eyes open, like to men astonished with fear. So that if
Christ were astonished with fear or amazed, he could neither have done nor
said any of those things which the Gospel reports he did and said: and
therefore unless you can alter the rules of nature, as you do of Scripture,
Christ was in no such astonishment as you dream of; neither did his memory
fail him in speaking those words: for then how could he not have remem^red
that they were spoken amiss, and needed correction as you conceive them.

Your self acknowledge that he might be.] It helps not you, I said, if we
should so interpret the word which S. Mark uses, that Christ began to be
afraid, or somewhat astonished: for if In verbo (...).
(...) be (...), to admire some (sudden or strange) sight, as Phanorinus
avouches, then might our Savior approaching Gods presence now sitting in
judgment to redeem the world, easily find cause both of admiration and
fear, and yet be free and far from suffering your hell pains. And where you
say my words are utterly untrue, that Defenc. page 123. li. 13.
many things might astonish our Savior for the time, besides such pains; they
are truer than any thing you have yet spoken, or will speak of his
astonishment. For whether we respect the sight of his eyes, or the apprehension
of his mind, he might either way behold many things worthy of that fear or
astonishment which the Scripture describes in him. Zan^hius de Incar Christi
li. 2. quaest. 11. Thesi 2 de scientia Christi. pa. 302.
If with the eyes of his body cleared with divine light, Christ being in
earth, says Zanchius, could see the things in heaven; and being in heaven,
does see what he will in earth, as he saw and heard Steven saying, Lord Jesus
receive my spirit; he saw and spoke to Paul persuing him in his Church, how
much more can (and could) the soul of Christ see particular things in the
word, which is his Godhead? So that either the eyes of Christ, or the mind of
Christ might behold or consider the glory of Gods judgment, whereof he spoke
when he said, John 12.
Now (even at hand) is the judgment of this world; or the greatness of man's
sin, or power of Gods wrath, or the vengeance deserved, from which he was to
ransom man, and for which he was to satisfy God; all these things might in
more likelihood in some sort astonish the humane soul of Christ, than the
pains of the damned presently then inflicted on him with Gods immediate hand,
as you imagine, but are no way able to prove, save by your own conceit. And
therefore your second observation, that these infinite incomprehensible and
incomparable pains, which you mean, astonished, is but the froth of your
fancy; for you shall never be able to justify any such thing by the text or
history of the Evangelists.

Defenc p^g. 123. li. 20.
Thirdly add heereunto that which you rightly grant, that it is true, a mighty
fear may so affect a man for the time, that it shall hinder the senses from
recovering themselves, and stop the faculties from informing one another.
Likewise afterward, astonishment draws the mind so wholly to think on some
special thing above our reach, that during the time we turn not our selves to
any other cogitation.] You take this to be true that I said, and so do I, but
this utterly subverted your former position, which now you recant, that Treat.
pa. 53. li. 32.
Christ could not but be astonished, forgetful, and all confounded in his
whole humanity, bot^ in all the powers of his soul, and senses of his body. If
Christ according to your desperate doctrine were all consounded in his whole
humanity, were not his understanding and memory confounded as well as other parts
of his humane nature? If he were all confounded in all powers of his soul, and
senses of his body, as your wicked error imagines, are not understanding and
memory powers of the soul? and did not I charge you justly and truly with
casting Christ into an infernal confusion for the time, since in hell it self
they can be no more but all confounded in their whole manhoods, both in all the
powers of their souls, and senses of their body? Tell what confusion in hell
is, or can be more, then all in all, and I will yield, I did you wrong. If you
cannot, then bethink your self how lewdly and loosely you adventured, all to
confound Christ in all the powers of his soul and senses of his body; in which
case whether you leave sense, memory or understanding unconfounded in Chist, I
leave to the censure of the discreet Reader.

Defenc. page 124. li. 1.
I say, as you say, he now on the sudden might turn neither sense nor memory
to any other object, and so not think on any thing else, but only on this
terrible and mighty sorrow and fear. Your helpers have advised you to recall
that forgetfulness, and all confusion in all the powers of Christ's soul, and
senses of his body, which before you sounded out with such waine loades of
words, as was maruailous; and now you be come to say, as I say, that there was
no confusion in the powers of Christ's soul, nor in the senses of his body, but
an intenti^e cogitation on some fearful or sorrowful thing, which for the
time so detained the powers of the soul, as on a matter most importing and
nearest touching the state of himself either in soul or in body, that he did
convert them to no other object. If you say thus with me, then must you say
farther with me, that as soon as Christ began to use speech, or convert his
cogitation to prayer, this astonishment was eased; and howsoever fear was not
altogether dispelled, yet he could no longer be said to be amazed, or to seek
what to do. For prayer to God without the mind intending, and attending it, is
sin; which might not be in Christ: and that Christ did attend his prayers, is
most evident. For he both added a condition to them, and presently declared,
what he meant by that condition, to wit, that he desired the bitterness of
this cup to pass, as much as Gods gracious will toward him should like, and
not as the sense of man's nature in him would affect. So that here is nothing in
Christ's prayer arguing any forgetfulness, or not remembering, but an evident
confirmation rather of that which you would so feign deny or avoid if you
could tell how; that Christ did religiously and carefully convert his
cogitations in his prayers, both to deprecate his Fathers wrath as far as
might be, and yet to give full assent to his Fathers will. And therefore the
difference, which Origin, Ierom, Bid, and others make betw^ene the beginning,
and continuing of these affections of fear and sorrow in Christ, howsoever with
a false show you impugn it, has better ground in it, then any thing you say
against it.

Defenc. page 124. li. 8.
Natures very instinct is in such dolours to wish and desire ease: and the
more vehemently it is pinched, the more earn^stly it desires: and this is Gods
own gift and workmanship in nature, and simply thus to desire is in this
respect truly to be reckned Gods own express will.] Have you now found, that
Christ did not manifestly in plain words pray contrary to his Fathers known
will; But that expressing the sense of man's nature in himself, as touching the
pains, which should assault him on the Cross, he desired that cup, that is,
the sharpness of that pain might pass, as much as was possible to stand with
Gods good pleasure. And yet least he should seem in nature more to respect his
own ^inart, then his Fathers will, he presently declares himself, that he
meant no farther to be eased, then might stand with Gods counsel and will
foredetermining these things. So that without your hell pains then inflicted
on Christ's soul by Gods immediate hand, and without your confused and
forgetful astonishment, the prayers of our Savior in the Garden did both
answer Gods ordinance in the frame of our flesh, which is not brass, as Job
speaks, and yet prefer the will of God for the conservation of his justice,
before the liking of his sense, or desire of his nature. Which if you
acknowledge, then are your assertions false and wicked, that Christ in plain
words prayed contrary to Gods known will and this could not have wanted
sin; had he not been astonished, when he so prayed. For the prayers are
facred and sound without any maze or oblivion of his Fathers will, and his own
purpose; but rather expressly remembering both, and preferring that, which
indeed should be preferred, when and as it ought.

Defenc. page 124 li. 22.
It was contrary in the outward words, and in the particular affection of his
mind now wanting this remembrance, but it was fully and wholly according to
Gods will in the general disposition of his mind and whole man.] You would
feign uphold a contrariety to Gods will in the prai^rs of Christ, and though
they be neither in truth nor in sense repugnant to Gods will, yet you say,
there is a repugnancy in the particular affection of his mind, As appears by
his adding, Not my will, but thy will be done. Howbeit you heard before out of
Zanchius a very learned and very sufficient Divine, Zambius de tri^us El^him
part 2. li. 3. ca 9. R^sponsio. 2.
Quare falsum omnino est, in Christo diuersam voluntatem a Patris fuisse. It is
utterly false, that there was in Christ a will diverse from his Fathers will.
The natural dislike, that man has of pain and death, which is the rule of
Gods creation, Christ calls his will, because it was the weakness of man's
flesh in him, as he forewarned, when he said, The spirit is prompt, but the
flesh is weak, to abide the pain and horror of death; but this natural
affection when he had confessed to be in himself, both to show himself to be
a true man, and naturally affected as we are, and also to foreshew, that his
death should be very painful and grievous unto him, he wholly and fully
submitted it to his fathers will, which indeed was his will and desire, (even
as he was man) as well as his Fathers. His own words are, Luc. 22.
Desiring I have desired (that is, I have earnestly desired) to eat this
Pass^ouer with you before I suffer. And again, Luc. 12.
I must be baptized with a baptism; and how am I grieved till it be ended? He
desired the time and f^uit of his death; he might not desire death in it self,
because it was not only the dissolution of nature, but the touch of Gods wrath
against the sin of man, and therefore no way to be desired, but in regard of
consequent effects. Neither was there any contrariety in the particular
affection of Christ's mind to Gods will, as you avouch. It is a dangerous device
of yours to make Christ's will agreeable to Gods in the general disposition of
his mind, but repugnant in his particular affection; which you would excuse
with a greater error of Now wanting this remembrance; But Gods will was as
Christ's was, that Christ in his humane nature should have an utter dislike and
horror of death, which yet for the love of man, and obedience to God, he should
submit to that will of God, whereby he would have the punishment of our sins
tedious and gr^euous to the Redeemer, least it should seem a sport to ransom
us from the wrath of God. Both these wills were in God the Father, and the
sense of the one, and the submission to the other, in the humane nature of
Christ; so that in either part Christ's will was conformable to the will of God,
though his natural dislike of death and pain yielded and submitted it self
to the will of Gods justice, by which he required and exacted the punishment of
our sin in the manhood of Christ.

Defenc. pa^. 124. li. 30
If you abhor this ^n me, yet see what Chrysostom taught. These words (NOT
AS I WILL, BUT AS THOU VVILT,) do signify two wills, says he, one of the
Father, another of the Son, contrary one to the other.] Think you, as
Chrysostom does, and then you shall easily be suffered to speak, as Chrysostom
speaks. For as power and weakness are contrary, so were the two wills in
Christ, declaring his two natures; the one despising and conquering death,
which was his divine will answeareable to his Fathers; the other fearing and
shunning death, which showed him to be a true man. As then Christ had two
contrary natures, yet knit and united in one person; so had he two contrary
wills touching death, yet both agreeing and concurring in one end. And so much
Chrysostom would have taught you, if you had read on the very same place, which
you quote for your error. Johan Chrysostomus in ^adem ^ratione apud Theod^retum
Dialogo 3.
If this were spoken, says he, of Christ's divinity, then were it a
contradiction indeed, and many absurdities would thence follow; but if it were
spoken of his flesh, then was there a good reason for those words, and nothing
in them that might ius^ly be blamed. For that the flesh would not willingly
die, this is not to be condemned, it is proper to man's nature. And Christ
showed (in himself) all the properties of man's nature, without sin, and that
very abundantly, to stop the mouths of Heretics. When then he says, if it
be possible, let this cup pass from me, and not as I will, but as thou will;
he declares nothing else, but that he was compassed with true flesh, which
feared death. For to fear and shun death, and to be astonished (or
perplexed) therewith, is proper to flesh. Now therefore (that is at this time,
when he spoke these words) he permitted his flesh alone, and naked to her
proper action, that showing the infirmity thereof he might confirm the truth
of (his humane) nature; and sometimes he covers it, because he was not a bare
man. Grant you by these words, that Christ declared nothing else, but that he
was a true man, and naturally feared and shunned death, which is the
dissolution of nature, as we do, and you shall have leave to call this
affection different or repugnant in power and strength, but not in purpose or
petition, to the will of his divine nature.

Defenc page 124. li. 33.
I grant M. Beza uses some terms differing from ours, yet his sense is the
self same with ours. He said Christ corrected not his speech, as if he had
before spoken amiss; I say, he did correct his speech, making it being good to
be better.] You can not, by your leave, thus wind out from your lewd
assertion, that Christ's prayer could not have wanted sin, had he been in
perfect remembrance without astonishment. If Christ's prayer were good without
the latter addition, which you call a correction; ergo it was not repugnant to
the known will of God, much less sin in it self, but that Christ now
wanted remembrance by reason of his infinite and incomprehensible pains. You
would feign daube up these dangerous conceits and conclusions, but your mortar
is untempered. If Christ's desire were good, as now you grant, before this
correction (and how could any thing be but good, which proceeded from him?)
then which way inferred you your hell pains out of that prayer? where is the
ground of your conclusion, that Christ sinned in that prayer, if he were not
astonished, because it was in plain words contrary to Gods known will? Is
any thing good, that is contrary to Gods known will? Feign you would, and yet
you know not how to keep this geere upright.

Defenc. page 125. li. 7.
Neither is this particular contrariety to Gods will any sin, namely, when by
Gods own ordinance we know not what Gods special will is, so that we always
remain apt and ready there unto when we know it.] Is this all the GOODNESS
you grant in the former part of Christ's prayer, that it was no sin, because
Christ wanted remembrance? does Chrysostom teach you any such doctrine? It may
be pardoned by your rule for want of memory; but that is no commendation of
any goodness in it. And yet if we venture to pray without faith, it is sin
so to tempt God. Neither can we be excused by want of judgment or memory; we
may omit somewhat for want of understanding, but if we commit ought upon
opinion or credulity that it is good and lawful for us, when indeed it is not
so, that does not excuse our ignorance or forgetfulness. It is the less
sin, but sin it is, and far from goodness. If therefore this be all the
goodness you ascribe to Christ's prayer, you expressly contradict Chrysostom,
who makes it proper and lawful for man's nature in the best remembrance to
dislike and shun death, so we still submit our selves to Gods will, as Christ
did, not to like that which is against nature, but patiently to suffer that
which is according to Gods will and counsel toward us.

Defenc. page 125. li.
So did David desire the life of his child, it was contrary to Gods will one
way, as the event showed; for the child died: yet he prayed well and rightly
according to Gods will in natures affection, seeing he knew not Gods secret
will to the contrary,] David had p^etie and charity to lead him to pray for
his childs life, though the Prophet denounced unto him that the child should
die. Gods threats do differ from his judgments in this, that his judgments
are irreuocable when they are once executed, and his wrath is placable, when he
threatens; since he never particularly threatens, but when we are impenitent.
God willed Jonas to preach, that after Jonah. 3.
forty days Nineueh should be overthrown; and yet was God neither inconstant
in his will, nor the Prophet false in his message, when upon repentance God
spared them. The Kings Proclamation was good divinity: Ibidem.
Let every man turn from his evil way, and who can tell, whether God will
turn from his fierce wrath, that we perish not? So said David: 2. Sam. 12.
Who can tell (whether) God will have mercy on me, that the child may live?
Gods secret will as we cannot know, so do we not resist, so long as we seek
by repentance to prevent or auert his plagues: but what is this to Christ's
case? was he ignorant of Gods will, which he so often foretold his Disciples;
what, where, and of whom he should suffer, as also the cause, why; Matthew. 20.
to give his life a redemption for many?

Defenc. page 125. li. 16.
Christ's sudden not remembering Gods particular will, (by reason of his
fearful astonishment) was all one, as if he had not know^n it at all.] It is
apparently false, that Christ did not remember Gods particular will touching
his death; for he added if it were possible, Christ's prayer not repug^ant to
the will of God.
before his prayer; and st^ll submitted his will to the will of God, which if
he had not remembered, he could not have done. The fearful astonishment of
which you dream, as if it still continued even in his prayers, is a needless
in^ention of such, as seek to make some pretense for their hell pains.
Christ's prayers were earnest, and often repeated, and as the Apostle notes, he
was heard in them, and therefore they were not repugnant to the will of God;
howsoever he desired the cup, that is, the sharpness thereof to be mitigated,
and proportioned to his strength and patience, which accordingly God his Father
performed.

Defenc. page 125. li. 25.
You say I am captious against Christ in not supplying one Evangelist with
another. For so Christ's desire will appear to be but conditional, therefore
not contrary to Gods will; yes nevertheless as touching the desire it self,
and his particular present inclination compared to Gods particular
determination herein.] If Christ's prayer in the garden were heard, as the
Apostle says it was, then is it evident it was no way repugnant to the will of
God: for God does not use to grant petitions made contrary to his will. And
then we must so interpret the sense of Christ's prayer, that it might take
effect in his sufferings, as I think it did. And though we should suppose, it
took not effect, yet since he himself did so condition his desire of nature,
that he subjected it to the will of God; which way can you prove it contrary to
Gods known will? Christ's particular present inclination compared to Gods
particular determination herein, you say, was contrary to it.] I deny that
utterly. For Christ's particular and present inclination of man's nature to
dislike pain and death was Gods general ordinance in all men, and Gods
special will in the manhood of Christ at that instant: and Christ's
determination was the same with Gods, since he submitted the one to the other,
and resolved, as we find in his prayer, with obedience willingly to undergo
that shameful and painful death, which Gods justice purposed for the sins
of men. Yea God has not only ordained, that the Cross should be grievous unto
us, as it was to the manhood of Christ, but he misliketh, when it is otherwise;
that is, if we despise his correction, because it is made tolerable by his
fatherly goodness respecting our weakness. Ierem. 5.
Thou have stricken them, but they have not sorowed, says the Prophet; meaning
they despised the hand of God, because it was tempered with mercy, and plagued
them not unto destruction. Then is it Gods will, that affliction should grieve
us, and he has not only so created us, but it is his purpose, when he smites
to have us feel it, and to have us mourn under the Cross, but yet without
distrust of his goodness, or dislike of his counsel, though it pinch us never
so near in the sense of our nature. What contrariety then to Gods will had
Christ's inclination of nature shunning death, and the sharpness thereof, so
far as was possible, and did stand with Gods pleasure; since his resolution
was the same with Gods will, most obediently to suffer it, though it seemed
never so sharp to his flesh, which was Gods will it should? as for Balaams bad
desire, I leave it to you to comment thereon at your leisure; his wicked
avarice secretly seeking after gain, though pretending Gods name, ought not in
Christ's case to be so much as mentioned.

Defenc. page 125. li. 2.
When we perfectly know and remember Gods certain will, every light affection
and sudden wishing to the contrary, howsoever conditionally, is no less then
manifest sin ^inst God.] Is it sin in Martyrs, that their flesh by sense of
nature endures not quietly the rage of fire without fear and grief, or is it
rather a godly conflict betwixt the ^eadinesse of the spirit, and the
weakness of the flesh, to feel the one, and to follow the other in regard of
duty to God and his blessed will, which has provided not pleasure, but pain
to make trial of patience? In desires and delights the sense of the flesh is
to be declined, least it bait the mind, and wax unruly; but in fear and pain
Gods sacred will is, that the flesh should be flesh, and not senseless, nor
careless, that the spirit may be proved, and the 1. Pet. 1.
trial of our faith in affliction, being much more pretio^ then gold, may be
found to the praise of God. It is therefore no sin, 1. Pet. 1.
for a season (if need require) to be in heaviness through manifold
tentations: Neither did Christ tell his Disciples, that they should not weep,
lament, nor sorrow in their miseries, since nothing could befall them without
the direct and express will of God, with whom the Matthew. 10.
hairs of (their) heads are numbered; But he promis^th, their John 16.
sorrow shall be turned to joy: Wherefore Christ's present and particular
inclination in nature to dislike the bitterness of pain and death, was not
contrary to Gods disposition, but answeareable to it; so long as in obedience
he always referred himself to the will of God, and his petition being
conditional, so far as might stand with Gods good will, was no way touched
with any show of sin, much less in plain words repugnant to Gods known
will, though our Savior were in perfect remembrance, as the Scripture
declares he was, and advisedly considered, and regarded the will of God in
every part of his prayer.

Defenc. page 126. li. 11.
The very nature of all conditional desires is such, that it includes
evermore a possibility (at least) of being contrary to his will, whom we
desire.] This general observation of yours is not true, and though it were, it
makes nothing to this purpose. The Saints have often prayed in full persuasion
of faith yet with a condition, not as doubting, but as humbling themselves in
his presence, before whom or of whom they spoke. When God had said to Jacob:
Genes. 28.
Lo I am with thee, and will keep thee, whither soever thou go, and will
bring thee again into this land; Jacob vowed, saying; if God will be with me,
and will keep me in the journey, which I go, so that I come again into my
fathers house in safety, then shall the Lord be my God. Shall we say, because
God adds a conditional to his vow, that either he doubted of Gods promise
made unto him that very night, or that it was possible to be contrary to Gods
will? I trust not. So Moses confessed to God; Exodus 33.
See, thou have said unto me, I know thee by name, and thou have also found
favor in my sight: Now therefore I pray thee, if I have found favor in thy
sight, show me now thy way, that I may know thee. Was Moses unfaithful to the
mouth of God, because he makes that a condition, which God uttered as an
affirmative; or was there any possibility of the contrary to that which God
had once pronounced? Likewise the Apostles under conditions express most
certain assertions; as Paul: 2. These. 1.
If it be a just thing with God to recompense trouble to them which trouble
you; and to you which are troubled, rest with us, when the Lord Jesus shall
show himself from heaven; Meaning, there can be no doubt, but it is just,
though he made it conditional. But we need not this rule for the prayers of
Christ in the garden. Christ knew it was possible for Gods power to save him
from death, and yet to make him the Savior of the world; but as Gods counsel
decreed and revealed now stood, he knew it was not possible, the whole cup
should pass from him, but that he must drink thereof. Both these Christ
affirms in the garden. Matthew. 26. verse. 53.
Think thou, (says he to Peter) that I cannot now pray to my Father, and he
will give me more then twelve Legions of Angels? how then should the Scriptures
be fulfilled, that it must be so? And at the second time of his return to
prayer; Ibid. verse 42.
O my Father, if this cup cannot paesse away from me, but that I must drink
it, (that is thereof) thy will be done. So that by the first frame of Christ's
prayers, Ibid. ver. 39.
O my Father, IF IT BE POSSIBLE, let this cup pass from me; If we understand
either Christ's purpose to make it appear, that his death revealed in the
Scriptures was now by Gods counsel necessarily required for our redemption,
and that it was no want of power, nor neglect of his safety, that put him into
the hands of his enemies, but his own good will obeying the wisdom of his
Father for our salvation; or else that he desired the sharpness of the Cup
might pass from him, so far as was possible, that it might not ouerpresse
his strength and patience; in either of these two senses the words stand well,
and have no touch of declining or disliking the counsel and determination of
God to ransom and reconcile the world to himself by the death of his Son.
If with Chrysostom, Cyril, Damascene, and others, we like to make it the voice
of man's weak flesh in Christ, but still subjected to the will of God, there is
no repugnance to the will of God, which is always preferred, though there be a
declining of his hand, if it were possible to stand with his will. For so long
as obedience ouerruleth the sense of nature, and nature shows nothing but
that which is ingraffed in it by Gods power and will, I do not see what
advantage you can take, Sir Defender, at this third sense of Christ's words,
though we grant the flesh of man to be so created, that it shrinketh at the
weight of Gods hand, and would decline it, if it might stand with Gods will.
Else were it not lawful to pray that affliction might be ended or eased, if we
might desire nothing that were possible to be contrary to Gods will, since we
know not his particular will touching our temporal troubles, but by the event.

Defenc. page 126. li. 16.
Thus David's and Christ's were not only possible to be contrary, but contrary
in deed as the sequel showed.] You may as well infer, that God himself had
contrary wills, when he repented, that he made man, when he threatened
destruction to Nini^eh, and death to King Ezechiah, and yet upon their prayers
spared both, howbeit, it were blasphemy to say, that God has wills indeed
contrary one to the other, as the sequel shows. He has an absolute will
working and perfourming in heaven and earth whatsoever pleases him, which
cannot be resisted, nor frustrated by any means. He has a conditional will,
by justice threatening and punishing us, when we are sinful and careless, and
by mercy sparing us, when we repent and turn unto him. And this will in him
though it work contrary effects in us, yet it is in him on^ and the same will,
wherewith he gives his own, as he best likes, pardons the penitent, and
reuengeth the obstinate; the one agr^eing with his mercy, the other with his
justice. So Christ had two wills, the one proportioned to Gods creation,
whereby the flesh shrinketh and shunneth pain, the other measured by Gods
determination, which declared his obedience; and in either of these he accorded
with the will of God, who meant not only to strike, but to have the stroke felt
with pain and grief to man's nature in Christ.

Defenc. page 126. li. 17.
Howbeit both their desires were nevertheless holy, made in faith, assured to
receive (as conditional desires may be) directed aright, prepared
sufficiently: yet only for this cause, seeing David simply knew not Gods
contrary will, Christ knew it not at this instant.] David repented his sin
(with which God was displeased) the more earnestly and instantly, because he
saw the dislike, which God had of his fact, was the cause of death denounced to
his child. So that David's desire to please and pacify God with most humble and
inward submission, the rather if it were possible, to auert the wrath of God
threatened to his child for his offense, had in it piety, charity, humility,
and other good points of godly repentance; and his prayer for his child was
pardonable, because he knew not Gods certain resolution to the contrary,
though he heard the Prophet in Gods name denounce, 2. Sam. 12.
the child should surely die: which David took to be conditional, as other
Gods threats are oftentimes, the rather to reduce sinners to more zealous and
hearty conversion unto God. But in Christ's prayers no such thing can be
pretended. His not remembering, what he knew most assuredly, and believed most
steadfastly, could not make his prayers to be prepared sufficiently, directed
aright, and assured to receive. For neither preparation, direction, faith, nor
assurance could be in the soul of Christ without understanding and memory;
since neither forgetfulness, nor ignorance of that, which we should know, do
warrant our prayers to be holy, much less to be perfect, and such as are
assured to be heard. And if all these conditions of faithful and Godly prayer
were found in Christ's petition in the Garden, as you confess, show us how they
could be indeed contrary to Gods known will. I have no doubt of all Christ's
prayers and speeches, but they were well advised, rightly prepared, and
thoroughly assured to be heard, that is perfectly holy, as he intended them; but
Christ's not remembering the will of God revealed to him, could not perform or
effect these things in his prayer, but rather contrariwise his full knowledge,
and present remembrance of Gods will, with exact obedience and submission
thereunto. Otherwise not remembering that, which he well knew, might excuse from
sin, if he were so amazed, that understanding and memory failed him; but it
could not make him assured to receive, since God does grant their desires to
such, as dewly remember, and not in such as in part, or wholly forget his will.
Again, not remembering the truth of Gods will revealed is not faith in any
man, since faith is the sure and full persuasion of Gods will and promises
toward us, which if we remember not, how may we be said to be fully assured,
and firmly persuaded of them? Wherefore you make out this matter with empty
words, as your manner is, least you should be taken tardie with a plain error;
and have peeced together very untowardly diverse men's places, the head not
agreeing with the h^eles, since you first defended, that Christ was forgetful,
and all confounded in all the powers of his soul and senses of his body, or
else he had sinned in praying against Gods known will; and now you anouch his
prayers were made in faith, sufficiently prepared, directed aright, and assured
to receive; yet only sor this cause, seeing he did not remember at that
instant, when he prayed, Gods will so plainly revealed unto him, and so often
foretold by himself. And yet the words themselves, which Christ used in his
prayer, are directly referred to Gods will; and whatsoever Christ feared, or
felt according to your conceit, he was right sure was inflicted on him by Gods
immediate hand, and consequently by Gods will, whose hand does not work
without his will, and yet seeing, and feeling it to be Gods hand, and so Gods
will, you make him not remember, that it was Gods will. What else is this, but
to make forg^tfulnesse to be faith, and error to be assurance, and confusion to
be sufficient preparation of the mind unto prayer, which are more then monsters
in Christian religion, and from which our Lord and master must be as free, as
from sin?

Defenc. page 126. li. 26.
All in vain then do you charge me, that I stretch the Scriptures beyond
their words and truth, when in my discourse I show that Christ in the Garden
was astonished and grievously perplexed, the text having only he began to be
astonished and grievously perplexed.] You took upon you in your Treatise,
without all proof, against the plain words, and plainer circumstances of the
text to pronounce, that Christ in the Garden Treat. pa. 55.
fell amazed and sorgetfull of himself, and Ibid. pa. 53.
could not be but astonished, overwhelmed, and all confounded in his whole
humanity, both in all the powers of his soul and senses of his body, and
unless this had been in him, he had sinned in deed. The ground of all this
geere you made the words of S. Mark, (...), he began to be afraid and in great
heaviness. I observed out of Ierom, that it is one thing to begin to be heavy
(or sorrowful) as the text says, another thing to have the Passion of
heaviness (or sorrow) to ouerwhelme the mind, as you would have it. In this
you say, I charge you all in vain; and why so? because the Scripture does
sometime use the word ( to begin) where the continuance follows. Had Ierom
made no farther reason, then that Christ began to be afraid; and so avouched,
that nothing beginning might proceed or continue, the places of Scripture
here heaped by you might have made some show; but Ierom gives a good reason
of his words, that the passion of fear and sorrow might not be excessive and
dominant in the mind of Christ, because it is the sinful corruption of our
nature to be so ouerswayed with immoderate and sudden affections, in which he
could not communicate with us. This reason you skip, and bend your self to
prove, the Scripture uses the words (he began) where the action had
continuance. As though any man doubted thereof, but as well good, as bad
actions must have their beginnings, before they can have any proceeding, or
continuing; but does that word prove, that every thing once begun is brought
to an end, or that every affection rising in man's nature grows to the highest
degree? if the word stand indifferent to signify the beginning of every action
or affection, either interrupted before the end, or proceeding and continuing
to the end and height thereof; then make those words nothing for your extreme
confusion of fear and sorrow growing to the greatest height, that might be, as
you imagine. And that the word naturally signifies a beginning in the
Scriptures, without any necessity that the action or affection should
continue, though some might proceed and increase, where the Scripture
testifies so much, there can be no question.

In the fourteenth of Luke, Christ showing by a familiar example of a builder,
how ridiculous and odious it is to begin a good thing, and not to perform it,
repeateth the common mock that follows such vain enterprises: This man
(...) began to build, but could not make an end. So says the Apostle to the
Galathians: Galat. 3.
Are you so unwise, that (...) beginning in the spirit, you will end in the
flesh? S. Matthew describes how Peter walking on the water toward Christ, and
beholding a mighty wind, was stricken with fear, Matthew. 14.
(...), and beginning to sincke, cried; Lord save me. And Jesus straightway
stretched out his hand, and stayed him. So in many other places: Philip. 1.
I am persuaded of this, that (...) he which has begun a good work in you,
will perform it to the day of Christ. When the ten Disciples heard James and
John desire, that one of them might sit at Christ's right hand, and the other
at his left in glory, Marc. 10.
(...), they began to disdain ^ames and John; but Christ presently called his
Disciples unto him, and by his speech repressed ambition on the one side, and
indignation on the other. So Peter, when those that stood by him in the high
Priests hall, charged him by his tongue to be one of Christ's followers, Matthew.
26.
(...), he began to curse and swear, he knew not the man. And immediately the
cock crew, and Peter remembering the words of Jesus, went out, and wept
bitterly, repenting his fault. An hundred examples might be brought, where the
word is in the like sort used to signify the beginning of any thing, as well
without continuance as with, when the Scripture expresses so much; but these
are so clear, that they admit no contradiction. And therefore Ieroms
observation is very true, and grounded on better reason than your refutation.

Defenc. page 127. li. 2.
As Christ was indeed astonished, so he did at first but begin to be thus, and
then afterward grew to the full.] That he began to be afraid, the Evangelist
says; that he afterward grew to the full, no Evangelist writes any such
thing; except you take upon you to be the fifth Evangelist, boldly and falsely
to avouch that which the other four do not mention. And as you enlarge the
circumstances of the Evangelists, so do you restrain the significations of
their words as pleases you: for (...) by all Interpreters, and even by such as
were the first deuisers of Christ's forgetfulness, is rendered expauescere, to
be afraid, and not to be astonished. Calvin does thus ^xpresse the words o^ S.
Mark: Caepit expauescere, and moerore aff^ci. Calvin. harmonia in Marci. ca.
14.
Christ began to be afraid, and affected with griese. As in S. Matthew he
translateth the word (...), affici moestitudine, to be touched with heaviness;
and timor and moestitia, fear and heaviness are all the words, that by any
warrant of sacred Scriptures Calvin could find. Beza in his Latin translation
keeps the same word; Caepit expauescere, Christ began to be afraid and so
does the Geneuian translation of the Bible into English; He began to be afraid,
and in great heaviness. Others more indifferent I shall not need to repeat.
You take a course by your self, that as you differ from all men in opinion, so
you will in translation of the words. For (...) you will have to be Defenc.
page 123.
astonished with fear though the rest content themselves to say, he began to
be afraid.

Defenc. page 127. li. 6.
The Text following does inuincibly show, that he did fully come to the
extreamitie of astonishment, and began not only. For did he but begin, when he
swet clotted blood trickling from his body to the ground? also when an Angel
was sent from heaven to refresh him and comfort him: did he then but begin to
be heavy?] Your fancies follow so fast without the Text, that they run headlong
against the Text. That Christ was afraid, I do not deny; that he came to the
extremity of astonishment, the Scriptures deny; howsoever you whiske it after
your whifling manner, that you may seem a man tried in all toys. The
extremity of astonishment is neither to do nor speak any thing, but to be
silent, and as it were without sense, as I have formerly showed. Your self
does so describe it: for you say, Christ was astonished, that is, overwhelmed,
and all confounded in all the powers of his soul, and senses of his body. A
man in this case has no right use of reason, understanding, memory, speech,
sight, or hearing for the time. Was Christ so? do your impertinent pushes
prove any such thing? do they not rather prove the contrary? did not Christ
speak, when he prayed? did he not rebuke his Disciples for their sleepiness,
and admonish them to watch and pray, that they entered not into temptation? did
he not fall to more earnest and vehement prayer, when his sweat began to
look like blood, which you in your learned conceit call clotted blood? The
strong cries and tears, which you mention, do they not plainly reprove your
supposed astonishment, and clearly confirm, that Christ had all the powers of
his soul, and senses of his body in their full use, when he thus converted
them with such zeal and contention of mind to this great work of our
redemption? what Sadler or Shoemaker would conclude this to be the fullness of
astonishment, which by so manifest circumstances cited by your self is
irrefragablely refuted? and on you run, as if you would ouerbeare all the world
with such witles words, and flaunting follies, which only serve to bewray the
weakness of your own conceits. Fear and sorrow I admit in the soul of
Christ, and religious of either kind in the highest degree, that man's nature is
capable of. A natural fear of death in the flesh of Christ I likewise
acknowledge, but I make not these things which you mean, the effects thereof.
What I receive, and what I refuse in our Saviors agony, I have so largely
delivered, that I must not spend paper to repeat all again. Neither does
Ierom mean, that Christ had a touch of fear, and no farther, as you most
fondly misconster him, and his words, where he says, Christ began to be
afraid; but he means, Christ so far admitted the pearcing and painful
affection of fear (for a time required in so great a cause) that it neither
possessed him wholly, nor continually, to bear dominion over him, or to work
any corruption in him, which is usual in our affections. You make your self
merry with the beginning, and never consider, that Ierom thereby excludes the
height of our inordinate affections of fear and sorrow, such as you bring in
when you all confound Christ in his whole humanity, both in all the powers of
his soul, and senses of his body.

Defenc. page 127. li 33.
As for Ierom, if he deny this, I must crave leave to dissent from him.] And
from you, if you affirm that, all wise and Christian Readers must dissent
without your leave. For it is not only false, and directly repugnant to the
text, but it is extremely wicked and impious to bring that confusion, which you
mention, and forgetfulness into all the powers of Christ's soul, and senses of
his body. [ Ibid. li. 27.
I think all to little sufficiently to express our Lords sufferings for us.]
You must then think the doctrine and pen of the holy Ghost to be most
insufficient, that continually and clearly proposes the sufferings of the son
of God for our salvation without any such presumptuous and irreligious
speeches. And howsoever you commend your devotion in Ibid. li. 31.
laboring to show, how Christ loved us, and to what baseness of our nature he
submitted himself for our sake; learn first to content your self with that,
which the wisdom and justice of God required of his sons humane nature, and
the truth of God witnesses in the Scriptures, and so shall you honor the
sufferings of Christ, as you ought to do, and not devise new helles and new
damnations for him, to please your violent fansi^s. And as new is your
devotion, as strange; if the whole Church of Christ before your time never
knew, nor heard, how Christ loved his, and to what he submitted himself for
their sakes; but have all this while erred in believing and following the
direction of Gods spirit in the word of truth and life, since they wanted all
knowledge of your hellish torments and confusion, which you have lately
invented for the soul of Christ, as the more principal part of our
redemption, and without which, the death of the Cross, to which he was
obedient, was nothing worth.

Defenc. page 127. li. 38.
Nay God forbid we should rejoice in any thing so much, neither can we praise
and magnify him for any thing so highly, as we may and ought for this extreme
abasing of Christ for us.] There was never no heretic, that could not cast a
show of piety upon his erroneous pretenses. Satan does transform himself
into an Angel of light, and falsehood always seeks to put on the vizard of
truth. Is it not thanks worthy, that the son of God would leave the use
and honor of his divine glory, wherein hce was equal to his Father, and take
unto him the shape of a servant with all the baseness and weakness of our
flesh, and with the shame and pain of his death on the cross, make
satisfaction for our sins, and by his blood redeem us to God, which is the
emptying of himself expressed by the Apostle in the place abused and
misapplied by you; but you must teach all this is skant worth thanks, if
Christ did not suffer in soul the second death, which is the lake burning with
fire and brimstone, and even the very pains of the damned, that you might be
indeed beholding unto him? And what if another as wise as you, will say, that
all which Christ suffered here on earth, was not worth thanks, except he
suffered in hell amongst the devils, where indeed are the pains of the
damned, which you have lately derived to the earth upon your authority; shall
this impiety also go for good religion, because the more Christ suffered for
us, the more we are and ought to be beholding unto him? we shall do well to
think, that we can never give thanks sufficient for the least of his mercies;
and not take upon us to determine, what recompense God must exact of his son
for our sins, except he will be unjust, which is a most pestilent presumption
and intrusion upon the secret counsels and judgments of God; but rather learn
to lament our own unworthiness and wickedness, and not delight or dwell in
sin, which God so hated and abhorred, that nothing could appease his wrath
against our uncleanness, but only the death and blood of his own Son.

Defenc. page 128. li. 2.
Remember your own words out of Austen, that there is in some men INSIPIENS
HONORIFICENTIA, a fond intent of honoring Christ. If there be any such, surely
this is one point thereof, which you maintain.] You apply Fathers, as you do
Scriptures; and call S. Austen fool, as well as all the rest of the learned
and ancient pillars of Christ's Church, because they reject your hellish
confusion, by which you ouerwhelme all the powers of Christ's soul and senses
of his body, rather then you will yield him understanding and remembrance in
his prayers. S. Austen says indeed of the Manichees, that were loath to
confess, Christ truly died a bodily death on the cross, for fear of
bringing him within the curse of a corporal death, since the death of man's
body first proceeded from Gods curse against sin; and therefore defended,
that Christ seemed there to die in outward show, but indeed did not die on the
cross; S. Austen, I say, affirms, that they with a foolish pretense of
honor unto Christ, denied the love of Christ toward us, and the truth of
Christ, who professed, that he should and would lay down his life a ransom
for many. What is this to the pains of the damned, or to the death of the
soul, of which S. Austen says, August. epist. 99.
who dare avouch it? and yet meant not so foolishly to honor Christ, as thereby
to deny or impugn the truth of Christian religion?

Defenc. page 128. li. 5.
Master Calvin a worthy minister of Christ, and a pillar of the Church is bold
and says; we confess indeed such is the baseness and folly of Christ's
cross, that proud men cannot away with it.] If master Calvin mean, as the
Apostle does, that the heathen not knowing the wisdom and power of God in the
cross of Christ, counted it mere fol^y for him, that was God, to become man,
and in the body of his flesh to endure so vile and shameful a death; I
account him no Christian, that is not of that mind with master Calvin: but if
he call them all proud, that did not like his new device of Christ's suffering
hell on the cross, which you have stretched and drawn to many degrees and
points above master Calvin, then let him look, whether it be pride to believe
the plain and fair doctrine of truth delivered in the Scriptures, as all the
Fathers of Christ's Church did, or for men to add thereunto their own
devices, as you and some others have done. For my part, as I love and honor
master Caluines name, and like well his resolutions, where he contented
himself in the grounds of doctrine and discipline to join with the ancient
and primative Church of Christ; so when he leaves them upon some liking of his
private devices, I must leave him. I so honor him, that I will not for love to
him dishonor all antiquity, as if Christ had never any Church, nor faithful
or learned minister therein before master Calvin. And were it worth the while,
I could easily show many great and maine differences betwixt master Caluines
conceit of hell suffered in the soul of Christ, and yours; but because it has
occasioned and hatched your amplified error of an other hell from the immediate
hand of God, I will not trouble my self, nor the Reader with sifting or
censuring that, which I am not bound to believe, no more then I am yours; till
it be proved by more substantial grounds, then master Caluins good liking of
it.

Defenc. page 128. li. 10.
In another place, where I showed from the more to the less, how Christ might
have (for the sudden) the powers of his mind astonished, and yet no decay in
him of faith, nor obedience nor patience: Like as there is not in a man a
sleep, or amazed with a blow on the head, hereupon you ask me scoffingly, was
Christ a sleep, or in a swoune?] Your answer was indeed drawn from the
less, to the more; that is, from the lesser vanity and falsity, to the
greater; and therefore my question, which you call a skoffe, was a sound
refutation of such ignorant misapplying of things impertinent and vncoherent.
For what if a man in his sleep, or in a swoune, retain habitual faith,
obedience, and patience; does that prove, that Christ awaked and well advised
might pray, he knew not what, and yet have actual faith, obedience, and
patience? If a man should babble in his sleep, or groan in a swoune, before he
recover sense or understanding, would you call that faith or prayer, though the
habit of faith were then in him? no more does that example prove any actual
faith, obedience, or patience in Christ at the time of his often and earnest
prayers in the garden, if all that while you make him all confounded in all the
powers of his soul, and so astonished, that he could not, or did not remember
his Fathers often revealed, and often repeated will, nor his own person nor
office, who came unto this hour of purpose to perform his Fathers will. And
therefore you must get you some better patterns for the use and acts of faith,
obedience, and patience in Christ's astonishment, then sleeping or swouning, or
else each Christian Reader will soon perceive you to be worse then a sleep, when
you dream of a Defenc page 128. li. 26.
far greater astonishment in Christ at the time of prayers, then is to be
se^ne in any man else, that ever was or shall be: And yet you defend, there
might be actual faith, obedience, and patience in Christ, because men in
sleep, or in a swoune retain the habits, or gifts of those virtues.

Defenc. page 128. li. 21.
As you grant that amazedness and astonishment comes naturally from sorrows
and fears: so I think in Christ both the one and the other was in the
extremest and most violent degree that might be.] Then must you also think,
that Christ had not the free use of speech, memory, and understanding, nor of
sense nor motion for the time, that he was in that amazedness. For it is
evident, as I have showed out of Galen a sufficient witness of natural
effects and defects, that men thoroughly amazed with fear, neither speak nor
do any thing: yea no man is so very a stranger to nature, but he knows, that
astonishment in the highest degree hinders both sense, and motion outward and
inward. And therefore when you put our Savior into the Ibid. li. 26.
extremest and most violent degree of amazedness, that might be, and into
far greater astonishment, then is to be seen in any man else, that ever was
or shall be; I report me to the Christian Reader, that has read or seen any
thing, whether by this bold and violent imagination of yours you do not take
from Christ the use of bodily sense, motion, and speech; and even of
understanding, and memory. The Scripture notes of the ghest, which wanted his
wedding garment, that when he was challenged for it, he Matthew. 22.
was speachlesse. When Saul heard the threats of him, that appeared in the
person of Samuel, He 1. Sam. 28.
suddenly fell all along on the earth, as sore afraid, because of the words.
When Saint John saw the sight of the son of God in his glory R^u. 1. v. 17.
He fell at his feet, as dead for very fear. So that fear may so far amaze
men, as to take from them speech, strength, and all use of life, that they may
lie even as dead for the time; which whether it agr^e to our Savior in the
garden, I make any man judge, that ever read or heard that part of the Gospel.

Defenc. page 128. li. 35.
For my life I cannot answer, this that follows. The suffering of hell
pains, which astonish and confound all the powers of the soul, and senses of
the body, neither was nor could be meritorious with God. I deny (this)
assumption. Not only all Christ's pains were meritorious, but even all his
infirmities also: his weariness, his hunger, his sleep, and so his
astonishment and amazedness.] The sleightnesse of your answer does prove
that, which I said, to be tru^r, then you are ware of. For though diminution of
strength, as in weariness; affliction of nature, as in hunger; and ligation of
sense, as in sleep; yea if you will, privation of life, as in death; were
meritorious in Christ, because the person, that was God and man, submitted
himself to these infirmities of our nature, which no way perverted nor
hindered the inward powers or actions of Christ's humane soul, yet that is no
proof, that such impressions, as deprive the soul of Christ of her proper and
essential operations by confounding Reason, understanding, will and memory,
should be meritorious, because they all confound the very instruments of grace
in the soul of Christ, which are requisite unto merit. For though the person
in Christ, which by nature did owe no obedience by reason it had an equality
with God, was the chief fountain of all Christ's merits, which could not have
infinite price and value, but that he was infinite, and no way bound, who
wrought them by his humane nature; yet the instruments of merit in Christ's
manhood were his soul, and his body; and chiefly his soul by her
understanding and will always p^rfectly knowing, absolutely liking, and
constantly performing by the presence and power of Gods spirit those things,
which were most pleasing to God. So that the pains and infirmities, which you
suppose in Christ, if they did confound and astonish all the powers of Christ's
soul and senses of his body (For so are the words of your assertion, and my
assumption) they neither were, nor could be meritorious. In sleep the senses
of Christ's body rested, which he could have strengthened by power without
sleep, but that he willingly submitted himself to those infirmities of our
nature for obedience to his Fathers will; yet even then was the soul of Christ
left free to divine cogitations and visions, which could not want in the soul
of Christ having the full and perpetual possession and fruition of Gods grace
and truth, though he would want the power and glory provided for him, till
Gods appointed time. Christ's sleep then had no agreement with your late
devised confusion of all the powers of Christ's soul; yea the prayers,
speeches, and actions of Christ in the garden, if you then confound in him all
understanding, will, and memory, which are the powers of Christ's soul, must by
your doctrine be full of vanity, and rather distractions, th^n religious and
humane actions, as not proceeding from the direction of grace, apprehension of
mind, and submission of will, but from a confusion of all these, which no
Christian man can tell what to make of. And therefore you must either recall
the confufion of all the powers of Christ's soul; which you say was the
extremest and most violent, that might be, or worse consequents will follow
upon these desperate and false amplifications, then you yet see. For take once
from Christ's soul his humane understanding and will, and place nothing but
confusion in his whole humanity, or as your words are, all confusion in his
whole humanity, both in all the powers of his soul and senses of his body, and
tell me what patience, obedience, or sanctity could be left, where neither
understanding, will, not memory were, but all confounded in the extremest
manner that might be.

Defenc. page 129. li.
If it seem a hard phrase, which in my former Treatise I used, saying. Christ
at this instant became forgetful of that which before he knew; my meaning is
(and so still I speak now) he remembered not, he considered not. Which many
times we use to name forgetting, but indeed strictly and properly it is not
remembering.] If you look well to it, you have harder phrases both in your
defense and Treatise, then Christ to be forgetful of himself. Which if you
revoke not, or plainly excuse not, rather by your folly not understanding the
force of them, then standing to justify them, they will prove open impiety. I
have so often repeated them, that I am weary of so unsavory words. And as for
proofs, that Christ should be thus all confounded in all the powers and senses
of body and soul, you be so used to wilful assertions depending only on your
secret conceits, that you do not think your self bound to prove that you
say, or to say no more in Christian Religion, then you can prove. For what one
sign or step of this great and general confusion in the soul of Christ do
the Scriptures mention, that you should thus rack it to the extremest and
highest degree, that ever was, shall, or might be? They be well helped up, that
have such an heady presumer and affirmer, as you are, to fashion their faiths
after your unadvised and inconsiderate fancies: But God send you his grace to
wax soberer, which is all the harm I wish you, though I like none of your
pangs to be the principles of my faith.

Defenc. page 129. li. 17.
Where you would wring out a contrariety in my words, as if I had said that
Christ being in the depth of his astonishment, did then perfectly know that the
dominion of death should not hold him: you do me wrong, I say not so. In that
place I argue from your supposition.] I have no desire to charge you with
impudency, but you wax sometimes so intolerable in your brags and shifts, that
I must either betray the truth, or tell you in plain terms that you do face
a great deal more then you can any way fasten by just proof. Let this example
stand in steed of many. If I here do you wrong, as you pretend, and you
reasoned only from my supposition, let me bear the shame of it with all
Christian Readers; but if it be plainly and expressly otherwise, then I pray
you Sir who is the shifter and outfacer? Look on the Page of your Treatise
quoted by me, viz. Pa. 59, and see whether they be not your own words (which I
cited) in your answer to an objection, and justified by you out of the 10 of
Mark verse 34. To an argument that Trea. pa. 59. li. 16.
Christ might pray, that his bodily death might not have dominion over him, you
answer, This is absurd to say that he prayed in such fear and terror of mind
against that which he perfectly knew should never come to him: namely that the
dominion of death should hold him. Do you confess of yourselfe, that you
speak absurdly, or do you mean it of the obiectors, against whom you bring
this as a reason; that since Christ Mar. 10. 34.
perfectly knew the dominion of death could not hold him, You think it very
absurd to say he feared that? And in the page precedent do you not again and
again avouch the same exactness of knowledge in Christ at the time of his
prayers? these are your own words tripled and quadruplied to that end. Trea.
pa 58. li. 30.
Thirdly, this proves that Christ knew it was Gods determinate will, in that
he terms it an hour, that is a time set of God for his suffering. Fourthly,
because he so mightily feared it, therefore doubtless he knew that he was
appointed to suffer it. Thus it is manifest in plain words he prayed contrary
to Gods known will. And least you should not be constant in your manifest
contradiction, do you not insist on the same words in your defense? Defenc.
page 99. li. 13.
He could not intentiuely pray against that, nor fear that, which he perfectly
knew concerned him not at all. Where you give to Christ in that extreme
astonishment, which you dream of, intentive prayer, and perfect knowledge of
Gods will in some things, which again in other things you deny unto him. So
that by your leave you gainsay your self, and your denying it is as unshame
fast, as your doubling it.

Defenc. page 129. li. 26.
To conclude this matter without color of reason, you wrest a plain text,
which otherwise (as it lies) makes strongly against you. They are our Savior
Christ's own words: Now is my soul troubled, and what shall I say? Father
save me from this hour: but therefore came I unto this hour. You say these
words do import a deliberation of two parts. But you speak against all
reason, considering the nature and frame of the very words. A deliberation must
needs be set interrogatiuely in both clauses. New the text is not so.] Of this
place I have spoken enough before, were it not that you challenge me with such
hateful terms of wresting a plain text without color of reason, because I
therein follow the judgment of Chrysostom and Epiphanius, who a man would
think had not only color of reason, but substance of learning to discern the
force of that speech. First the words, as well by the nature of the petition,
and your own confession, in that it is for a temporal thing; as by the
supply of the rest of the Evangelists must be conditional, and have a secret
reservation of Gods will, as in the like case the other Evangelists do
express; and namely S. Mark, who says; Mark 14.
Christ prayed, if it were p^ssible, that hour might pass from him. And so
whether they be deliberatiue or positive, they make nothing for your purpose,
since not with resolution, but with condition, If it pleased God, Christ
desired to be saved from that hour. But I wrest a plain text, because I
avouch, that the words import a deliberation of two parts, which you say must
needs be set interrogatiuely in both clauses. Whence comes this new Art of
Oratory, that every deliberation must be interrogatiue? As though a man might
not doubt or deliberate either by int^rrogation, condition, or simple
subjection of the pa^ts in question. When Christ asked the chief Priests and
Scribes, Mark 11.
whence the baptism of John was? from heaven or of men? they thought within
themselves: If we say from heaven, he will say, Why then did ye not b^leeue
him? But if we say from men, we ^eare the people. So the four Lepers that sat
at the entering in of the gate of Samaria, (when the dearth was there in El^zeus
time) disputed with themselves; 2. Kings 7.
Why sit we hear till we die? if we say, we will enter into the City, the
famine is in the City, and we shall die there. And if we sit here, we die
also. Now therefore come, let us fall into the camp of the Aramites: if they
save our lives, we shall live; if they kill us, we are but dead. As here they
reason with a condition, so might they have said to the same effect by way of
proposing and answering to themselves: what shall we do to save our lives? we
will enter the city, there is the famine; we will sit still, here is likewise
death. Let us go to the Aramites: they will kill us, then we are but dead;
they will save us, then gain we our lives. Is it not all one in this
deliberation, whether we propose the parts by interrogation, condition, or
proposition? In the words of our Savior likewise, Now is my soul troubled;
and what shall I say? The answer to that patheticall question, What shall I
say, might have been made either by interrogation; Shall I say, Father save me
from this hour? or by condition; If I say, Father save me from this hour: or
by simple supposition; I will, or I would say, Father save me from this hour;
but therefore came I unto this hour. Which way soever we propose the former
words, Father save me from this hour; Christ's answer by way of full
resolution and conclusion, But therefore came I into this hour, does convince,
that the former words, Father save me from this hour, are by himself removed,
or denied as no part of his final determination, though it were, or might be a
part proposed in his deliberation. For either Christ must positiuely determine
clean contraries in one sentence, which were open inconstancy, and no way
imaginable in the Son of God; or this latter must remove the former being
repugnant to the maine consent of his will, and intent of his coming. For
therefore came he into this hour of man's redemption, because he would not be
saved from it with man's destruction. And thus much the best and most skillful
Interpreters have collected to be the force of the words following, to which
Christ adds the conjunction aduersatiue, (...), which in their judgment
supposes here a negative precedent. So Chrysostom conceiueth our Saviors
words, I do not say, save me from this hour; And why? Because the words
following with an aduersatiue repugnance to the former words, do prove not the
first, but the last to be Christ's full purpose.

Defenc. page 129. li. 38.
Chrysostom and Epiphanius do descant about it; trying how the text may bear
such a meaning: but it can not stand being so evidently against the course of
the text.] Indeed Chrysostom and Epiphanius are not comparable to you, neither
in learning nor judgment; you make us such new positions and principles both
of reason and faith, that their Divinity is stale to yours: but with all
learned and wise men, the youngest of the twain will be trusted for the true
sense of a text far before such Dreamers and Deuisers as you are. The course
of the text is evidently against it, you say. What course of the text? The
words used by our Savior are with it: But therefore came I into this hour.
What sense or meaning can this sentence have, but that Christ purposely coming
into this hour had no resolution to be delivered from this hour? which being
true, the former words, Father save me from this hour, may show the desire or
doubt of nature inclining to that petition, but the present refusal thereof
follows expressing Christ's will and purpose in putting himself into that
hour. These words then, But therefore came I into thi^ hour, are in effect,
not so, for therefore came I into this hour. Which the best Interpreters old
and new have observed in the force of Christ's words. Chrysostom. in Joha^nem.
homil. 66.
Therefore came I into this hour, as if Christ had said (says Chrysostom)
though we be moved and troubled, yet we flee not death. For I say not (thus as
my resolution) Father deliver me from this hour, but Father glorify thy name.
And Epiphanius: Epipha. li. 2. Here Is. 69.
What shall I say? Father; speaking by way of preparation and dubitation.
(...), This, says Christ, I will say, but therefore came I into this hour.
For he came not against his will, but willingly. Theophylact: Theophylact. in
12. cap. Johannis.
For this cause, says Christ, came I into this hour, that I might suffer
death for all. He teaches us very plainly by this, that though we be troubled
and perplexed with it, yet we should not fly death for the truth. For I, says
he, am troubled being a true man, and permit (man's) nature to show it self,
yet do I not say to my Father, that he should save me from this hour, but what
say I, Father glorify thy name. The later Writers, of no mean judgment,
allow the same sense. Erasmus thus renders the sum of Christ's words: Erasm.
paraphra. in cap. 12. Johannis.
I find my soul troubled for the day of my death now approaching. And what
shall I say? For the love of mine own life, shall I neglect the life of the
world? By no means. I will apply my self to the will of my Father. Man's
weakness troubled with fear of death, may say unto him, Father, if it be
possible, save me from this instant danger of death. But Love desirous of man's
salvation, shall presently add, Nay rarather, if it be expedient, let death,
which I desired, come, for so much as wittingly and willingly by the leading of
the spirit I have offered my self to die. These words Bullinger^ in ca. Joh.
12.
Bullinger cites, and calls an excellent explication of that text. Gualter
in like manner: Gualteru^ homilia 118. in 12. ca. Johannis.
This is as if Christ had said, Let no man think me as a cowardly captain, to
exhort others to patience and constance, being my self safe from danger. For
death approaches me, and that so cruel and bitter, that the very remembrance
thereof troubles my soul. What then shall I say, when amongst men there is no
hope? To thee o Father I turn, save me from the hour of this terrible death.
But what do I say? Even therefore came I into this hour. What other thing then
shall I ask, o Father, but that thou should glori^ie thy name? Do all
these learned Interpreters wrest this text, and speak they against all reason
without considering the nature and frame of the words, or do they out of the
very frame and force of the words deduce Christ's resolution to be this,
Father glorify thy name, notwithstanding my former words, since I came of
purpose into this hour, not to be freed from it? [The first words Defenc. page
129. li. 36.
pretend a plain resolution, or at least a great inclining toward
resolution.] If a plain resolution, then Christ contradicts himself with a
plainer resolution in the end, which to affirm of the Son of God, advise
you, whether it be blasphemous or no. As for an inclination, since Christ made
no idle deliberation, but spoke out of his natural humane affection abhorring
death, that makes wholly with my speech, affirming, that howsoever the sense
of nature in Christ did incline to avoid death, in this debating with himself,
yet he presently refused it by saying, But therefore came I into this hour,
and fully resigned it, when he said, Father glorify thy name: which resolution
of his, God ratified with his own voice from heaven, I have glorified it and
will glorify it.

Defenc. page 130. li. 10.
Hence I reasoned effectually before, but no where you answer it. If Christ's
such suffeings in his soul were ordained of God for him, then certainly indeed
he did suffer the same.] Certainly indeed a man shall scant meet with such
another, that disdaineth all men's reasons and interpretations besides his own,
and when he comes to conclude any thing, can hardly discern an Owl from an
Eagle. Here is a profound argument made for your hell pains, that Christ's
soul was troubled with the foresight and remembrance of his death on the
Cross: ergo God ordained, that certainly and indeed he should suffer in his
soul the pains of the damned. Children in their cradles, if they could
prattle, would easily match the goodness of this reason; and other answer, as
it needs none, so it shall have none for me, how effectual soever this
fancy seems unto you.

Defenc. page 130 li. 17.
Further you except, that this was fear of eternal death, which caused in
Christ this agony, and from his fear he was delivered. To say (as you do)
that it was eternal death and eu^rlasting malediction, which Christ here thus
woefully and distressefully feared, is the strangest speech in Diutnity that
ever I heard.] You cunningly dissemble, as your manner is, that Page 22. which
you quote, I professed to refuse no man's opinion, that Se^m page 22. li. 2.
agreed any way with the rules of truth; and thereupon laid down three
things, which Christ might (...) in the Cup of Gods wrath, and by his prayer
accordingly decline them: to wit, (...) (...), corporal (...) above his
strength, and the separation of his soul from hi^ bod^e by death. The fear of
eternal death, which is urged by some of good learning, and even by the
Catechism, on which you would seem to stand so much, if we admi^ted in Christ
himself, I said must be taken for a Religious dislike and shunning of hell,
Sermo. page 23. li. 4.
not for any distrust of his own salvation, or doubt of Gods displeasure
against himself, which we could not imagine in Christ, without evident want of
grace and loss of faith, and these we might not attribute to Christ's person,
no not for an instant. Where then I allege so many reasons Pa. 23. li. 32.
guarding Christ's person most sufficiently from all danger and do^bt of
eternal death; thence you collect, that I avouch, Christ thus ^ofully and
distressefully feared everlasting damnation, which is a strange and (...)
falsehood, though familiar with you, as if without such gross stuff you could
not (...) out your pamphlet. The Catechism we heard before, saying, that
Christ was Aeternae mortis horrore persusus, wholly touched with the horror of
(...) death. M. Calvin says as much, Calvin. in li. 2. ca. 16. sect. 10.
Vnde eum oportuit cum Inf^rorum copi^s, (...) mortis horrore, qu^si consertis
manibus luctari. Wherefore Christ was to wrestle h^nd in (...) with all the
power of h^ll, and with the horror of ETERNAL death. Others might be brought
in like sort, but these suffice to discharge me, that I did not imagine these
things of mine own head, but found them in men of good learning and judgment,
which yet I did not receive, except we did expound their words to import in
Christ a religious fear declining everlasting death in himself, or
affectionately sorowing, when he conside^ed what was due to us for ou^ sins.
Wherefore if you make so strang^ of these words, stir against your authorized
Catechism and Master Calvin who first used them.

Defenc. p^g. 130. li. 20.
You cannot help your self in making Christ's ^eare of this death to be only
a religious fear, and a fear for others, these imaginations I have removed
before. Then you perceive well enough, in what sense I admit their words, but
to advantage your self, you dispense with a slanderous lie. Your remoouing is
like the roling of paper to make pipes withal, you play still on one string,
and that so much out of tune, that every man is weary with hearing it, besides
your self. li. 29.
These affections, you say, were not likely in him at all, much less to be
the causes of such effects.] As though Christ had none other causes of sorrow,
but only this. And what unlikelihood, that these should be in Christ at this
season, saving that your fancy leads you to what you list? [ These are not
fear properly, they ought rather to be called a religious care, and pitt^e,
which differ greatly from the nature of fear properly taken.] Did I profess
that Christ feared everlasting death properly? did I not rather excuse or
qualify the vehemency of their words, who put in Christ an horror of
eternal death? you reason now against the Catechism, which you make show to
maintain, and not against me. For other fear of everlasting death in Christ
then improper I acknowledge none. [ You think the nature of enlabeia will not
admit any proper fear,] Then do you convince your self to be a notable
deluder and abuser of the truth. For you are not ignorant what I say, but you
pervert it of purpose to miscarie your Reader, and countenance your cause. [
li. 38.
What say you, did Christ doubt eternal damnation, and therefore feared it?]
you lack a wooden dagger to become your part better; have I any such words
or sense? I show the general signification of ^labeia to be Conclus. pa. 305.
li. 25.
a careful and diligent regard to beware or decline that, which we mislike or
doubt, and that as well in private and public affairs, as in Religion: and
you apply this, as if I had said, Christ feared and doubted eternal
damnation. Whereas I neither mention eternal damnation in all that section,
nor so much as name Christ within forty lines of those words, which show how
largely enlabeia is taken. [ You speak so darkly that I know not how to take
you.] You double so continually that I cannot tell what to make of you: I have
in the same page, 305. whence you took these words, distinctly showed what
parts of Gods wrath, Christ might be said to fear or suffer, and in what
sense, and yet you complain of darkness, when you shun the light, and watch
for a word applied to another purpose, pretending you must needs stumble at
that straw. And therefore never come in with any after close, what my meaning
may be, if my words be not plain, reprove them; if they be, refute them,
except you receive them.

This you say comes nearest to the signification of the Greek word. I grant
it does touching eulabeia, but in Ma^ke the word does import properly fear,
and that in extremity.] It is happy yet that when you cannot choose, you will
grant that, which is fully proved to your face. In your unlearned Treatise
you would needs make as unlearned an observation, that Treatis. page 74. li. 22.
this very word not only in other Authors, but in the Scripture is used for a
perplexed fear: And when your ignorance is convinced, (for enlab^ia is not
only less then (...), which is fear in the Greek tongue; but contrary to
it, because it is the De placitis Philoso. li. 7. in zenone.
declining of evil with reason and circumspection, as Diogenes Laertius
writes) you grant that which you cannot gainesay. With as much skill you
avouch, that ekthambei^thai does import properly fear and that in extremity;
whereas properly it notes admiration at any strange or sudden sight. Whether
fear be joined with it or no, which sometime is according to the cause and
circumstance of the place. [ Defenc. page 131. li. 8.
My reason that Eulabeia here signifies fear properly, yea a perplexed
fear, and not only a religious devotion, as you say, is grounded not so much
on the nature of the word, as on the circumstances of the place, and the other
words of the text.] Christ did as well naturally fear that, which he
suffered, as that which he shunned; though he were heard in that only, which
he religiously shunned, and not in the rest, which he suffered. And therefore
the other words of the text do not infer, that enlabeia contained all, that
Christ feared; but only that, which he religiously feared, and from which he
was freed. And where you [ Defenc. page 131. li 23.
grant the Apostle may intend this also by the nature of the word, that Christ
notwitstanding all this dreadful fear, yet declined not a jot from a most
reverend regard of obedience to God, which still he kept firm and safe:] You
think with your mixtures to work some maruailes. For that one and the same
word in one and the same place should have two repugnant or different
significations, and the Apostle there intend them both, this is news to all
men save to you, to whom no manner of absurdities are new. And where you would
knit a dreadful fear of evil from God, and a reverend regard of obedience to
God, both together in one word, you make Christ at one instant to decline that,
which he did desire, and to desire that, which he did decline. For what he did
fear, that he did decline, and what he so reverently regarded, that he as much
desired, which was obedience to God; and so by one and the same word you
conceive not only contrary minds, but contrary matters in Christ. [ li. 29.
To like effect this word signifies in that place of the Acts 23. verse. 10. as
the circumstances also will confirm.] We should soon have heard of those
circumstances, if any such had been, but if you omit them as weak, I need
not entertain them as worthy of answer. I see no such circumstances, as you
speak of, much less any such signification of the word, as you have framed us
out of the Apostle. Every caution declining any thing, fears somewhat, which
it would prevent, and so eulabeia, when it signifies to be wary of any evil,
has a fear of that evil, lest it should happen, and therefore seeks the
best means to decline it.

Defenc. page 131. li. 32.
Where you argue Christ was delivered from his fear of hell torments; ergo he
suffered them not, I deny your sequel. This proves directly the contrary.
He feared the death of the soul, ergo he did suffer it.] My sequel I think
has ground sufficient in nature and Scripture to make it good. When the Saints
so often prayed to God to deliver them from the dangers, which they feared, or
found coming toward them, did they mean they would suffer them first to the
full, and after be losed from them; or else that they would be freed from
them, and not suffer them? I know there is a deliverance out of the midst of
troubles; and so you may defend that Christ was delivered from hell fire,
because he did not suffer it eternally: But since fear by the rules of nature
is of future, and not of present evil, if Christ were heard from his fear;
that is, delivered from that which he feared, then certainly he did not suffer
it. But th^nce you infer directly the contrary, for li. 36.
that fear is of that, which is to come, as (you say) I well observe.] Surely
your sequels be like rotten rindes, they fall a sunder as soon, as they be
touched. Did I avouch, that fear was of that only, which necessarily must
come, or of that, which possibly might come to our selves, or to others? Is
there any man of common sense, that ever affirmed as you do, that whatsoever a
man fears, must befall him? for that is your direct proof, of which you
speak, that all things feared must necessarily come to pass. Otherwise if men
may fear that which is imminent, and yet be freed from it, how will it follow,
that Christ really suffered, what he feared? Defenc. page 132. li. 2.
Such a manner and measure of fear, as this manifestly was, could not be but a
very suffering.] Of what? of fear, or of the thing feared? fear is an
affection or passion of the mind foreseeing evil, that is possible, and
afflicting it self for the approaching, or possibility thereof. But he that
makes no difference betwixt the fear of future evil, and the sense of
present evil, confounds all things. Men may fear they know not what, yea
they may fear, where no fear is, that is, without just cause; but this is the
weakness, or guiltiness of man's mind persuing it self by fearing that, which
they need not, or should not fear.

Defenc. page 132. li. 5.
My soul is (says Christ) full of (actual) sorrows even unto death.] When
you add anything to the words of our Savior, you should take care to put
nothing to them, but that which is sensible and true, since he was full of
wisdom and truth. Now this that you add in help of your conceits, is
neither. For sorrows are passions, not actions of the mind; and therefore to
say actual sorrows, has no sense in it. If by actual you mean present,
then you exclude all future sorrows against the plain words of our Savior,
who notes his should continue unto death. As for present torments inflicted on
the soul of Christ by the immediate hand of God the word perilypos, does no
way reach to them, nor express any such thing. You may be therefore suffered
to say, li. 6.
there is in this no doubtful word; for that which you add, is so absurd and
senseless, that no wise man will judge it doubtful. ( li. 7.
your comparisons of fearing captivity, death, loosing a purse etc. are
devices unfit for divinity.] I match them not with Christ's sufferings good
sir, but by them I show how lewtering your Logic is, in saying a man
suffers, that he fears; which is so far from truth, that every child
may soon confute it, and well deride it. [ Defenc. page 132. li. 12.
God you say, might well hear Christ two ways; Frst, by sufficient sustaining
him in it; Secondly, by delivering him out of it in due time.] Add this
interpretation then to the words of Christ's prayers in the Garden, and what is
become of your maine position, Christ prayed in plain words contrary to Gods
known will? For since God did sustain Christ in that he suffered, and in the
end delivered him with honor and glory, the cup by your constuction may be
said in both these respects to have passed from him, and so in either sense God
heard him, and delivered him from it. But else where you are in greater
earnest, that Christ could not intentiuely pray against that, nor fear that,
which he most perfectly knew could by no means ever possibly come ne^re him,
namely that the dominion of death should hold him. If there you were in
sadness, then now you do jest or worse, to tell us that God might well hear
Christ in that he never did or could pray for. That the death of the soul or
body should have dominion over him, was simply impossible, and Christ (...)
knew so much, as your own words yield. Then neither did he, nor could he pray,
by your positions, for any such thing, and consequently God did not hear him
in those things for which he prayed not. And so your two ways of hearing and
delivering Christ, your self, by your own doctrine, overthrow, rather as
jests, then just deliverances. And then does my sequel pursue you more
strongly then before, that Christ must be freed from suffering that he feared,
not by suffering it, since he never doubted and so never prayed by your
divinity to be sustained in it, nor after suffering to be freed from it.

Defenc. page 132. li. 15.
In another place you seem to observe a point both strange and very contrary
to your self in saying fear is more intolerable in Christ then doubting; when
you have so often and so earnestly affirmed, that Christ feared, and for fear
became astonished.] To him that never read leaf nor line of holy Scripture,
this may make some jolly show; but to him that can distinguish white from
black, it will appear to be rather an ignorant conceit in you, then a
repugnant speech in me. A natural fear of evil is incident to all men's
natures by Gods ordinance in his first creating us, and so common to Christ's
manhood with all men, be they good or bad. For therefore did God threaten death
to Adam if he disobeyed, that both the love of God enioied, and fear of evil
(if he transgressed,) might restrain him from sin. A religious fear of Gods
greatness, and (in cause of committing or suffering for sin) the trembling
at the power of his wrath, is proper to the godly, wherein Christ might and did
communicate with them, as being to bear the punishment of our sin, though he
were free from all sin. A distrustful fear, which quenches faith and
excludes hope, is common to all the wicked, and therein Christ might not
concur with them, least he conioined with them in si^ne. The first was
tolerable, the second was commendable in Christ, the third was neither. Of this
third kind of fear I speak, when I say, fear is more (...) in Christ then
doubting. But perhaps you could not discern so much, because my speech was
dar^e. I am content to be tried by the Reader, whether any man might mistake my
words even there, where you stumble at them, but he that would wilfully pervert
them. My words stand thus. In that perfect persuasion, knowledge, and assurance
of Gods everlasting Sermo. pa. 118. li. 22.
purpose, favor, and love toward him, that he should be the Savior of the
world, if doubting be not tolerable, how enexcusable is fear and terror, as if
he were for saken of God? Do^ I here speak of all kinds of fears, or of that
only, whereby Christ should fear, least Gods purpose, promise, and love
toward him might fail? my illation in that very page is this. The soul of
Christ must therefore be far from fearing or doubting least Ibid. li. 32.
God would change his mind, recall his word, frustrate his promise, and violate
his o^th: for these are blasphemies against God, in the highest degree. He must
be more then blind, which does not see what kind of fear I exclude from
Christ: but you did cunningly to pervert my words, when you could not resist my
reasons. For all your apprehensions of Gods proper wrath and fiery
indignation, which you so much proclaim, if you direct them to the person of
Christ, as if he conceived, feared, or doubted any change or decrease of Gods
favor and love toward him, or his sacrifice, then are they these very
fears, which here I banish from Christ as utterly blasphemous. It was
therefore some skill to shift of these words with a slanderous and false
crimination least they should make you breath, before you were disburdened of
them, if you took them rightly.

Defenc. page 132. li. 19.
You seek a weak advantage in that I said eisaekonstheis may seem to show,
that Christ was heard being in that, which he was saved from. You see I
challenge no certain but a seeming reason from that word.] In the maine ground
of our salvation and redemption, which are most certain in the Scriptures, to
impugn the doctrine there delivered with seeming reasons, is the guise of him
that would seem a good Christian, but is none. Indeed you have beset your
self in your defense with store of seemings; as I could specify the places
and points, if it were to this purpose; and I think your whole defense has
nothing in it but your seemings, you use therein so few either authorities or
reasons, other then your own conceits and assertions. But upon these seemings
you set pestilent positions, slanderous imputations, and false conclusions, as
even here you both resolve, that Christ was in your hell pains; and you
presume so to translate the word eisakonstheis, he was heard being in it, as if
that were the true force of the Apostles words. [ But your self makes a
stranger conclusion; ergo the active (...) Treat page 63. li. 26.
referred to God; imports that God being in the same pains did hear him.]
Yet such a conclusion, as your collection cannot avoid. For where Christ was
heard, God did hear; the passive in Christ notes the active to be truly
affirmed of God, that he did hear Christ. If then that word, as you boldly
with your seeming reason and false translation affirm, import being in the
pains of hell, it must so signify as well in the active referred to God, as
in the passive applied to Christ. If you be now ashamed to hear of these
unseeming and unsavory reasons; blot them out of your own book, and bestow
your time better hereafter.

Defenc. page 132. li. 24.
Lastly, you say, but in the garden Christ never prayed with strong cries and
tears to be saved from death, that we read in the Scriptures. I hope you do^
not read in the Scriptures expressly at all, that thus he prayed in the
garden: You may soundly gather it from the Scriptures I grant. My words are
not, that the Scriptures expressly name Christ's tears in the garden; but that
none other place nor time of Christ's prayer mentioned in the Evangelists, do
admit tears but the garden. For there the place being private, and his prayers
so vehement, that his sweat was like blood, both old and new writers have
collected, that the Apostles words were verified in the garden, yea the sweat
of Christ Bernard calls tears, where he says: Bernardus in Ramis Palmarum
Sermon. 3.
Christ falling into an agony, prayed the third time where he seemed to weep,
not only with his eyes, but with all the parts of his body, that the whole
body of his Church might be purged with the tears of his whole body. Zinglius
confesses as much. Zinglius in Historiam Passio.
Non lachrymas modo oculis sed and sanguinis guttas e corpore exprimit seria
and deuota oration, vt in trepidatione Christi est cernere. Serious and deuote
prayer does not only draw tears from the eyes, but a bloody sweat from the
body, as we see in Christ's Agony. And surely the writer of the Epistle to
the Hebrews must either not collect this from the Scripture, but report it
besides the Scripture, which is somewhat dangerous; os else by the sweat of
Christ's face, trickling down to the ground, he collected, that in that in:
entiue and vehement prayer, tears ran down as fast as sweat, and jointly
with sweat: and other sound gathering it from the Scriptures there is none.
And this collection if you grant, that the Apostle from the vehemency of
Christ's prayer observed the cause of the one to be the cause of the other,
since it was not possible the face should run with sweat through the
feruencie of prayer, and not the eyes with tears; then grant you, that it may
soundly be gathered from the Scriptures, that zeal of prayer, and not heat of
pain was the cause of Christ's bloody sweat.

Defenc. page 132. li. 34.
The Apostle in all reason may be understood to have respect to all the
woeful times and cries of our Savior, as on the cross, and in the 12. of
John.] There is no reason to extend the Apostles words to Christ's prayer in
the 12. of John: for there the Scripture does not mention either strong cries
or tears, which are the Apostles words. On the cross he used a loud voice,
but tears he shed none, neither was the sense of his prayer there to be freed
from death, but rather to hasten his death, to which he had now wholly submitted
himself according to his Fathers will. And therefore your stretching the
Apostles words to all those times, to make Christ's agony, if you could tell
how, to continue on the cross, wants all reason. His pain most increased on
the cross, and his sorrow rising thence could not decrease; but neither his
astonishment, nor that which the Scripture calls his agony, accompanied with
his bloody sweat, continued on the cross. You think it unreasonable to say,
that Christ on the cross had persistance in joy, and beheld God always
favorable and faithful unto him, Defenc. page 132. li. 38.
without intermission or obscuration; though his flesh, in which sin was
condemned, and his body where he bare our sins, were subjected to most
shameful and cruel torments from the hands of the wicked: what vncoherence is
there in those words, or what disagreement from the Scriptures? I saw the Lord
always before me, said David concerning Christ. For he is at my right hand,
that I should not be moved. If this beholding of God were Sermon. p^. 116 li.
25.
always, then was there no intermission; if before his face, then was there no
obscuration. These are my words, which why you should dislike, or how you can
refute, I do not see. You can touch nothing, which you one way or other turn
not out of his right course. Firmness of faith, and assurance of hope I give
unto Christ on the Cros^e, and either of those bring with them inward joy of
mind, how much soever our outward state be troubled, or our flesh afflicted.
Neither are these such contraries as cannot stand together, since they are both
in diverse parts, and for diverse respects. S. Peter says, 1. Peter 1.
we rejoice in the faith of salvation, though for a season we are in
heaviness through manifold temptations. S. James says, my James 1.
brethren count it an exceeding joy, when ye fall into diverse tentations. S.
Paul says, Romans 5.
we rejoice under the hope of the glory of God, neither so only, but also we
rejoice in tribulation; knowing that tribulation brings forth p^tience,
(experience, and hope) which makes not ashamed. Then as it is no absurdity,
that the spirit should be ready, and the flesh weak, nor that the inward man
should be renewed, when the outward man per^sheth; no more is it any
repugnancie, that Christ should have joy in the holy Ghost and in hope, when he
found and felt exceeding affliction in his flesh; and as the Apostle teaches,
Hebr. 12.
for the joy set before him, endured the cross and despised the shame
(thereof.) If then there be joy in hope, how could Christ want joy, if he
wanted not hope? and hope if you take from him, you leave him in despair,
which is the loss of hope; which whether you will add to the rest of your
unsound faith, I leave it to your choice. Notwithstanding your self in this
very book allow to Christ on the cross, and in his agony by reason of the
very same words, (which I cite page 116.) not only Defenc. page 110. li. 28.
and 34.
constant and continual joy in God, but exceeding and general joy, with which
whether your hell and perpetual extreme agony as well on the Cross as in the
Garden may stand, I refer it to the sober and wise Reader.

Defenc. page 133. li. 3. and 1.
How vain is this consequent, how false are these sayings, and contrary to
the Scripture in the circumstances that his astonishment must continue
eighteen hours, from his entering into the garden to the ending of his life
the next day at three of the clock afternoon.] Indeed it is most absurd, and
openly repugnant to the Scriptures and to all the circumstances thereof, to
defend that Christ's agony, which you say was the cause of his astonishment, or
his astonishment, which was the effect thereof, continued on the Cross; and
yet such is your error, that you make Christ's spiritual pains on the cross
to be greater then in the Garden, and his astonishment to be less, because you
do not find, that on the cross, where his pain was present and most sharp,
he prayed ought against the known will of God, as you avouch he did in the
Garden. Your supposing and presuming without all warrant of holy Scripture
that God with his immediate hand inflicted the pains of the damned on the
soul of Christ, Defenc. page 133. li. 9. 10.
sometimes more and sometimes less, and sometimes more suddenly then at other
times, and sometimes staying it, and this variableness of Gods hand to be the
true cause of Christ's astonishment; is a saucie, senseless, and shifting
imagination, aggravating, easing, and iterating Gods hand at your pleasure; and
yet such is the folly and f^lshood of your doctrine, that without this
desperate device every child would cry shame on you. For where on the Cross
by your own confession Christ's mere spiritual pains most increased, even
there his astonishment was none at all; and though you teach it not possible
for Christ not to sink, and Treat. page 54. li. 28.
not to be confounded under the burden, yet when he Ibid. page 63. li. 15.
came to the greatest of his passion, then was he freest from all confusion,
and so your hell pains by your leave were not the cause of Christ's
astonishment, if any such thing were in him.

Defenc. page 133. li. 16.
I confess his extreme astonishment did ever quickly pass from him, yet the
sense and taste of that cup might continue longer, in such a manner and measure
as he was better able by his deity to sustain it. Now what ill is there in
these conceits, I pray you, what folly is there in them?] As much as may be.
For when you have sought heaven and earth, sea and land to bring Christ's soul
within the compass of your hell-paines, and therewith to astonish and confound
all the powers of his soul, and senses of his body; suddenly with the
speaking of, (yet) you free him from it, and still return and remove it, as
often as you list. And when you are urged, that hell pains continuing and
increasiing on the cross by your doctrine, there was no manner of astonishment
or confusion in Christ's reason or remembrance; you say the taste of the cup
might continue. So that when the pains were less, then Christ did drink the
cup, and when they were greatest, then he did but taste the cup. Thus play you
the Tapster with Christ's torments, and set up the rest of your cause on this
absurd conceit of Drinking and tasting the cup; which is not only dissonant
from all truth, but repugnant to all sense. For if your hell pains were the
true cause of Christ's astonishment, then the cause continuing, the effect could
not cease; and the cause increasing, the effect could not diminish. Where you
fly for help to Christ's deity, the better to enable him to sustain the pains
of the damned without astonishment, you forget that if Christ would have used
any divine power to resist or repress his pain, he might easily have suffered
none. And weak you make Christ's godhead, if using it to that end, he could not
save himself from confusion and forgetfullnesse; as also you put a conflict
betwixt the Father and the Son, if he could not enable his manhood against
astonishment, as well at one time as at another. Therefore this abusing Gods
immediate hand to take memory from Christ, when you list, and thus pretending
Christ's deity to keep him in the pains of hell, and yet to free him from
forgetfulness, show right on what foundation you b^ild the whole plat of your
doctrine, even on your own fancies, without all direction or instruction from
the sacred Scriptures, which have not one word more or less, touching these
devices of yours in so weighty causes of our redemption.

Defenc. page 134. li. 1.
How you seem to avouch, that Christ was by God for saken in body, but not in
soul, le^ them declare that can. I am sure no man can in truth maintain it.]
It is more easily maintained then refuted. To be forsaken, is to be deprived of
all sense and fruition of the power and life, that is in God, and comes from
God. Thus Christ's body was forsaken for the time, and left to death, which is
contrary to life, wherewith God quickened man here on earth. But the soul of
Christ was never forsaken of hi^ life which was the grace and spirit of God,
whereby the soul is quickened. As for wresting Ambro^e, as I did Hilarie, show
first wherein, and then spare not to speak it. Otherwise your censure has so
much partiality, and so little probability, that your Reader after so many
fails will not now depend on your single say.

Defenc. page 134. li. 5.
After this you are bold, and ask if any dare doubt of your doctrine? yea
surely I dar^ not but doubt of it.] What dare you not do, who dare device a
new faith without all precedence of the holy Scriptures, and take upon you to
guide and rule Gods immediate hand, as seems best to your liking. In our
conformity to Christ's sufferings I observed two things out of the word of God:
one, that we have fellowship with Christ's afflictions and follow his steps; the
other that we must rejoice in communicating with his sufferings. Neither of
which can generally and justly be verified of your hellish confusion and
torments. For must we be all confounded in all the powers of our souls and
senses of our bodies, and must we forget Gods known will through astonishment,
and pray against it, before we can follow Christ's steps? this must be your
doctrine, as also that we must rejoice in this shrincking from the will of God,
and praying against it, because the holy Ghost wills us to rejoice, when we
communicate with Christ's sufferings. [ (...) li. 15.
Some are conformable in some measure with Christ even in these his
sufferings.] Not only some may, but all must be conformed to Christ their head
to suffer with him, before they shall reign with him. So that as Christ said
to James and John, Matthew. 20.
Ye shall drink indeed of my cup, and be baptized with the baptism, that I am
baptized with, So he performs to all true believers. Whosoever, says he,
Luke 14.
bears not his cross, and comes after me, cannot be my Disciple. And where
to my allegation, that we must rejoice in the fellowship of Christ's
afflictions, you answer; Defenc. page 134. li. 17.
We ought to turn them to joy and gladness, though not properly to be glad in
them, This is but an evasion. I commend not affliction, because it is grievous
to nature, but for the use and reward thereof, and partaking therein with
Christ. And if we are therein to rejoice, as you now confess, li. 22.
even when we are most bruized and pierced in our souls with the terrors of
God, Then I hope our Savior Christ in the midst of all his sufferings had the
same joy, which we must have; and consequently I had reason and truth on my
side, when I said Page 132. li. 36.
Christ on the Cross had always persistance in joy, which you then impugned,
and now do grant against your will. And if your credit were ought worth, I say
not in this so much as you do. For you ascribe to Christ on the cross, Page
110. li. 28. and 34.
constant and continual joy in God, yea exceeding and general joy, and yet
you think it much that I should affirm, that the Scriptures attribute to
Christ persistance of joy on the cross how bitter or grievous soever the shame
and pain thereof were unto his flesh.

Defenc. page 134. li. 24.
You frame an objection to your self, which you neither do nor can answer:
Christ's soul might feel the torments of hell for the time without any
distrust or doubting of his salvation or our redemption.] I answered you, which
you shall never avoid, first that the true pains of hell by the sacred
Scriptures, are not temporal, but eternal. You tell us you have showed
Defenc. page 134. li. 33.
Eternal continuance in hell pains is not of the essence or nature of hell
torm^nts. So have you said page: 12. though page: 53. as you often quote it,
there is no such thing: but even there also have I showed, that this you say
out of your own brain, the Scriptures affirm no such thing. Secondly, I
answered you, that the horror of the pains of the damn^d did admit no joy; for
in hell I hope there is no joy. Christ then by your own doctrine having
constant, continual, exceeding, and general joy, was neither in the true
pains, nor in the true terrors of hell, unless in defense of your devices you
will now make your new heaven, and your new hell to be all one. For joy in the
holy Ghost you directly make to be the substance of heavenly bli^ie. Now if in
Christ and all his members you put at one and the same time, the true terrors
of hell, and the true joy of the holy Ghost, what miss you of mixing heaven
and hell at one instant in Christ and all the faithful. A third reply I gave
in that very place to this objection, which you say, I neither do, nor can
answer; and that was, Sermon. page 135. li. 3.
since it is no where witnessed in the Scriptures, that Christ suffered the
pains of hell, why strive you to establish a mere conceit of men, neither
written, nor spoken before our age? All these are no answers with you, and
only because you have deuiced a new hell from the immediate hand of God, with
which you delude, as your manner is, all that the Scriptures speak of the
pains of the damned. But glory not in your device; to invent a new faith, it
is as much sin, as to renounce the true Christian faith, which indeed is
ancient, and in substance as old as the Scriptures, since they serve to
testify from the beginning Gods blessed will and promise of salvation unto man
through the death of Christ, which God first named the Serpents biting the
heel of the woman's ^eed.

Defenc. page 135. li.
After this you set v^hemently against my last argument that Christ suffered
not in some sort the death of the soul; first if we should speak strictly
after the manner of death in the body, then no man is so mad or foolish as to
say that any man's soul can die at all, that is, want life and sense as a dead
body does.] You be come now to the vpshot of all your defense and doctrine,
whether the Scriptures do any where teach, that Christ died the death of the
soul, or the second death for our redmption: and here shall we find nothing
but an heap of words broched out of your brains, and so tempered with your
conceits, that when you have all said, you say nothing with any substance or
show of holy Scripture. You disclaim, that the soul is at any time deuoide of
life and sense, as dead bodies are, as if that were ought to your purpose; but
yet the death of the soul has a resemblance and concordance with the death of
the body, as spiritual things may have with corporal. And therefore as the
body being once dead wants all sense and motion, which are the parts or
effects of life from the soul quickening the body, so the soul being dead to
God, who is her life, has no sense nor motion of Gods grace in this life, nor
sight nor hope of glory in the life to come, but destitute of the one here

on earth, which is grace, has no desire nor feeling of God, and in the next
world deprived of all possibility of glory, is subjected to eternal and
intolerable misery from the presence of God.

Defenc. page 135. li. 24.
Such a death as immortal souls are subject unto is Gods separation from
them, and this is two fold; the first death, and the second death, as the
Scripture speaks. The first is the separation of them from Gods grace, which
is in this life by sin reigning in them]. The soul laden with sin in this
life, is not utterly dead, so long as it retains any sense or motion of Gods
grace. So that sorrow for sin joined with any desire of true repentance is a
plain sign of life in the soul, though sorrow for sin without hope be
plain despair and death of the soul. And therefore the soul of man finding
the danger of sin, and desiring to be delivered from it, yet lives whiles
she apprehends, affects, or seeks the grace of God; but if she want all
sense of God by faith, and motion to God by hope and desire, she is wholly dead
to God, that is void of the life of God, which is derived from God unto the
souls of men. As for the second death of the soul, the Scriptures indeed
speak thereof, but you err groslely in this second death, the execution
whereof always follows the first death as well of the body as of the soul,
though the guiltiness and condemnation thereof by a man's own conscience may
be found here in this life. And therefore the second death by the open and
evident words of the holy Ghost is called the Revel. 20.
lake of fire, or the 19. and 21.
lake burning with fire and brimstone, which is not in this life. And
consequently your next collection, that the second death is Gods leaving them
in the feeling of the most sharp and most vehement pains inflicted by Gods
justice for sin, is as false, as it is defective, not agreeing in one word
with the tenor of the sacred Scriptures, which you pretend to follow.

Defenc. page 1^5. li. 30.
This last kind of death is so called and named in many places of Scripture.]
The second death is expressly named, but in four places of the Scripture. The
first, Revel. 2. v. 11
Be thou faithful to death, and I will give thee the crown of life. He that
overcomes (the first death) shall not be hurt of the second death. The
second, Revel. 20. v. 6
blessed and holy is he, that has part in first resurrection (of the soul
unto the life of grace) on such THE SECOND DEATH has no power. The third,
Ibid. v. 14.
Death and hell were cast into the lake of fire, THIS IS THE SECOND DEATH. The
fourth, Revel. 21. v. 8
The fearful and unbelieving, the abominable and murderers, and whoremongers,
and sorcerers, and idolaters, and all liers shall have their part in the lake,
that burns with fire and brimstone, WHICH IS THE SECOND DEATH. Save in these
places the second death is never expressly named in the Scriptures; and in these
most apparently the second death follows after the death of the body, and is
everlasting. And neither on Christ, who is the first resurrection unto grace,
and the second resurrection unto glory; nor on any of his members has the
second death any power by the plain words of Saint John. So that all your
platform is quite overthrown by the direct words of the Apostle, freeing
Christ and all his elect even in this life from all power of the second death.
And therefore you set your self in this section evidently to confront the holy
Ghost, when you seek to prove that Christ suffered the second death of the
soul, as the Scripture speaks. And besides the Scriptures, if you talk of
second deaths, you may as well tell us tales of a new world, as of an other
word without the witness of Gods spirit. But you have found out many places of
Scripture, where this last kind of death is so called and named.] Eight you
quote by the side in your margin, but take not the pains to discuss one of
them, only you pronounce after your stately manner, that those places of
Scripture prove that, which you mean to be the death of the soul. Now what
if not one of them speak any such thing? is not your Reader sure to find you a
true man of your word, when you quote eight places, and not one of them to your
purpose? but this is your perpetual course, to mistake and misuse Scriptures
at your pleasure, and then to say you have soundly proved it. On the contrary
I affirm that none of these places intend any such thing, as you imagine of
your terrestiall and temporal hell, but they exactly conclude against you,
that damnation is eternal, and no death of the soul, which is not
everlasting, is expressed or intended in any of those Scriptures; or in any
other, that you or your friends are able to pick out. And though it may
suffice me as well to say nay, as you to say yea, yet for the Readers better
resolution I will not be grieved to run through all these places, as much as
shall be needful.

The first is, Ezech. 18. ver. 4.
the soul that ^inneth, it shall die. These words may signify either
subtraction of grace in this life, which is consequent to sin in the wicked,
or exclusion Eight places of Scripture abused for the temporal death of
Christ's soul^.
from glory in the next world, which is the just and full wages of sin. But
that every soul, which sins, has felt, or shall feel in this life your
temporal hell or the pains of the damned, this is a gross error to be
fathered on those words, and repugnant not only to the truth of this text,
but even to the sense and experience of all the Godly, and such as your self
dare not avouch, since you qualify your conceit in that behalf with these
words, that Defenc. page 134. li. 15.
some in some measure are conformed with Christ in these his sufferings. But if
God by Ezechiel meant your earthly hell, then absolutely all men, children not
excepted, must feel in this life pains equal with the damned, for so much as
they have sinned, and deserved everlasting damnation.

The second is the commination, that God made to Adam, Genes. 2. ver. 17.
Whenever thou ^atest thereof, thou shall die the death, (or) surely thou
shall die. Here are all sorts of deaths threatened, but not to be executed
either on all men, nor in this present life; God reserving to himself power
and liberty to dispose of all men's souls according to his determinate
counsel, though they should all be guilty and liable to all kinds of death by
virtue of those words upon the transgression of the first man. This exposition
the Apostle gives when he says, Romans 5.
The offense of one (came) on all men to condemnation, which is the verifying
of these words, that all men died in Adam, to wit, were subject to death, not
only by dying the death of the body, which is appointed for all men, but to
the guiltiness of everlasting death not executed on all, though deserved by
all.

The third, which is the Romans 6.
Apostles conclusion, is either generally meant of all kinds of death, which
came in by sin, as the rewards and punishments thereof, and then it is
nothing to your intention; or else it expresses the full wages of sin to be
everlasting death by opposition to eternal life mentioned in the next words
following. For eternal life is the gift of God, as (eternal) death is the
wages, (that is both the desert and repayment) of sin. Take which you will,
either the general or special construction of death, it is no way pertinent
to your purpose.

Less is the fourth, that the Apostles were the 2. Cor. 2. verse. 16.
savor of death unto death in them, that perished, as they were the savor of
life unto life in them, that were saved. For the preaching of the Gospel,
which the Apostle means in that place, does not proclaim a terrestiall or
temporal heaven to them that believe in Christ, but life eternal; and
consequently neither does it denounce a temporal death to them, which refuse
Christ, but everlasting death. And therefore there can be nothing more absurd
then to convert these places to the proof of your temporal hell; for so you
should do the reprobate a very good turn, if you could show, that the death
threatened them for not believing in Christ, were to dure but for a time, or in
this life only, where your new found hell has power and place, and no where
else.

With like success you note for your fifth, that the 2 Cor. 3. verse. 7.
ministration of death was glorious, the Apostle so calling the law, because it
denounced death not temporal, but eternal to all transgessours. So that if
the full wages of sin be eternal death by the word of God, then did the law
not denounce a temporal death due to all men by course of nature, be they good
or bad, (though even that at first entered as a part of the punishment of
sin) but everlasting death, which is the second death, is reserved, as S.
John writes, for all sorts of sinners and liers.

Saint James is the sixth, who says, James 5.
He that conuerteth a sinner (erring from the truth) shall save a soul from
death. If a man converted shall be saved from your temporal hell, which you
here would intend by the death of the soul, then much more the Conuerter and
he that never erred from the truth shall be free from your hell; and
consequently Christ was most free, who was truth it self, and never erred.
But as truth is the way to everlasting life, and freeth men from all bondage
of sin and Satan, so error and infidelity have another manner of death than
your terrestiall hell, which you make common to Christ and some of his members;
and he that is converted from error or sin shall be saved from everlasting
perdition, which indeed is the death of the soul depriving it of all bliss
and joy for ever.

The seventh and eigth you take out of Saint John, who says, 1. Ioh. 5. verse.
16, 17.
There is sin unto death, for which we must not pray: But whosoever is borne
of God, sins not that sin; and so neither Christ, who was the true Son
of God, nor any of his chosen, who are the children of God by adoption, can
sin that sin, nor die that death, because he that is begotten of God,
lives by God, who is eternal life to all that know him, and cleave unto him
without separation. If then the sins of the Elect be not unto death, but such
as we in piety may, and in charity must pray for; consequently the death of
the soul here meant by Saint John, is such as is not incident to any of the
sons of God, and so not the temporal hell, which you communicate to Christ
and his members.

Here are your eight places of Scriptures proouing (as you pretend) the second
death of the soul, which you ascribe to Christ, in every one of which, save
the first and second, there can be no question, but everlasting damnation is
intended, and in those two the guiltiness of eternal death, which is due to
sin, may be comprised in the name of death; which the Apostle justifies,
when he says, Romans 5. v. 12.
The offense of one (came) on all men unto condemnation, which is in effect
that he said before, Death went over all men, forasmuch as all men have sinned.
But that any of these intend your temporal hell brought into this life not by
snares and fears working on the souls of men, but by substance and essence;
and not eternal death in hell fire with the Devil and his Angels, you nor all
your adherents shall ever be able by any ground of holy Scripture to make it
appear. And therefore your presuming it upon the bare show of places
concluding no such thing, is a pestilent intrusion upon the word of God, whiles
you stick not to couple your conceits, which are false and erroneous, with his
undoubted and undefiled truth.

Defenc. page 135. li. 31.
First ordinarily and commonly it belongs only to the damned, wherewithal
are the ordinary accidents and concomitants desperation, induration, utter
darkness etc. with perpetuity of punishment, and that locally in HELL.]
Generally and truly the Scriptures never use the name of the second death, but
for the lake burning with everlasting fire, into which the Devil and all the
Reprobate shall be cast, and whatsoever you otherwise pretend, is your own
absurd device without the Scriptures, and against the Scriptures, to keep your
doctrine from open derision and detestation. And since your self acknowledge,
that this is the ordinary and usual doctrine of the Scriptures, it shall be
needful for your Reader to hold you to that, till you fully prove your
extraordinary device by the same Scriptures, by which the other is euidenly
confirmed, and so much openly confessed by you.

Defenc. page 135. li. 36.
In this sense the Fathers generally do take it, where they deny that Christ
suffered the death of the soul: and so do we.] If your cause have so little
hold in the Scriptures, it has less in the Fathers, who in the necessary
work of our redemption thought it sacrilege to say any thing that was not
apparently proved by the Scriptures. And as you light not on a true word, when
you come to deliver us the mysteries of your new hell, so this is patently
false, that the Fathers generally take the death of the soul for eternal
damnation only, when they deny that Christ died the death of the soul. They
speak as the Scriptures lead them, and confessing two deaths of the soul as
the Scriptures do, which are sin excluding all grace, and the wages of sin
even everlasting damnation; they generally deny that Christ died any death of
the soul, and have for confirmation of their doctrine therein, the whole
course of the sacred Scriptures concurring with them.

Defenc. page 135. li. 37.
Secondly, the death of the soul, or the second death, may be extraordinarily
and singularly considered, namely to imply no more but simply the very nature
and essence of it.] You broach two apparent and evident untruths, which you
make the whole foundation of your presumptuous error. First, that either
Christ or his Elect in this life did or do suffer the very nature and essence
of the second death. Next, that the Scriptures do singularly and
extraordinarily reserve that kind of second death for Christ and his members.
Show either of these by the word of God, before you make them grounds of your
doctrine, or else any mean Reader may soon conceive you mean to teach no
truth confirmed in the Scriptures, but a bold and false device of your own,
which you would extraordinarily intrude upon the word of God.

Defenc. page 136. li. 5.
This is a death to the soul, as before we have showed: according to this
sense the Scriptures and Fathers before noted may rightly be understood not to
deny it in Christ.] When you glaunced before at the death of Christ's soul,
you prayed us to have patience, When the Defender should prove the death of
Christ's soul, he says be h^th proved it already.
till you came to the place, where we should receive a reasonable satisfaction;
and now you are come to the place, where you should make just and full proof
thereof, you send us back again, and say you have showed it before. What
means this doubling and deceiving of your Reader, but that you would seem to
have many proofs, when indeed you have none? and therefore you post us to and
fro, to seek for that we shall never find. In the 113. Page of this Defense,
you went about by your miserable misconstruing of certain words used by some
of the Fathers to enforce a show of a death on the soul of Christ; but against
the hair, as there I have proved: and therefore stand not on your former
unfortunate adventures, but either here make proof by the Scriptures, that
Christ died the death of the soul, or leave prating and publishing it so
confidently as you and your adherents do for the chief part of man's
redemption. [ The Scriptures and Fathers, you say, before noted, may rightly be
understood not to deny it in Christ.] Is this all you have to say for the
death of Christ's soul, that the Scriptures and Fathers may be understood not
to deny it? The Scriptures must affirm it, before you can make it any point
of Christian religion, or part of our reconciliation to God. Romans 10.
Faith (is) by hearing, and hearing by the word of God; and not by not denying.
If that be your course, to put any thing to the Creed which you list to say the
Scriptures do not deny, you may quickly have a large Creed, containing all
things which the Scriptures, abused with your figures and wrested to your
fancies, shall not in express words, as you think, deny.

Defenc. page 136. li. 9.
Moreover, let it be observed: that if we had no proofs at all in Scripture
for this point, yet our question is fully proved and confirmed by those other
sufficient and pregnant proofs alleged and justified before.] Your palpable
and pregnant follies are sufficiently seen before: your proofs were none but
bald and false presumptions, conceived by your self, though otherwise void of
all reason and authority: with such props you have hitherto supported your
Defense, and now you be come to the maine issue, whether the Scriptures or
Fathers do teach, that Christ for our redemption died the death of the soul,
or the death of the damned, which is the second death, you would pass it over
as a matter of no moment, and here tell us if you had no such proof (as indeed
you have none) yet you have played your part before, which was to set a good
face on an evil cause, and to prove just nothing.

Defenc. page 136. li. 13.
For it is to be noted, that no man sets the question in these terms that
Christ died in his soul, neither do we at all use them very much in speaking
of this matter.] The Scriptures themselves set that for the question. First of
all, I 1. Cor. 15.
delivered unto you (says Paul) that which I received, how that Christ died
for our sins according to the Scriptures. Since then Romans 5.
we were reconciled to God by the death of his Son; and Christ is the Hebr: 9.
Mediator of the New Testament, through death for the redemption of the
transgressions in the former Testament; and where a Testament is, there must be
the death of him that made the Testament. The question rises of it self what
death the Son of God died for our sins, by the witness of holy Scripture.
And hitherto for these fifteen hundred years and upward the Christian world,
both of learned and unlearned, has believed that the Son of God by the death
of his body on the tree ransomed our sins, reconciled us to God, and utterly
destroyed the kingdom of Satan; and that he neither did nor could suffer any
other kind of death, as the death of the soul, or the

So that the reference of the Apostles words stands thus; he offered up
prayers and supplications with strong cries and tears to him that was able to
save him from (all touch of death) and was heard (in that he prayed for,) and
though he were the son, and god was able to keep him untouched of death,
that is, to make him the Savior of the world without tasting any kind of
death, yet such was Gods counsel and his own liking, that he learned (or
performed) the obedience of a son by the things which he suffered. Whereby
the Apostle teaches us, it was neither want of power in God, that Christ died,
for God was able to have saved the world by him without his death, neither was
it lack of favor toward his son, for God HEARD him in that he asked; but
to manifest in his person the perfect submission of a son to his father, God
would have him obedient to death, even unto the death of the cross; and so
make him the author of eternal salvation to all that obey him, As he obeyed
God his Father. Those words then, Christ offered prayers to him that was able
to keep him from death, prove not death to be the cause of Christ's fear, nor
the scaping therefrom to be the scope of Christ's strong cries and tears; but
the Apostle thereby notes that Christ neither doubted of his Fathers power nor
love, when he prayed so earnestly unto him, but was assured of both, and
enjoyed both in such sort as might best stand with the honor and wisdom of
God the father, and of Christ his son. And therefore all your collections and
illations built on that false ground do^ fall of themselves, as having nothing
to support them but your idle and vain supposals.

Defenc. page 137. li. 6.
Your own self do fully grant and affirm it with me; yea you affirm farther
then we do, or then the truth is or possibly can be, you say Christ he^re
thus feared eternal death, and everlasting damnation.] I must take no ^corne
to have you wrest and wring my words to a contrary sense, when you offer that
course to the Apostles words. The place which you quote for proof of my
meaning will convince you to be a malicious falsifier. My words a man would
think are plain enough, and my exposition of that speech used by some men, is
such that no man of any intelligence or conscience would so grossly pervert it.
Thus I say page: 23. Sermon. page 23. li. 4.
Distrust of his own salvation or doubt of Gods displeasure against himself,
we cannot so much as imagine in Christ, without evident want of grace, and
loss of faith, which we may not attribute to Christ's person no not for an
instant. And again, Ibid. li. 17.
I refrain to speak, what wrong it is to put either doubtfuln^sse, or
forgetfulness of these things in part of Christ's humane nature. And to the
question thereon demanded, li. 20.
Why then did he pray, that the cup might pass from him?] I answer, he had no
need to pray for himself, but only for us, who then suffered with him, and in
him. What learning I cannot say, but what lewdness is this, to father that on
me, which I fully forsake; and still to press me with that, which I so often
prevent and repel? I did not intend in my Sermons to note any by name, nor
sharply to censure their sayings; but repeating as much as I saw, I gave the
best construction or mittigation to their words, that any truth would endure.
Where then some men (whom by your importunity you have urged me to name) as the
Catechism of master Nowel, which you would seem so much to reverence, in
plain words avouches, that Christ was Page 280.
(...) mortis horrore perfusus; perfused or plunged with the horror of et^rnall
death; And master Calvin says, Institutione li. 2. ca. 16. sect. 10.
Oportuit (...) cum inferorum copijs (...) mortis horrore quasi consertis
manibus luctari; Christ was to wr^si ^ith the powers of hell and with the
horror of eternal death, as it were hand to hand; Their words, suppressing
their names, I there taught might be tolerated, if we took horror for a
religious fear only trembling at the terror of hell, and praying against it,
or did attribute that trembling and fear of eternal death to Christ in
respect and compassion of us, that were his members, and whom he joined and
reckened in his sufferings for us, as one person or body with him. Which
moderation of mine you every where conceal, and make your Reader believe, that
I fully grant and affirm that, which I expressly deny. And not content
therewith, you enterlace my words with your lewd additions, as if I said,
Christ thus feared eternal death; You mean with strong cries and tears, and
with a bloody sweat; where I referred his earnest cries and tears to one
purpose, and his fear to another; yielding to Christ a religious fear to
decline the force of hell, and a careful prayer against the power of hell by
the example of David; who describing the passion of Christ in the 22 Psalm,
says expressly of his person and in his person, Psalm. 22.
They pierced mine hands, and my feet, they part my garments among them, and
cast lots on my vesture. But be not thou far of, O Lord my strength, have
thee to help me. Deliver my soul from the sword; my deso^ate (soul) from the
power of the Dog, sau^ me from the Lions mouth, and answer me (or protect
me) from the horns of the Unicorn; praying in this place not against any man,
but against Satan the author and vpholder of all mischief.

Defenc. page 137. li. 10.
Christ could not possibly fear in such woeful manner that, which he perfectly
knew should never come nere him: but he perfectly knew that eternal death and
the cup of Gods everlasting malediction should never touch him. Therefore he
could not by any means pray in such sort against it.] You refute your self,
and not any thing which I affirmed. That Christ prayed against the power and
rage of hell and Satan, is plain by David's words, that he prayed in such
woeful manner, are not my words, but yours. And yet this proposition, that
Christ prayed for nothing, which he perfectly knew was Gods almighty and
unchangeable decree, is not true. For Christ was most assured and most
certainly knew of all things, whatsoever were decreed and appointed by God for
himself; and yet he prayed for many things, not as doubting of them, but as
confessing whence he must, and did receive them. He perfectly knew he should be
glorified with the glory which he had with his Father before the world was; and
yet John 17.
he prayed for it. In the former words of David Christ perfectly knew, that God
would save and deliver his soul from the Lions mouth, from the power of the
Dog, and from the horns of the Unicorn, and yet he earnestly prays for
it. Christ's prayers then do not prove that he feared the contrary to his
petition, but that he was assured to obtain, and by prayer professed whence it
came whatsoever he had, even from his Father. The next assertion, which you
make, is a direct contradiction to your self, and not to me. For if Christ in
those vehement prayers had such exact and perfect knowledge of Gods counsel
and love, as here you auouche, then was Christ in no such confusion and
forgetfulness, as you put him in at the time of his agony to save him from
sin. And where not four leaves before, you made a shameful shift to rescue
your self from a plain contradiction, and bobbed your Reader with a manifest
fitten, that I did you wrong, Defenc. page 129.
You did argue from my supposition, that Christ was not astonished at the time
of his prayers in the garden, but in his perfect memory (which I seemed to
affirm, and you denied) a man may here perceive, that you want wit to see
what hangs together in your own tale, or that your memory is very short to
relapse so soon to the clear crossing of your self again. For here you
positiuely, frequently, and earnestly affirm that in his prayers Christ 11.
perfectly knew and saw Defenc. page 137. li. 18.
what was ordained by God for him, and 12.
that the cup of Gods eternal malediction should never touch him.] So brickle
are your brains, that you egerly and openly say and unsay in the space of
four leaves; and reuerse your own positions, wherein the Reader if he be
wise, will see you more 13.
constant, before he credit you.

Defenc. page 137. li. 17.
Again that which he feared and so pitifully prayed against, was that which
he knew was by God ordained for him. Yea fear is always of that which is to
come, but eternal death was not by God orde^ned for him, that was not to come
upon him (which Christ In the marg^ne.
knew right well.) Therefore it was not eternal death which he so feared.]
Your reasons be like rotten re^ters that when you would push forward, recuyle
on your head. Out of the Apostles text the 5. to the Hebrews, you draw a mayor
directly against the Apostles words. For he says, Christ was heard in that he
FEARED, (supposing that as yet to be the sense of the last word;) you say, he
was not heard, but knew that which he feared to be ordained of God for him, and
not to be avoided. So skillful you are, that out of the Scriptures, you frame
as^ertions expressly repugnant to the Scriptures, and yet you fancy them to
be invincible arguments. Wherefore the Apostle denies your first proposition,
That what soever Christ prayed against, was ordained of God for him, And if his
authority be not current with you, Christ himself assures you, it is false.
His own words are, against which I hope you will not open your mouth; (...) 11.
Father I know tho^ he arest me always. If Christ were always heard in his
prayers, then that which he praid against, was not ordained of God for him. For
God did not alter or innouate the things ordained for his son; neither would
Christ have so strongly prayed against them, if he had known them to be
ordained of God for him. So that here you are as sound as in the rest,
broching still your own fancies without any warrant besides your own, which
is grounded on false and absurd positions, you taking no care what you say, no^
heed what you should prove.

For who besides you would flaunt this out for a foundation of his cause, page
(...); 7. li. 19.
fear is alw^ies of that which is to come? Where if you mean certainly and
infalliblely to come, (as you must, otherwise it proves nothing) the
proposition is generally true neither in the wicked, nor in the godly, and
least of all in Christ himself. The wicked do fear many things, that fall
not on them, yea they often fear, as David says, Psalm. 53.
where no fear is. The godly by fearing before hand, what may come; do often
prevent the coming of it. Mary was Luc. 1.
afraid at the sight of the Angel, that saluted her, and yet brought he a
great blessing to her. Peter walking on the water, was Mat. 14.
afraid, when he saw a mighty wind, and began to sincke, but Christ presently
reached forth his hand, and rebuked him for doubting. The Disciples were Luc.
24.
abashed and afraid at the sudden presence of there master in the midst of
them, and yet no evil was toward them. So that fear may grow as well from
appearance, and opinion, when no hurt is imminent, as from the certainty of
evil present, or coming. Christ taught all his Disciples to fear him, even
God; Luc. 12.
who after he has killed, has power to cast into hell. Shall we thence
infer by your divinity, that God will cast all the faithful into hell,
because he has power so to do, which they must fear? Philip. 2*.
Finish your salvation with fear and trembling, says the Apostle. Shall we
therefore never be saved, because we must always tremble and fear under the
mighty hand of God? Under the same hand of God migh Christ fear and tremble,
not doubting of his salvation, nor distrusting his Fathers love, but knowing
that the hand of God was Almighty, and able to impose far greater pain on
his body then his humane flesh was able to bear. It is therefore due to Gods
power from all the faithful, and was likewise from Christ's manhood, for men
to be afraid of the strength of Gods hand, when he arises to punish sin,
though when and how he will do it, we may not, or cannot determine. And if we
should grant, that Christ's flesh even thus feared the power of Gods hand, that
was able to keep him from death, and to inflict what pain pleased him, you
are no whit the nearer to your new found hell, or to your second death of
Christ's soul, which you labor to derive from these words of the Apostle to
the Hebrews.

But to let the reader see, how rashly and rudely you conclude, what you list,
out of the Apostles words without any sure ground. The word, which all this
while you have taken to import a coufused and perplexed fear in Christ, has
no such signification in the Greek tongue; and in this place of the Apostle,
by the judgment of the ancient and best learned interpreters of all ages, that
are not infected with this new fancy, is taken for reverence, or a religious
fear of God. Of which signification there can be no question with any man,
that is meanly learned. And albeit some favoring your fancy, have sough
far and near for examples, where (...) might signify a painful and
amazing fear, yet find they none, neither in profane nor sacred writers, but
only a careful fear to decline evil, or a religious fear honoring God, to
be the true force of that word. How profane men use the word, (with that I
have elsewhere said) this may suffice. Diogenes Laertius delivering the decrees
and opinions of the best philosophers, says of them: they affirm, (...) de
(...) (...) (...). (...). i. 7. (...) (...).
(...); that ((...)) carfulness is contrary to fear, as being an honest and
reasonable declination of evil: ((...)) and that a wise man is never amazed
with fear, but wary to decline evil. Saint Ierom confesses as much among
Christians. (...) li 3 (...) 5. ^pist ^d. (...).
He that fears, has pai^e, and is not perfect. According to which
signification of fear, servants have the spirit of bondage in fear. There is
another kind of fear named by the Philosophers, (...), and with us it may be
called (...), though this do not fully match the force of the word. The
Prophet (David) knew the (...) of the perfect, when he said, nothing wants to
them that fear the Lord. Of Simeon, that took Christ in his arms, when he
was brought to the Temple, by his mother, Saint Luke says, he was a just man,
(...), and one that religiously feared God. So of those (...) (...). 2.
that buried Steven the Martyr, he says; (...) 8.
(...), certain m^n F^ARING GOD carried Steven to be buried. And in the
twelfth of this Epistle, the same Apostle uses the very word which he applied
before to Christ, for the common duty of all the godly. Hebr. 12.
Let us have grace, by which we may serve and please God with reverence, (...),
and a religious fear. Which is M. (...) (...). in 12. ca. epistol^ ad Hebreos.
Bezaes own interpretation of that place, howsoever he swerve from it in the
form^r words of the same Epistle. Neither does the Syriack translation any
thing help him, since the word dechalta, which in the fifth Chapter is affirmed
of Christ, in the 12. Chapter of the same Epistle, and indiuers other places of
the new Testament is by the same translator referred to al Christians, as
expressing a general duty belonging to God. And therefore there is no need, why
any man should translate the one otherwise then he does the other; specially
the whole Greek and Latin Church, concurring in one and the same signification
and exposition of the word; which is a better precedent to follow, then any one
man's translation.

And where some others would take advantage of the Greek preposition (...) as
(...) signifi^th for, as well as from.
signifying always from, and not for; it is an evident oversight in them,
abusing their skill to maintain their will, more then truth enforces. For
(...) in the new Testament, and with the Septuagint notes usually as well for,
as from. In the 14. of Saint Matthewes Gospel, when the disciples saw Christ
walking on the waters at the fourth watch of the night, and approaching the ship
wherein they were; they cried Matthew. 14. verse. 26.
(...) for fear. The soldiers likewise, that kept the Sepulcher, when they
saw the Angel, that rolled away the stone, and sat on it, they were Matthew.
28. verse. (...).
astonished (...) for fear, and became as dead men. Zacheus by reason of his
low stature could not see Jesus, Luc. 19. v. 3.
(...) for the multitude, or press that was about him. The Apostles that cast
their net into the sea at Christ's commandment, could not draw it, (...) for
the number Ioh 21. v. 6.
of fishes, that were in the net. Paul reporting the manner of his conversion,
how he was stricken to the ground with a great light, that suddenly shined on
him from heaven, says; When I could not see Acts 22. ver.
(...) because of the glory of that light, I was led by the hand to Damascus.
The S^ptuagint in many places use the same proposition in the same sense;
Isreal's eyes were dim Genesis 48. v. 14
(...) for age. My bones (says Job) are dry Job. 30. v. 30
(...) for heat. You shall cry Esa. 65. v. 14.
(...), for grief of heart, and houle (...) for affliction of spirit, says
Esaias of the Jews rejected. Where the Septuagint do make (...) equivalent to
(...) with an accusati^e, which notes the cause of any thing. Infinite are the
examples, that might be brought out of sacred and profane writers for farther
proof hereof, but these are enough to show, that Chrysostom, Photius,
Oecumenius, Theophylactus, and other Graecians commenting on those words of the
Apostle, did not forget the propriety of their own tongue, when they expounded
this text as declaring, that Christ was heard for the reverend respect of God
to his son, or for the religious submission of the son to his Father: and
the Latin Fathers Ierom, Ambrose, Primasius, Sedulius, Bid, Haymo and others
following the same translation did not err of ignorance, but duly considered
the nature and force of the Apostles words. Where then you have made us a stout
conclusion, that Christ thus fearing could fear nothing but the death of the
soul, or the second death, you cannot justly prove by any words here used,
that Christ had any fear, much less such a fear as you imagine; though I may
safely grant a fear, and such a fear, as the Scriptures describe or express
of Christ, and you nothing the nearer to your presumptuous conceit.

Now if we give ear to the ancient Fathers discussing this place, your device
has neither strength nor stay in these words. Ambros. in 5. ca. epistolae ad
Hebreos.
Beatus Paulus hic dicit preces cum et supplicationes fundere non timore
mortis, sed nostrae causa salutis. Vnde and in alio loco dicit sanguinem
Christi melius clamasse pro nobis quam sanguinem Abel. Blessed Paul here
says, (as Ambrose writes) that Christ offered prayers and supplications, not
for any fear of (his own) death, but for the cause of our salvation.
Whereupon in another place (Paul) says, the blood of Christ cried better
things for us, then the blood of Abel. And again, Ibidem.
Totum quicquid egit Christus in carne, preces sunt and supplicationes
propeccatis humani generi^. All whatsoever Christ did in the flesh, were
prayers and supplications for the sins of mankind. So says Primasius. (...)
in (...) (...) ad He^reos.
All that Christ did in the flesh, were prayers and supplications for the
sins of mankind: and the sacred shedding of his blood was a strong cry, in
which he was heard of God his Father: for his reuerence] That is, for his
voluntary obedience, and most perfect charity. Ibidem.
Christ here is said to have powered forth prayers and supplications, not for
fear of death, but rather in the (...) our salvation. And we must note, that
reverence, as Cassiodorus says, is taken sometimes for love, and sometimes for
fear: but here it is put for the exceeding love wherewith the Son of God
embraced us, and for the perfect obedience, whereby he was subject to his
Father even unto death. So Sedulius: (...) in 5. ca. (...) ad Hebreos.
Christ prayed with teares] not soed for fear of death, but for our salvation,
and was heard] of God the Father, when the Angel did comfort him. For his
reuerence] either his with his fathers, or his fathers toward him. Haymo
treads in the same steps with Primasius. (...) in 5. ca. (...) ad Hebr^os.
The Apostle speaks this of Christ meaning plainly to express, what our hie
Priest ^id in his Priesthood. What is, in the days of his flesh?] as long as
he dw^lt in this mortal body, he offered up prayers and supplications with
strong cries and tears to God his father. All that Christ did in the flesh,
were (...) and supplications for the sins of mankind, and the sacred shedding
of his blood was a strong cry, (...) herein he was heard of God his Father for
his reverence, that is for his voluntary (...) and most perfect charity. God
heard him in raising him up the third day, as the Psalmist says, thou will not
suffer thine holy one to see corruption. If then the Apostles purpose were to
note (as these Fathers affirm) that Christ all the time of his conuersing
here with men showed himself our hie Priest with strong cries and tears for
us to God, that was able to save him and his members from death, or to raise
him again from death as conqueror thereof, and was heard for his religious
obedience and love to God and man; what show has the death of Christ's soul
in these words, or what sequence from them?

Neither is there any part of this exposition; that wants good warrant from
the Scriptures, and likewise allowance from the fathers. For besides that
Christ said to Paul as yet a persecutor, Acts 9.
Saul, Saul why persecutest thou me, not in person but in members; the Apostle
sets these things down for assu^ed points of doctrine, that Romans 6.
our old man was crucified with Christ, and we (...). 2.
buried with him; and raised up, and quickened together with him, and (...). 2.
made sit together in heavenly (places) in Christ Jesus. (...), de (...) (...)
ad (...) li. 2.
We were in him as in a second first fruits (or new restoring) of our nature,
praying with a strong cry and not without tears desiring the impery of death
to be abolished, and the life, which was at first given to our nature to be
restored. But here of I have spoken so much before, that I may spare my pains,
in this place. Only if we follow the (...), which the Syriak interpreter
proposes agreeable to the greek and latin Fathers, that Christ, Testamentum
(...) ca. 5. ad Hebreos.
when he was compassed with flesh offered prayers and petitions with a vehement
cry and tears to him, that was able to raise him (or quicken him) from death,
and was heard: We need none other subversion of all your syllogismes. For then
the thing which Christ so earnestly desired with strong cries and tears, was
the resurrection of himself and of all his members after the death of the body
into a perpetual and celestial life.

Defenc. page 137. li. 22.
When in the garden Christ prayed against that cup, which he feared; that it
might pass from him, there he yields and submits himself presently to
the undergoing of it. But it were, I know not what, to say, that Christ did
ever yield and submit himself to undergo eternal death, or to taste the cup
of gods eternal malediction. Therefore it was not this, that he feared and
here praid against.] You are somewhat idle headed to make such a stur for that,
which I am farther from, then you are. At the sharpness of Christ's bodily
death, which he would not frustrate nor mitigate, and in the pains whereof he
was to yield more perfect obedience and patience, then all mankind besides was
able to do, the weakness of his humane flesh might naturally somewhat
stagger: and the power of Gods hand against sin, which might be laid on his
^oule or body, he might vehemently but righteously fear, and with strong cries
and tears deprecate the force thereof, and in neither of these is there any
vicinity with the second death, or with the death of the soul; and so
neglecting what you should prove, you vainly push against that, which I do
not uphold. And yet if we admit these cries and tears to be powered forth, not
for himself, but for us, then might he most woefully bewail our deserved
destruction, which was no less then everlasting damnation of body and soul;
if he did not ransom and release us from it. To his fathers will Christ
submitted himself in the garden, but what he disliked in that cup which he
named, and how much thereof he tasted, is known neither to you, nor to me, nor
to any man living. That it was very sharp, we may justly collect by his
natural dislike thereof, but what degrees or sorts of pains were adherent to
his passion, is not for you or me to determine. What he might suffer with
piety, patience, and obedience to his father, is above man's reach to define,
but the second death or the death of the soul, if we follow the leading of the
Scriptures, and not fall to devising a new hell, and a new death of the soul
to support our fancies, are things, that by no color of Scripture can be
confirmed, howsoever you strain and stretch the word of God to find them there.

Defenc. page 137. li. 28.
And yet it was, I grant, the death of the soul, or the second death, that is,
simply the (...) thereof, Gods withdrawing himself from him in the pains and
torments thereof.] Your grant is the ground of your doctrine, besides that
which you have nothing else to bear the burden of your devices. But what a jest
is this, when you should justly prove, and fully conclude your assertions, to
fall to granting of them, whereas your grant with me, and with any man that is
wise, is not worth a gray goose quill. Howbeit these are the best buttresses of
your cause, even your own violent conceits, that force the Scriptures to your
liking. But Sir, remember you are neither Prophet, nor Apostle, and so your
granting of these novelties, may show your own gyddinesse, it cannot prejudice
the true and undoubted rules of the Christian faith. [ Hence it follows
in^incibly that Christ indeed suffered, (since thus he feared) more then the
mere bodily death, even the death of the soul. For he could not I say thus
fear, but he must needs know that it was to come, or might come unto him. If
he but knew that it might come unto him, then it certainly did come unto him at
one time or another in his passion before he left the world.] Here is the prime
and pride of your observations out of this place of the Apostle to the
Hebrews; and except a man were out of his wits, he would not revel in this
sort with such waterish and witless resumptions. Palpable untruths you call
invincible certainties, and trifles wherewith children will not be deceived,
you obtrude to the whole Church of Christ, as fortresses of their faith. Christ
feared, ergo he suffered; more then a bodily death, ergo the death of the
soul. What he knew might come, that certainly did come. These be such bables,
that boys in the street will deride them, and yet you conceive and propose
them as Sapientiall and sovereign collections. But he that wilfully wandreth,
thinks no way straighter, then that he traceth, and dreamers are often
delighted with empty shadows; now if we take your own translation, the
Apostle tells us, that Christ was heard in that he feared, ergo he did not
suffer it, and though it might come, yet because he was freed from it,
certainly it came not; and many things might come more then the death of the
body, and yet not the death of the soul. If then you have no stronger means
to conclude the death of Christ's soul, then these, the simplest Reader will
soon perceive, that your reasons be as frigent, as your humors be fervent;
and though there be fire in your mind, yet there is water in your mouth, for
you truly conceive, or justly conclude nothing.

Defenc. page 138. li. 3.
Sec. to the Hebrews. Christ abolished through death him, that had the power
of death, that is, the Devil, and so delivered all them, which for fear of
death were all their life time subject to bondage. Here I see no reason in the
world but that the Apostle by the often repeating of death, and by the natural
referring of it in one place (as it were) to the other, does understand and
signify one and the same death altogether. But it is the death of the soul
which the Devil has power and execution of, also the death of the soul
sinful men were held in fear of all their life long. It follows then (I
suppose) that even through the death of the soul, Christ abolished the Devil,
and delivered his children.] I know not whether your eyes be open, or your
brains sound that you see nothing, but what pleases your self. And what if
they be either so dim or so dull, that you see not the truth, is that a
reason that your ignorance or wilfulness must be the loadstone of our creed?
with such peevish and private presumption would you prevail against
Scriptures, Fathers, and the whole church of Christ, that what you do not, or
will not see, we must relinquish as false and erroneous? to let you see (if you
be not blinded with preferring your fancies before the truth of Christ,) that
this is a lazy, loose, and lewd argument, which here you make; take your own
mayor or first proposition, that Christ suffered the self same death, which he
abolished, whereof the Devil had power and execution and whereof we were in
fear (being not redeemed) all our life long; and set this for the second
proposition or assumption; but it is most evident, that the Devil had power
and execution of eternal death, and to the fear of everlasting Destruction
were we subject all the time of our life, before we were delivered by Christ:
ergo Christ suffered eternal death and damnation in hell. For he abolished
that from the faithful; and thereof the Devil had power and execution, as
also we were in fear and danger of that without the Redeemer. What say you to
this conclusion grounded on your own collection and proposition? see you the
falsenesse and wickedness thereof? and yet if your assertion be true, that
Christ must redeem us with the same kind of death, whereof we were in fear
and bondage without him, and abolish the Devil with that very death, whereof
he had power and execution, the one is as strong as the other. But who besides
you would warble thus in so weighty matters?

True it is, that the name of death compriseth all the kinds of death, I mean
of body, of soul, of both for ever; and this chain of death is inseparable
and inevitable, where Christ does not break it. By the malice of the devil
persuading sin, which is the loss of grace, and death of the soul in this
life, came into the world the death of the body; that hence both body and
soul might be haled to hell; though first the soul, and after the body, when
at the last day it shall rise from the corruption of the grave to everlasting
destruction. To think that Christ submitted himself to all these sorts of
death, corporal, spiritual and eternal, is most hellish blasphemy; for so
he should not have redeemed us, but destroyed himself, body and soul
forever. To say that Christ delivered us not from all these lincks of death,
from spiritual death (whiles here we live) from eternal death, after this
life, and at the general resurrection, from the power of the grave, where our
bodies rot in the mean time, is heathenish impiety and heresy denying the
whole force and fruit of our redemption by Christ. Since then he cleared us
from all, and yet suffered not all sorts of death, it is manifest (which is the
Apostles meaning in the words by you cited) that by one kind of death, which
in Christ was corporal, he freed us from all power of death, here and
hereafter in body and soul; not preserving our bodies, that they should not
turn to dust, but restoring them after death, which is the far more
marvelous and mighty work of God. And this is every where so plainly
witnessed in the Scriptures, and plentifully confessed by the learned and
ancient fathers, that none but he that is blinder then a bat, would profess
he sees no such thing. Christ Matthew 20.
gave his life a ransom for many, and Coloss. 2.
by the blood of his cross pacified things in heaven and in earth. Hebr. 9.
By the sacrifice of his body once (made) we are sanctified, and 1. Peter 1.
healed by his stripes; who bare our sins in his body on the tree. If then
the blood of Christ cleanse us from all sin, by which the devil and death had
power over us; It is most certain, that Christ abolished sin and Satan by
suffering his blood to be shed unto death for the remission of sins, and
raising himself, that is the Temple of his body from death into a glorious and
blessed life, by which the power and kingdom of Satan, were utterly
overthrown.

Defenc. page 137. li. 15.
Against this you have no reason at all, but words and wrestings, and vain
oftentation of Fathers, none of them all denying our sense.] The reason of all
reasons is against it; which is, that no man, nor Angel may add, or alter any
thing in the Christian faith, without the sure warrant of the sacred
Scriptures. Romans 10.
Faith is by hearing, and hearing by the word of God. It is reason enough for
me, and for all ^he faithful, that there is no such thing delivered in the
word of God. You talk of words and wrestings, as knowing them best, and using
them most; and herein I am content to stand to the judgment of the wise and
indifferent Reader, whether you have brought ought yet for the death of
Christ's soul, or his suffering the second death, but your own speeches and
surmises, abusing the words of the holy Ghost to your own fancies without
either cause or color.

And touching the vain ostentation of Fathers; who, as you vaunt, deny not
your sense, I brought ancient and learned writers not ignorant of the Christian
faith, as being the pillars of their times, that with great perspicuitie and
vehemence denied, as I do, the death of Christ's soul; and affirmed with me
the death, which Christ suffered in the body of his flesh, to be a most
sufficient ransom for the sins of the whole world. Augustins words were;
August. epist. 99.
The same flesh in which only Christ died, rose again by the quickening of the
spirit. For that Christ was dead in soul, that is in his humane spirit, who
dare (...), since the death of the soul (in this life) is none else but sin,
from which he was altogether free? This you say denies not your sense: and
why? because you avouch the death of Christ's soul, which Austen asks who
dare avouch? to say that Christ suffered the death of the soul, is with Austen
an impudent and wicked presumption, and no part of the Christian faith, or of
man's redemption. Austen by the death of the soul meant sin, you will say,
which you mean not. You say by your leave, that Christ Trea. pa. 42. li. 20.
became defiled and hateful to God by our sins; And so if pollution of sin
be the death of the soul, that kind of death you ascribe to Christ, though not
for his own sins, yet for ours, then made his, no less by guilt then by
punishment, as you teach directly against the assertion of Saint Austen, who
says: August contra Fa^stum li. 14. ca. 4.
Christ took our punishment without (our) guilt, that thereby he might release
our guilt, and end our punishment. But you understand not Austen, when he
says, there is no death of the soul (here) but sin; he does not thence
exclude the consequents and adherents to sin in this life, but notes, that
only sin does kill the soul, because it does separate us from God, who is
the life of the soul; and the light and grace of God departing from the soul
by sin, the soul dies, that is loses all her sense of God, and motion to
God, by which she lives unto God. This with Austen, and this indeed by the
word of God, is the death of the soul, which if you attribute to Christ, you
incur open and exquisite infidelity. For your meaning therefore it makes no
great matter, if you will offer to correct our Creed you must speak as the
Scriptures speak, and not deliver ^s your private dreams for the public
doctrine of Christ's Church.

With like neglect you skip the rest avouched by Saint Austen, that Christ died
only in his flesh, which rose again by the quickening of the spirit. Wherein
least you should use your accustomed evasion, that the flesh of Christ
compriseth as well his soul, as his body, Saint Austen has wisely prevented
you, in saying, the same flesh only died, Which rose again. Where if your
learning serve you to say, that Christ's soul rose again the third day, you
shall make us a new resurrection of souls, after this life, as the Scripture
does of bodies, which were a meet device for such a divine, as you are. How
beit Saint Austen naming Christ's soul a part from his flesh, and affirming of
Christ's soul, that no man (in his right wits) dare avouch Christ's soul died,
but only that flesh, which rose again; it is as clear, as man's speech may
be, that he utterly refuses the death of Christ's soul, as an irreligious and
unchristian position, and directly teaches this as a ground confessed in
Christian religion, that Christ died in his body alone, which rose again the
third day, and not in his soul, which no Christian man durst avouch was ever
dead. Of all the elect he says likewise, that they who August. d^ (...) li.
13. ca. 15.
pertain to the grace of Christ, so far die, as Christ died for them, Carnis
tantum morte, non spiritus; the death of the flesh only, and not of the
spirit. If this make not against you, nothing that I say, makes against you,
for I can use none other, nor plainer words, th^n Austen and the rest of the
Fathers do in teaching, that Christ died the death of the body only, and not
of the soul; and that by his death which was only corporal, he destroyed the
dominion of sin, and the strength of eue^lasting death. August. (...). 162.
There is a first death, (says Austen) and there is a second. The first death
has ^wo parts; one, whereby the sinful soul by transgressing departs from
her creator; the other whereby she is excluded from her body through the
judgment of God for a punishment. The second death is the everlasting torment
of the body and soul: either of these deaths had every man obliged unto them,
but the immortal and righteous son of God came to die for us, in whose flesh
because there could be no sin, he suffered the punishment of sin, without
the guilt thereof. Wherefore he admitted for us the second part of the first
death, that is the death of the body only, by which he took from us the
dominion of sin, and the p^ine of eternal punishment.

Say as Saint Austen here says, and our controversies are ended. If he deny
not your sense, you may the sooner accept this confession of the Catholic and
Christian faith, from which no man yet swarued these fifteen hundred yeer^s.
But then you must tear both your Treatise and your defense in pieces. For by
this, as by infinite other places in Austen, it is evident; first, that Christ
took not unto him the guilt of our sin: secondly, that he died the death of
the body only: thirdly, that by that his corporal death he destroyed sin,
hell, and Satan: fourthly, that the death of the soul he could not die,
because he could have no sin; and lastly, that he was far from the second
death, which is the eternal damnation of body and soul. Acknowledge these,
which never Christian man yet refused, and we shall soon resolve all other
questions. If you have of late gotten you a faith besides this, and against
this general Creed of all Christendom, look well to your new devices; you
may sooner be excluded from the faith, then your fancies be included in the
faith.

Defenc. page 137. li. 17.
Thirdly, it seem^th also that Peter teaches the same, saying, Christ in his
suffering was done to death in the flesh, but made alive by the spirit. Where
death may be very well referred both to the soul and body of Christ, because
the text here speaks (as I judge) of the whole and entire sufferings of
Christ.] Be these the demonstrations you bring us out of the Scriptures for the
death of Christ's soul, that these words of Peter MAY BE referred both to the
soul and body of Christ, IT SEEMS SO and YOU IVDG^ SO? To you that hunt
after your conceits in every syllable of the scriptures, that is any thing
doutfull, may things SEEM, that are not, and if you may be judge, what sense
each place may bear, we shall quickly have a new doctrine and discipline in
the Church of God, framed to your fancies, though no way deduced by just proof
from the word of God. But here Christian Reader thou may see the foundation
of this new redemption by the death of Christ's soul, and his suffering the
second death; H. I. so judges; and to him it so seems. Indeed it is common
with you and your consorts to set down every thing for the undoubted word of
God, what you once conceit may seem to be within the compass of any text.
But I hope the wise and Godly Reader will look better about him, then to take
your maying, your seeming, your judging, for the ground of his faith against
the plain and express places of the Scriptures, and against the continual
and general understanding of the whole Church of Christ. Yet let us hear the
reason of your seeming, since other proof for your purpose you bring none,
neither here, nor else where.

Christ, as Peter teaches, was 1 Peter 3.
mortified (or put to death) in the flesh, but quickened in (or by) the spirit.
What conclude you out of these words? D^fenc. page 137. li. 2^.
The word flesh, it seems, cannot here in this place be understood to
signify only the body of Christ. If that cannot be, then was S. Austen much
deceived, who out of these very words concluded, that Christ died in Epist. 99.
flesh alone, and not in soul; and adds a better reason out of Peter's words,
then you bring any; since Christ was in that part mortified, in which he was
afterward quickened; and of the soul of Christ as none durst avouch, it was
ever mortified, so never being dead, there was no cause it should be quickened;
and therefore neither of these attri^utes agreed to the soul of Christ, but to
his flesh only. [ Defenc. page 137. li. 28.
My reason is, because wheresoever in the Scripture the flesh and the spirit
are noted oppositely together in Christ, there the flesh signifies always the
whole humanity, even both parts thereof, the soul also, and not only the
body.] First that rule has no ground nor truth; and if it were addmitted, it
proves no such thing, as you would enforce. For in a case far plainer, the
name of Christ wheresoever it is applied to Christ living, I mean, saying,
suffering, or doing any thing, there without all question the whole humanity
is comprised in that name, since Christ's body without his soul could neither
say, suffer, nor do any thing. And yet were it mad divinity to attribute
every action and passion affirmed of Christ in the Scriptures, as well to his
soul, as to his body. That Christ sat, that he hungered, that he did eat,
that he slept, and was circumcised, buffited, whipped, and a number such like
are avouched in the Scriptures of Christ living, that is of his whole
^umanitie, (for without body and soul he could do, nor suffer none of these
things:) And yet I trust you will not therefore conclude, that Christ's soul
did (...), (...), eat, or sit, or that it was circumcised, buffited, and
whipped, as well as his body. So that the word may contain the whole man, as
doubtless the name of Christ's (...) does, and yet the things ascribed to the
person do not always properly agree to both parts alike. For so we shall make
the soul to have flesh and bones as well as the body has, which we^e to make
it no soul, but a body. Wherefore your illation is as weak as your
observation is false, and you far from inferring your purpose. I know the
soul does partake in all these and such like actions, and passions with the
body. For the force to do, and since to feel, is from the soul; and so in
the death of the body, the soul is partaker with the body, not to lie dead
and senseless as the body does, but to feel the pain of death, and suffer
the separation from the body, (...) the effects of death appear in the body:
But that the soul does die, when the whole compound of body and soul dies,
is no consequent, neither in Philosophy, nor Divinity. [ Defenc. page 137.
li. 20.
The text here speaks (as I judge) of the whole and entire sufferings of
Christ.] The text here speaks of death bereauing life, which was after
re-^stored when Christ's body was again quickened by the power of his spirit;
the rest of Christ's sufferings during the whole time of his life are not
comprised in the name of death; otherwise Peter must have said, Christ was
always dead, since his affections (...) with circumcision, if not before,
which is no part of Peter's speech, nor meaning; yea rather it is repugnant to
both, since Peter says, Christ 1. Peter. 3.
suffered once f^r sins, when he was put to death, and not ever and always,
whiles he lived on ^arth.

Defenc page 137. li. 35.
Against this observation what pretended you? some Scriptures palpably abused.
first Matthew, where Christ speaks of his Disciples, that their spirit (their
inward regenerate man) was ready to watch, b^t their flesh (their corrupt
Nature) was weak and sluggish. (...) is this to Christ's flesh and spirit?] If
my authority were as good as yours, and my learning as great I could say as
you do, I judge it so; but if I show not better reason for me to a^firme,
those words Christ meant of himself, then you do or can, that he meant them
not of himself, I am content your consistorian seeming shall go before my
laborious proouing, my use is not to rely too much on mine own judgment, as
you do, though I thank God, I can examine both your and other men's
interpretations, but when I find a thing maturely and rightly considered and
conco^ded by the learned and ancient Fathers in matters of faith, or
exposition of the Scriptures, I go not easily from them. Tertullian says,
Tertullianus de suga in persecutione.
Christ himself professed his soul was (...) unto death, his flesh weak,
that he might show to thee, there were in himself both the substa^ces of man
by the property of heaviness in the soul, and weakness in the flesh.
Athanasius likewise. Athanasius de Passione and Cru^e (...).
A little before his death Christ cried, the spirit was willing, but the fles^
weak^, that our adversary (the devil) encountering him as a man, might feel
his divine power. Theophilus Alexandrinus. (...) epistola Paschali prima contra
Appollinaristas.
If Christ took only the flesh of man, (and not the soul of man) why in his
Passion did he say, the spirit is prompt, but the flesh weak. Ambrose, Ambros.
ls. 4. in (...). ca. 4.
If Christ's body had been spiritual; he would not have said; the spirit is
prompt, but the flesh is weak. Hear the voice of either in Christ, as well of
weak flesh, as of a ready spirit. The ancient writer among the works of
Saint Austen. De Salutaribus documentis. ca. 64.
The truth it self, our Lord Jesus Christ says of himself, the spirit is
prompt, but the flesh weak. Cyrill. Cyrill. Thesauri. li. 10. ca. 3.
Though Christ abhorred death as a man, yet as a man he refused not to do the
will of his Father, and his own as God; and therefore he said the spirit is
prompt, but the flesh is weak. Vigilius. Vigilius contra (...). li. 5. ca. 4.
What is that, wherein he suffered and tried weakness, but man's nature,
whereof he said at the time of his passion, the spirit is prompt, but the flesh
weak? tasting of which infirmity he learned to help the weak. Seuerianus.
Seuerianus contra Nonatum citatur a (...). contra (...). hem.
My soul (says Christ) is he auic unto death. And interpreting to what his
Passions pertained, the spirit, says he, is ready, but the flesh weak.
Remigius. (...) in (...). (...). 26. (...). a Tho. (...) in (...) (...) (...)
(...).
In these words Christ shows, that he took true flesh of the Virgin, and
that he had a true soul; Wherefore he now says, that his spirit is ready to
suffer, but that his weak flesh fears the pain of his Passion. Euthymius.
(...) in (...).
My God, my God, (said Christ) why have thou for saken me, that is, why have
thou left me in this fear, knowing (my) spirit is ready, but (my) flesh weak.
What think you had I no more reason to say, as I said, then you have to deny
it? where also you may note, that all these learned Fathers refuse your lame
observation, as well as I do; and so you had need seek some better
authority then your own, or perhaps some one, that (...) you with this rule
serving to none other end, but to help forward your hell fancy.

(...) page 139. li. 1.
Think you that Christ's soul was willing to suffer as God had appointed, but
that his flesh resisted? ve^ily so you seem here to understand, and it is as
likely, as your applying of flesh and spirit to Christ in your page 104.] Put
on your visard before you take in hand to control the judgment of so many
Fathers. Your pride is greater then your wit in this and most things that pass
your pen. Is it such news to you for me, or for them to say, that Christ's
flesh was weak, that is, not so ready to suffer, as was his soul? sees your
mastership no difference betwixt weakness and resistance, specially when in
comparison of the readiness of the spirit, the flesh is said to be weaker,
that is, less ready to suffer then the soul? does not the Apostle apply the
same word unto Christ when he says, Christ was 2. Cor. 13.
crucified through weakness? and long before, the Prophet said of Christ;
Esa. 53.
He is a man full of sorrows, and one that has experience in infirmites. So
that your cholor was kindled without cause, when you struck such an heat with
my saying, that Christ's flesh was weak; the Prophet foretold he should be a
man full of sorrows, and well acquainted with infirmities.

The untrue conceit which you challenge in the 104. Page of my Sermons touching
Christ's flesh, where I said, it must have force to cleanse and quicken, when
you impug^e, I will defend; in the mean time it may serve, I savd nothing, but
what our Sa^iour said before me; Job. 6. verse. 56. 54.
He that eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, dwells in me, and I in him,
he has eternal life, and I will raise him up at the last day. If you could
take any hold, I doubt not the sharpness of your teeth, but your foolish
conceits are carried like clouds in the air, they rest not, before they vanish.

Defenc page 139. li. 5.
Then Luke; where both spirit and flesh are not intended of Christ (as our
observation requires) but only the flesh.] Your observation is made to fit
S. Peter's words to your fancy. For there are not many places in Scripture,
where spirit and flesh are expressed and intended of the two natures of Christ,
though in other places some words adjoined do prove him to be God, as well as
man. In that of S. Luke, Christ does not deny himself to be a divine spirit,
for then he were no God, since God is a John 4.
spirit; nor to have an humane spirit, for then he were no man; but that which
they saw with their eyes, he affirmed was flesh and blood, and not any
apparition in the shape of a man. And the words following, Luke 24.
as ye see me to have, contain and note the other part of his humane nature,
which was his soul and spirit, and consequently infer, that he was a man,
and had an humane spirit, though compassed with flesh and bones, as we have.

Defenc. page 139. li. 7.
Then the Romans: where I affirm that flesh signifies the whole manhood of
Christ, according to the which he came from David, even as well as Solomon or
Nathan did, who were David's sons in their entire and perfect nature.] Whether
Christ's body without a soul, which was but a Carcass, be always in the
Scriptures intended by the name of Christ's flesh, this is not the question;
there is but one place in the new Testament, where Christ's flesh imports his
dead body, as when Peter says, Christ's Acts 2.
flesh saw no corruption; but whether whatsoever is attributed to Christ's flesh
with comparison or mention of his divine nature, do properly agree as well to
his soul as to his body, this is the thing in question betwixt you and me.
That the man Christ was borne of the Virgin, and died on the Cross, there is
no doubt, but that his soul was made of the seed of David, and circumcised,
and crucified as well as his body, this is your error; and for this you have no
show in the word of God, and therefore you seek by rules of your own making
to draw it in by the heels, when you cannot by the head. It is but a shift to
save your self, when you tell your Reader, that Christ's whole manhood came
from David, as well as Solomon, or Nathan did; The point is whether Christ's
soul were made of the seed of David, as well as his body was. That I deny,
and have the Apostle for my warrant, that men are only the Heb. 12.
Fathers of our bodies, and God is the immediate Father of (our) spirits. Which
if it be true in all men, then Solomon and Nathan were the sons of David, not
because their souls were made of the seed of David, but only their bodies; and
yet since they drew as much from their father, as children by Gods ordinance do
or may do, therefore were they the sons of David. In Christ it is most sure,
which the Apostle says, that according to the flesh he was made of the seed of
David. This by no means can be verified of his soul, howsoever you would
slubber it up by calling his whole manhood the son of David, which I do not
deny. Not that his soul was made of the seed of David, as was his body that
is an open and an odious error; but that his flesh made of the seed of David
which was the Virgins body, was also quickened with a soul from God in due
time, that came not out of David's loins. Even so the whole man in Christ died
on the Cross, not that his soul was deprived of life, or left dead, as was
his body; but that the conjunction of soul and body, which makes the whole
man, was dissolved by death, his flesh lying in the grave without corruption,
and his soul remaining in the hands of God, to which it was commended.

Defenc. page 139.
So likewise Christ was kin to the jews according to his whole humanity, as
well as Paul was.] When you can show kindred in spirits, as well as in flesh,
that is derived from parents, then say that Paul and Christ were kin to the
Jews according to their whole humanity; till you prove that, howsoever use of
speech may be endured which must be interpreted according to the truth, you can
never conclude there is consanguinity between souls, as there is between
bodies. And spite of your heart, if you will not maintain untruths to uphold
your credit, as your manner is, the Apostle teaches you how to understand those
words, that as we have fathers of our bodies, from whom our spirits come not,
but immediately from God; so kindred and consanguinity, which comes by the
parents, goes by flesh and blood received from them, and not by souls infused
from God. S. John leads you to the same rule, that men are borne of blood,
and of the will of the flesh, and so by flesh and blood comes kindred; God
giving souls to quicken their bodies. Wherefore the Scriptures, when they
express kindred, they note it by flesh and bone. As when Laban said to Jacob,
Thou art my Gene. 29.
bone, and my flesh; So Judah of Joseph, Gene. 37.
he is our brother, and our flesh. So Abimelech to his mothers brethren, Iudic.
9.
I am your bone and your flesh. And vsualy where kindred is claimed or yielded,
the Scriptures express it by 2. Sam. 5. 19
flesh and bones, as Adam said to Eve, Genesis 2.
This now is bone of my bone, and flesh of my flesh. So that howsoever you
dream or talk of the consanguinity of souls, it is like the rest of your
novelties which have no handfast but in your head; and the exception taken by
me will stand good, do you and your adherents what you can, that in these
attributes to the manhood of Christ you shall never prove they properly
pertain to both parts, but to the whole conjoined, or to one part severally
respected.

Defenc. page 139. li. 21.
Further, that which you bring out of the Corinthians compared with this in
Peter, does most clearly open and confirm the same. He was crucified touching
his infirmity, but lives by the power of God. His soul had infirmities of
suffering in it, as well as his body: therefore his soul also is understood
here that it was crucified and died, that is, according to the condition
thereof.] You prove not what you promise, but pronounce what you please, which
if any man will suffer you to do, we shall soon have a new Church, a new
Faith, and all things new. Before you pretended rules at least, though void of
reason and truth; now you bend against all rules of learning, Logic,
Grammar, and Divinity. For I pray you in Grammar what is (...), and (...) here
used by the Apostle? Are the parts here noted, that were crucified and raised
to life, or the cause from which first death was suffered, and after life was
recovered by our Savior? A man would think, that (...) were by or through
weakness, even as (...) is by or through the power of God. Christ then was
crucified, not by the immediate hand of God, but by the Jews, who could not
crucify his soul, as they did his body. If you know not who crucified
Christ, read the Gospel afresh, or hearken to S. Peter, who said to the
Jews; Act. 2.
Jesus of Nazaret have ye taken by the hands of the wicked, and crucified and
slain: and proclaimed openly to the Rulers of the people, and Elders of
Israel, Act. 4.
Be it known to you all and to all the people of Israel, that by the name of
Jesus Christ of Nazaret, whom ye have crucified, whom God raised again from
the dead, by him this Creeple stands whole before you. The Jews then 1. Cor.
2.
crucified the Lord of glory, who could not kill the soul but only the
body. Therefore they crucified only his body; and other crucifiers of Christ
the Scripture names none. How come you then against all learning and truth to
collect that Christ's soul was crucified?

Defenc. page 139. li. 25.
His infirmity the text here names metonimically understanding in Christ
that in which his infirmities were.] When the plain text will not serve your
turn, you fasten what you list with figures to it, and then by as good
Logic, you change a part into the whole, and conclude like a Doter in
Divinity (for you skorne all degrees, as you do all rules of School) that
Christ's soul was nailed to the cross (for that is crucifying) and died as
well as his body. These be woonderous leapes in my small understanding, and
such as few men but you could light on so readily. In st^d of the Apostles
speech, that Christ was crucified (...) through infirmity, (or by reason of
infirmity voluntarily embraced, whiles he submitted himself to his Fathers
will) to clap in this conclusion, that Christ was crucified and died as well in
soul, as in body. Had you lived in former ages, what heresies could not you
have deduced from the text it self, if not by Grammatical or Logical
inference yet by metonymicall and metaphorical excurrence. Sampsons riddle
was, out of the strong came sweetness, and we may say, out of the weak
comes bitterness.

Defenc. page 139. li. 37.
Other reasons also I noted serving well heereunto, but I omit to rehearse them
again. For it seems your self agrees with us in them, holding expressly
that the spirit here in Peter is the Deity of Christ according to Austins
judgment. Now this being granted and acknowledged, how can it be likely but
that the other opposite part of the flesh must needs import his whole and
entire Manhood. Page 140. li. 11.
Now this being so, then it follows by the text, that Christ in his Passion
was done to death both in soul and body.] Your other reasons tended after your
manner to show, that spirit in Peter's words did not signify the soul of
Christ; to which I said nothing, because I therein agreed with you. Where then
you conclude ouer-hastily, that therefore it signifies the Deity of the
second person in Trinity, the text enforces no such thing; as that the second
person in Trinity did in the days of Noe preach by his own Godhead, and not
by his spirit. Gene. 6.
The Lord said, my spirit shall not always strine with man, his days shall be
120. years. Which whether we take to be the words of the Father, or the
Son, by the spirit there is meant the holy Ghost, which proceeds from the
Father and the Son, and is called the spirit of them both, and did by the
tongue of Noe the Preacher of righteousness witness the judgment of God to
come by the flood upon the wicked and disobedient world. By this power of his
which is his spirit, God quickened the humane flesh of Christ, when it was
crucified and dead in the grave, and by the same spirit shall he restore and
quicken all the bodies of the faithful after they be turned to dust. And
although I have no doubt but the works of the Trinity toward all creatures
are undivided, and the power of the Father is the power of the Son, yet when
the Scriptures do testify, that Christ's humane flesh was quickened by the
spirit we must understand the holy Ghost: God the Father raising his Son, and
the Son raising himself by the spirit of sanctification, which is the power
of the Father and of the Son. So speaks the Apostle to the Romans. Romans 1.
Christ made of the seed of David as touching the flesh, and declared to be
the Son of God, with power through the spirit of sanctification, by the
resurrection from the dead. Where his flesh made of the seed of David proves
him to be a true man, and the mighty declaration of him to be the Son of God
shows his Divine nature and glory, which most appeared by the wonderful
works and gifts of the spirit of sanctification, powered out on all his after he
was once ri^en from the dead.

Least you think this my device to defeat your observation, hear what the
learned and ancient Fathers say thereof. Chrysostom upon those words of
Paul, Christ was declared to be the Son of God with power through the spirit
of sanctification.] Chryso^t. in epistolam ad Romanos ho-^l. 1.
The fourth argument (of Christ's Divinity) is drawn (says he) from the
spirit, which he gave to those that believed in him, and by which he sanctified
them all. Wherefore Paul says, through the spirit of sanctification. For
only God was able to give those kinds of gifts. Ierom. Through the spirit of
sanctification.] Paul Hieron. in ca. 1. epistola ad Romanos.
notes here the holy Ghost the Creator. Ambrose, Paul Ambros inca. primum
(...) ad Romanos.
calling Christ the Son of God, shows God to be his father, and adding the
spirit of sanctification, notes the mystery of the Trinity. Augustine. that
Paul says, August. in expositio. inchoata epistolae ad Romans
Through the spirit of sanctification, he means, because they received the
gift of the spirit after Christ's resurrection. Theodoret, the Apostle here
teaches, Theodoretus in ca. 1. epist. ad Romans
that he, who was called the Son of David according to the flesh was declared
to be the son of God by the power, which was showed from the holy Ghost after
our Lord Jesus was risen from the dead. Oecumenius, Oecumenius in ca. 1. epist.
ad Romans
through the spirit of sanctification.] He means by the holy Ghost, which
Christ gave to the believers in him. Theodulus Theodulus in cap. 1. (...). ad
Romanos.
through the spirit of sanctification, that is, by the holy spirit, which
Christ gave to those that believed in him. Theophylactus Theophylact. in ca. 1.
epist. ad Romanos.
by the spirit of sanctification, that is, by the spirit, with which he makes
the believers holy. Haymo Haymo in ca. 1. epistolae ad Romanos.
the spirit of sanctification is here taken for the holy Ghost, who gives
sanctity to men and Angels, who also fashioned, quickened and sanctified
Christ's manhood in the Virgins womb, of the seed of the Virgin, without the
seed of man.

The new writers with one consent, as Erasmus, Zuinglius, Peter Martyr,
Bullinger, Musculus, Gualter, Hemmingius, Aretius, and Calvin himself follow
the same interpretation, so that your observation against and after all their
judgments is misbegotte and borne out of time; and brought in of purpose to
paue the way for your new found fancies, which have no ground, but in your new
made notes as much crossing probability, as authority. Yea the observation
wrongeth the distinction of the persons in the most blessed Trinity, and
dishonoreth rather the Deity of the Son of God then aduanceth it; whiles the
Son of God, and the spirit of holiness, being both expressly named, you take
them both for one person; and make the Son of God in his divine nature to be
less then the possessor, or giver of life and righteousness, eueu a receauer
of both. For in all these places where you say the name of spirit is used to
signify Christ's Godhead, the power and work of the holy Ghost is there
intended and expressed, as that Christ was Romans 1.
declared to be the Son of God by the spirit of sanctification; and was 1.
Tim. 3.
God manifested in the flesh, justified by the spirit, as also 1. Pet. 3.
mortified in the flesh, but quickened by the spirit. The spirit of
sanctification is the title of the holy Ghost sanctifying as well the Manhood
of Christ, as his members; and the giving thereof declares the Son to be
true God, whose spirit this is as well as the Fathers, and by whom the Son
works as well as the Father. And where it is written, that Christ was
Justified and quickened by the spirit, if there you read in the spirit, meaning
in the Deity of Christ, then Christ's Godhead received life and
righteousness, which by your leave is a speech ne allowed ne frequented in the
Scriptures. For though the second person in Trinity by his internal and
eternal generation received all, that he has, from the Father, who begat him,
yet of this generation, which is secret, substantial, and eternal, the
Apostles speak not, when they say Christ was quickened and justified; but the
one shows that Christ's body, which was put to death was raised again to
life by the power of his spirit: the other notes that he was God manifested in
the flesh and justified, that is, proved and confirmed so to be by the mighty
works and graces of Gods spirit showed as well in his own person, as in all
his members. For that is the intent of the Apostles words, not that his divine
glory was only praised or acknowledged of men, but that the world believed,
the Angels admired, the spirit justified, that is most mightily and clearly
witnessed him to be God manifested in the flesh. Then has your observation his
full discharge, since there is no one place, where these words the spirit and
flesh are applied to Christ to note his two natures, though his Godhead be
testified and plainly proved in most of the same places by more pregnant
words then spirit, which is common to Angels, souls, and winds; and only
shows, that it is no palpable or sensible body; where the name of spirit
alone in the Scriptures standing for the third person in Trinity notes the
power and grace of the holy Ghost, by which these things were wrought for
Christ's manhood. And in that place of Peter, on which you most depend, if you
follow the Syriac translation to which your own adherents so often appeal,
the Apostles words are, Christ was dead in body, but liu^d in spirit, which
conuinceth first, that flesh is there taken for the body of Christ contrary to
your observation, and that Christ still lived in spirit, which euerteth your
maine conclusion intended from this place for the death of Christ's soul.

But were it, as you suppose, that flesh and spirit were ascribed to Christ to
declare his two natures, the one to be corporal and humane, the other to be
spiritual and divine; how does it follow, that every thing affirmed of his
manhood must properly agree both to body and soul? by what Logic conclude
you that? you may as well avouch that Christ's soul is truly corporal or
carnal, because it is comprised under the name of flesh, as that other
attributes of the body are verified in the soul. Which if you think absurd,
though the name of flesh by a figure of speech import the whole man, because
the Scripture speaks not of a dead, but of a living man: then is there less
cause, that each action or passion affirmed of the flesh should exactly or
properly be referred to the soul, since the common use of speech intending the
whole by a part is figurative; and in figurative speeches, as where the soul
or the flesh are taken for the whole man, the attributes cannot be properly
restrained to each part, no more then the names are. And even out of those
places by which you would collect death to be common to the body and soul of
Christ, the ancient fathers conclude death to be proper to the body of Christ,
and not common to the soul; as Austin out of Saint Peter. August. (...) 99.
Quid est enim, quod viuificatus est spiritu, nisi qu^d eadem caro, qua sola
fuer at mortificat us, viuificante spiritu resurrexit? What other meaning has
this that Christ was quickened by the spirit, but that the same flesh, in which
only he was put to death, rose again by the quickening of the spirit? And
Cyrill. Cyrill de recta fide ad (...) li. 2.
Was it not a work of infirmity to endure the cross? I confess (says Paul)
he was weak in the flesh, but he revived again by the power of God. And how
was he weak? by suffering his own body to taste death for us, and restoring
to life again that very temple (of his body) not doing this by the weakenessc
of his flesh, but by the power of God. Christ Ibid^m.
died for us, not as a man like one of us, but as a God in flesh, giving his
own body a ransom for the life of all. Wherefore his Disciple (Peter) says
wisely and warily, that he suffered in the flesh. But of the fathers judgment
in this case more shall be said afterward.

Defenc. page 139. li. 12.
Here you object, thus I note all the attributes of the body common to the
soul. Nay for sooth that I do not;] Forsooth the ground of your conclusion
infers so much what ever your meaning is, or may be. For this you urge, that
wheresoever the flesh of Christ is taken for the whole manhood of Christ, the
thing affirmed of Christ's flesh must be common to soul and body; and thence
you conclude, that since Christ suffered death in his flesh by Saint Peter's
words, he must by the Scriptures ^e said to have died as well in the soul as
in the body. You regard no more but death to be common to both, which of all
others is not common to both, because they are seured by death; but upon this
collection it follows, if your rule be not false, that since through out the
Scrtptures, where mention is made of Christ's living flesh, or of his actions,
or passions, the whole manhood of Christ is there understood, then
consequently all those things so affirmed of Christ must be common to both the
parts of Christ's humane nature, that is as well to his soul, as to his body.
To pretend your meaning against your speech, when you see how absurd your
saying is, is a childish vanity; if your observation and illation be true,
this that I object, follows; if those be not true, then fail you of your
first purpose, that death must be common to both parts of Christ's manhood.
Besides the falsitie of your collection appears by this, that when things are
attributed to Christ living, which are proper to the soul or body, and yet
are ascribed to Christ's person, this kind of speech is figurative, either
because the whole is taken fot a part, or because either part has some
concurrence or reference to the actions and passions avouched of Christ. But
thence you may not infer, that all such things most properly agree to either
part in Christ; that is such palpable ignorance, that you seem not to
conceive, what a man is, or whereof he consists. For so you may conc^ude,
that the soul eats, drinks, sleeps, sits, falls, and such like, as
well as the body, because these things are affirmed of the person, that is of
the whole man, though indeed performed by means of the body.

More folly it is to urge the same in death, which seuereth the soul from the
body, and so leaves nothing common to body and soul, but the general
attributes of a Creature, as to be local, finite, and such like. For where
death is the privation of life, and the soul is the life of her body, what
reason or sense can it have, because man dies, to say the loss of life must
be common to the soul, which is the cause of life, as well as to the body,
which is but the vessel, or vehicle of life. True it is, the soul by death is
driven to depart from her body, but so long, as she is present, there is life,
and she must first be gone before death, which is the lack of life, can seize
on the body. To draw this consequent then from reason, that the soul must
die, when man dies, is the part of him that understands not what reason
means; except by the dying of the soul he note the departing of the soul
from the body, in which sense the Scriptures sometimes apply the name of
death to the soul, as we shall afterward see.

Defenc. page 140. li. 14.
This attribute of dying understood in such sort and manner as the body
properly dies, that is to become without life and sense, I make not common to
the soul.] The whole man consisting of body and soul, is most properly said
to die, that is to be dissolved, the soul departing from the body; the body
is properly said to be dead, that is to be void of life and sense. and if we
say, the body dies, as speech is often guided rather by use then by rule, we
mean the body begins to lack sense and life, and to be possessed by
death. And though the soul cannot be void of life and sense in such sort as
the body is, because she is the life of the body, yet when the soul is dead,
she is utterly void of her life, which is God, and has no more sense or
feeling of him, then the body lying dead has of the soul. How then does it
follow, that because Christ died in the flesh, or in his manhood, that his
soul must be dead after her manner of dying, as well as his body after his
sort of death? [ where the whole dies, either part, you will say, must die.]
But Peter does not say, Christ died in his whole manhood, that is your lame and
blind conceit, but that Christ died in the flesh. And yet the whole manhood may
die, and not both parts, because the whole is a thing conjoined of parts, and
so dissolved, where they are severed, though both parts do not die. [ the
whole, you mean for every part.] Your meaning is, not the matter, but Peter's
words are the thing that I stand on. Now what do they infer, when he says,
Christ died in the flesh? you say the whole, and every part thereof, because
the spirit here opposite to the flesh imports the whole dietie, and
therefore the flesh must comprise the whole humanity.] This is that bold and
false observation, that has deceived you and your leaders. For besides all
other exceptions h^eretofore taken, which are enough; the words of Paul in the
same case, which is also one of your examples, Christ was Romans 1.
made of the seed of David according to the flesh, do they infer that
Christ's whole manhood, and every part thereof, as well soul as body, was
made of the seed of David? If you and your instructors see the falsenesse of
this collection, with what face urge you so earnestly the same illation from
Peter's words? but your wills, not Peter's words, are the foundation of your
faith; and so you can make a show to wrangle, you little care for truth or
substance.

Defenc page 140. li 25.
This if you do not acknowledge, the shame of absurdity and contrariety,
which in your fancy you accuse me of, that Christ's soul died and died not,
will sit nearer to you than to me.] Is this enough to say the word? You may
soon write, if you make it suff^cient to say what you list; but your
absurdities and contrarieties are not so easily declined, as you would
slightly ouerslippe them. Look back to your former footing, and see how
shamefully you shun your own assertions. Examining the place of Peter after
your learned manner, and laboring, as you thought, with impregnable force to
prove, when Peter ^yth, Christmas mortified in the flesh, but qnickened in (or
by) the spirit, that the spirit could not there be taken for Christ's humane
soul; you Tre^ pa. 78. li. (...).
butted both these as absurd and most false, that Christ was made alive either
in his humane soul, or by the same. I replied, that you refuted your own
position. For if in the former words of Peter, his meaning were to say, that
Christ's soul and body, as you conceive him, were done to death; then of
necessity Christ must be quickened and restored to life, as well in his humane
Soul, as in his Body. And this is so far from being absurd and false, as
you proclaimed it, that it is openly blasphemous otherwise to say or think,
that Christ was never made alive in his humane soul, if once it were dead, as
you collected out of Peter's words. What course now take you to color these
incongruities. You meant it was absurd to say, that Christ's soul was quickened,
as was his body. Of the manner of death you speak there not a word, but only
seek to prove, that spirit in that place can not be taken for Christ's soul,
because it is most absurd and false, (as you say) that Christ was made alive in
his humane soul. How you will iangle or iuggle touching your intent, is not to
this purpose; you must answer for the sense, which you would patch to Peter's
words. The death, which Christ suffered in his flesh by Peter's assertion, was
it the death of the body alone, or of both body and soul? if of the body only;
then is your commentane, which corrupts Peter's words, absurd, false, and
wicked. Did Peter intend to teach, that Christ died in both parts of his
manhood, that is in soul as well as in body? then is it a necessary truth,
and point of piety to confess and affirm, that Chist was made alive in his
humane soul, which you say is absurd and false. Which way will your wisdom
wind out of this grinne? you meant it is absurd for the soul to be quickened,
as the body is. You meant as best served your turn, but what meant Peter? if he
affirmed the soul of Christ died, as you interpret him, must not his words
avouch that Christ's soul was made alive, except you resolve, that Christ's
soul once dead was never quickened again? and though you set a bold face on
these contradictions, and say you are far from them, yet each mean Reader may
soon perceive how far you were ouershot in them, though here you would
outface them. And where you now say, that in such a sense you do not deny,
but Christ may be said to be quickened in the spirit, what is this but to grant
that now, which before you called absurd and most false.

D^c. page 140. li. 37.
I hope it is clear to reasonable men, that Christ's soul according to the
Scriptures phrase may be said in some sort to have tasted and suffered death,
that is the extremest feelings of Gods wrath for sin, and the most vehement
pains of the damned, but in a singular manner and extraordinary way. And to
the same reasonable men I refer it, whether you have brought one word or
syllable out of holy Scripture concluding that Christ died the death of the
soul, or the second death. The Scripture phrase you have perverted and
distorted to your meaning, but the words are far from inferring any such
thing even in the judgment of the meanest. Your mittigations, In some sort, in
a singular manner, and extraordinary way, What argue they but your wresting of
the Scriptures from their right sense, since no such thing is there affirmed,
yea the death of the soul, and the second death in the Scriptures are such, as
you dare not avouch of Christ, but with these limitations, which are no where
mentioned in the Scriptures, but are houels to shroud your absurd and false
doctrine from the tempest of the word of God conuincing you of impiety and
heresy, if you did not thus delude the force of them? But in vain do you
seek for these unsound refuges, when you be once driven from your footing in
the word of God. For you must not only prove by the Scriptures, which you
neither have done, nor can do, that Christ suffered the death of the soul,
and the second death, as you say he did; but you must show also where these
exceptions are written of Christ, otherwise they are but shifts declining the
maine and general truth of the Scriptures touching the death of the soul,
and the second death; which can no more agree to Christ then sin and
damnation; which you may as well defend, IN A SORT, in a singular manner, and
extraordinary way to be found in Christ, as the other. And therefore dally not
with the word of God, and faith of Christ, your singular manner will not save
you from abusing the one, and defacing the other, except you can show, where
your assertion as well as your exceptions be written in the book of God. As
for the most vehement pains of the damned, when you take the pains to prove
any thing otherwise then by the meal of your own mouth, you shall be answered.
The pains of the damned expressed in the Scriptures are reiection, confusion,
worm of conscience, and torment of hell fire, which if by your cunning
conueyance you cast upon the soul of Christ you shall cough me a singular and
extraordinary miscreant.

Defenc. page 141. li. 6.
Now besides the matter you gird at me in diverse places, as where I say, the
death of the soul is such pains and sufferings of Gods wrath as always
accompany them that are separated from the grace and love of God.] This geere
deserved more then girding; other men use to blush at such falsehoods, but
shamefastness and you are parted. When you had thus grossly thwarted the
truth, as to say, that the pains of Gods wrath, which here you make the most
Treatis. page 77. li. 5.
vehement pains of the damned, do always accompany them that are separated
from the grace and love of God; your Printer or Corrector ashamed of that more
then childish oversight, would not take upon him to altar your text, and so to
amend your error, but with a marginall note bridled your words, making an
addition clean contrary to your text. For where you said, always, he said,
ordinarily, which is not always, and so he gives you the lie; and yet
himself is as far from the truth as you are. For neither always, nor
ordinarily, much less always ordinarily, (which is as much as always
sometimes) do the most vehement pains of the damned accompany them that are
strangers to the grace and love of God; and therefore this Laborinth is like
your other riddles in religion, neither Writer, Reader, nor Corrector can tell
what to make of them, nor how to temper them with any truth. But now you will
make amends for all.

Defenc. page 141. li. 10.
Forsooth it is true, they are always wicked whom these pains do accompany
ordinarily.] It is the first time I heard you speak toward a truth, but this
is clean kam to that you said before. Your former speech was, these pains do
always accompany the wicked, and now you turn the cake in the pan, as if
that side were not burnt, and tell us, they are always wicked, whom those
pains do accompany ordinarily. Forsooth this is not How handsomely the
defender shifteth hands.
that, you said before; and if you be ashamed of your folly and falsehood, I
am not against repentance. But it were plain dealing to confess the fault,
and not to bring in an ape for an owl, and say it is the same Creature. And
yet forsooth whether this position be true or not, is without the compass of
your skill. For first what is ordinary with you? once a week, once a month,
or once in seven years? you have gotten a word, that you may wind at your
will, and limite as you like best; and yet without all proof you resolve, that
these pains do ordinarily accompany the wicked: experience I trust you will
take none upon you, for then by your own rule you must be always wicked; to
sift other men's souls, what pains they feel, though they be wicked, I win you
have no way, but by report or con^ecture, which are both uncertain. Warrant in
the word you have none; that such pains do always or ordinarily accompany
the wicked, the contrary may rather be thence collected. For when the wicked
shall say, 1 Thessalonians. 5.
Peace and safety, then shall sudden destruction come upon them. Peace and
safety in the pains of hell I suppose they have nor cause, nor will to say.
In Peace then and safety, not in the pains of the damned, are many, if not most
of the wicked till destruction come upon them, which is not always, nor
ordinary, since they can be destroyed but once, and until that time their ease
and abundance make them forget God.

Defenc. page 141. li. 18.
Again you pretend to have much against me where I say, the feeling of the
sorrwes of Gods wrath due to sin in a broken and contrite heart is indeed
the only true and perfectly accepted sacrifie to God. True so I said, and
again I say it. What see you annsse in it? Then unhappy men are the godl^e
(say you) which are at any time free from the pains of the damned, to what
purpose is this? I speak of Christ's sacrifice. Thus your triumphs before the
victory come to nothing but blasts of vanity.] If I mistook your meaning,
you are the more beholding to me; the sense, which you now express, is worse
then that I charged you with; and yet I took your words, as they lay, which
because they were namely applied neither to Christ nor to us by you, I pressed
you with the lesser absurdity of the twain. Why your words might not be
referred to the faithful, I saw no cause; David confessing that the Psalm. 51.
v. 17.
sacrifices of God (he means esteemed and required of God) are a troubled
spirit, and a contrite and broken heart causes the sacrifice of righteousness
to be accepted. I strained your words no farther then David's, but said you
mi^construed the words of the holy Ghost; if you took a broken and contrite
heart repenting his former sins for the pains of hell suffered in the soul.
You now say, you meant this of Christ, that his broken and contrite heart
feeling the most vehement pains of the damned was the only true, and
perfectly accepted sacrifice to God, and ask me what I see amiss in this? I
will soon tell you. Where I would have charged you with a single error against
the Godly, by reason your words are indistinct and doubtful, you load your
self with a double injury against God and his Son. For first the sacrifice
of Christ's body, by which we are sanctified, as says the Apostle, is
excluded from being a true and perfectly accepted sacrifice, if the pains of
hell in his soul be only the true sacrifice. Secondly a false sacrifice
devised by your self, and never offered by Christ, is obtruded by you unto God
as the only true sacrifice, which he must perfectly accept: and so where
before you blazed an untruth, you be now come to bolster it up with impiety.
For where no Scripture does witness, that Christ suffered any such sorrows
and pains of hell, as you surmise, you now openly profess, that all sorrows
and sacrifices besides this were neither true nor acceptable unto God, and that
this your device surpas^eth all the merits and obedience of Christ whatsoever.

Defenc. page 141. li. 30.
Where Austen seems to deny that Christ's soul might die, he denies that
Christ suffered any pains of damation locally in hell after his death, as it
seems some held about his time, whom here he labors to confute.] If your
ignorance were not every where patent, some man perhaps would stumble at your
report: but you are grown to such a trade of outfacing, that almost you can
do nothing else. That any such opinion was held in Austens time, as you talk
of, and that he labored there to confute the same, is a mask of your making
to hide your own blemishes; Austen refelleth that as a fable in exact words,
when he says, Quis audeat dicere, who dare say so? Now if some had so held, he
must have said, some do say so; but who dare say so, is as much as no man
dares say so. If no man durst so to say, then no man was so wicked or
irreligious in Austens time as to dare say, that Christ's soul died, which now
is become the greatest pillar of your pater noster. As for suffering in hell
locally, it is a fiction of yours fastened to S. Austen, he has no such words,
and therefore no such meaning.

Defenc. page 141. li. 37.
He had no necessary cause ^o speak of the second sense thereof, how the soul
may be said to suffer death extraordinarily for sin imputed only, neither
does he speak against that in Christ.] S. Austen a man would think had cause
to know how we were r^d by Christ, and surely if he were ignorant thereof, you
would not judge him worthy to be a Curate in your Conuenticles: but show that
he, who taught so much, and wrote so much (as his works declare) ever spoke
word of your newfound redemption by the pains of hell suffered in the soul
of Christ; or by the second death. Against it he often speaks, when he so
soundly and sincerely collecteth out of the Scriptures, that Christ died for us
the death of the body only, and not the death of the soul. And this how could
it be a true or tolerable assertion, if the Scriptures did avouch, or the
church in his time had professed the death of Christ's soul to be the chiefest
part of our redemption for sin, and reconciliation to God? Wherefore never
dream he had no necessary cause to speak of your sense; if your sense had
been a part of the Christian faith, would any man in his right wits have
asked, as Austen does; Who dare avouch it? He discusseth the place of S. Peter,
and when he comes to those words, Christ was quickened in the spirit, or by
the spirit, he resolves this cannot be spoken of Christ's humane soul, because
that, which was afterward quickened, was first mortified, and therefore we
could not say, that Christ's humane spirit or soul was restored to life, except
we first yielded, that it was before subjected to death. Now that Christ's soul
was ever dead, who durst avouch it? The reason, why Christ's soul could never
die, he renders thus, for that the Scriptures acknowledge no death of the
soul in any but sin and damnation, to neither of which the soul of Christ
could be subject. August. epist. 99.
Certe anima Christi nullo mortificata peccato, vel damnatione punita est,
quibus duabus causis mors animae intelligi potest. Surely the soul of Christ
was neither dead with any sin, nor punished with damnation, which are the two
ways how the death of the soul may be possibly understood. This collection of
S. Austins out of the Scriptures touching the death of the soul is most sound,
and cannot be shaken with all your shows and shifts, talk of ordinary and
extraordinary as long as you will. That standing good, which yet we see
immooueable for all your battery, it follows ineuitably, that Christ ne did
ne could die the death of the soul, ne may any man defend it, without apparent
falsity and impiety. What proofs you have proffered against S. Austins
conclusion, let the Reader judge, I must confess my self very blind, if he
see any; for I see none, and therefore not only S. Austins words, but his
reasons out of holy Scripture stand firm, and hold you fast to the grinding
stone, being no way as yet counteruailed or controled, but with your vain
speeches and most unlearned euasions.

Defenc page 142. li. 2.
Nay according to Austins own definition of the souls dying it will easily
appear, that Christ's soul may be said to have suffered some kind of death.
Mors est spiritus, deseri a Deo. The death of the soul says he, is Gods for
saking of it, but the Scripture says, God did forsake him for a season: yea
the Fathers also agree fully thereunto. Therefore by Anstins definition largely
and rightly taken, Christ may be said in some sense to have died in soul.]
From your shifts you return again to your proofs, and neither barrel is
better herring. The mayor you think, is Austins, the minor is Christ's own
words, and what, trow you, should hinder the conclusion. This reason has but
three of your wonted flowers, I must not say faults, the mayor is larger then
Austen ever meant, and the minor no way matcheth it, except you quite alter the
words of Christ, and the conclusion comes nothing near to your purpose.
Examine them in order. Not every forsaking of the soul is death, for the godly
often in the Scriptures complain (as I have showed) that they are forsaken of
God, when yet their souls live: but as life is repugnant to death, and God is
the life of the soul, so till God have utterly forsaken the soul, she is not
dead. Whiles she retains any fellowship of grace with God, who is her life,
she is not dead, because she partaketh with life. As then death is the utter
privation of life, so God must utterly forsake the soul, before she can be
pronounced to be dead; and that kind of forsaking is indeed the death of the
soul in this life. So that your mayor, if ever you will come near S. Austins
meaning, must be the death of the soul is Gods utter for saking of the same.
And that thus you must conster S. Austins words, appears every where by his
In Psalm. 70. in Johan. tract. 47. de verbis Apost. Sermon. 30.
comparison with the death of the body, which is not dead, till the soul be
utterly departed from it. For as the body which has in it any power or
presence of the soul, is not dead but living, so the soul, that has any
communion with God who is her life, can not be truly said to be dead, but as
yet to have life. Were you no Divine, but a plain Sophister, reason teaches
you so to understand S. Austins words: for where life and death be priuatiues,
as well in the soul, as in the body, the one has no place, till the other be
utterly quenched. He is not blind, that has any sight; nor deaf that has
any hearing; the privation utterly excludes the habit; neither is the soul
dead, that has any force or effect of life in her, and consequently not every
forsaking, but only an utter forsaking of God is the death of the soul here
in this life.

Your minor then should be, that Christ's Soul was utterly forsaken of God,
which are not the words of Christ on the cross, nor any way consonant to them:
yea the very entrance to that speech, when Christ said, My God, my God, does
prove the quite contrary. Matthew. 22.
God is not the God of the dead, but of the liuiug. Then directly by the plain
words of Scripture, when Christ said, My God, my God, his soul confessing God
to be his God, was living, and consequently the words following, why have thou
forsaken me, do net prove the death of the soul, unless you make the Son
of God so unwise as not to understand, what he said, or so amazed, that he
marked not his own speech; which with you perchance is no absurdity, but with
me it is a wicked and unchristian impiety. Christ's words therefore import,
that he found a kind of forsaking, but not that his soul was forsaken of the
truth, grace, or spirit of God, these be blasphemies to avouch, and no points
of pietic; nor that he was utterly or altogether forsaken, which only is the
death of the soul. And against this wresting of Christ's words from their
right sense, how many testimonies of scriptures and Fathers have I sormerly
brought? all which you trippe over with a light foot, and make as though you
felt them not. You have been told, Galat 3.
the just shall live by says. So that if Christ wanted not faith, he could not
choose but live in soul. Again, 1. John 4.
God is (...), and he that dwells in love dwelieth in God. Christ then must
either have life, or want love, for the love of God is the life of the soul.
Farther, the Spirit of God is the Romans 8.
spirit of life, that quickneth the soul; yea then (...) thereof is life and
peace. Then must you take from Christ the spirit of God with all the gifts and
graces thereof, before you can deprive the soul of Christ from life. What an
hellish heap of blasphemies are here before you can affirm, that Christ's soul
was dead according to the Scriptures, and according to Austins meaning, who
herein ioineth with the Scriptures. Christ then ly^ing in soul with perfect
obedience and patience, and assuredly knowing God to be his God, and his
Father, complains that he was left or forsaken, that is, either not delivered
from his troubles and afflictions, but left in sinners hands, to do their
pleasure with him; or deuested of his power, and left through weakness unto
death, which should for a season sever his soul from his body; or lastly lest
in this shame of the cross, and anguish of body, without any open or sensible
show or sign of Gods favor toward him, or care for him. All these kinds of
forsaking the learned and ancient Fathers acknowledge in Christ on the cross,
and other forsaking of the soul they admit none, howsoever you falsely pretend
their full agreement.

Come now to your conclusion, if you could euince that Christ's soul was
utterly forsaken of God, and deprived of life, which you can never; and to
offer it, will convince you of heinous and wilful heresy and blasphemy: yet
can you conclude no more, but the death of the soul in this life, which is
either ignorance or contempt of God; Hell pains you cannot infer, nor the
torments of the damned, which are the second death; and so your great flourish
out of Austen for the death of Christ's soul is but a ^aw. And the Reader may
see, with what understanding and conscience you read and allege the Fathers,
that where you acknowledge Defenc. page 142. li. 12.
they do deny this phrase generally, that Christ died in soul, yet you
boldly and lewdly affirm the next line before, they li. 11.
grant the thing in effect; as if they denied that in words, which indeed they
knew to be a part of the Christian faith, and were like you, who shift and lie
for life to support your own Devices. But in all these shows of yours the
advised Reader shall find nothing but a careless and senseless resolution to
say any thing, rather then to admit a truth, or to relent from the least of
your conceits: whereof he may have a full proof in your words next following.

Defenc page 142. li. 16.
Let this be the answer touching all your Fathers and Councels, which you bring
abundantly (here and there) about this point of the souls death.] A short
answer indeed, if it had either truth or sense in it. It is right a colts
trick when he will not or can not endure the load, to cast the whole pack
off at once. That they generally deny the death of Christ's soul, you grant;
and with a brazen face, and barren head you add, they mean otherwise; they
deny not the thing, but only the phrase. What is this, but to supp^ up the
truth with a sad countenance, and to belch forth your shame with open
mouth? had you examined their places, your shifts, sleights, and untruths
would have laden a carrect; you have better now provided for your self, with
belying them all at once, you have incurred but one inconvenience. But like is
your Defense to your cause, it entered first with advantage of phrases, and so
it will end with a windmill of words. Well, that the Christian Reader may
perceive, how ancient and universally consented and confirmed by the church of
Christ this truth has been, which I teach, that Christ died no death for our
redemption, but the death of the body only; to those Fathers, which you say
are abundantly brought by me already, I will add others, that though there be
no care nor conscience in you, yet all men, in whom there is any sense, may see
your device of the death of Christ's soul and of hell pains, and the most
vehement torments of the damned suffered by him, to be not only a falsitie
repugnant to the Scriptures, but a novelty against the maine consent and
confession of all antiquity. If their testimonies be long and many, thou will
b^are with me Christian Reader, I hope; the expense of a little paper to me, or
pain to thee is not so dear, as the cause it self both for thy direction,
and for my discharge. First then thou shall hear, that Christ died in body
alone, which is my assertion: and withal that Christ died not in soul, which
is their conceit, contradicted by all the Fathers; and in the end we will
shortly view whether these Fathers cross their new found redemption in words,
o^ matter. The places I think good to repeat in Latin or Grecke, as much as
shall need, (which otherwise I refrain of purpose to decrease the volume least
it should be too great) that the Reader should ncither distrust my translating,
nor make long search for the words themselves in each Writer, if happily he
desire to see them.

Tertullian proving the resurrection of our bodies by Christ's example, says,
Tertull. de Resurrect. carmis. ca. 48.
Sine dubio, si mortuum, sisepultum audis secundum scripturas, NON ALIAS QVAM
IN CARNF, aequ^ resuscitatum in carne conced ^ipsum enim quod ^idit in mortem,
quod iacuit i^sepulchro, hoc and resurrexit, non tam Christus in carne, quam
caro Christi. Without Christ died no death of the soul by the judgment of all
the Fathers.
question, if thou hear that CHRIST DIED that he was buried, according to the
Scriptures NONE OTHERWISE THEN in the flesh, thou will grant that he was
likewise raised in the flesh. For that very thing which fell by death, which
lay in the grave, that surely rose, not so much Christ in the flesh as the
flesh of Christ. And in the same place: Dominus Ibidem.
quanquam animam circumferret trepidantem vsque ad mortem, sed non cadentem PER
MORTEM. The Lord though he carried about a soul fearing unto death, YET NOT
FALLING BY DEATH. Origin, Origin. li. 5. in ca. 5. epist. ad Romanos.
By sin (says Paul) came death, that death no doubt, whereof the Prophet
says, the soul that sins, the same shall die, whereof a man may justly
call this bodily death a shadow. For whither soever that pierces, of force
this follows as a shadow does the body. If a man object, that our Savior
did no sin, neither was there in him the death of the soul by reason of any
sin, and yet he sustained a corporal death: we will answer him; that where
Christ owed this death to none, nor was obnoxious to it, yet for ^ur salvation
of his own accord, and by no necessity he undertook this (so above called)
shadow (of death.) Ibidem.
This common death then he did undergo, but that death of sin, which reigned
over all others, he did not admit. Athanasius: Athanas. contra Arianos oratione
3.
(...)? What else was that which was crucified, but the body (of Christ?) And
again: Christ's Ibidem.
resurrection could not be without death. (...)? And how could death have had
place in him, if he had not had a mortal body? And again:

Idem de incarnat. verb^.
Death of it self could not appear but in the body; and therefore Christ put
on a body, that finding death in his body he might abolish it. Ambrose;
Ambros. de fide ad Gratianum. li. 3. ca. 5.
Who is he that would have us partakers of his flesh and blood? Surely the
Son of God. Quomodo nisi per carnem particeps factus est noster, aut PER
QVAM, NISI CORPORIS MORTEM, mortis vincula dissoluit? IN QVO NISI IN CORPORE,
expia^t peccata populi? IN QVO PASSVS EST, NISI IN CORPORE? Sicut and supra
diximus, Christo secundum carnem passo. How was he made our Partner but by
flesh; and by what death, other than the death of his body, did he dissolve
the bands of death? WHEREIN, BUT IN HIS BODY, did he expiate the sins of the
people? WHEREIN, BUT IN HIS BODY, did he suffer? As we said before, Christ
suffered in the flesh. Chrysostom: (...). (...).
(...) (...).
(...).

^.
We died a double death, therefore we must look for a double resurrection.
Christ died but one kind of death, therefore herose but one kind of
resurrection. Adam died body and soul; he died to sin, and to nature. In
what day soever ye eat of the tree, said God, ye shall die the death. That very
day Adam did not die (in which he did eat) but he then died to sin, and long
after to nature. The first is the death of the soul, the other is the death of
the body. For the death of the soul is sin or everlasting punishment. To us
men there is a double death, and therefore we must have a double resurrection.
To Christ there was but one kind of death, for he sinned not, and that one
kind of death was for us. He owed no kind of death, for he was not subject to
sin, and so not to death. Therefore he as free from sin rose but one (...).
We as g^e of sin, die a double death, and so must have a double resurrection.
This Sermon, whence these words are taken, thought it be not amongst
Chrysostomes printed Volumes, yet besides that it was published in print by
FRONTO DVC^VS, it is found in the written Greek copy of Chrysostom lying in
New College Library in Oxford, whence these words are taken little differing
from the printed copy.

Out of Augustine though much be said, and much more might be; yet think I not
meet to omit some places as well for the cleerenesse as the rareness of them,
some of them being sufficiently witnessed unto us by others, though they be not
found at this day among his printed works. And first of those that are found:
August. de (...). (...) 4 ca. 3.
Vtrique rei nos^, id est, and animae and corpori medicina and resurrectione
opus crat. Mors animae impiet as est, and mors corporis corruptibilitas. Sicut
enim anima Dco deserente, sic corpus anima deserente n^ur, vnde ill^ sit
insipiens, hoc exanime. Huic ergo DVPLAE MORTI NOSTRAE Sal^or impendit SIMPLAM
SVAM, and adf^ciendam vtramque resuscitationem nostram in Sacramento and
exemplo praeposuit and proposuit VNAM SVAM. Neque enim fuit peccator aut imp^,
vt et tanquam spiritu mortuo in interiori homine renouari opus esset: sed
Indutus carne mortali, EA SOLA MORIENS, EA SOLA RESVRGENS, EA SOLA NOBIS ad
vtrumque concinuit, cum in ea fieret interioris hominis sacramentum, (...)
exemplum. Either part of us, that is, both soul and body, needed curing and
raising. The death of the soul is impictie, and the death of the body
corruptibilitie. As the soul dies when God for saketh her, so the body dies
when the soul for saketh it, whereupon the one is soolish, the other
senseless. To this double death of ours, our Savior applied his single death,
and to make a double resurrection in us, he preferred and proposed his one kind
of death for a Sacrament, and for a Precedent: for he was no sinner or wicked
person, that he should need any renewing, as one dead in spirit, but putting on
mortal flesh, and dying in that ALONE, and rising in that ALONE, he fitted
that ALONE to both our (deaths) placing therein a Sacrament for our inward man,
and an example for our outward. So again: Idem contra (...) Arianum. ca. 16.
ca. 18.
Sensit mortem (Christus) sicut omnes sentiunt, qui mori^nte carne mentibus
viuunt, etc. Credo mortuum esse filium Dei, illa quae secundum naturam
generalis est cunctis, non illa, quae specialis est malis. Christ selt death,
as all feel it, who dying in the flesh live in their spirits. I believe the
Son of God died that death, which by Nature is common to all, not that which
is proper to evil men. The words which the second Council of Hispalis does
cite out of S. Austins writing against Maximinus, are worth the hearing,
though they be not now in his printed works, as many other things are not,
which Bid and others allege out of him: Concilium Hispalens. 2. ca. 13. ex
August. aduersus Maximinum.
Vbi resurgit nisi in eo, quod potuit cadere? Vbi resurrexit nisi in eo vbi
mortuus? Quaere mortem in verbo, nunquam esse potuit. QVAERE MORT^M IN ANIMA,
NVNQVAM IBI FVIT. Quaere mortem in carne, plane ibi fuit. Et paulo post, Quid
miraris? Nec mortua est anima, nec verbum mortuum est. CARO TANTVM MORTVA EST.
Where was Christ raised, but in that which might fall? Wherein did he rise, but
in that wherein he died? Seek for death in (his) deity, it could never be
there. Seek for death in his SOVLE, IT NEVER WAS THERE. Seek for death in
his flesh, there was it indeed. And a little after, Why do thou marvel?
Neither was Christ's soul dead, nor his Godhead; ONLY HIS FLESH DIED. Neither
want the same words in effect in his printed Sermons: In Iohannem tractat. 47.
Hoc suscitabatur quod m^ur. Nam verbum non est mortuum, anima illa non est
mortua. That was raised (in Christ) which died. The Deity died not, yea his
soul died not. Ibidem.
Quid fecit mors nisi corpus ab anima separauit? in morte sola caro est a
Iudaeis occisa. What did death in Christ more than sever his body from his
soul? in death his flesh only was killed of the Jews.

The council it self adding of their own says. Concilium Hispalens. 2. ca. 13
Prophetia quoque in psalmis passionem Christi in carne sola sic asserit.
Foderunt manus meas and pedes meos, dinumer auerunt omnia (...). Vbi non
deitatis, sed tantum crucifixi corporis iniuria intelligitur. Sola in Christo
materia carnis mortis fragilitate defuncta spem resurrectionis expectabat. The
prophecy in the Psalms avouch the passion of Christ in the flesh only, when
it says they pierced my hands and my feet, and numbered all my bones. Where not
the injury of his deity but of his body is perc^aued in Christ the matter only
of his flesh yielding to the srailty of death expected resurrection. Petrus
quoque Apostolus Christi supplicium sic praedicat in solo corpore consummatum:
Ibidem.
qui peccata (inquit) nostra pertulit in corpore suo super lignum. Peter also
the Apostle preaches the passion of Christ to have been performed ONLY IN HIS
BODY, when he says Christ bare our sins in his body on the tree. And again
Ibidem.
Sola caro crucis exitium sensit, sola caro lanceam pertulit, sola sanguine and
aqua manauit. Ipsa sola mortua, ipsa sola in sepulchro posita ipsa sola tertio
dic resuscitata. Only the flesh of Christ tasted the sharpness of the Cross,
only the flesh endured the spear; only the flesh yielded forth blood and
water. That only died, that only lay in the grave, that ONLY ROSE AGAIN. And
assuring themselves this to be the Christian faith confirmed in the old and new
testament, they say, Ibidem.
Ecce pronunciata est passio corporis Christi ex lege and Prophetis. Cuius
quidem fidei verit as tam est efficax, vt eam nec tyranni sua potuerint
crudelitate confundere, nec haereticorum subdola circum^ to pessumdare, n^c
hypocritarum diminuere fallax simulatio. The passion of the body of Christ is
proved by the law and the Prophets. The truth of which faith is so forcible,
that neither tyrants with their ^rucltie could confound it, nor Heretics with
their crafty devices euert it, nor Hypocrites with their false dissembling
diminish it.

Theodoret. Theodoret. Dialogo. 3.
(...); how could the soul (of our Savior) having an immortal nature, and
not touched with the least spot of sin, be possibly taken with the hook of
death? Cyril. Cyril. de recta fide ad R^. li. 1.
(...). If we conceive Christ to be God incarnate, and suffering in his own
flesh, the death of his flesh alone suffices for the redemption of the world.
Fulgentius. Fulgentius a^ I (...). li. 3. ca. 7.
Quis ignoret Christum nec in diuinitate sed IN SOLO CORPORE MORTVVM and
sepultum. Who can be ignorant, that Christ was dead and buried, not in his
deity, but in his body only. Cum sola caro moreretur, and resuscitaretur in
Christo, filius Dei dicitur mortuus. Idem Christus secundum solam carnem
mortuus, secundum solam animam ad insernum descendit. When the flesh only
died, and was raised again in Christ, the Son of God is said to have died.
The same Christ died in his flesh only, and descended into hell in his soul
ONLY. Idem. ca. 5.
Moriente carne non solum Dietas, sed nec anima Christi potest ostendi
commortua, The flesh dying, not only the dietie, but the soul of Christ
cannot be showed to have been also dead. The same Father and fifteen other
Bishops of Africa make this confession of their faith. ^.
Mors silij Dei quam sola carne suscepit, vtramque in nobis mortem, animae
scilicet carnisque destruxit. The death of the Son of God, which he SVFFERED
IN HIS FLESH ALONE, destroyed in us both our deaths, to wit the death of soul
and body. This confession Gregory followed when he said, Gregorius in (...).
li. 4. (...). (...).
Solumpro nobis mortem carnis suscepit. Christ undertook for us the only death
of the flesh. And again, coming to us, who were i^ the death of spirit and
flesh, Christ brought his own death to us, and loosed both our deaths. His
s^le death (...) applied to our double death, and dying vanquished our double
death. Vigius ^.
Secundum proprietatem naturae, sola car^ mort^m s^t, sola caro sepulturae
(...) (...). Ergo (...) dominum iacuisse in sepulchro, s^d in sola carne, and
Dominum d (...) (...) (...) (...) (...). According to the propriety of nature,
only the (...) (of Christ) (...) death, only the ^sh was buried. Therefore we
say the Lord lay in the gr^ue, but in flesh alone, and descended into hell, but
in SOVIE A^ONE. Bid treads just in their steps. (...) in ca. 10. (...) (...)
(...).
Hoc (...) quod m^atur. Nam verbum (...) non potuit, (...) anima illa mortua
^it. Caro tantum mortua est, and resurrexit tertia (...). That was raised,
which died, the Godhead could not die; his soul was not dead, only his flesh
died and r^se again. And again, Idem Homi^ 4. in (...).
Veniens adnos, qui in morte carnis and spiritus eramus, vnam suam, id est,
carnis mortem pertulit; and duas nostras absoluit: simplam suam nostrae dupl^
co^t, and dulpam nostram subegit. Christ coming to us that were in death of
body and spirit, suffered only one death, that is the death of the flesh, and
freed both our deaths: ^ee applied his one death to our double death, and
vanquished them both. Albinus. ^.
Quid significat morte morieris? duplicem mortem ^ominis designat, animae
videlicit and corp^s. Animae mors est, dum propt^r peccatum quodlib^t animam
d^t Deus. Corporis ^rs est dum propter necessitatem quamlibet corpus descritur
^b anima. Et hanc dupl^m Christus sua (...) destruxit. Nam (...) (...) (...)
est ad tempus, anima vero nunquam, qui nunquam peccauit. What is meant ^y this
t^ou shall ^e the death? it notes a double death in man, to wit, of soul and
body. The death of the soul is when for any sin God forsakes it, the death
of the (...) is when for any necessity the body is deprived of the soul.
This double death of (...), Christ destroyed with his single death; for he
died only in (...) for a time, but in soul he never died, who never sinned.
This continued without change to Bernards time, who says of Christ, ^.
Ex dua^s (...) nostris, cum a^ra nobis in cu^ (...), (...) (...) reputaretur,
sus^ns p^am and nes^ns culpam, dum spon^e and TANTVM^N CORPORE MORITVR, and
vitam nobis and (...) prom^ur. Of our two deaths, where one was the desert of
(...), the other the d^e of punishment, Christ's taking our punishment but (...)
from sin, (...) (...) dies willingly and ONLY IN (...), he me^h ^or us
life and (...).

I have been the longer good Reader in alleging these fathers, to assure thee
that I deliver no doctrine touching our redemption; but ^uch as the whole
Church of Christ in the best and purest times professed to be principles of the
Christian faith; and that in so evident and pertinent manner, that I know not
how to lighten or strengthen their words. Thou hear them with one voice
affirm, that Christ died not A DOUBLE, but A SINGLE death for us; which they
likewise a^ch was the death of HIS BODY ONLY, AND NOT OF HIS SOVL^; and THE
DEATH OF THE SOVLE HE DIED NOT. The death of the soul they truly derive from
the Scriptures to be either sin, or damnation: sin, by which men are
deprived of all grace, and so of the life of God: and damnation, which is a
perpetual reiection from all bliss, addicting the wicked to eternal and
intolerable misery in the torments of hell fire. Which of these things will
this dreamer deny? will he say, that Christ died more deaths then ONE, and as
well the death of the soul, as of the body? So he must say, if he will uphold
his new redemption by the death of Christ's soul, and so he does say: but
whether there in he cross not the full consent of Christ's whole Church, I
leave it to thy censure. Will he shift, as he has hitherto done, with the
name of flesh, that it compriseth as well the soul as the body, and therefore
by the death of Christ's flesh only, the Fathers do not exclude the death of
Christ's soul, but the death of his Godhead? they prove indeed against the
Arians, that the Son of God could not die in his Divine nature, but only in
his humane flesh. And this, as we now see, is one of their maine reasons: The
soul of Christ died not, nor could die; much less then his Godhead. And
therefore the most of them do express that argument, utterly denying that
Christ's soul died any kind of death, but only his flesh. Besides a number
of them not only expres^e by circumstances and consequents of burying and
rising again, what the rest mean by the flesh, but they use the word (...),
which can not be taken for the soul, and with like zeal and truth avouch,
that Christ died in his body only. So that these three stand for clear and
sound conclusions with all these Fathers: First, that Christ died BUT ONE KIND
of death. Secondly, that HE DIED ONLY IN HIS FLESH, OR BODY; and thirdly, that
THE DEATH OF THE SOVLE HE NEITHER DID, NOR COVLD DIE.

Will he shu^e with the name of death, and say they meant not his kind of
death? that will nothing relieve him. For first if Christ died but one kind of
death; and of his bodily death no Christian may so much as doubt, then by maine
consequent out of their words, Christ died no death of the soul, let him take
it how and which way he will. Again, if Christ DIED ONLY IN BODY, as they
likewise witness, then apparently he died not any death of the soul, neither
in your sense Sir Defenser nor in theirs. Lastly, what death of the soul can
you show mentioned in the Scriptures without the compass of their division,
that is, which is not sin, or damnation? Of sin the Apostles words are
plain. Romans 7.
Sin seduced me, and slew (...); (...) (...), and I died; as likewise that
^hes. 2.
Coloss. 2.
we were dead in (our) sins. This death men li^ing may die, as the Apostle
says of wanton widows, ^. Tim. 5.
living she is dead; and of all the Gentiles ^phes. 4.
walking in the vanity of their mind, they are strangers from the life of
God, through the ignorance that is in them, because of the hardness of their
heart, who being past feeling have given themselves to work all uncleanness
even with greediness. Where the hardness of man's heart, void of all feeling
or (...) of God, and so running on in all wickedness, is by the Apostle
defined to be the death of the soul which is a depriving or ^anging from the
life of God. The second death, as I before have showed, is the la^e burning
with fire and brimstone, into which the devil and all the wicked shall be
cast. Show now a third death of the soul not in your extraordinary fancy and
folly, but in the word of God; to which these Fathers proportion their
speeches. If there be no such thing there, then directly, earnestly, and truly
do these Fathers avouch, that Christ d^ed no death of the soul.

Of Fathers it may be your Mastership makes small account, and will not stick
in the high persuasion of your great and deep learning to reject them all, as
ignorant of the principles of their faith, and so fitter to be taught then to
teach: but that proud peevishness (to give it no worse words) I leave to the
sober to censure: for an vpshot the Reader shall have a clear conclusion out
of the sacred Scriptures, that the soul of Christ never was, nor could be
dead; and consequently that these learned and ancient Fathers delivered sound
and true doctrine touching the soul of Christ, and The soul of Christ living
by gra^e, could no way be dead.
fully build their as^ertions on the maine foundations of the Divine
Scriptures. It is evident by nature, sense, and truth, that priuatiues can not
concur at one and the same time, in one and the same subject. For the one
expels the other, and so can not be found both together. Yea since the one
of them clearly remooueth the other, they can no more stand together, then may
contradiction. For that which lives, is not dead; and that which is dead,
lives not. I mean always the same time, and the same part. But the soul of
Christ by the manifest and manifold testimonies of holy Scripture did always
live in the fullness of faith, of hope, of love, of grace, of truth, of
spirit. It is evident therefore that the soul of Christ never died, nor could
die. Which of these assertions will you encounter? that Christ's soul may be
alive and dead both at one time? You would seem the leaf before, to shun
the shame of Defenc. page 140. li. 25.
this absurdity, that Christ's soul died and died not: will you now come
plainly and grossly to it by auouching that Christ's soul was at one and the
same time LIVING AND NOT LIVING, DEAD AND NOT DEAD, that is both ALIVE AND
DEAD? If you do, there is no man in England that has either eyes or ears to
see or hear, but he will reprove you for a manifest beliar of his sense, as
well as of Christ's soul. Will you smoothly set yourselfe to one side, and say
that Christ's soul was not alive? so many parts of life, as I have named in the
soul of Christ, so many pregnant proofs are there in holy Scripture that
Christ's soul was not only living, but as full of life as of grace during the
whole time of his passion. Neither is there any one of those things named by
me concerning the life of Christ's soul, which you can take from Christ
without apparent blasphemy. For if you deprive him of says, hope, love,
grace, tru^th, or the spirit of God; you leave him in Infidelity, desperation,
hatred of God, reprobation, falsehood, and make him no way the Son of God,
since they only are the sons of God, who are led by the spirit of God. Now
what shameful and impious enormities these are, you can easily conjecture. So
that of force you must confess the soul of Christ to be living, and endued
with all these parts and powers of the life of God, or else you must profess
your self to be nothing less then a Christian. And even the prayers which he
made and obedience which he showed in all and every his conflicts and agonies,
prove his soul not only to live, but to rest assuredly on the favor and
love of God toward him, which are no fruits nor effects of the death of the
soul, but exactly the conrrarie.

Yet pain you think Christ might all this while suffer, and that most
extreme; which you call the death of the soul.] Your calling sweet sower,
good badde; light darkness, and life death; changes not the natures of the
things, but conuinc^th your own ignorant and wilful headiness. You must call
things in Christ, not as pleases your fancy, but as the word of God
directs; and by witness thereof shall you never be able to prove, that
Christ's soul was dead; since thence so many sure demonstrations may be
brought, that Christ's soul was always John 1.
full of truth and grace, and of the Holy Ghost, not only in a greater
abundance then either man or Angel has, or can have, but above all measure.
And in this state if we should imagine with you, that John 3.
Christ's soul suffered the greatest sense of torments that any creature can
feel, yet this does not infer Christ's soul to be dead, but expressly the
contrary, since all pain, The soul of Christ in her greatest pains did most
show the life of patience and obedience to God.
yea if it were possible, pain equal with hell it self suffered in this life
with obedience and patience, (such as all Christ's sufferings were, except you
will wrappe him as well within sinning as suffering) does convince the soul of
Christ to be rather living then dead; as the martyrs of Christ had their souls
then most living in their greatest torments, when force of intolerable pain
excluded their spirits from their bodies. And therefore I do not a little
marvel how lightly you leap to determine and defend the death of Christ's
soul, since all pain endured with patience, obedience, and confidence,
proves the soul to be most alive to Godward, even when she departs, as
not able to sustain the fury and violence of the torment increasing. And
herein appears your notable error in calling that the death of Christ's
soul, which the Scripture calls his obedience and victory. For he was Phil.
2.
obedient to the death, even the death of the Cross; that is, in all his
sufferings unto the end: he Revel. 3.
overcame, and sat with his Father in his Throne, as we ouercomming shall sit
with Christ in his Throne. And other conquest in our conflicts there is none,
then constant resisting all temptations, and patient enduring all afflictions,
which Christ did before us, and we must after him by his example, both which
are most ^uident ^ignes and effects of the life and strength of the soul. To
believe, and love God, to hope in him, and call on him in pro^perity, declares
the soul to be (...), but in ad^ty and extrea^ty to continue and (...) those
duties of piety; are as for^ible powers and parts of the life of the soul, as
the Scripture makes any. Wherefore it is a gross oversight in you to call
that the death of the soul, which the Scripture makes the life of the soul,
and to pronounce Christ's soul to be dead in those respects, which the word of
God teaches to be the chiefest proofs of the life of the soul.

If you slide from the sense of absolute and inherent pain to the fear and
horror of dereliction and desperation in the soul of Christ (for you role at
your pleasure from one to another, and are constant in nothing, but in general
and doubtful speeches, as were the first authors of this conceit;) and make
that the death of the soul; No temptations without desparation kill the soul.
then know you that these temptations kill not the soul, till they plant
infidelity and desperation in the soul of man from which I trust you will
clear Christ, or else I m^st ask what difference betwixt you and a Turk. For
the Jews were not so wicked, as to take from Christ his trust in God, they
said of him, as he hung on the Cross, Matthew. 27.
he trusts in God, but they thought God had failed him in suffering him to
come to that cursed kind of death, wherein they knew not the wisdom or power
of God. But no Christian can be excused by ignorance, if he diminish the faith,
hope, love, patience or obedience of Christ in all his sufferings; and those
not decreasing, it was no way possible for the soul of Christ to be but
living, yea full of life and grace, how great soever the pains were, which he
endured, or the temptations which he resisted. So that both fathers and
Scriptures pursue you narrowly to this straight, that Christ's soul must
either always live, and so your doctrine is utterly false, which avouches the
death of Christ's soul to be the ground of our redemption; or if it died, it
must die with sin, since without sin there is no death of the soul; and
all pains and torments, that are possible in this life, if they be suffered
with obedience and patience, do rather demonstrate the life, then confirm the
death of the soul, even in the person of Christ Jesus.

Defenc. page 142. li. 24.
But our authorized Catechism published by master Nowel and the homily shows
that Christ suffered far more sharply then mere bodily death, even the
infinite pains of Gods wrath in his soul: which I pointed you unto before,
but you fairly leap it over.] You belie the one, and confute the other; and
then charge me with leaping them both over. The homily which indeed is
authorized, has no such thing, as you report; the Catechism, which is only
approved to be taught to children in schools, has more then you any way like
or receive, and yet not that, which you now defend. The sorrow and pain, which
the Catechism supposes in Christ's soul, was the fear and horror of eternal
death; that you not only refuse in plain words, but refell with many reasons,
as you think. The like you do for Christ's descent to hell, which the
Catechism confesses to be, not the presence of Christ's soul in Paradise, but
an effectual force thereof in hell, whereby the souls of the faithless saw
their damnation to be just, and the Devil himself perceived all his power to
be destroyed and overthrown. If you regard the Catechism so highly as you
pretend, why slip you from it in these or other points at your pleasure? why
obtrude you that to others as authorized, which your self do not admit?
indeed some men have of late years inclined to vehement and violent
temptations offered to the soul of Christ in his sufferings, and some to
fears and horrors even of eternal death, as master Calvin, and the
Catechism, which you cite; but if you may be suffered to shrincke from them at
your liking, never blame me, if I do not prefer them before all these
fathers. Howbeit to speak uprightly without wronging them, I do not see, that
either the Catechism or master Calvin do expressly defend the death of
Christ's soul, or the second death, but only the fear and horror, not of a
temporal hell, as you have distilled their infusion, but of eternal death;
which you with might and maine reject. And surely if they did contradict the
confession of all these fathers, I would adhere to the primative church of
Christ in matters of faith, rather then to the devices of late writers
dissenting from themselves and others. But touching the death of Christ's soul
I see no cause to depart from them, since they define no such thing, and
therefore they a^e idly alleged by you even as the rest are by you proudly
neglected. And till you leave this contemning of ancient Fathers, and straining
of later writers beyond their meaning, I for my part think you worthy of no
charge in the church of Christ, neither of that you had, wherein you sowed as
much cockle as corn, nor of that you may have, except you change your mind;
and learn to teach nothing to the people of God, but what is warranted by the
word of God.

Defenc. page 142. li. 36.
`You say I should have done well to have laid down for a show, which is
written in Easy he laid down his soul unto death; Verily if I had, it would
have made some show.] I said indeed the Prophet Esaias would make a better show
for the death of Christ soul, then the Poet Terence, whom only you produced
for proof thereof: but such was then and still is your presumption, that on
your bare word you will pronounce, what best pleases your fancy. Howbeit the
words of Esaias are but a show for the death of Christ's soul, since they
exactly declare his bodily death to be the redemption of mankind. For when the
soul in the Hebrew tongue, and in the old Testament is said to die, either by
the soul are meant the vegetative and sensitive powers of the soul, whereby
the spirit of man is united to his body, and which are quenched by death; or by
death is meant the distraction of the soul from the body, which violence of
death is common as well to the soul thrust from her body, as to the body left
without a soul. That signification of the word soul the Apostle shows, when
he prays, the 1 Thessalonians. 5.
whole spirit, and soul, and body of the faithful may be kept bla^lesse unto
the coming of Christ, and says Hebr. 4.
The word of God pearceth to the dividing a sunder of the soul, and the
spirit: And this sense of the word death the Scriptures express, when they
often mention, that the souls of the godly do, or would die. When Joseph's
brethren would have slain him, Ruben said unto them; Genes. 37. verse. 21.
Let us not strike him in the soul, that is, let us not kill him. So Balaam
seeing the glory of Gods people, said, Numb. 23. verse. 10.
Let my soul die the death of the Righteous, and mine end be like his: that
is, Let my soul depart in peace as the Righteous do. And least any think,
that Balaam spoke he knew not what, Sampson willing to end his life with
revenge of the dishonor done to God by the Philistines insulting at his bonds
and blindness, when he pulled the house on his and their heads, said, Iud^.
16. verse. 30.
Let my soul die with the Philistines. So Elias weary of his life, 1. Kings.
19. verse. 4.
desired for his soul to die, saying Lord take my soul; he meant from his
body. So Moses comparing a rape with murder, says. Deuter. 22. verse. 26.
This is as if a man should fall upon his fellow, and kill him in the soul.
And so Jeremy to Jerusalem, Iere 2. v 34.
In thy bosom is found the blood of the souls of the poor innocents.
Infinite places are there in the Scripture to like effect. All which declare,
that the soul of man feels the death of the body by her departing from it;
and that the Prophet Esaias, when he said of Christ, He Esa. 53. v. 12,
powered forth his soul unto death, Had no meaning but to describe Christ's
bodily death, in which the soul is powered out from the body, that is, wholly
separated from it. The very phrase of pouring forth the soul, which must
needs be from the body, shows that the Prophet directly described the death
of Christ's body, by which the soul is emptied and powered out of the body, as
out of a vessel replenished with it. So that here you have as much hold for
the death of Christ's soul, as you had before, which is utterly none.

Defenc. page 143. li. 1.
You earnestly affirm that this word signifies soul or spirit in a proper
sense. Also how resolute are you forbidding to divert from the native and
proper significations of words, but when the letter impugneth the grounds of
Christian faith and charity.] In the Page; 167. which you quote, I neither
spoke of this place, nor of this word; and therefore your considering cappe was
not on, when you so much mistook my words. I know Nephesh is applied as well
to beasts, who have no souls, as to bodies once living, but then dead. And
therefore of Nephesh I affirmed no such thing: of S. Lukes words repeating
David's, and exactly distinguishing the soul from the flesh in Christ, I did
indeed avouch, and still do, that we must not rashly depart from the proper
significations of that and other words in the Scripture, except the letter
breed some inconvenience to faith or good-maners. But what is that to this
place, where though the word Nephesh be granted properly to import the soul,
yet the rest shows it to be referred to the death of the body, because the
soul is powered forth of the body by the death thereof, where before it was
contained and enclosed.

Defenc. page 143. li. 15.
The rather if we note that which follows: he was counted with sinners; that
is he was punished by God as sinners are punished, and not by the Jews only
counted among Thieves.] You take upon you to control both the Prophet and the
Evangelist; who refer this misiudging of Christ to men, and not to God. Esaias
says, Esa. 53. v. 4.
We did judge him as plagued, and smitten of God, but he was wounded for our
transgressions. And S. Mark, when the Jews had crucified Christ amidst two
thieves, says; Mark. 15. verse. 28.
Thus the Scripture was fulsilled, which says he was counted among the wicked:
Thereby noting their error, not Christ's desert. Besides it is somewhat saucily
said, that Christ was accounted wicked in the righteous judgment of God, and
not by the malicious error of the Jews. Such pleasure you take against both
Scriptures and Fathers to avouch what you list, yea though it draw with it an
injurious slander to the son of God. The words of the Prophet, he verse. 9.
made his grave with the wicked, compared with those that solow, though he did
no wickedness; clearly convince, that Christ was an innocent, though he were
counted and used with malefactors; and that the Prophet never meant to correct
Gods judgment as corrupt, but to show the wisdom and goodness of God,
delivering his Son to be esteemed and used as wicked by the wicked, and not
by himself. Howbeit there is no necessity to refer these words to the person
of God the Father, but they more fittely express the humility of Christ
himself, who made his grave, that is, was content to die in the midst of two
Thieves, and to be buried as they were, considering the coherence with the
words precedent; which out of all question must be understood of Christ
himself. For thus they stand. verse. 8.
He was cut out of the land of the living, he was plagued for the transgression
of my people. verse. 9.
He made his grave with the wicked Where no reason forces any change of
persons; and so the same person of Christ, who was cut from the land of the
living, made his grave with the wicked.

Defenc. page 143. li. 11.
But chiefly considering withal, that also before he made his soul a sin
offering. Therefore you must needs grant, that Gods word makes Christ's soul
to be sacrificed for our sin. And we desire no other death of the soul.] It
is marvel you do not out of this place infer, that Christ's soul was made
sin, for the words are, when he shall make his soul sin. But an offering
for sin is the usual signification of that word in the Scriptures, and
therefore you did well in confessing so much, to save me that labor. Christ
then made his soul an offering for sin; what deduce you out of those words?
[ we desire no other death of the soul.] In faith you be a silly sacrificer,
that know not a dead soul A dead soul is no sacrifice for sin.
to be no sacrifice for sin. A dead soul is void of all things, which should
please God; and so can be no sacrifice accepted for sin. Psalm. 51.
A troubled spirit (sorrowing for sin) is a sacrifice to God, says David.
But does repentance kill or quicken the soul? God Acts 11.
gives repentance unto life, that is, he raises the soul first dead in
sin, by repentance unto life. 2. Cor 7.
Worldly sorrow causes death, but Godly sorrow causes repentance unto
salvation. Now salvation is not the death, but life of the soul. Hebr. 11.
Without faith it is impossible to please God. And the sacrifice, that shall
abolish sin, must needs please God. It must then not want faith, by which the
righteous live. Wherefore by your leave I make the clean contrary conclusion
out of those words. The soul of Christ was a sacrifice for sin; but a dead
soul is no sacrfice for sin; the soul of Christ therefore was not dead.
[Without death, you will say, there is no redemption for sin.] Without blood,
which notes the death of the body, there is no redemption for sin; but the
soul, I trust, has no blood to be shed. And so much the bodies of beasts
offered, did prefigure, I mean the death of the body but not of the soul.
Willing obedience, constant patience, and assured confidence in the soul of
Christ submitting it self to the counsel and will of his Father, was the
spiritual and inward sacrifice, which Christ joined with the external and
bloody sacrifice of his body. For having two parts, as all men have, a soul
and a body; neither part might be withdrawn from this sacrifice; but his
body must be yielded unto death, and his soul must yield her self pure,
undefiled, and void of all spot, yet feeling and enduring withal meekness
and humbleness of heart, the pain of death separating her from her body. And
grant the soul were here taken for life, what so great improper or unused
speech is that, since the soul is truly and properly the life of the body.

Defenc. page 143. li. 16.
We deny not but this phrase, Animam ponere, is to lay down the life, and in
diverse plac^s signifies no more then simply to die, both concerning Christ and
other men: yet this is no necessary reason that here in I say the soul
should be taken figuratively for the life only; the rather seeing here the
text precisely sets down the great work of our redemption, and to take it
as we do literally, impugneth no ground at all of faith or charity.] The
words to lay down or power forth the soul import as you confess, not the
death of the soul, but the death of the body. And since in the words of Esai,
Christ powered forth his soul unto death, there can by no learning be more
concluded out of that place, but that Christ willingly laid down his soul to
depart from that body, which is no way the death of the soul, as you fancy,
but a plain description of the death of Christ's body. And where for your
pleasure you will take it literally, that is no proof for the death of
Christ's soul, because the word soul may be properly taken, when it is powered
forth of the body by death; but it notes a willing submission to death, where
otherwise our souls are taken from us, or we loose them whether we will or no,
when we are left or put to death against our wills.

Defenc. page 143. li. 27.
Austen has not a word against us, in that great place which you cite, his
whole argument being to an other purpose.] Austins words in that place be
pregnant against you for all your dissembling. August. in Iohannem tractat. 47.
Quid fecit passio, quid fecit mors, nisi corpus ab anima separauit? What did
(Christ's) passion, what did death, but separate (his) body from his soul? If
the death and passion of Christ did nothing but separate Christ's soul from his
body; then neither Christ's death nor passion prevailed to the death of his
soul. And if his soul were not touched by death, then was it never dead: and
so much Saint Austen witnesses in the very same tractate. Ibidem.
Verbum non est mortuum, anima illa non est mortua. The word died not, the
soul (of Christ) died not. And therefore the death of Christ, which the
Scriptures every where note, was the breathing of his soul out of his body,
and not the separating of his soul from God, as you would have it. Austins
purpose in that place you little conceive, if you make him have but one
purpose. As occasion served he taught many things pertinent and incident to his
text, which was large, even from the 10. verse unto the 20. of that John 10.
Chapter: And these words, I lay down my soul for my sheep, being part of
his text, he had just occasion to treat, what death Christ died for his
sheep, which was neither the death of his diety, nor the death of his soul,
but only the separating of his soul from his body, if this make not against
you, you have good luck, that nothing will reach you: his words refute the
foolish error, which you would establish, that by the Scriptures Christ may be
said to have died the death of the soul, as well as the death of the body,
which Austen expressly contradicts, auouching the one, and denying the
other, in as plain speech, as any wise man can require.

Defenc. page 143. li. 34.
All your other discourse here against me is almost nothing but reuilings and
reproaches and bitter skoffes. Yet you say you have not learned nor used to give
reuiling speeches. Have you not learned it? is it then natural unto you? N^y
you mean these are fatherly warnings and admonitions. If your fatherly
admonitions are such, what are your Lordly rebukes? If these be your bishoply
blessings, what are your cursings?] What my discourse is against H^ your
defendour (...) some what pleasurable.
you, mu^t be left neither to your censure nor mine, but to the Readers. If I
called your conclusions bold and foolish, showing neither learning nor wit; but
sauouring only of the vanity of your own conceits, the truth forced me so
to do, which I might not betray. When you rejected the judgments and
expositions of the fathers one after an other, as Trea. pa. 69. li. 67. 68.
fond and absurd, void of sense, reason, and likelihood; yea most absurd, and
too fond to be spoken; and trampled on their names and credits, as you would on
nutshels, affirming Ibid. pa. 95. 96.
It is only the Fathers abusiue speaking and altering the usual and ancient
sense of words, that bred this error; their unapt and perilous translating,
that confirmed the same; and that is a thing too rife with the Fathers, yea
with some of the ancient est of them, to alter and change the Authentike use
of words, whereby it is easy for errors and gross mistakings to creep in;
is, or ought any good man to be so patient, or rather negligent as to hear a
parrat thus prate against the whole Church of Christ in her best times next
after the Apostles, and not only to spare his folly, but to reverence his
pride? For my part I must confess, I took my self bound in duty to yield
him no more regard, then he deserved, that thus sought to blaze his errors with
contempt of all men save of himself. If therefore your absurd positions and
proofs, S. Treatiser, did not justly provoke these replies, which I made, in
the opinion of any wise and Christian Reader, I cry your mercy; but if you
think me to blame for not taking you to be some Patriarch of Vtopia, because
you can scoff and mock as well at Bishops, as at fathers, Solomon advises me
to answer some men according to their merits, Prou. 26.
least they seem wise in their own eyes. Your Mockes I remit to your self, I
am as ready to bear^ them for the truth, as you to give them. Howbeit you
wanted colors in your coat, when you made such pastime with the blessing of
Bishops; and pepper in your porrage, when I taking learned for skillful, (which
is not strange to any save to you, whose skill is void of all good learning)
you would needs make your self such mirth, that railing must be natural to
me, because I was not learned or expert therein. I wish these were the worst of
your toys, and then my sufferance should quiet the whole.

Defenc. page 144. li. 8.
Finally that is not true, where you say, the flesh does often signify the
soul in us.] Is it ignorance or malice which drives you to this waywardness,
to avouch you know not, or care not what, so you seem to cross that I say?
better learned then you, or I, observed that before me, which you affirm to be
false. Austen says, August. d^ (...) and Symbolo ^a. 10.
Anima cum carnalia bona adhuc appetit, caro nominatur. The soul, so long as
it affects fleshly things, is called flesh. And Ambrose. Ambros. in 6. c^.
(...). ad Romanos.
Caro aliquando corpus intelligitur, velipsa anima sequens corporea vitia. The
flesh is sometimes understood to be the body of m^, or the soul it self
addicted to corporal vices. And Ierom. H^. in 5. ca. ^pist. ad Galat.
Anima inter carnem spiritumque consistens, quando se tradiderit carni, caro
dicitur. The soul consisting between the fles^ and the spirit, when it
yields it self to the flesh, is called flesh. And least you clamor against
these Fathers, as your Treatise does, that they change the authentike use of
words, hear what Zanchius a man of good judgment, though a late writer, says
thereof. Zanchij tractat. Theologic^ de peccato originali These. 6.
Flesh and blood revealed not this unto thee, says Christ to Peter. The mind
of man he calls flesh and blood: why so? because it is wholly corrupted by the
flesh, so that it sauoureth nothing but flesh. How think you Sir, is it true
or false which I said, that the soul is often called flesh because of her
corruption, as well as the body?

Defenc. page 144. li. 12.
Here I desire the Reader to change a word or two in my former Treatise: for
always to set usually, and for a Man to set Christ. Because since I find that
flesh and spirit together applied to men do once (2. Corinthians. 7. verse. 1.)
signify merely the body and soul. Which then I thought every where did
signify in us our corrupt and regenerate man. Which oversight the Bishop
spieth not, but in this place confirms. The Bishop, that professed he found
few true sentences in your Treatise, had neither will nor leisure to traduce
them all; but observing your errors in doctrine, remitted this and many other
ouersights as not preiudicing the maine point in question. As for his
confirming it, that is one of your usual verities, who by the defending of
falsehood have gotten you such an habit, that you can scant see or speak a
truth, when it touches but the skirts of your cause. And how come you now to
put so great a difference betwixt always and usually, where before you did
interpret always to be ordinarily? but now you find flesh and spirit together
applied to men once to signify merely the body and soul. Mean you in all
the Scriptures, or in the new Testament only? You call it the Treatis. page
136. li. 8.
perpetual use of the Scripture, and so must include the old Testament as well
as the new, except you will bar the old from being part of the Scripture.
What then shall become of that, which Moses so often ascribes to God, when he
says? Numb. 16. and 27.
O God, the God of the spirits of all flesh. Prays he for the spirits of men,
or of beasts? If you will straighten your words to the new Testament, how
insolent a bragger, and negligent a Reader of the Scripture are you; that first
said it was always so, and now correcting your error say you find it once
otherwise, where a child might easily have found it oftener. The Apostle
decreed the Offender at Corinth to be 1. Co^. 5.
delivered unto Satan, for the destruction of the flesh, that the spirit might
be saved in the day of the Lord. And to the Hebrews he tells us, Heb. 12.
We had fathers of our flesh, which corrected us, and we reverenced them.
Should we not much more be subject to the Father of spirits? In both which
places the spirit of force must signify the substance of man's soul.

Defenc. page 144. li. 19.
Finally to make an end with your Fathers and Councels, I have showed before
that your large claim proves a very short gain. For in substance and full
effect they are evidently and generally against you and for us. If thou think
Christian Reader, that I charge this man unjustly with impudent facing, behold
but these words, and say what thou think of them. He that has not brought,
nor can not bring one evident or pertinent word out of any Father for the death
of Christ's soul; he yelleth out with open throat^, that generally and
evidently they are in substance and full effect for him and against me. It is
no time here to repeat, what is past; by that which is said, thou may easily
judge, on which side the Fathers stand with full confession of the truth and
their faith. Bragging is boys play, where all performance wants. li. 24.
[ As for their denying that Christ died in his soul, I have answered before.]
With senseless and shameful shifts, that Christ's soul died not as the body
did, that he died not the ordinary death of the soul expressed in the
Scriptures, but an extraordinary newly devised by your self; and more then
this in sum and substance you have not said one word. li. 25.
[ Further where you bring them in many places saying by his blood only he
redeemed us, and he suffered only in his body, they are abused by you
woonderfully, not in their words but in their meaning.] You would feign change
dying into suffering, and have your Reader imagine, that I say Christ's soul
suffered nothing at all; but these are now so stale tricks of yours, that every
man rejects them as fast as I do. From death you (...) to sufferings, from
sufferings to proper sufferings of the soul, to which you add as a
supplussage, the pains of the damned from the immediate hand of God. And so
where you find any Father affirm that Christ GRIEVED, FEARED OR SORROWED in
soul, which are the natural passions of man's soul common to good and badde,
you look no farther, but presently pronounce that Father makes evidently with
you. But awake out of this ignorant l^thargie, there be many steps between
their words and your wiles, which you will never tread over with any the least
show of truth or proof. If I have not abused their words in alleging them,
as you confess, and I assure my self, I have not, but where the Printer
perchance has made some fault, which no man can avoid, (as page 81. August. de
Trinitate li. 11. the Printer has set for lib. 13. and some such) then have I
less abused their meaning; whereof I make every Reader judge, and so refer
my collecting to their censuring, which is no abuse.

Defenc. page 144. li. 28.
They striving against Arians and such other heretics, who would have Christ's
Deity to take part in his sufferings for our redemption; the godly ancient
writers do hereupon say, he suffered and satisfied for us only in his body,
not excluding the proper and immediate sufferings of his spirit. Let the
Authors themselves be viewed, if you think 1 affirm of them falsely.] Against
whom they write, is not so much, as what they write, and how they confute those
heretics, whom they undertake. The positions, which they establish out of the
Scriptures against such heresies, are most to be regarded; by their proofs you
shall see their purpose. To confound those misbeleeuers, that would have the
Godhead of Christ suffer in his flesh, or together with his flesh, the Fathers
do soundly oppose, first that the Godhead is inviolable, impassible, immutable,
and such like properties of the Godhead. Secondly that the soul of Christ was
subject to no kind of death, neither of sin nor damnation, which are not the
death of the body, as you wilfully, but most absurdly would wrest it: and
therefore the Godhead was much more free, not only from this death of the
body, but from all touch of any kind of death. Thirdly, to show what it was
in Christ that died, since neither the Deity nor the soul of Christ could die
any kind of death, they prove that that which died, was a mortal body,
buried and raised again the third day according to the Scriptures. Which
accidents and attributes belonging only to the body of Christ; It is most
certain by the sacred Scriptures that only the body of Christ was yielded to
death for the redemption of our sins. These be the chiefest of their reasons,
though they have many others tending to the same issue, which whether they
truly and effectually exclude the death of Christ's soul from the work of
our redemption, I leave it to their judgment, that shall peruse the former
places by me cited; or view the Fathers themselves in their full discourses.
And yet a number of these Fathers in the places by me alleged do not refute
the Arians, but handle professedly other points of our redemption and
salvation: as Tertullian in his book of the Resurrection of the flesh,
Chrysostom in his Homily of drunkenness and of the resurrection, Augustine in
his 99. Epistle, and those Chapters of his fourth Book de Trinitate, which I
produced; Gregory upon Job, Bernard in his Sermons to the Soldiers of the
Temple, Bid in his Homilies, and Albinus in his questions: these I say do not
there take in hand to refell the Arians, but to deliver what kind of death
Christ died to free us from all deaths; And resolve, as we may read, that by
one kind of death, which was the death of Ch^istes body only, both our
deaths of body and soul were utterly abolished. And whether this be true or
false, which I avouch, I wish no better trial then the present view of their
sayings, whom now you stroke as ancient and godly writers, but not long since
you stripped as fond, absurd, the peruerters of Authentike words, and occasioners
of gross errors.

Defenc. page 145. li. 1.
Tertullian and Cyrill will give a taste hereof for all the rest.] You will
give a fresh taste of your unlearned mistaking them, otherwise their places as
they make nothing for your pretenses, so were they objected and answered
before. [ li. 2.
In Tertullians words, Christ's flesh, is expressly opposed to his Deity, not
to his soul; so that evidently he means thereby his whole manhood.] If you
mean that Tertullian still conceived Christ's flesh to be humane flesh, that
is not amiss, but wide from your matter: But if you would observe, that
Tertullian in that tractate speaking of Christ's flesh, does not distinguish it
from Christ's soul, or makes common to Christ's soul whatsoever he there
a^firmeth of Christ's flesh, it is a palpable and pestilent untruth. When he
says, H^c vox carnis and animae, id est hominis. This was the voice of his
flesh, and of his soul; that is of his Manhood; does he not in exact words
distinguish Christ's flesh from his soul? Again where he says, Tertullianus
aduersus Praxeam.
Denique (spiritum) posuit and statim obijt: spiritu enim manente in carne,
caro omnino mori non potest: Christ laid down (his spirit) and straight way
died; for his spirit abiding in his flesh, the flesh could not die at all: can
there be any doubt, but the name of Christ's flesh here does not contain his
humane spirit or soul, though you avouch the contrary? Of the attributes of
Christ's flesh he says, and Ibidem.
videtur, and contrectatur per carnem. Christ is seen, and handled by the
flesh; which I hope he is not by his soul. Though therefore he often interpret
carnem, id est hominem; flesh, that is man, showing he speaks of Christ, who
had both body and soul, yet that does no way prove, that what he affirms
of Christ's flesh must be common to both parts of Christ's manhood; which
simple shift when you have once taken up, you can never make an end of it.

Defenc. page 145. li. 5.
If he had meant to exclude any part or faculty of the soul from suffering, as
he does his Godhead, he had consirmed that heresy against which he strives,
as before I noted.] You keep close to your own notes, though they want both
truth and judgment. To make Christ's soul as impassible as his Godhead, was
to make him no man; for man's soul is mutable, and subject to affections and
passions, which God is not. But what is this to the death of Christ's soul, if
it were an humane soul and not equal with his Deity? or what heresy does
this confirm, if Tertullian deny Christ's soul to be mortal, which he
ascribes to the flesh of Christ? You talk much of heresi^s, but take heed,
you leap not head and ears into them, whiles you devise new deaths, and new
hels for the soul of Christ without and against the rules of the sacred
Scriptures.

Defenc. page 145. li. 7.
It seems he yields the name of death to this suffering of Christ's whole
manhood; in saying, quod vnctum est, mortuum ostendit: that died, which
received the anointing. For I hope his spirit was anointed with the holy
Ghost, as well as his flesh.] You do we^l to ad^e seeming to this saying: for
to him that understands little, it may so seem, when in truth it is nothing
less. Tertullian interpreting the name Christ, which is as much as Anointed,
says; Christ died, not as he was the word, and Son of God, but as he was
Anointed, that is in his humane flesh, which was anointed as well as his humane
spirit. Does he say, all that was anointed, died, as you most falsely would
enforce his speech? It suffices then that he died, not as he was God, who can
no way be subject to death, but as he was man having one part mortal, which
was his body; and he died that death, which is common to all, I mean the
separating of the soul from the body; not that which is special to the
wicked, as rei^ction from the favor and grace of God. Tertullians own words
next before are these. Tertullianus aduersus Praxeam.
Cum duae substantiae censeantur in Christo Jesus, diuina and humana, cons^et
autem immortalem esse diuina^, cum mortalem quae humana sit, apparet, quatenus
eum mortuum dicat, id est (...) carnem, and hominem, and silium hominis, non
qua spiritum, and sermonem, and filium Dei. D^do ^que Christus mortuus est, id
est vnctus; id quod vnctum est, mortuum ostendit: (...) (...) c^rnem. Where
there are two substances in Christ Jesus, a divine and ^n humane, and it is
c^rtaine, that the divine is immortal, and the humane mortal; it is plain
wherein the Apostle pronounced Christ to be dead, that is, as he was flesh and
man, and the Son of man, not as he was a spirit, and the word, and Son of
God. In saying then Christ, that is the Anointed, was dead, he shows that
which was Anointed, even his flesh to have been dead. Will you teach out of
these words, that Christ's soul was certainly mortal, because it was not
his divine substance, and that he died in soul, because he died in his humane
nature, as a man, which Tertullian expounds to be his flesh; and likewise his
death to be the laying down of his soul, or breathing out of his spirit as
the Evangelist describes it?

Defenc. page 145. li 14.
My false translating of him, which you note, is not worth the noting, but you
do worse in false placing those his last rehearsed words for advantage: in
Tertulli^n they are used more generally coming long before.] Your
mistranslating can not be defended, and my misplacing, as you call it, is no
way prejudicial either to the truth, or the authors intent. What should hinder
me to allege diverse sentences out of any Writer occurrent in one and the same
Treatise, and tending all to declare his meaning, and to d^ct your
misconstruction of him? I use to set Ibidem by the side, to show that it is a
new sentence; which if the Printer omit, what wrong is done to the Reader, so
long as I add or alter nothing, as you do? He that will rightly conceive
another sense, must compare his words uttered in the same discourse, and
belonging to the same matter. You say they are used more generally in their
own place, this were somewhat, if your saying were any thing worth; but if
they be diverse proofs of one thing, though in place one before another, they
all have one intention, and must have one construction. Your manner is to make
what you list of every man's words, my course is to show by the words
precedent and consequent, that I take the right sense of each Writer, not upon
the advantage of one word wrested from the rest; but out of the whole context,
to manifest the true meaning of each man's speech. If therefore Tertullian had
said, Haec mors est carnis and animae, this is the death of soul and flesh, as
he says, Haec vox est carnis and animae, this is the voice of soul and flesh,
It had been worth the obiecting; and yet I must tell you, that Tertullian being
of opinion, that the soul was traduced with the seed of the body, when he
divides a man into flesh, soul, and spirit, as here he does, by naming all
three parts; it may well be doubted, whether he spoke of the substance of the
soul, which is a spirit; or of the powers of sense and speech, which fail by
death and are often comprised in the name of the soul. But it is clear by
Tertullians own words, that Christ's humane spirit was not dead or forsaken,
since he there urges, it was committed to the fathers hands, and consequently
was not forsaken, nor left to death, as the rest of Christ's manhood was.
Tertullianus aduersus Praxeam.
Caeterum non reliquit pater filium, in cuius manibus filius spiritum suum
posuit. Denique posuit and statim obijt: spiritu enim manente in carne, caro
omnio mori non potest. But the Father did not forsake the Son, into whose
hands the son laid down his spirit. For he laid it down, and presently
died: the spirit remaining in the flesh the flesh could not die at all. The
Father then left the flesh of his son unto death, but he took Christ's spirit
into his hands, and so for the son to be forsaken, was nothing else but for
his flesh to be left to death. This is Tertullians own exposition of himself,
howsoever you would dally and deceive both your self and your Reader by
general or special, before or after.

Defenc. page 145. li. 24.
Cyrill also even in that book which you cite for you shows that he
excludes but Christ's deity though he mention only his suffering in flesh.
Christ then is God, impassible as God, passible according to the flesh.] You
put a whole But to Cyrills sense, more then you find in his text, and yet the
words passible and impassible, are not the things, we strive for. Impassible is
that, which by no possibility can admit any mutation or alteration, by force or
affection, which is proper to God alone. So no part of Christ's manhood was
impassible. But though his soul were passible with diverse affections and
impressions, how will it follow from these or any other words in Cyrill, that
Christ's soul died? Cyrill has in many words showed, which I before have
cited, that Christ's soul was subject to all humane and natural passions or
affections but without sin or corruption; in this sense what does it help
you to have the soul of Christ passible by nature, and not impassible as his
godhead is? but you love to loyter, that thus still repeat one lesson, not only
besides your book, but against your book.

Defenc. page 145. li 30.
In a word so do all the rest, as before is partly noted.] A total sum is
as soon made of lies, as of trueths. All the answer you give is, they spoke
against other Heretics, not against you; but this is the danger, that if such
points, as they prove against other Heretics, make against you, you had need
beware of the conjunction and communion between you and other Heretics.
Against li. 31.
Nestorius they affirm, you say, the union of Christ's natures.] Why skippe you
Sermo. fo. 331.
Athanasius, Epiphanius, Ambrose, and Augustine, that never heard of Nestorius?
who teach directly, that Christ's suffering of death mentioned in the
Scriptures, was the suffering thereof in his mortal body, which died and rose
again; and by the death of this body was the ransom for us all paid. Ambros.
in Luc^ ca 4. de ductu Christi in desertum.
What pray (says Ambrose) could there be (for death and Satan) but his body?
You say his soul. August. in Psalm. 148.
Accepit ex te vnde moreretur pro te. Non posset mori nisi card. Non posset
mori nisi mortale corpus. Christ took of thee (says Austen) wherein he might
die for thee. There could die (in him) nothing but flesh. There could die (in
him) nothing but his mortal body. These and many such places yon cleanly
skippe, and tell in a word they are all for you. [ li. 32.
They preserve the properties of each. They therefore hold not his only bodily
sufferings.] Nay they therefore hold not the death of Christ's soul, since
that is no necessary property of man's nature assumed by Christ. Their reasons
likewise and expositions of the Scriptures, which you pervert, exclude your
conceit of the death of Christ's soul most apparently. (...). The Deity could
not suffer (death, say they) because it was no body. Then only the body
could suffer that death which Christ died. And since the soul is no body,
that also must be free from the death which Christ died. These positions
likewise of the Christian faith, that the Son of God was wounded, crucified,
dead, and rose again for us all, they expound to be expressly meant of his
body wounded, crucified, dead, and raised the third day; so that where you
would cavil, that the name of Christ's flesh imports his soul as well as
his body, they directly refell you, and pronounce all these things to be
verified of his body, and not of his soul or deity, since nothing in him could
suffer death but his body. And the Scriptures that Christ by the grace of God
tasted death for all, and by death conquered him that had power over death, and
such like, they exactly refer to

the death of his body; which argues all your doctrine of the death of Christ's
soul to be merely superfluous, if not wholly pernicious.

Defenc. page 145. li. 33.
Is this then your great boast of all the Fathers and councels? nay are they
well used at your hands, to be thus drawn clean from their purpose to an
opinion which they never thought of? is this good dealing toward Gods people
to tell them, that the Fathers generally teach the only bodily sufferings of
Christ and deny our assertion of his souls peculiar suffering, which they
justify and con^irme indeed?] Intrueth good Reader if I were not too well
acquainted with this man's unshamefastness, I should think I rather heard a
plaier on the stage, then a Penman in the Church. Is it possible for a man of
any learning or understanding thus in print and open view of the whole Realm
to rage, revell, and rush on with lying, craking and facing, when he speaks
not one true word? for first, Sir flincher, is this the point here or any
where proposed by me, whether Christ's sufferings were only bodily? did I
promise or produce any Fathers to that end? is it not the death of the soul,
and the pains of the damned, which I impugned in Christ's sufferings? have I
not most truly performed, which I ever professed, that the whole Church of
Christ for so many hundred years never thought, never heard of the death of
Christ's soul in the work of our redemption, but rested their faith on the
death of Christ's body as a most sufficient price both for the souls and bodies
of the faithful? What cunning then is this, first to shift your hands of that,
you can no way prove, though you still do and must profess it, and then to
clamor at me for drawing the Fathers clean from their intent and meaning? is
this the way to credit your new Creed, by such devices and stratagemes to
intertaine the people of God, least they should see how far you be slid from
the ancient and primative Church of Christ? take a while but the thought of a
sober man, and this pangue will soon be ouerpast. Did you not undertake to
prove the death of Christ's soul, by Scriptures, which indeed I first and most
required; and have you so done? look back to your miserable mistakings and
palpable peruertings of the words of the holy Ghost, and tell us what one
syllable you have brought sounding that way? are your secrets such that they be
no where revealed in the word of God? must all faith come from thence, and is
your faith exempted, that it shall have no foundation there? are men and Angels
accursed, that preach any other Gospel then was delivered and written by
Christ's Apostles; and shall you be excused for devising a new kind of
redemption by the death of Christ's soul no where witnessed in the Scriptures?
you see how easy it were to be eloquent against you in a just and true cause;
but words must not win the field. What I impugned, my sermons will show; what
I have proved, I will not proclaim. If I have failed in that I endeavored,
the labor is mine, the liberty is the Readers to judge. Let the indifferent
read it, they shall find somewhat to direct them: let the contentious skanne
it, they shall see somewhat to harle their have, and perhaps to restrain their
stiffness. What ever it be, I leave it to others, since the discourser hastes
toward an end, and so do I.

Defenc. page 146. li. 2
This is the profit that comes by ordinary flaunting with Fathers, which many
do frequent in these days. Think they, if the Scriptures alone suffice not
for things in religion, that the Fathers will suffice? or if the Scriptures may
be wrested by subtle heads, that yet the Fathers can not.] Is it not enough for
your self to be a despiser of all antiquity and sobriety, but you must
insult at them that bear more regard to either than you do? If to flaunt with
Fathers be so great a fault, which yet respects their judgments that have
been liked and allowed from age to age in the Church of Christ, what is it to
fliske with pride and folly grounded on nothing but on self-love and
singularity? It were to be wished, that even some of the best writers of our
age, as they think themselves, had had more respect to the ancient Fathers,
then they show; we should have wanted a number of novelties in the Church of
God, which now we are troubled withal, as well in Doctrine as in discipline.
This course of concurring with the lights of Gods Church before our time in
matters of faith, though you mislike, other manner of men then you are, or ever
will be, have allowed and followed, as August. contra I^num. li. 1.
Augustine, Theodor. diol. 2. and 3.
Theodorete, Leo epist. 97. (...). Leonem.
Leo, Cassi. de incarnat Domini li. 7 ca. 5.
Cassianus, Gelas. de duabus in Christo nat^ris.
Gelasius, Vigilius li. 5. cap. 6.
Vigilius, and the two Hispalensi concilium 2. ca. 13.
councels of Hispalis, and others; not doubting the sufficiency of the
Scriptures, but showing the correspondencie of believing and interpreting the
Scriptures in all ages to have been the same, which they embraced and urged.
And in all evenness of reason, were it better to feed the people with our
private conceits pretended out of Scripture; or to let such, as be of
judgment, understand, that we frame no faith but such as in the best times
has been collected and received from the grounds of holy Scripture, by the
wisest and greatest men in the Church of God? your only example turning and
winding the words of the holy Ghost to your own conceits, will show, how
needful it is not to permit every prater to reign over the Scriptures with
figures and phrases at his pleasure, and thence to fetch what faith he list. If
you so much reverence the Scriptures, as you report, which were to be wished
you would, why devise you doctrine not expressed in the Scriptures? Why teach
you that touching man's redemption, which is no where written in the word of
God? Indeed the Scriptures are plain in this point of all others, what death
Christ died for us, if you did not pervert them against the histories of the
Evangelists and testimonies of the Apostles. Omit the description of his death
so farely witnessed by the four Evangelists, what exacter words can we have
then the Apostles, that Christ Coloss. 1.
pacisied things in earth, and things in heaven by the blood of his cross, and
reconciled us, which were strangers and enemies, in the body of his flesh
through death. Believe what you read, and what you read not in the word of
God, believe not, and this matter is ended: but by Synecdoches without cause
you put to the Scriptures, not what you read in them, but what you like best,
and by Metaphores and Metonimies, you will take body for substance, and flesh
for soul. And so where the Apostle avouches, that we were reconciled to God,
through death in the body of (Christ's) flesh, you tell us, we could not be
redeemed without the death of Christ's soul, and the essence of the pains of
the damned suffered by sudden touches from the immediate hand of God after an
extraordinary manner. If you teach no doctrine but delivered in the
Scriptures, aband on these devices not expressed in the Scriptures. If you
content your self with the all sufficient word of God in matters of faith, you
must relinquish the death of Christ's soul and pains of the damned as no part
of our redemption, since there is no such thing contained in the word of God.
To me and others that believe, the words of Paul are sufficient, declaring this
to be the very ground of the Gospel, which he received and delivered, that
Christ 1. Cor. 15.
died for our sins according to the Scriptures, and that he was buried, and
that he arose the third day according to the Scriptures. Whence by a full and
fair coherence I collect, that whatsoever died in Christ according to the
Scriptures, that was buried and raised the third day according to the
Scriptures. But it is more then manifest by the Scriptures, that the soul of
Christ was neither buried, nor raised from death the third day, but only his
body. It is therefore as plain to me by the all sufficient word of God, that
the soul of Christ died not for our sins according to the Scripture.

Your Defenc. page 146. li 23.
section touching material fire in hell, I have sifted at large before, I
shall not need to say any more of it. Your hemming in all the world on your
side, Defenc page 147. li. 25.
not some, nor the most, or best, but even all, and every one, both Churches
and writers in the world, who are Protestants; and leaving none to uphold the
doctrine which I deliver, but Papists, Jesuits, and Friars, is, as I told you
before, and must tell you again, an egregious lie, so loud and lewd, that all
the belles in London, if they should jar together, could not yield a more
offensive sound. That every new writer speaks of some fears, sorrows,
temptations, or painful sufferings in the soul of Christ, never was, nor is,
by me denied, neither do I in my Sermons take upon me to determine, what
fears, temptations, pains and sorrows Christ might and did suffer in his
soul: only I added, that we must beware, we diminish not his faith, hope,
love, confidence, obedience, patience, and other gifts and graces of the spirit
of God in the soul of Christ, which the Scripture clearly makes to be
without want, defect, or measure in him. Shunning those sands, I left every man
to his liberty to speak or write of Christ's fears and sorrows, as far as
any circumstance of holy Scripture did duly enforce: but the death of the
soul, the pains of hell, and of the damned, and the second death if any
sought to fasten on the soul of Christ, whosoever they were, they did it by
their own surmises, they had no warrant for any of those in the word of God,
except they took the pains of hell figuratively for great and intolerable,
such as sometimes the Godly in their humane weakness think and complain
they feel or fear, though they come nothing near the true pains of hell,
which cannot be endured in this mortal life and flesh by the evidence of
nature and Scripture. This being my constant course, as my Sermons printed do
apparently witness, what folly, what madness is this, so egerly and often to
challenge me for contradicting the whole world, when it is but your immoderate
greediness or giddiness to think, that every man, who writes any thing of
the fears or sufferings of Christ's soul, does presently teach as you do, the
death of Christ's soul and the substance of the most vehement pains of the
damned, yea the second death to be a necessary part of our redemtion, which
Christ must suffer, before he could ransom us? To censure men's private
opinions I take no pleasure, some men otherwise very learned and laborious,
have dipped too deep in that die, as your self prove and pronounce by
rejecting and reselling the horror of e^ n^ death, in the soul of Christ;
though Master Calvin say, Christ CONFLICTED therewith; and the Catechism
avouch, Christ was therewithal P^VSED. If you may thus renounce and refute the
first devise and spredders (as you think them) of your proper and spiritual
temptations and torments in the soul of Christ; give others leave to receive
them no farther, then they concur with the Scriptures, and with the primative
church of God. I find diverse men speak diversely, but very few and these late,
that light on the death of Christ's soul, and sudden touches of the
essential pains of the damned from the immediate hand of God, which is your
fresh and new device: yea many that are carried away with the general terms of
Gods wrath and horror of his dreadful judgments against sin, no way like the
death of Christ's soul, and by special words debar all mention of the second
death in the sufferings of Christ; and those as well English, as others.

How false and soolish your vaunt is, of all and every church and writer in
the world, that are Protestants, to be of your mind, will soon appear to any
that will read and weigh the works and words of Zuinglius, Musculus, Martyr,
Bullinger, Aretius, (...) new (...) teach the sufferings of Christ's soul
without the pains of hell.
Zanchius, and of sundry others as sound in faith, as ripe in judgment, as
diligent in reading, and sufficient in all kind of learning, as the best you
can name either broching or bowing toward your late conceits; who though they
teach, that Christ suffered in soul and body, as I do, yet they assign far
other sufferings in the soul of Christ, then your essential pains of the
damned. I may not stand to make new discourses touching new writers; a place or
two shall serve for all, and so an end of this matter. Bullinger upon those
words of Esaias Christ laid down (or made) his soul a sacrifice sor sin,
says. (...) in (...) (...). ^3.
To make his soul a sacrifice for sin, is to offer himself to be a
sacrifice to Purge sins. And he says Christ's soul, and not his flesh, not
that the flesh of Christ was not offered for us, but that whole Christ, body
and soul, offered himself to God, and that willingly, from his heart, and of
his own accord; and whole Christ was the expiation of our sins, licet
interim neque diuinit as sit passa, neque anima mortua, sed caro; de quare
beati Patres Vigilius and Fulgentius contra Haereticos religiose disputarunt;
Though during that time neither his diuinty suffered, NOR HIS SOVLE DIED: but
his flesh: whereof the blessed fathers Vigilius and Fulgentius have religiously
discoursed against Heretics.

Zanchius, whose learned works are to me in steed of many writers, that are
carried with faction and affection to uphold, whatsoever some other men say,
though he could not for his often and great labors get time to finish his
purposed treatise of man's redemption in that exact manner, that he has done
the rest, yet commenting on S. Paul's Epistles, as occasion was offered, he
fully delivers the matter and manner of our redemption to be the only
sacrifice of Christ's body and blood; other propitiatory sacrifice for sin
then that he acknowledges none, though he ascribe to the soul as well her
sufferings, as her sacrifice. Zanchius in ca. 2. epist. ad Philip. v. 8.
All things prepared, which were requisite to offer the sacrifice for our
sins, behold the Priest with his sacrifice, Christ with his body, the body I
say of (him that was) God, who through voluntary obedience to his Father, and
most ardent love to us, offered himself to God for a most sweet smell. And
where did he offer himself? on the altar of the Cross: he suffered, and died,
and that on the cross. Ibidem.
Patitur in anima summam tristitiam, timorem, ignominiam; in corpore summos
dolores, in singulis membris atrocissima flagella. Ibidem.
In ligno moritur, vt mors per lignum ingressa in mundum per lignum tolleretur
e mundo. He suffered in soul most exceeding heaviness, fear, and shame; In
his body most bitter pains, in every member most grievous scourges. On the
tree he died, that as death came into the world by a tree, so it might be taken
out of the world by a tree. Idem in ca. 1. ad Ephesians. v. 7.
To that point, how we are redeemed, the Apostle says, by his blood, that is
by (...) sacrifice, which consisted of the offering of his body delivered to
death, and his blood shed (...) (...). (...) fuit proprius modus, this was the
proper manner, (or only way) how we must be redeemed from the captivity of
sin and death. This Ibidem.
sacrifice which is often signified by the name of (Christian) blood alone, is
that price of which the Prophets before, and after the Apostles say, we were
redeemed (by it.) For Ibidem.
we are redeemed, and have remission of sins in Christ by his only blood.
Idem de tribus (...). 1. cap. 5. test. 9.
This is even he, who by the only sacrifice of his body should effectually
cleanse the sins of the world. And so again. The Apostle Idem in ca. 1. ep.
ad Coloss. verse. 22.
expresses the material cause of our reconciliation, or the thing wherewith
the Father reconciled us to himself, to (...), by the oblation of the true and
humane body of Christ delivered to death for our sins. This he means, when
he says in the body of his flesh through death. For this body, which was
truly flesh, and an humane body; not simply, but as it died, is the matter of
our reconciliation, by that was reconciliation made. He Ibidem.
ioineth the body with blood, because both are the price of our reconciliation,
and by both were our sins cleansed. The Apostle then Ibidem.
signifies reconciliation was by the oblation of the body of Christ, as by the
true sacrifice sor sin.

Zanchius speaks not precisely, you will say, against the death of Christ's
soul.] In plainly and fully delivering the matter and mean of our redemption
to be the ONLY SACRIFICE of the body and blood of Christ offered on the cross
to death; he excludes all other ransomes for our sins, and so makes the death
of Christ's soul not only to be superfluous to man's salvation, but no mean of
our redemption. For in his judgment, Zanchius de tribus Elohim part. 1. li. 5.
ca. 1 (...) 10.
Christ is the propitiatory sacrifice for sin, not simply, but as he died
for us with the shedding of his blood; and Ibidem.
this ONLY SACRIFICE (the shedding of Christ's blood unto death) God chose
from everlasting for the expiation of our sins, and promised the same from
the creation of the world, and shadowed it with resemblances. And touching the
death of the soul, if you teach as Zanchius does, you will presently find it
is open blasphemy to ascribe to Christ any death of the soul. Zanch^ tractat,
theologic^ de peccato originali. ca. 4. these. 3
A triple death (says he) God threatened to Adam for disobedience; a spiritual
death, which was the separation of grace, of the holy Ghost, and of original
righteousness from the soul and body of Adam, of which death in the
Scriptures there is often mention made. This death Adam died as soon as he did
eat. The second was a corporal death, whereby the soul is severed from the
body. To this Adam was presently (upon his eating) made subject; though he did
not straightwayes actually die. The third is everlasting death, which is known
to all, and of this death Adam was forthwith made guilty. This triple death
was the punishment of his disobedience. And upon like occasion comparing the
death of the soul and of the body, he says. Ibidem in ca. 2. epist. ad
ephesians. verse. 5.
There is a triple death; spiritual, (of the spirit or soul) corporal,
known to all men; and the third is that eternal death pertaining to body and
soul, wherewith all the wicked shall be punished in hell. These all God
threatened to Adam, when he said, what hour soever thou shall eat, etc. thou
shall die the death. For he straightway died in spirit (or soul); he incurred
also the death of the body, because he became mortal; and was made guilty of
eternal death. Ibid.
We have rightly said death to be the privation of life, and so of all the
actions of life consisting in the separation of body and soul. The like we
must say of the spiritual life and death. The spiritual life is a certain
spiritual and divine force, whereby we are moved to spiritual and divine
actions by the presence of the holy Ghost dwelling in us. The holy Ghost
regenerating us in this spiritual life is as it were the soul thereof. And
holy and spiritual thoughts, holy desires, holy actions both inward and
outward are the operations of this spiritual life. What then is the death of
the spirit? even the privation of the spiritual life, and consequently of all
spiritual and good actions in a man destitute of the presence of the holy
Ghost, which should quicken him, coming from sin, and for sin. Ibidem.
What strength has a man dead in body to the actions of this life? so neither
can he, that is dead in spirit (or soul), do any works of the spiritual
life. Here is a full and true description of the death of the spirit or soul
of man, which if you and your friends dare attribute to Christ; then does
Zanchius favor the death of Christ's soul: but if every piece hereof applied
to Christ be evident heresy and infidelity, then did Zanchius no way defend
the death of Christ's soul to be any part of our redemption; and as for the
second death, he acknowledges none, but that which is eternal, and inflicted
in hell on all the wicked.

Much more might be brought to like effect, showing the true and only mean
and matter of our redemption and reconciliation to be the only body and blood
of Christ yielded unto death for the ransom of our sins; but I should make a
new volume, if I should stand thereon. It may suffice in the judgment of any
reasonable man to refute the slanderous mouth of this most insolent prater,
that I profess, I mislike nothing the writings and resolutions of all these
learned Protestants, for as much as I have seen and read of them, (which is as
much as I could get) touching our redemption by the death of Christ; but teach
the same that they taught, and in my private moderation could bear the words
of many others, (those only excepted who elude the plainness of the
Scriptures, with the finenesse of their new devices), were it not, that such
hoblers, as this is, upon such occasions will never leave their fresh inuenting
new means and causes of our redemption, till they be they know not where.
Taking it therefore to be no evil way, when men of great wits and gifts begin
to turn to their own devices, to see what the learned and ancient lights of
Christ's Church believed and derived from the sacred Scriptures in those very
points of truth and our salvation; I have chosen rather to show thee,
Christian Reader, the general and continual consent of religious and reverend
antiquity; then to muster men's names of latter times, and by disgracing or
comparing their labors or learnings, to set any man, or Church in fire. If so
many learned and ancient fathers displease happily some in respect of their
private contrary conceits, I have done my duty to declare the truth, and
showed my desire of peace, whiles I never meant, nor can yet be drawn to
impeach any man's name or credit, howsoever I think, that some of them swerve
from the exact rule and sense of holy Scriptures in some few points, as well of
doctrine as of discipline.

THE SECOND PART. WHAT IS MEANT BY THIS IN THE CREED, THAT Christ descended to
HADES, or Hell.
I Shall not need (good Christian Reader) to spend much time or pains in this
question. An article of the Creed since it is, That Christ descended into Hell;
and the same derived from the Scriptures, confessed by all Antiquity, and
confirmed by authority of this whole Realm, as well in the book of Common
prayer, as in the Articles of Religion ratified by Prince and Parliament, it is
not for an English man directly to dispute against it; howsoever, retaining the
words, many doubt or deny the sense thereof. I may be the shorter, for that
the Refuter insisteth only on four reasons against the descent of Christ to
the place of the damned, which our English Creed calls Hell; and the rest,
which he brings, is like his former labor, that is, is nothing but a bold
pronouncing of his own conceits, and a false misconstruing of other men's
sayings. His first reason is.

Defenc. page 149. li. 7.
If there be a good and sound general reason in Christian faith, that Christ's
soul leaving his body, ascended up to heaven, and there remained till his
resurrection; and if there be no special reason of authority to the
contrary, that his soul now descended, th^n surely every good Christian
ought to believe, that his soul ascended to heaven, and descended not locally
into hell. But both these former parts are most true.] Not one of these parts
is true, and were they (as they are not) most true; yet conclude they not your
purpose. That Christ's soul leaving his body ascended up to heaven, is more
than any Scripture expressly avouches. The order of our Creed leads us to
believe, that Christ rose the third day from the dead before he ascended to
heaven. That he was in Paradise the same day that he died, his own words to
the penitent thief, This day shall thou be with me in Paradise, may prove, if
we admit them to be spoken of Christ's soul and not of his Deity, as Saint
Austen and others expound them: but that Christ's soul departing from his
body, and returning to the same again, diuerted no whither, nor spoiled
powers and principalities, nor made an open show of them, triumphing over them,
for this there is neither good reason in the Christian faith, nor warrant in
the word of God, but only your courageous assuming any thing that may seem to
support your cause. On the other side, what reasons there are, general or
special, for Christ's descent to hell, though you make light of them, the
Church of Christ from the beginning has received and professed them, not from
the mouths of men, but from the witness of holy Scripture, howsoever you
turn and wind the words of the Holy Ghost to fit them to your appetite. And
what so great need is there of special reasons of authority to the contrary?
Will not general testimonies of the Scriptures serve to prove a truth, except
the special circumstances of time, and place, and manner be therewithal
expressed.

Ibid. li. 16.
The analogy of faith requires, that the head should be there where the
members were, and where they remain till their resurrection, that there he
tarry till his resurrection. It seems also these texts will prove it; Where
I am, there also shall my servant be. I will, that where I am, there they also
shall be with me.] Did you speak of the perpetual abode of the head and
members in one and the same place of joy and bliss at Gods appointed time,
Your words had some dependence on Christ's promise, saying; John 12.
Where I am, there also shall my servants be: but this speech of Christ's is
restrained to a certain time, in which it shall be verified, as appears by
that he said, John 14.
I go to prepare you a place, I will come again, and receive you unto my
self, that where I am, there also you may be. At his next coming he will take
us unto himself, and then shall we be ever with the Lord. This is the time,
when his promise shall be performed. And though the Saints dissolved are now
with Christ, that is, not only received to rest and joy in Christ, but also
where the glory of Christ sitting at the right hand of his Father continually
shines to them, and on them with full assurance of everlasting glory prepared
for them; yet no analogy of faith, nor any words by you brought, do prove all
the Saints to have their bodies now in heaven, because Christ has his there;
or that the souls of the just were after the speaking of these words, always
here on earth, where Christ was; or that all the Saints rose with him, as some
did; or that when, and where Christ appeared after his resurrection, all his
Saints must or did appear with him. Much less is there any sequel from
either, that all the souls of the righteous must or did accompany Christ's
soul going to Paradise, and coming thence; so that he could not descend to
Hell to triumph over Satan and all the power of darkness, but the spirits of
the just deceased must leave Paradise, and go thither with him.

Defenc. page 149. li. 20.
I see not but that he promises here his servants even a local accompanying
of him after this life, and that also generally whither soever he went.] Then
was Peter a slender Divine, who hearing these words from his Masters mouth, did
after openly proclaim, That Act. 2. v. 34.
David was not ascended into heaven. If it be so firm a promise, as you
pretend, then David, as well as the rest, must locally accompany Christ
whithersoeuer he went, and consequently ascend to heaven with him; which Peter
utterly denies. And all the Fathers of Christ's church had little understanding
of Christ's words, when they generally denied, that the souls of the Saints are
yet in the same place of glory where Christ is. If you belee^e not my report of
them, peruse their own words following. Irenaeus, Irenaeus li. 5. ca. 31.
It is manifest, that the souls of Christ's Disciples shall go to an invisible
place appointed them of God, and there shall remain until the resurrection;
and after receiving their bodies, and rising perfectly, that is, corporally, as
Christ did rise, shall so come to the sight (or vision) of God. Iustine the
martyr. Ius^ (...). 75.
The souls of the righteous are carried to Paradise, where they enjoy the
company and sight of Angels, and Archangels, and the vision of Christ our
Savior: and are kept in places fit for them till the day of resurrection and
recompensation. Tertullian, Tertullianus aduersus Marcionem. li. 4.
It is apparent to any wise man, that there is a place determined, which is
Abraham's bosom, for the receiving of the souls of his sons. That region, I
mean Abraham's bosom, though not heavenly, sublimiorem tamen inferis, yet
higher then the places below, shall give comfort to the souls of the
righteous, until the end of things with the fullness of reward bring the
resurrection of all men. Idem de a^ima. ca. 55.
Heaven is open to no man so long as the earth remains: together with the
passing away of the world, shall the kingdom of heaven be opened. Origin,
Origin* in Le^t. homil. 7.
The Saints departing hence do not presently obtain the full rewards of their
labors, but they expect us, though staying, though slacking. For they have not
perfect joy, so long as they grieve at our errors, and lament our sins. For
these, says Paul, have not yet received the promise, God providing for us a
better thing, that they without us should not be perfect. Hilarie Hilarious in
Psalm. 2.
The day of judgment is the repay of everlasting happiness or punishment. But
the time of death till then, has every one under his laws, whiles either
Abraham or torment reserve each man unto judgment. Ambrose, Ambros. de bo^o
mortis. ca. 10.
Till the fullness of time come, the souls (departed) expect their due reward;
for some pain, for some glory is provided. Chrysostom, Chrysostom. in 1.
Epistolam ad Corinth. homil. 39.
Though the soul were a thousand times immortal, as she is, those admirable
good things she shall not enjoy without her flesh. Ibidem.
If the body rise not again, the soul remains uncrowned, and without that
heavenly bliss. Augustine, August. in Psalm. 36.
After this short life thou shall not as yet be where the Saints shall be, to
whom it shall be said, Come ye blessed of my Father, receive the Kingdom
prepared for you from the beginning of the world; the shall not as yet be
there, who knows it not? but thou may be there, where the poor Lazar was
seen afar of by the proud rich man. In that rest shall thou securely expect
the day of judgment, when thou shall receive thy body, and be changed to be
equal to an Angel. Theodoret, Th^dor. in 11. ca. Epist. ad Hebreos.
The Saints have not yet received their crowns. For the God of all expects
the conflicts of others, that the race being ended, he may together pronounce
all, that overcame, to be conquerers, and so reward them. Oecumenius, O^cume.
in 11. ca Epist. ad Hebreos.
All the fore said Saints have not yet received the good things promised to the
just, God providing better for us. Least they should have more then we, in that
they were crowned before us, he has therefore appointed one certain time,
that we should be crowned with them. Andreas Caesariensis, Andrea^ C^sari. in
(...). ca. 18.
It is the judgment of many godly fathers, that every good man (after this
life) has a place ^itte for him, by which he may conjecture the glory prepared
for him. Theophylact. Theophylact. in 11. ca. epist. ad Hebreos.
The Saints as yet have attained nothing of the heavenly promises. (God) has
appointed one time to crown all. Bernard, Bernard. in (...) (...) Sanct. sermon.
3.
you perceive there are three states of the soul; the first in (this)
corruptible body, the second without the body, the third in perfect
blessedness. The first in the Tabernacles, the second in the Courts, the third
in the house of God. Into that most happy house of God the souls (of the
Saints) shall not enter without us, nor without their bodies.

Neither do I find any Scriptures, that allow the Saints deceased the same
place of glory, where Christ now is at the right hand of God in the highest
heavens, till the last day come. What Abraham's bosom is, whither Lazarus soul
was carried by the Angels, or where it is, I dare not define. Only the Scripture
faith, it was a place of Luke 16. How many heavens the Scriptures make.
comfort after death, and Luke 16. How many heavens the Scriptures make.
vpvvards far of from Hell; a Luke 16. How many heavens the Scriptures make.
great gulf being set between that and hell. Of Paradise, where Christ
promised the penitent Thief should be with him, the very day that he died, I
read what Paul writes, how he was taken up into the 2. Co^ 12. ver. 2.
third heaven, and into 2. Co^ 12. ver. 4.
Paradise; Whence we may rightly collect, that Paradise is in the third heaven.
Now what number of heavens the Scripture delivers, is not so certain as some
men suppose. We find the whole region of the air to be called Heaven, as where
Christ names the Matt. 8. and 13
byrds of heaven, and the Matthew 26.
Mark 14.
clouds of heaven. Again that place of the firmament, where the Sun, the
Moon, and the stars are, is called heaven. Genes. 1.
Let there be lights, said God, in the firmament of heaven to separate the day
from the night. And I Genes. 22.
will multiply thy seed, as the stars of heaven. The third heaven, if I be
not deceived, the Scripture makes to be the original and proper habitation of
Angels, where they were first placed, and whence they fell, that are now called
Devils. Iudae epist. verse. 6.
The Angels which kept not their original, says Jude, but left (...) THEIR
PROPER HABITATION, has Godreserued in ever lasting chains under darkness
unto the judgment of the great day. In this celestial Paradise, which at
first was the proper mansion of Angels, as the Scripture observes, there was
not only place for sin, and danger of falling, as we find by experience of
the reprobate angels, but after this was left an higher degree of perfection,
and a greater increase of glory; as we perceive in the elect Angels, who were
confirmed in goodness, and advanced to the presence of Gods throne, there to
behold the face of God in the proper place of his sanctity and majesty. Of this
third heaven the book of Job says; God Job. 15.
found no steadfastness in his Saints, yea the heavens are not clean in his
sight, since there he found sin in those transgressing Angels which left
their proper habitation, and pressed with pride and disobedience to the throne
of God. This fault and fall the Prophet resembles, when he says, Esa 14.
How art thou fallen from heaven, o Lucifer? Thou said in thine heart, I will
ascend above the higth of the clouds, and I will be like the most high. * The
last or highest heaven the Scripture names the Seat, throne, or habitation of
God: which is not only holy, as whereinto Revel. 21.
no unclean thing shall enter, but is above all other heavens, and often
called the heaven of heavens. In this is the presence of Gods throne, that is,
a perpetual and plain revelation of his divine glory and majesty, which the
elect Angels always behold. And here is not only the fullness of Psalm (...).
joy, as in the presence of God, but the stability, security, and satiety of
everlasting life, and bliss to men and Angels, without any defect, doubt, or
danger of failing or decreasing. In this they want nothing, and besides this
they desire nothing, since in him, who is all in all, they find all things
worthy love, delight, and joy. Look down Esa. 63.
from heaven, says Esaias to God, and behold from the dwelling place of thine
holiness and glory. And Jeremy, I^m. 25.
The Lord shall cry from above, and give out his voice from his holy
habitation. (...). ^gs 8.
Behold the heavens, and the heavens of heavens contain thee not, says
Solomon. Psalm. 148.
Praise the Lord from the heavens, says the Psalmist, praise him in the
highest. Praise him all his Angels, praise him all his armies. Praise him
heavens of heavens. To this place when Christ ascended with his body, the
Apostle says of him, that (...) 7.
he was made higher then the heavens, and Ephesians. 4.
ascended above all the heavens, and (...). 1.
sits ^t the right hand of majesty in the high places. Now A. (...) de
(...). li. (...) ca. 1.
two we call both, not all; but of three we first use this word ^ll. And the
Greek tongue has a special number for two, which is the duall; the plural
is applied to more. Besides Moses says in the beginning (before the G^. (...).
1.
light or firmament were created) God made eth hashamai^m, the heavens and the
earth; where by the name of heaven; the best interpreters understand the place
appointed for the habitation of Angels and the revelation of Gods glory. Now
the word hashamai^m in Hebrew being not the singular number must have diverse
ma^s in it, as well as the air and (...) have diverse regions and sphaeres to
make the name of (...) (...) agree to either of them. So that when Christ is
said to have ascended a^ the heavens; nature, reason, and Grammar, besides
Scripture seem to teach us, that he ascended above that part of the third
heaven, where the Apostle notes Paradise to be. And consequently, if the
souls of the righteous deceased be in Paradise, they are not as yet in the
highest heavens, where Christ sits in the glory of God his Father, ( in
whose house are many mansions) and whether they shall be admitted at the last
day, when Christ shall come again to take them unto himself, and to have them
for ever with him in the possession and communion of his kingdom and glory,
that they may be like the Angels.

To this difference of place and glory before and after the day of judgment,
the Scriptures incline as well as the Fathers, if I mistake them not; which I
refer to the judgment of the wise and learned. S. John saw the souls of the
Martyrs Revel. 6.
Under the altar, where they were willed to rest until (the number of) their
fellow servants were fulfilled. But when crowns of glory are given them, as
in the last day, they shall Revel. 7.
stand in the presence of the throne of God, and before the Lamb, and he that
sits on the throne, will dwell among them. 2. Tim. 4.
Henceforth, says Paul, is laid up for me the crown of righteousness, which
the Lord, the just judge, shall give me at that day: and not to me only, but
unto all that love his appearing. 1. Pet. 1.
Blessed be God, says Peter, who has be gotten us again unto ^ lively hope to
an inheritance immortal and vnd^filed, which fades not away, reserved in
heaven for you, which is prepared to be showed in the last time. 1. John 3.
Now are we the Sons of God, says John, but yet it does not appear what; we
shall be and we know, that when he shall appecre, we shall be like him, for we
shall see him as he is, that is as well the glory of his Godhead, as of his
manhood. Then as Paul says to all the faithful, Coloss 3.
Your life is hid with Christ in God; When Christ, which is our life, shall
appear, then shall ye also appear with him in glory: And he shall say; M.
atth. 25.
Come ye blessed of my Father, receive the kingdom prepared for you from the
foundation of the world; and not, retain the kingdom already possessed by you.

It were easy out of new writers to show the same; Master Cal^m shall su^ce
for all, who uses not ouersoone to concurie with the fathers, when they divert
from the Scriptures. Cal^us in (...).
The souls of the saints after death are in peace, says he, because they are
escaped from the power of the enemy. But when heavenly Jerusalem shall be
advanced to her glory, and the true Solomon, Christ the king of peace, shall
sit aloft in his judgment seat, then shall the true Israelites reign with
their KING. This they may easily perceive by the Scriptures, whosoever have
learned to give ear to God, and hear his voice. This also have they delivered
to us by hand, who have sparingly and reverently handled the mysteries of God.
For Tertullian says. ^
why should we not admit Abraham's bosom to be called a temporal receptacle of
the souls of the faithful? And Chrysostom, Chrysostom. (...). 28. in Epistolam
ad (...).
Understand what and how great a thing it is for Abraham to sit, and for the
Apostle Paul (to expect) until he be perfected, that then they may receive
their reward. For until we come, the Father has foretold the^, he will not
give them their reward. Art thou grieved because thou shall not yet receive it?
what should A^ do, who overcame so long since, and yet sits without his
crown? what Noe? and the rest of those times? for behold they expected thee,
and expect others after thee. They prevented us in their conflicts, but they
shall not prevent us in their crowns, because there is onetime appointed to
crown all together. Augustine in many places describes August. de (...)
(...). 12. ca. 9. and li. 13. ca. ^. and (...) ad I (...). ca. 108.
secret receptacles, in which the souls of the godly are kept until they
receive their crown and glory. Bernard in two homilies made at the feast of
all Saints, where he handles this question of purpose, teaches that the
souls of the Saints departed from their bodies, do stand as yet in the outward
courts of the Lord, being admitted to rest, but not to glory. Into that most
blessed ^ouse, says he, they shall not enter neither without us, nor without
their bodies. Those that place souls in (some part of) heaven, so they give
them not the glory of the resurrection, (to be showed on them at the time of
the resurrection and not before) they differ nothing from the former opinion.
And in his institutions. Caluinus (...). li. 3. ca. 25. 6.
Since the Scripture every where bids us depend upon the expectation of
Christ's coming, and differreth the crown of glory (...) that time, let us be
content with the bounds, which God has appointed us; that the souls of the
godly having ended their warfare (of this life) depart into an happy rest,
where with a blessed joy they look for the fruition of the promised glory; and
so all things stand suspended till Christ our redeemer appear. Then none of
these writers, old nor new, so conceived, or so expounded Christ's words, as
you do, that all his Saints do locally accompany him and generally,
wheresoever he abides, or whithersoeuer he goes.

Defenc. page 149. li. 23.
The Fathers all with one voice (I may truly affirm) teach and believe even
that Christ after death went no whither, but where his faithful and holy
servants were: yea and there remained till his resurrection. To which consent
of men some where you ascribe exceeding much.] Your assertions all the Fathers
with one consent refuse, to which agreement of learned and ancient writers I
confess I yield very much, when there is no express Scripture against it,
alleged and urged by some of themselves; as in all the cases where I forsake
them, there is: but what is that to your novelties, who neither in the first,
nor second question yield any thing to their judgments and censures; put them
altogether? That the souls of the faithful before the coming of Christ were
in Abraham's bosom our Savior first delivered, and no father, that I know,
departs from it; but where Abraham's bosom was, whether in earth or
elsewhere, and whether it were a skirt of hell or no, till Christ transferred
them thence to Paradise; of this some fathers diuersely think, and diuersely
speak. And but that Saint Austin learnedly discusseth and resolves this
point, that Abraham's bosom could be August. (...). 99.
no member, nor part of hell, since this was a secret habitation of rest and
happiness, which the Scripture never affirms of hell, but calls it a place
of torment; it would be hard for you, or any of your crew to say where Abraham's
bosom was. That Christ after death went to the place, where the faithful were
in expectation and desire of his coming to redeeine the world; the Fathers
affirm; but that he went no whither else, or that hec went not to the place of
the damned as well to discharge and release his members thence, that is from
all fear and danger thereof, as to destroy the power of the devil over all
his, and to triumph over the force and fury of Satan in his own person, that
every knee of things under the earth should bow to him, as well as of things in
heaven and earth, in this you utterly mistake the consent of the Fathers, which
you so much talk of; and show that you never came near the reading of them,
howsoever you presume to affirm what you list, of them. And least I should
carry the Reader without cause to rest on my word, as you would have him do on
yours, he shall hear the Fathers speak their own minds, and so the better
judge of your abusing them.

Ireneus. Ireneus li. 5. ca. 31.
David said prophesying this of Christ, thou have delivered my soul from the
nethermost hell. Cyprian. Cyprian de pass Christi. ^ant. carm^ ^ie do^
resurrection
When in Christ's presence hell was broken open and captivity made captive, his
conquering soul being presented to his fathers sight, returned without delay
to his body. Lactantius, or as some think Venantius. o The darkness fled at
the brightness of Christ, and the gross mist of eternal night vanished. Hinc
tumulu^ repetens post tari^ra, carne resumpta, belliger ad coelos ampla trophea
refers. Then after thy being in hell, thou going to thy grave, and resuming thy
body, as a warrier thou bar^st to heaven a (...) CONQVEST (over hell.)
Athanasius. Athanasius de humanitate Christi contra A^nos.
(...); who ever went to hell besides the son, which rose from the dead? Idem
contra A^ian oration 4.
at the sight of whom (...), the keepers of hell gates shr^ncke for fear. Yea
Idem de virgin^tate.
HADES, HELL (or the Devil) at the sight of him (...), was afraid and amazed
saying: Who is this, that descends (hither) with so great power and
authority? Who is this, that teareth open the brazen gates of hell, and
breaks the bars of Adamant? Who is this, that being crucisied is not
conquered by me who am death? Who is this, that loses their bands, whom I
conquered? Who is this, that by his own death destroys me, that am death?
Eusebius. Eusebius de demonstratione Euangelica li. 10. ca. 8.
To him only were the gates of death opened, and him only the keepers of hell
gates seeing, shranke for fear; and the chief ruler of death, (the devil)
knowing him alone to be his Lord, rose out of his lofty throne, and spoke to
him fearfully with supplication and entreaty. Eusebius called Emisenus.
Eusebi^ mil. 6. de pas. ^at.
The Lord descending darkness trembled at the sudden sight of unknown
light, A^ praefulgidum fidus caeloru^ Tartareae caliginis profunda viderunt,
And the deepes of hellish darkness saw the most bright star of heaven.
Deposito quid^ corpore imas atque abdit as Tartari seeds filius hominis
penetrauit: the Son of man laying aside his body pierced the lowest and
secret seats of Tartarus, (or of the dungeon of hell.) Hilarie. Hilar. de
Trinitate li. 3.
The powers of heaven do incessantly glorify the Son of God sor conquering
death, and breaking the gates of hell. Idem li 4.
In hell he killed death. Gregory Nazianzene. Nazianzen, in Christo patiente.
Going to the gates of hell all covered with darkness, thou shall pearce hell
with a sharp spear; and shall deliver all, thou alone being free, and shall
besides have the victory over thine enemies; (...), valiantly SVBDVING HELL,
the SERPENT, and DEATH. Chry^ostome. Chrysostom. de resurrect. sermo. 7. tom^. 3.
Descendente in tenebrosam inferoru^ caligine^ Domino ettam illic tun^ (...)
dubio dies splendidissimus fuit, vbi seruator illuxit, tenuit in illo noctis
horrore inuiolabilem Maiestatis suae splendorem. The Lord descending into the
dark m^st of hell, even there no doubt then was a most clear day, where our
Savior shined. In that horror of night he held the brightness of his Majesty
inviolable. Ierom. Hiero. in Psalnium. 34.
Pro vita populi mortuus, non es derelictus in Tartaro. Dying for the life of
thy people, thou wast not left in hell. And again, I^em in ca. 12. li. I^b.
Christ d^stroyed and brake open the closed places of hell, and put the devil,
that had power over death. from his kingdom and Dominion. Augustine. August.
epist. 99.
If the holy Scripture had said, that Christ after death came to Abraham's
bosom, not naming hell and the sorrows thereof, I marvel if any man would
have durst to affirm, that Christ descended into hell. But because evident
testimonies (of the Scripture) mention hell and the sorrows (thereof), no cause
is occurrent, why our Savior should be believed to have come thither, but to
save from those pains. And again. Idem. in Psalmum 85.
There is a lower hell, ^hither the dead go, whence God would deliver our
souls by sending his son thither. For I^dem.
therefore Christ came even unto hell, that we should not abide in hell.
Ruffinus. Ruffinus in expositione Symboli.
Eousque ille miserando descendit vsquequo tu peccando deiect^s es. Christ
descended of mercy to the very place, whither thou wast dejected by sin.
Fulgentius. Fulgentius ad Tra^mundum li 3.
It remained to the full effect of our redemption, that the man, which God
took unto him without sin should descend even thither, whither man separated
from God fell by desert of sin, that is to hell, where the soul of a sinner
uses to be tormented; and to the grave, where the flesh of a sinner uses to
be corrupted: yet so, that neither Christ's flesh might rot in the grave, nor
his soul be ^ormented with the sorrows of h^ll. Cyrill. Cyrill in Leuitioum
li. 9.
The powers, Principalities and rulers of the world, which the Apostle
numbreth, none other could conquer and carry into the desert of hell but only
he, who said, be of good hope, I have overcome the world. Therefore it was
necessary that our Lord and Savior should not only be borne a man amongst men,
but also descend to hell, that he might carry into the wilderness of hell the
goat, that was to be led away; and returning thence, this work performed,
might ascend to his father. Caesarius Arelatensis. Casa. Arelatens. bo^ 3. de
Paschate.
Aeterna nox inferorum Christo descendente resplenduit, attonitae mentis
obstupuere Tortores. The everlasting darkness of hell was made bright with
Christ's descending thither: the tormentors inwardly stricken were amazed.
Prudentius. Prudens. (...) hymno. 9.
Tartarum benignus intrat, fracta cedit Ianua, fertur horruisse mundus noctis
aeternae chaos. Christ mildely entered hell, breaking open the gates: the world
shook at (the opening of) Chaos of everlasting darkness. Arator (...)
Apostolica. li. 1.
Arator. Infernum Dominus cum destructurus adiret, Sol ruit in Tenebras, arua
tremunt concussa locis, saxa crepant: tartara moesta gemunt, quia vincula cunta
quiescunt. Mors ibi quid faceret, quo vitae portitor ibat? When the Lord went
to hell to destroy it, the Sun was darkened, the earth shook, the rocks
claue in sunder. Hell mourned to see her bands loosed. But what could death do
there, whither the bringer of life came? Petrus Chrysologus, Mortem suscepisse
and vicisse, intrasse inferos and redijsse venisse in iura Petr. Chrysolog. in
Symb^lum sermon. 60.
Tartari, and Tartari iura soluisse, non est fragilit as sed potestas. To
suffer death and to conquer it, to go to hell and to return, to come within
the laws of the dungeon of hell, and to dissolve the laws thereof, is not
weakness but power. And thus he makes Christ to speak after his
resurrection to his Disciples. Ego ex mortuis sum vinus: ex infernis sum
supern^s. Ego sum, quem mors fugit, inferna tremuerunt, Tartarus Deum confessus
est. Idem sermon. 81.
I am alive from the dead, and come up from those below. I am he whom death
fled from, hell trembled at, and the dungeon of hell confessed to be God.
Maximus, This day (of Christ's Maxim. sermon. 4. de die sancto Pasch. inter
homilias Eusebius. Emiseni.
resurrection) which the Lord has made penetrat omnia, vniuersa continet:
coelum, terram, Tartarumque complectitur, pearceth all places, contains all,
compriseth heaven, earth, and the dungeon of hell. For that Christ the (true)
day lightened heaven, earth, and the deep of hell, the Scripture witnesses.

There should be no end of alleging, if I should cite all, that speak to this
purpose. These be ancient and sufficient to prove this refuter a fabler, in
affirming that the Fathers with one voice avouch Christ went no whither but
where his faithful and holy servants were, whom the Fathers did not think to
be in the torments of hell, nor in the place of the damned; and to show that I
teach none other sense of the Creed, then all these Fathers, and infinite others
did before me. Neither can they be shifted off, as this Trifler uses to
decline them, who name Hades, that they meant the world of souls, which might
be as well in heaven, or paradise, as in hell: since they speak of Christ's
descent after death to that place, where there was everlasting darkness, and
amazedness of devils, bondage and punishment of sinners, deliverance from
destruction, an happy and mighty conquest over enemies, with such like
circumstances, which by no means can agree either to Paradise or heaven, or to
any other place but only to hell, where these things are found, and no where
else.

And if new writers may be regarded, I could bring as many or more of them of
great learning and good judgment confessing and allowing this exposition of
the Creed which I follow, (that Christ descended into Hell to destroy Satan's
power and force over his, and to free them all from coming thither) as
concurrent and consonant with the sacred Scriptures; and namely refelling your
fancy, that Christ went no whither but where his faithful and holy servants
were. The very Catechism which you would seem so much to respect, as if it
were the public and authorized doctrine of this Realm, makes it needful to
believe, that Catechism. Nowelli Gracolat. page 292.
as Christ's body was (laid) in the bowels of the earth, so his soul separated
from his body descended ad inferos, to the places (or spirits) below, (that is,
to hell) and with all the force and efficacy of his death so pierced unto the
dead, atque inferos adeo ipsos, and even to the spirits in hell, that the
souls of the unfaithful perceived the condemnation of their infidelity to be
most sharp and just, ipseque inferorum princeps Satan; and Satan himself the
Prince of hell saw all the power of his tyranny, and of darcknesse to be
weakened, broken, and destroyed: and contrariwise, the dead; who whiles they
lived, believed in Christ, understood the work of their redemption to be
performed, and felt the fruit and force thereof with a most sweet and certain
comfort. The Catechism treating of Christ's descent to hell mentioned in the
Creed, delivers this to be the sense thereof, that Christ's soul separated
from his body descendit ad inferos, descended unto hell. And least we should
doubt what he means by inferi, he puts inferos as a degree lower and
farther then the dead, in saying Penetrauit ad mortuos, atque inferos adeo
ipsos, Christ pierced unto the dead, and which more is, even to hell it self
and makes Satan to be Princeps inferorum, the Prince of hell; Who is no chief
ruler either in heaven or Paradise, but only in hell. Again he resolves,
that together with the soul of Christ came the power and force of Christ's
death as well to the faithful, which were saved by him, as to the rest justly
condemned for their unbelief; and that the Devil himself saw all the power
of darckenesse afflicted and oppressed by Christ. More then this I do not
teach; and so much the catechism avouches to be part of the Christian faith,
and the meaning of that article in the Creed, Christ descended into hell.

Peter Martyr likewise in the confession of his faith, and expos^tion of the
Creed, says; Petri Martyris in 12. Articulos fidei exposit.. 20.
As touching Christ's soul; as soon as it departed from the body, it rested
not idle, but descended ad inferos, unto hell. And surely the one and the other
societic both of godly souls, and of the damned, found the presence of
Christ's soul. For the souls of the faithful were cheered with great
comfort, and gave God thanks sor delivering them by the hand of this Mediator,
and performing that which so long before he had promised. Other souls also
adjudged to everlasting damnation, animae Christi aduentum persenserunt,
perceived the coming of Christ's soul. Zanchius showing the different
interpretations of those words of the Apostle, Zanchius in 2 cap. epistol^ ad
Coloss. verse. 15.
Christ spoiled powers and principalities, and made an open show of them,
triumphing over them in himself, (that is, in his own person; says,) Other
Interpreters hold, that these enemies were v^nquished and conquered on the
cross by Christ; but the triumph was p^rformed, when Christ in his soul
entered the kingdom of Hell as a glorious victorer. For so they interpret the
Article, He descended into Hell. And because the word deigmatizein does
signify to carry one in an open show, as the Romans were wont in the eyes of
men to lead their enemies once overthrown, with their han^s bound behind
them to their perpetual shame; and the soul of Christ separated from his
body might really do this to the devils, bringing them out of their infernal
kingdom, and carrying them along the air in the sight of all the Angels and
blessed souls: therefore nothing hinders us to interpret that which Paul
here writes, as the words sound, even of a real triumph (over the devils) in
the sight of God only, and of the blessed spirits: specially since the Fathers
for the most part so expound them, and ex nostris, non pauci, neque vulgares,
and of our Expositors not a few, and those no mean men. Aretius in his
Problemes purposely treating of Christ's descent to hell, first alleges, that
Aretij Proble. loco. 16. de descensu Christ^ ad inferos.
Tota Ecclesia vbique terrarum hodie illum Articulum and agnoscit, and diuer
sum a sepultura recitat, the whole Church throughout the world at this date
acknowledges that article, and recites it as different from (Christ's)
burial. And to that objection, that some Creeds had not this clause, he
answers; Ibidem.
The Church finding the descent (of Christ) to hell to be plainly delivered in
the Scriptures, with great advise admitted this Article into the Creed.
Otherwise how could it be that with so full consent of all nations, and all
tongues, this clause should be so constantly, and so consentingly received?
Repeating therefore many other senses he refuses them every one, and
concludes. Ibid^m.
Quare mea est sententia, Christum descendisse ad inferos, postquam tradidisset
spiritum in manus Dei patris in cruce, etc. Wherefore mine opinion is that
Christ descended into hell after he yielded his soul on the Cross to the
hands of God his Father. Ibidem.
And hell in this question we put to be a certain place appointed for the
damned, even for Satan and his members. Ibidem.
To the words of Christ uttered to the thief, this day shall thou be with me
in Paradise, I answer; they hinder not this cause. For Christ was in Paradise
with the thief according to his divinity, in the grave according to his body,
in hell according to his soul. Howbeit there is no certainty, how long Christ
stayed in hell: not long it seems; so that he might in soul that very day
return from hell, and after a glorious sort enter Paradise with the thief.
Neither has that any more strength, that Christ commended his soul into his
Fathers hands. For the soul of Christ was still in his Fathers hands, though
he descended into hell. This descent was void of forrow and shame to Christ.
Where they say, there was no need of this descent, they run back to the
beginning: for how should it be needless, which the Scripture pronounces
Christ did, and we confess in our Creed? We judge it therefore needful; first
for the reprobate, that they might know he was now come, of whose coming they
had so often heard, but neglected it with great contempt. Again, Satan was
perfectly to know, that this Christ whom he had tempted in the desert, and
delivered to death by the fraud of the Jews, was the very Messiah and the seed
promised to the woman. Hoc inquam expediebat etiam Demonibus in imo Tartaro
innotescere; This I say was expedient even for the devils in the deep of hell
to know. Thirdly it was expedient for the elect, that Satan might see he should
have no right no not on their bodies, since Christ hereafter would raise them
to life. Hemmingius. Nicolaus He^mingius in 2. ca. epistol^ ad Coloss.
As Christ by his death conflicted with the enemy on the gibbet of the cross,
and overcame him; so by his glorious descent to hell, resurrection, and
ascension to heaven he executed the triumph, erecting as a monument of his
victory the ensign of his cross. Mollerus writing on the 16. Psalm.
Henricus Mollerus in Psalm. 16.
Touching Christ's descent to hell; We (says he) understand that Article of
our faith in the Creed simply and without allegory: and believe that Christ
truly descended to the lower parts of the earth, as Paul speaks, Ephesians. 4.
It is enough for us to believe, which Austen affirms in his Epistle to
Dardanus; Christ therefore descended, that he might help those, which were to
be helped. For Christ by his death destroyed the powers of hell and the
tyranny of the devil, as is said, Osee, 13. O death, I will be thy death; and
thy destruction, O hell. And this his victory he would in a certain manner show
unto the devil, that he might strike perpetual terrors into the devil, and
take from us all fear of (Satan's) tyranny. Let it suffice us to know this,
and omit curious questions and disputations (heereabouts.)

Pomeranus on these words of the 16. Psalm, Thou will not leave my soul in
Hell; Johannes Pomeranus in Psalm. 16.
Here have thou (says he) that Article of our faith, Christ descended into
hell. If thou ask what he did there, I answer; He then delivered not the
Fathers only, but all the faithful from the beginning of the world to the end
thereof; not out of Lymbus, but out of the lowest nether most hell, to which we
all were condemned; and in which we all were as in death by the sentence of
God. There everlasting fire did abide to us all, that being delivered to death
by the sin of Adam, we might in the last judgment be delivered to punishment
and perpetual sire. Christ therefore descended even thither unto death and
hell to this end, least thou should d^scend thither, that as he had redeemed
us from death, so he might deliver us from hell. Westmerus in his expositions
of the Psalms follows word for Bartholomeus Westmerus in Psalm. 16.
word the confession of Pomerane. Wolfgangus Musculus, Christ therefore was to
die, not that he should simply be dead, but that by his death he might conquer
death and Musculus in Psalm. 16.
overcome him that had the rule over death: and so he was to descend to hell;
not that his soul should be subject to any infernal power, but that subduing
the gates of hell he might deliver our souls from that tyranny. Of the article
of Christ's descent to hell, I am not ignorant how diversely learned men do
think. It is somewhat obscure indeed and subject to many disputations, but yet
no godly man upon that occasion will resist or offer force to the Apostles
words, (thou will not leave my soul in hell) but will desire of God the
understanding thereof, and in the mean time with a single faith cleave to the
word of truth, although he can not clearly perceive the manner how that was
performed. Of this Article see Aust^n Epistle 99. Vrbanus Regius, The Church
delivers us out of the Scriptures that Christ after he was Vrbanus Regius in
Catechismo minore.
dead on the cross, descended also to hell to suppress Satan and hell, (to
the which we were condemned by the just judgment of God) and to spoil and
destroy the kingdom of death. Zacharias Scilterus: The descent of Christ to
hell (whereof mention is made in the Apostles Scilterus de R^gno Christi Thesi.
38.
Creed after the death and burial of Christ) is to be understood simply
according to the letter and without allegory of the ostension and declaration
of Christ's victory no less glorious then terrible, (as Luther writes to
Philip Melancthon) indeed made to the devils in hell or in the place of the
damned, and of Christ's expugning, disarming, spoiling and captiuating the
power of Satan, and of his destroying hell and euerting the whole kingdom of
Satan, and of his delivering us from the power of death and eternal damnation;
and out of the jaws of hell. David Chytreus. The Article of the Creed let us
retain David. Chytraus in Symbolum.
simply as the words sound; and let us resolve, that the Son of God truly
descended to hell to deliver us from hell, to which we were condemned for sin
in Adam; and from the power and tyranny of the devil, by which we were held
captive. Of which effect and fruit of Christ's descent the Fathers speak; (as)
Ierom, Christ descended to hell that we might ascend to heaven. And Fulgentius,
The man which God assumed, descended thither, whither man separated from God by
defert of sin fell, that is to hell, where the soul of a sinner used to be
tormented. And Augustine. Dying for thee, I descended to hell to bring thee to
Paradise; Tartara adij, vt tu in caelo regnares; I went to the place of the
damned, that thou might reign in heaven. Georgius Mylius in his explication
of the Augustane confession. Mylius in Augustanae confessionis explicatione
articulo 3. de Christo.
The true and proper sense of this Article is, that no metaphorical, but a
real descent of Christ to hell must be understood, whereby he descended to the
lower parts of the earth, Ephesians. 4. verse. 9. Et ipsas Damnatorum seeds adijt; and
went to the very place of the damned. The second point is, that this Article is
no part of his passion and humiliation, but of his victory and triumph. I omit
infinite others, not only private writers, but Universities, Cities, and
Countries, that have publicly approved the same doctrine, admitting and
allowing the Augustane confession exhibited by the States of Germany to
Charles the Emperor, which thus they declare in their book of Concord. With
one consent Concordia electoru^r nei^u^ and ordinu^ Imperij and theologerum qui
Augustanum confessionem amplectuntur articulo 9. de descensu Christi ad inferos.
we advise this matter not to be disputed, but this Article (of Christ's descent
to hell) to be most simply believed and taught. It ought to suffice us, if we
know, that Christ descended into hell, destroyed hell to all believers, and by
him (or his descent thither) we were taken out of the power of death and Satan,
from everlasting damnation, and even out of the jaws of hell. The manner how
this was done, let us not curiously search, but refer the (exact) knowledge
hereof to an other world, where not only this mystery, but many others
simply believed of us in this life, shall be revealed, which pass the reach of
our blind reason.

And where some would so moderate this Article, as if it meant no more but that
the force and effect of Christ's death was manifested as well to the damned to
exclude them from all hope, as to the faithful to increase their comfort;
Luther sharply, but truly, thus refuteth that fancy. Thou will not leave my
soul in hell. Lutherus in Psalm. 16.
The sense (hereof) is most plain, so plentifully and diligently delivered by
the Apostles. But even here have men presuming all things of their wits,
begun to dispute, whether Christ were in hell as touching his soul, and the
substance thereof, and what this means, that he was in hell. And a great
number have dared to contradict the spirit (of God) that Christ's soul was not
in hell but by effect: being for sooth handsome glozers of the word of God;
Thou will not leave my soul, that is, the effect of my soul, in hell: Christ
descended to hell, that is, he effected somewhat in hell: but despising these
frivolous and impious trifles, let us simply understand the words of the
Prophet, as they are simply spoken; and if we can not understand them, let us
faithfully believe them. Greater is the authority of this Scripture, then the
capacity of all men's wits, as Augustine says. For the soul of Christ
according to her substance truly descended to hell. To like purpose might
exceeding many new writers be brought, all confessing the descent of Christ's
soul to the very place of the damned and of the devils, that the truth, force
and glory of his humane soul might appear as well to the reprobate angels and
spirits under earth, as to the elect above the earth; God making the humane
nature of his Son this recompense, that as he was despised and reproched by
Satan in his instruments, so he should be adored and feared even of all the
powers of darckenesse, and wholly despose of them and their kingdom: but these
may suffice the sober Reader to let him see, that I deliver none other sense of
that Article, then has been formerly received in the church of Christ with
full consent, and to this day is continued in the same by many great and grave
Divines, whose judgments I need not be ashamed to follow; though I confess I
depend not on their words farther then they conform their writings to the word
of God, which in this case I take to be plain enough howsoever some quarrel
be made to the diverse significations of Sheol and Hades, which is as easily
done in other Articles of the Creed, as in this; if it were the part of a
Christian to wrangle with every word, that has sundry senses or uses in the
holy Scriptures.

Defenc. page 149. li. 29.
To (my) purpose other Scriptures do make very much, as where Christ says,
Father, into thine hands I commend my soul; and to Idem. pa. 95. 150. li. 18.
the thief that hung by him, This day shall thou be with me in Paradise.] You
bring Scriptures rather for show then substance; since they infer no such
thing as you would enforce on them. The souls of the Saints living and dead
are in the hands of God, and chiefly Christ's soul, when it descended to hell,
not only to be brought thence, but even there by gods hand assisting to destroy
the strength of Satan's kingdom, and to triumph over all the powers and
Principalities of darkness. If those words did always import a present
possession and fruition of heavenly glory, then could David with no truth have
spoken them Psalm. 3^.
of himself so long before his death, when as yet no part of Gods promises to
him touching his kingdom were performed. But the souls of the faithful are
always in the hand of God, whiles here they are protected by him, and after
this life received in rest, though they come not, as yet to be invested with
the fullness of heavenly glory. Yea the words properly pertaining to our
Saviors person, and condition after death, Psalm 15.
`Thou wilt not leave (or forsake) my soul in hell, do show that Christ's
soul was then in Gods hands, and compassed round with the power and glory of
God, when hell and Satan trembled at his presence, and were both vanquished and
spoiled by him. Your adding, that this sentence may be fitly applied to Christ,
proves nothing. For though I have no doubt but Christ's soul was with far
greater honor and favor, joy and bliss received into the hands of God, to
whom it was committed, then the souls of all his Saints: yet that does not
prove his present entrance after death into the glory of heaven, and
continuance in the same, except you will say that at his resurrection, and till
his Ascension his soul was out of his Fathers hands, because during that time
it was on earth, and not in heaven; which were a strange position in divinity.
Sapient. 3.
The souls of the righteous (were) in the hands of God long before Christ's
coming, as the wise man witnesses; and yet were they not in the glory of
heaven, but in Abraham's bosom, as our Savior teaches. And so the wise man
expounds Lucae 16.
himself, adding; Sap. 3 verse. 3. and 7.
No torment shall touch them, they are in peace, and in the time of their
visitation they shall shine: reserving them to a time appointed, when glory
shall be revealed on them, though in the mean whiles their spirits were kept in
rest and joy under the mighty hand of God.

The Thieues being in Paradise with Christ, the same day that he died,
concludes How Christ was in Paradi^e the day of his death.
no such thing, as you conceive. For first no words, there or else where, euince
that Christ spoke this of his humane nature. Saint Austen resolves, August
epist. 57 ad Dardanum.
The sense is much easier and freer from all ambiguities, if Christ be
understood to have said, this day shall thou be with me in Paradise; not of his
manhood but of his godhead. And in his 111. Tractate upon John, upholding the
same exposition, adds; In Iohannem tract. 111.
He that said to the thief painfully hanging, yet healthfully confessing,
(this d^y shall thou be with me in Paradise) according to his manhood had his
soul that da^e in h^ll and his flesh (...) the grave, but according to his
godhead undoubtedly he was in Paradise. Titus Bishop of Bostra in Arabia,
somewhat elder then Austen, shows how these words may be verified of either
of Christ's natures. Titus Bostrorum Episcopus in ca. 23. Lucae.
How was this promise of our Lord made to the thief, this day shall thou be
with me in Paradise performed? Christ taken d^wne from the cross was in hell
according to his soul, and nevertheless by the power of his divinity brought
the Thief into Paradise. Happily he first carried the believing Thief to
Paradise, before he descended to hell. Damascen is of Austens mind. Damasc. in
homilia de sancto sublato.
The same (Christ) is adored in heaven as God together with the Father and with
the holy Ghost, and he as man lay in the Sepulcher with his body, and abode in
hell with his soul, and gave entrance to the thief into Paradise, his
divinity, which cannot be comprehended in any place, every where accompanying
him. And so is Euthymius. Euthymius in 23. ca. Lucae.
How said Christ, this day shall thou be with me in Paradise? because as God,
who fills all places, he was every where at one instant; in the sepulcher,
and in hell, and in Paradise, and in heaven. But admit the words to be meant of
Christ's humane soul, what reason call you this? Christ's soul was in Paradise
that very day that he died: ergo neither that day, nor any day else before his
resurrection, his soul did or could descend to hell. You must amend these
reasons before any man will yield you to have reason or sense. Christ might
that very day, that he went to Paradise, subdue and subject all power in hell
unto himself, he might do it the next day, he might do it the third day,
when he rose from the dead: the time is not the thing we strive for, which we
must leave to God; but the real and actual performance of the Apostles words,
He spoiled powers and principalities, Co'off 2.
and made an open show of them, triumphing over them in himself; which in
other words Peter expressed, when he said, Christ's Acts 2.
soul was not left (or forsaken) in hell: but Acts 2.
God raised him ^p, loosing the sorrows of death (or hell) that Philip. 2.
every knee of things under earth should ^ow unto him, as well as of things in
heaven and earth, and that every tongue (even of the damned and Devils, for
there are none other under earth) should confess (either willingly or
constrainedly) Jesus Christ to be Lord unto the glory of God the Father. This
conquest over hell and Satan being acknowledged, whereby all power in heaven
and earth (and consequently in hell contained in the earth) was yielded unto
Christ's manhood after his death, and before or at his resurrection, we shall
not need to be curious about the time and manner thereof. The compilers of the
centuries at Magdeburge do well admonish. Centur. 1. l. 1. ca. 10. de pass
Christi.
Descendisse Christum in infernum, articulus sidei est, verum quanam ratione
ibi omnia sunt gesta, non est express traditum. That Christ descended to hell
is an article of the faith, but in what sort all things there were done, is
not expressly delivered. Happily it is enough for us to h^ld the general,
and a more exact declaration of this mystery we shall hear in another life.

Defenc. page 150. li 21.
The eternal and general ordinance of God is showed (Luc. 16.) to be such,
that none can go out of heaven down to hell, nor come from hell up to
heaven.] You boldly presume after your manner, that Abraham's bosom was heaven,
of which many learned men do make great doubt. For if the souls of the
righteous were in heaven before Christ's death and bi^th, then were they Luc.
20.
equal unto the elect Angels before the resurrection, which Christ says shall
be when they are the Luc. 20.
children of the resurrection, and so not before. And how were the words of
our Savior true, which he spoke in his life time; John 3.
No man ascends up to heaven, but he that descended from heaven, the Son of
man which is in heaven; If all the Saints deceased were in heaven? or how had
he the Coloss. 1.
preeminence in all things, if all the Patriarks and Prophets were there before
him? again the words of Abraham reach no farther then unto men; they restrain
not Angels from descending and ascending, and much less the son of God. If
none without exception could go fro heaven to hell, as you would construe
Abraham's speech, how fell the Devil and his Angels from heaven to hell? how
did Saint John see Revel. 20.
an Angel come down from heaven, having the key of the bottomless pit, and
binding and shutting up Satan in that pit? if Angels may pass from the one
place to the other, how much more might Christ, who is the Lord and head of
Angels, and has the Revel. 1.
keys of hell and death? But since the Scriptures anouch Christ's soul was
not left in hell, there are plainer and expr^sser words for the being of his
soul in hell, then in Abraham's bosom; and so if there be no return thence,
no not for Christ himself, then by your lame and lewd collection you condemn
Christ's soul to perpetual prison in hell. And how comes it to pas^e by your
divinity, that Abraham must receive Christ's soul into his bosom, who was the
Redeemer and Savior of Abraham? is your skill so great that you forget Christ
to be the son of God, and so meeter to receive Abraham's soul into his
protection, then to be received of Abraham? but what will you not say and
suppose to continue the credit of your conceits in the eyes of the simple,
though no wise man, unless wedded to your devices, will any thing be moved
with these weak suggestions?

Defenc. page 1^. li. 19
As touching Austens diverse opinion and yours, see before page 29 and your page
360.] Could you find any diversity worth the marking between Austens opinion
and mine touching Christ's words on the cross to the thi^fe, your modesty would
serve you to make the most of it; but if I repeat diverse opinions of learned
writers, and leave the Reader to his Christian liberty, which he best likes;
what offense take you at that, except it be that I follow not your trade, which
is to despise all the world besides your self? Indeed in your 29 Page you say,
I reject Austens exposition of Christ's words to the Thief, this day shall
thou be with me in Paradise; which Austen understands of the thiefes soul
and Christ's divine presence in Paradise; but you keep your wont to tell ta^es
for truth, and to wast words when you want good matter. For I do not reject
Austens exposition, but only add, as now I do, since there is no Scripture to
fasten Christ's soul to hell for the whole time of his death, Christ's soul
might after death at diverse times be in Paradise and in hell. Wherein I leave
the Reader to his discretion, which of those two expositions he will embrace.
Neither did I in this anouch more then Austen himself else where is content to
yield. For reasoning against Felicianus the Arrian, he says August. contra
Felicianum ca. 15.
Seddicet aliquis, deitatis hanc, non animae Christi credimus vocem. But some
will say we believe this (to day shall thou be with me in Paradise) was the
voice of Christ's deity, and not of his soul. To which part then of the thief
do we take this promise was made? this day, says Christ to the thief, shall
thou be with me in Paradise, whose body the common death had enclosed until
the resurrection to come. It was then the soul of the thief to which Christ
promised and performed this: Whereupon he concludes Si igitur mortuo corpore
ad Paradisum anima mox vocatur, quemquamne adhuc tam impium credimus, qui
dicere audeat, quoniam anima seruatoris nostritriduo illo corporeae mortis apud
inferos custodiae mancipetur? If then the body (of the thief) dying, (his)
soul were presently called to Paradise, shall we think any man so wicked as
to dare say; that the soul of our Savior during the three days, that his
body lay dead, was held in the custody of hell? So that though S. Austen
acknowledge the other sense of Christ's divine presence in Paradise to be multo
expeditior, and ab ijs omnibus ambiguitatibus liber, far the easier and freer
from all objections; yet he does not endure, that any man should so fasten the
soul of Christ to hell for the time of his death, that Christ might not thence
depart and be in Paradise, when pleased him, as well as the Thief, but must
stay in hell, as if he were kept in custody.

Defenc. page 15^. li. 27.
How you will do to maintain that Christ went indeed to them, but presently
left them that he might go to hell, I know not. In this I doubt you walk
without your guide.] If I did use any such words, that Christ must presently
post from heaven to hell, as if Christ needed no long time to descend to hell.
he were like to be benighted before he came thither, you might busy your
brains with lack of time and want of guides; but if Angels present themselves
here from heaven in a moment and time almost insensible, what should hinder
the soul of Christ endued with greater power and might then any Angel, to go
at what time, and with what speed he would to do that which the Scriptures
testify he did? If then the Prophets and Apostles bear witness, that his
soul was in hell, and there not left, but ascending upward led captivity
ca^tiue, and spoiled powers and principalities; why play you the jade in
jesting at an Article of the Christian faith, as if the way were long and
tedious between Paradise and hell, so that Christ must have some time and
help to dispatch so great a journey? The Apostle teaches, that the
resurrection of the dead shall be in a 1 Cor. 15. verse. 52.
moment and in the 1 Cor. 15. verse. 52.
twinkling of an eye. If so general and strange a work (as to have all their
souls out of Paradise and hell joined to their bodies, and their persons alive
caught up to the judgment seat of Christ in the air) shall be wrought in all
the sons of men elect and reprobate at an instant; what incredible thing is
this, except to an infidel, that he which made heaven and earth with a word,
should in as short time, as he saw cause, show his humane soul to the powers
of darkness in the midst of their kingdom, and take all strength and rule
from them, and lead them captive at his pleasure? And therefore never calculate
so curiously the distance or passage from Paradise to hell; if these things
were not marvelous in man's eyes, they were not meet works for the Son of
God; but examine soberly, whether the Scripture avouch any such presence of
Christ's soul in hell, and conquest over hell. And if that appear, teach men
to leave the rest to the mighty hand of God; which brought the soul of his
Son thither, in what time and manner he thought good, and might best make for
his glory.

Defenc. page 150. li 30.
I add that which is clear and certain: yea that which your self rightly
believes and professes with us, though against the opinion of the Fathers,
that the souls of the holy Patriarks dead before Christ were not beneath, but
above; Not in Limbo, but with God in peace, joy and bliss, even in Paradise
that is heaven.] Your certainties be your own ouerhastie conjectures, neither
well understanding your self, nor others. In the places, which you quote out
of my Sermons, I say as Christ himself delivered that the just deceased were
in Abraham's bosom, which the wise man calls the hand of Of Abraham's bosom.
God: And that Abraham's bosom was upward far above hell, as appears by the
words of our Savior; more I durst not determine. Neither did I make Abraham's
bosom to be Paradise or Heaven, I had no warrant so to do; but the place
whither the soul of the thief was carried the day of his death, Christ calls
Paradise, which the Apostle seems to make a part of the third heaven. And
here were the souls of the righteous after Christ's death, except you think
that Paradise was provided only for the penitent thief, which S. Austen
counts a great Epist. 9^.
absurdity. Thus much I said, and still say; as also that the faithful
departing this life, Reu^l 14.
rest from their labors, and 2. Cor 5.
dwell with the Lord, in places prepasred and appointed for them, though as yet
they have not their house, which is eternal in the heavens, nor are clothed
with life swallowing up mortality. But that the souls of the Patriarks were
in heaven, that is in the glory of gods kingdom, before the death and coming
of Christ, I have no such words in any of the pages which you produce. I use
not of things unknown to give hasty judgment, I leave it to God, who has
many places of abode in his house, and desire not to search into his secrets
unrevealed in this life.

Defenc. page 150. li. 37.
Hence I conclude that Christ's soul after his death ascended indeed, and
descended not downward beneath us here. I hear your conclusion, but I see no
premises from which you may justly infer so much. For though the soul of
Christ might ascend after death, if we respect situation of place, in
comparison of the earth; yet because the Scriptures reckon no ascending but
into the glory of heaven, (otherwise the devils that Ephesians. 2.
rule in the air, should ascend, and the damned that come to judgment, shall
ascend); the Christian faith does not say that Christ ascended before he
descended. And the apostle exactly observing the relation and application of
those two words unto Christ, says his descending was the first of the twain,
that was performed. Ephesians 4.
This says he, that (Christ) ascended, what is it but that he first descended
into the lower parts of the earth? Otherwise if you be disposed to play with
the ascending and descending of Christ's person, body, or soul before or
after death, you may find us many descents and ascents besides the two that
are mentioned in our Creed. The Nicene Creed says of his person, that for us
and our salvation he descended from heaven, and was incarnate by the holy Ghost
of the virgin Marie; and of himself he says; John 6.
I am the living bread, which descended from heaven. Then after his death his
soul ascended as you say, and so must descend again before his body could be
restored to life. Now the apostle says; Christ Ephesians. 4.
descended into the lower parts of the earth, and likewise must thence ascend
before his resurrection. And lastly after forty days he ascended body and
soul above all the heavens. Here are six descents and ascents, if you list
to control the Creed; but the Christian faith following the apostle, notes
only two, his descending to hell; or to the lower parts of the earth, and his
ascending above all heavens; which were two material parts of our salvation
after he took flesh, and profitable for us to know. And though you stiffly
stand on this, that Christ's soul descended not downward beneath us here;
Yet against the Creed, and the apostles words, that Christ descended to hell,
and to the lower parts of the earth, no wise man will admit either your opinion
or assertion, howsoever you think you can make a flourish with David's words,
who says he was Psalm. 139.
fashioned beneath in the earth: of which we will speak when we come to
examine the force of the apostles words.

Defenc. page 151. li. 1.
Only except there be some special reason of good authority to the contrary,
which is the second point of importance here to be considered. Touching which
thus I say, without express and evident Scripture there is in the world no
sound nor meet authority to disprooue our former reason or conclusion.] Your
reasons raked out of the Scripture are such, that no man need to regard; they
are miserable mistakings and palpable misapplyings of the Scriptures intending
no such thing as you imagine; and for the contrary they are plain enough, and
such as have been received and reverenced by all Christendom without exception,
till you and some others in our age started up with figures and phrases to
mince and manage the Scriptures to your pleasure. They are ^eely divines that
do not know, the names of heauon and hell; of life and death of flesh and
sp^it, of Christ and of God, may be diversely taken, and diversely used even by
example of holy Scriptures; but it is the high way to all heresy and
infidelity to turn and wind every word occurrent in the Scriptures after every
signification, that may be found thereof in the old or new Testament, without
respect to the maine grounds of the Christian faith, and to make Rabbis and
Pagans to be the best interpreters of words used by the holy Ghost to express
the mysteries of Christ's kingdom. And how come you now to be so strickt in
this second question, that without express and evident Scripture, against
which you cannot so much wrangle, you will yield to nothing; who were so
licentious in the former, that without all Scripture, and against the
Scripture, you maintained a new kind of redemption by the death of Christ's
soul, and his su^ering the second death; which if you stand to the word of
God, is eternal damnation of body and soul in hell fire? you show your self
more then a Patriarch in the Church thus to coin new articles of the Creed
without all warrant of the word, and to cast out the old, though confessed and
continued since Christ's time, because you find some words to have diverse
senses, at least with Jewish and heathen writers, though not with Christians.

Austen himself avouches well and faithfully, supposing there were no
express, nor plain Scripture for Christ's descending, the^ (says he) it were
marvelous boldness, that any should dare say he went down to hell.] But the
same Austen in the same place tells you, that Epistola ^9.
euidentia testimonia and infernum commemorant, and dolores; evident testimones
(of Scriptures) mention both hell and the sorrows thereof, to which Christ
came. And for full proof hereof, he says eu^n in the same Epistle, Ibidem
epistola 99.
Defenc. page 151. li. 12.
We can not contradict either the prophecy, which said, Thou will not leave my
so^le in hell; which les^ ^y man should d^e otherwise interpret, Peter
expounds in the Acts of the Apostles; nor the words of the same Peter, where
he affirms, that (Christ) loosed the sorrows of hell, in which it was
impossible he should be held. Who then but an Infidel, will deny that Christ
was in hell? All that you have to say against this, is that Jews and Pagans,
to wit, wicked Rabbis, enemies to Christ, and Poets ignorant of all truth,
used the words Sheol and Hades otherwise than the whole Church of Christ
without exception, till our age, received and believed them from S. Peter's
mouth, and S. Lukes pen, that (...) signifies the foul, and hades imports
hell: put you from this shi^t, and you fall ^ull within the compass of S.
Austens challenge, that is, of plain infidelity; and the^e be simple Sidemen
to clear you from that crime.

q Now I assume this and by Gods help shall make it manifest, that there is in
all the Scripture no one place whereby it may be proved by any show of reason,
that Christ's soul after this life went locally downward from hence, or
diversely from the so^les of ^ll good men deceased.] Though the opinion you h^e
of your ^lfe be great; yet when you come to condemn the whole Church of God ^s
ignor^t of the Christian faith, or altering the same; you should use some more
modesty than to say, they had not one plat ^all the Scripture, nor any show of
reason to believe as they did. You pre^ume much of your Rabbis and Pagans,
preferring their enuio^s and frivolous i^aginations before the judgment and
faith of the whole Ch^ch of Christ yet take good heed lest the better and elder
sort even of your own Deponents receive you not; and so you test convicted in
the ^ares of all good m^n to be rather an insolent affecter of novelties, than
any regarder of sobriety or piety.

Defenc. page 151. li. 18.
Only there are two or thr^ places sonsibly wrested to this p^rpose. First,
that (Ephesians. 4.) where Christ is said to h^e come down into the lowest parts
of the earth.] If that place be wrested from his right sense, the Church of
Christ from the beginning must be charged with that wresting. Ireneu^ cites
those very words of the Apostle, that Christ descended to the lower parts of
the earth, and makes them equivalent with the words of David touching Christ,
The have delivered my soul from the nethermost hell, saying: Irenaus li. ^.
cap. 31.
Ho^ and Da^id in c^m prophet^s d^xit; so much Da^id in his prophesi^ spoke of
him. Tertullian alleging the very same words of the Apostle, concludes;
Habes t Tert^llianus de anima. cap. 55.
regionem Infer^m subterraneam credere; by this thou art to believe that the
region (or place) of hell is under the earth. Cyprian: Cyprian. de Unction
Chrism^.
Descendens ad inferos captiuam ab antiquo captiuitatem reduxit. Christ
descending to hell brought back the captivity, that of old was captiuated.
Arnobius: Arnobius in Psalm. 137.
Postea vidit inferos, and long factus est, non solum a c^lis sed and ab ipsa
Terra in abyssi profunda descendens etc: after (his cross) he visited hell,
and became far off not only from heaven, but even from the earth it self,
descending into the depth of the bottomless pit. Chrysostom: Chrysostom. in 4.
ca. ad Ephesians.
Christ descended to the lower parts of the earth, after which there are none
other. And he ascended above all, higher than which there is nothing. Ambrose
upon that place of ^aul: Ambros. i^ 4. ca. epistolae ad Ephesians.
After death (Christ) descended to hell, whence rising the third day, he
ascended above all the heavens before all men. Ierom out of those words of the
Apostle, Christ descended to the lower parts of the earth, first concludes:
Hieron. in 4. ca. epistol^ ad Ephesios.
Infernum sub terra esse nemo iam ambigat; Let no man now doubt but hell is
under the earth. And expounding the rest, he says: Qui descendit cum anima in
infernum, ipse cum anima and corpore ascendit in coelum. He that descended to
hell in soul, ascended to heaven with body and soul. Primasius upon the same
words of Paul makes the like collection: Primasius in 4. ca. ad Ephesians.
Ergo sub terra est infernus. Qui descendit cum anima in infernum, ipse cum
anima and corpore ascendit ad coelos. Therefore hell is under the earth. And he
that in soul descended to hell, ascended to heaven in soul and body.
Photius: Photius apud Oecumenium in 4. ca. ad Ephesians.
To the lower parts of the earth, after which place there is no lower; he
means hell. Dorotheus: Dorotheus de sancto Eps^te Doct. 22.
What is, He led captivity captive? By Adams transgression the enemy made us
all captives, and had us in subjection. Christ then took us again out of the
enemies hand, and conquered him that made us captiu^. Erepti sumus igitur ab
inferis ob Christi humanitatem. We were then taken from hell by Christ's
humanity. Theophylact: Theophyl. i^ 4. ca. ad Ephesians.
At quem in locum descendit? In infernum, etc. To what place did Christ
descend? To hell, which he calls the lowest parts of the carth after the
common opinion of men. Haymo: Haym^ in 4. ca. ad Ephesians.
First Christ descended to the lower parts of the ^arth into hell, and after he
ascended to heaven. He descended to hell in his soul alone, and then he
ascended above all the heavens in body and soul. It must be noted by this that
he says, Christ, descended to the lower parts of the earth: he shows hell to
be under the earth, whence it is called Infernus, because it is lower than the
earth, or under the earth.

Zanchius repeating diverse Expositions of this place, adds in the end: Tan^h.
in 4. ca. (...) ad Ephesians. verse. ^.
The Fathers for the most part are of this opinion, that Christ in his soul
came to the place of the damned, to signify not in words, but with his
presence, that the justice of God was satisfied by his death and bloodshed, and
that Satan had no longer power over his Elect, whom he held captive: that
himself was made Lord over all, and all power over heaven and earth given him;
and a Name above all Names, that in the name of Jesus every knee of things
celestial, terrestrial, and infernal should bow: neither that he came
thither only to signify this in such sort as is said, but also that he might
c^ie all the devils with him in a triumph: as it is Coloss. 2. He spoiled
powers, and principalities, and made an open show of them, leading them (as
captives) in a triumph by the virtue of his cross, by which he had purged
sins, and appeased the justice of God. Could he not have done this, without
any such descent of his soul? He could, but he would be so far humbled, that
his soul should descend into that most dark and wretched place, though not
there to suffer any thing, but to begin thence his triumph over the power of
the Devil. And this opinion of the Fathers I dare not condemn, since it is
not repugnant to the sacred Scriptures, and has likely reasons. The consent of
the Fathers when it is not contrary to the holy Scriptures has great weight
with me. There is as much difference betwixt this man's modesty and yours, as
there is between his learning and yours. He durst not condemn the judgment
of the Fathers, because it had probable grounds, and was no way contrary to the
Scriptures: you avouch they had no show of reason from any place of Scripture.
But your reward will be according: for where he is with all, and even by your
self reputed a sound and learned Writer; no man will take you but for an
unsound and unlearned Boaster.

Defenc. page (...). li. 21.
I have largely and plainly showed (Treat. page 140.) that this place speaks
not a whit neither of hell, nor of Christ's soul descending locally, neither
before his death nor after. I^ notes only Christ's sensible and apparent
humiliation to the last and lowest point, that is, to the grave; according to
the Hebrew phrase, which the Apostles frequented in their Greek writings very
much. You have showed it, as your manner is, with your seeming and saying that
so you judge: but other proofs you offer none besides phrases and figures,
wherein you take upon you to be very copious. I say then, Thus I say, It seems
to me, and Thus do I judge; these be your best demonstrations, the rest is idle
and vain talk. Three senses you make of these words, but not one of them
otherwise than by your own authority. Treat. page 144.
Some think, you say, that this Greek phrase (to the lower parts of the
earth) is only a figure of speech, a kind of hypallage, for the earth which is
the lower part of the world.] If every man's thoughts may stand for sound and
true Expositions of the Scripture, we shall have many more devices than the
world has yet heard of; but how prove you this in^erting of the Apostles words
by your supposed figures to be the true meaning of the holy Ghost? Whatsoever
pleases not your humor in the words of God, if you may chop and change with
figures of speech, you will lea^ little the^e, that shall not taste of your
turnsall.

Treat. page 145.
Others do thank^ that it may be taken, as al^ding to that metaphorical
Hebrew phrase tachtijoth erets, the lower parts of the earth, where David
means his Mothers womb. And then wh^re David means only Christ's taking our
flesh. The Christian faith was never framed out of phrases or figures of speech
unknown to the people, and passing their understanding: neither did the
Apostles so deliver matters of doctrine, as purposely ^oluing them in every
darcke and doubtful phrase, that might be gathered out of Moses or of the
Prophets: this is the way to leave nothing certain in the book of God, though
the words be never so plain, as long as any phrase or figure may pervert it.
If David once by a metaphorical kind of resemblance called the lowest part of
his Mothers body, where he was fashioned and framed, tachijot^ arets, the
bottom of the earth; that is, of his mother being earth, or compared with the
earth, which is the common mother of us all, whence our bodies first came, and
whither they must return; or noted the strangeness and secretnesse of his
conception and formation in his mothers womb by the bowels of the earth, where
metals and minerals lie and grow in like manner: What is this to the Apostles
words, who dallieth not here with obscure phrases and metaphors, as David did
for ciuilities sake calling his mothers womb the bowels of the earth, but
expounds the words of David cited immediately before, that Christ ascending
up on hi^, led captivity captive, and gave gifts unto men? That then which the
apostle immediately adds by way of a Parenthesis, must tend wholly to the
declaration and exposition of these words of David, that Christ ascending led
captivity captive: the later words, that he gave gifts to men, he presently and
largely shows how they were performed after Christ's ascending to heaven. And
since Christ's conception, though it be an Article of our faith, yet was wrought
by the holy Ghost, not as David's was, neither was Christ's body fashioned by
degrees; first in seed, then in blood, after in flesh, as David confesses his
was, but after a more strange and wonderful manner, as the Fathers both Greek
and Latin teach; and during the time of his conception, Christ did not lead
captivity captive; his mothers womb can no way pertain to the Apostles
purpose in this place, howsoever you or some others would feign show their
devices in making the Apostle hunt after strange and obscure metaphors out of
David's words once used for good manners sake.

Treat. page 141.
It seems to me a very plain Hebraisme, expressing tachijoth erets: which
words are no where found for hell; for the grave they are found. Like to this
is erets tachtith (Ezechiel. 31) where the several circumstances do plainly
teach that the grave only is there meant, and the condition of death, the same
sense manifestly has another Hebrew phrase very like to this: Sheol tachijah
(psalm: 86) and Sheol tachath: (Esa: 14) where though many think hell is
signified; yet surely the circumstances do convince that the grave only is
there meant. this do I judge, that the desce^ding of Christ to the lower parts
of the earth may be taken truly, plainly, and as is agreeable to the Hebrew
phrase, whence surely this Greek phrase arises, namely for Christ's
humiliation unto the grave. Here is your third exposition of the Apostles
words, which you call a plain demonstration, that this place speaks never a
word of hell, nor of Christ's descending thither, but only of his grave: and if
these proud and vain bragges may go for proofs, you will prove any thing;
but you must come back for all this have, and learn that truth is not so
lightly put from her holdfast, as you suppose. For setting aside your
hypallages and metaphors, which are nothing to the meaning of the Apostle in
this place, the ground which here you lay, that erets tachtith, the lowest
earth, and Sheol tachtijah, the lower Sheol are no where used for hell, but
every where for the grave, is false and full of rash resolution, directly
repugnant to the truth of the Scriptures, and the circumstances of those
places, to which you appeal. And least the Reader should think I speak
altogether out of mine own head peremptorily and presumptuously, as you do;
he shall hear the judgment of some of the eldest Rabbis, and others well
learned in the Hebrew tongue touching these phrases, and then we will examine
the circumstanccs of the texts themselves. And because I would make but one
labor of many; and the meaning of Sheoltachtijah; the lower sheol and erets
tachtith the lower earth cannot well be discerned until we see what sheol
naturally and truly signifies, I will first examine the signification of
sheol at which you and others so much stumble and then grow to consider of the
places where those words are used and their circumstances.

Sheol properly signifies the pitts or places under earth where the bodies or
souls of the dead are received to corruption or destruction, so called for
that they are never satisfied but always expect more, ever since man was
adjudged to death for sin: and though in the great conceit of your own skill
you tell me, that my Defenc. page 152. li. 14.
not considering (or not caring for) the use and manner of the Hebrew tongue
causes my mistaking as in these places, so likewise in all, or most of the
rest, and causes mine error in this maine question; Yet I hope I shall let the
Reader see in the end, that proud ignorance leads you so rashly to resolve as
you do both of the words and places in question, and likewise of my positions.
Mercer^ a man of no mean skill in the hebrew tongue, as appears by his
pains therein taken, in his additions to Pagnines Lexicon perused and
published by Ceallere and Betrame, two learned hebricians of our age, observes
that Mercerus in Pagnini thesauro in Rali^ shaal.
hoc nomine generaliter locasubterranea tendendo centrum versus appellantur,
the places under the earth even to the (middle or) center thereof are generally
called by this name (Sheol) as by another name of the same signification, it is
elsewhere called Erets tachtith, the lower or lowest earth (Ezechiel. 31:) and
often with an adiect sheol tachtijah for explanations sake. Proprie insernum
dixeris ita vt locum significes. Hinc cum verbo descendendi passi^ iungitur.
Properly you may call it hell or the place below, for which cause it is every
where joined with a Verb of descending. Forstere in his hebrew Dictionary
repeating what others thought of the sense of the word Sheol, as that some
took it for the pit, others for the grave, some for death it self, some for
the state of the dead; plurimi vero inferum, id est locum damnatorum; and the
most took it for hell, even the very place of the damned; adds in the end. ^.
I am of this opinion, that I think it imports in the Scripture most often
the place where the dead are under the earth, so called for that it cannot be
satisfied, as Lactantius in certain verses of his seems to render that
Etymology of the word. Inferus insatiabiliter ca^a guttura pandit. Hell
opcneth wide his insatiable throat. Et aliter verti commode non potest quam
nomine infernus, and cannot be otherwise conveniently translated then by the
name of Infernus (hell or the places below) Deuter. 32) A fire is kindled in my
wrath, and has burned to the nethermost hell. So does Ezechiel use another
word of the same signification, ca. 31. Thou shall be cast down erets tachtith
to the lower earth. Pagnine unknown to no man that is learned, for his labors
in the hebrew tongue, says, Sheol Pagnini thesaurus in ver^ sh^al.
sepulchrum, infernus, Gehenna. Sheol signifies the grave, hell, Gehenna.
Munstere Mun^ieri dictionarium Hebraicum in Rad^e shaal.
Sheolidem quod sepulchrum, fonea, infernus. Sheol is as much as the grave, the
pit, and hell. Auenarius. A^enarji Ie^icon in verbo Sh^l.
Sheol sepulchrum, item infernus id est locus inferior sub terra. St de impijs
dicitur, significat perditionem. Sheol is the grave; also hell, that is the
lower place under the earth. When it is spoken of the wicked, it signifies
perdition. Lauater: Lauaterus in 15. caput Prouerbiorum.
Sheol non tantum significat locum damnatoru^, sed etiam foue^m vel sepulchrum.
Sheol does not only signisie the place of the damned, but also the pit or
grave. And before them all Lyra well learned in the Hebrew tongue, if not a Jew
borne, said. Lyra in ca. 5. Esai^.
Accipitur verse. 11
infernus in Scriptura dupliciter; infernus (which is the Latin translation of
Sheol) is taken two wa^es in the Scripture; one for the pit, where the
Carcasses of the dead are put, the other, for the place whither the souls of
the damned descend.

The truth of their judgments, that Sheol signifies the places under the
earth, where the bodies and souls of the dead are received will appear by the
very confession of the Rabbis themselves, as well as by the direction of the
Scriptures. Touching the situation of Sheol Rabbi Abraham says. Rabbi Ab^a. in
ca. 2. Ion^.
Sheol m^kom aamakhephec bashamaijm shehu marom. Sheol is a deep place opposed
to heaven, which is on hie. And again I^m in Psalm. 139.
Sheol is the lowest place of the whole earth opposite to heaven. Rabbi Leui.
Rabbi Leui in ca. 26. Job.
Sheol hi mattah bemuchalat vehi markez. Sheol is absolutely below, and is the
center (of the earth.) And that with them it imports hell I mean Gehenna,
the place appointed to torment the souls of the wicked, there can be no
question. Rabbi Iehosuas the son of Leui delivering the names of hell, that
are occurrent in the Scripture, says, In ^bro ^rubin cap. Osio^ passin.
there be seven names of Gehenna, and these they are. Sheol, Abadon,
destruction, Bor Shachath, the pit of perdition. Bor Sheon the lake of ruin or
roaring, Tith haiauen, the bottom of the mire, Zal-maueth, the shadow of death,
Erets tachtith the lower earth. In the exposition of the 11 Psalm there are
repeated as Midras ^ebium in Psalm. 11.
places of abode for the wicked in Gehenna, Sheol, Abadon, Erets tachtith.
David Kimchi commenting on these words of the 9. Psalm, sinners shall be
turned to Sheol, says. Rabbi David Kimchi in Psalm. 9.
Vuederash lishola hu gehinnam, and in derash, Sheol is Gehenna. Elias the
Leuite in his Caldaie Lexicon says: Elias in Methur. geman verbo Sheol.
Veiesh Sheol Methurgemim gehinnam. Sheol with the (Translators or)
Interpreters is Gehenna. The Caldaie paraphrase expressing those words of
David, The shape (or beauty) of the wicked) shall consume in Sheol, but God
will redeem my soul from the hand of Sheol, thus rendereth them: Chaldea
paraphrasis in Psalm. 49. verse. 15 and 16.
Their bodies shall wax old in Gehenna, but the Lord will redeem my soul
from gehenna. Rabbi Solomon likewise expounds Sheol in that place by ^abb.
Solomon in Psalm. 49.
Gehinnam. So in the sixth Psalm it is said, Whosoever is not circumcised,
Midras tehilim in Psalm. 6.
iored Gehinnam, goes to Gehenna, as Esaias threateneth; Sheol has enlarged it
self. Rabbi Moses Hadarsan upon the first of Genesis: Rabbi Moses Hadarsan in
1 ca. Genes.
Gehenna is said to be deep, as it is in the ninth of the Proverbs. In the
deep of sheol are the ghests (of an harlot). The Hebrew gloss upon those
words of God uttered by Moses, A fire is kindled in my wrath, and shall burn
to the nethermost Sheol, says; In libro Tanchuma.
In my wrath, that is, in the midst of Gehenna, as it afterward follows, and
shall burn to the lowest sheol. Rabbi Ioden expounding the words of David,
Thou have delivered my soul from the nethermost Sheol, says; Rabbi Ioden in
Midras tehilim Psalm 85.
The way of Adulterers leads to the deep of hell, and therefore he says,
Thou have delivered my soul from the nethermost sheol. With whom Rabbi Selomo
concordeth: Gl^ssa Rabbi Selom. Ibidem.
The way of Adulterers is to be in the deep of hell, and thence have thou
delinered me, said David, when Nathan said unto me, The Lord also has taken
away thy sin. And lest we should doubt what they mean by Gehinnam, Elias the
Leuite says,; Elias in Thesbi verbo Gehinnam.
Kareu Rabbothenu mekom onesh hareshaim achar motham gehinnam. Our Rabbis call
the place of punishment for the wicked after their deaths, Gehenna.

Neither want these Jews that avouch Sheol, and specially the nether most
Sheol to be below in the deep of the earth, to be opposite to heaven, and to
be the place of punishment for the wicked after their deaths, warrant in the
sacred Scriptures to uphold these assertions. For though Sheol extend to any
place under earth, that by Gods ordinance requires or receaueth the bodies or
souls of the dead, and in that respect to the godly it can be no more then the
grave, and the loss of all things in this life consequent to the grave; and in
that sense we must interpret Sheol, when it is applied to the bodies or
persons of the Saints, whose souls are in rest and bliss with God, and not
under the earth, where Sheol is: yet the full force of that word when it is
threatened to any, or affirmed of the wicked, notes the pit of destruction for
their souls, as well as of corruption for their bodies, and the consequents of
either; and the nethermost Sheol expressly designeth the place of torment
appointed for sinners, that die out of Gods favor, and receive the just reward
of their unrighteousness. Prou. 15.
The way of life, says Solomon, is above to him that knows to decline from
Sheol, that is below. Where first it is evident, that as verse. 24.
heaven is above, in which is true and eternal life; so Sheol, which is the
pit of death for body and soul, is below us, which must needs be in the
earth under us. This partition of celestial, terrestrial and infernal
persons and places the Apostle warranteth by this authority, when he says.
Phil p. 2.
Every knee of things (...), in heaven, on the earth: and under the earth
(should (and) shall) bow at the name of Jesus. And since the whole world is by
the word of God in the creation, conservation, and alteration thereof
sufficiently divided into heaven and earth; the place of hell must of
necessity be either out of the whole world created by God, and so no where; or
in heaven, which is an impious absurdity and monstrous contrarie^e; or else it
must be within the compass of the earth: and not being upon the earth where
men live, it must needs be under the earth, whither the wicked descend when
they die. This distribution also Saint John ratifieth, when he says, Apoca. 5.
None in heaven, nor on earth, (...), nor under the earth, was able to open the
book. Wherefore the book of Job to express the infiniteness of Gods
perfection and wisdom, uses these four comparisons. Job 11.
The heavens are high, what can thou do (there)? It is deeper then Sheol;
how can thou know it? the measure thereof is longer then the earth, and
brother then the sea. Where if we be not wilfully bl^nd, we cannot choose but
see, that Sheol is not only deep, but the deepest place in the world; even as
heaven is the highest. To compare the wisdom of God with the grave, which is
six foot deep, or not so much, were most ridiculous, since we commonly dig
to that depth and deeper upon diverse occasions. And therefore Sheol is the
deepest place in the earth, to which no man living ever pierced, to make report
of the deepenesse of it. Moses confirms the same when he says; Deuteronomy. 32.
sire shall burn to the lower Sheol, and shall eat through the earth, and
inflame the foundations of the hills.

As the situation of Sheol is below under the earth, that is in the bottom of
the earth, so is it a place threatened to the souls, not only to the bodies of
the wicked, though at length it shall receive both. David putting a difference
betwixt himself and the wicked, says, Psalm 49.
Like sheep shall they be laid in Sheol, but God will red^eme my soul from
the hand of Sheol. David never drempt that his soul should be in the grave,
nor that the souls of the wicked should there be laid: much less that his
body should be freed from the grave, more then the bodies of such as knew no
God at all. Sheol then here, as in sundry other parts of Scripture, signifies
somewhat, from which the godly shall be saved, and whereto the wicked shall be
everlastingly adjudged. But that is not the grave, which is common to all men,
good and bad. It was therefore the Sheol of souls from which David hoped to be
delivered, and which the wicked shall not avoid: And so are his very words. The
Lord will deliver my soul from Psalm. 49. v. 15.
the power of Sheol. Again the full reward of wickedness is not the grave
whereto the godly come as well as the godless. But Sheol is threatened in the
Scriptures as the full and final wages of all impiety, neither is there any
other note or name sor hell, except metaphorical throughout the Old Testament.
Wherefore when David says, Psalm. 9 v. 17.
sinners shall be turned to Sheol, and all nations that forget God; he does not
threaten them with that, which is general to all Gods children, but with that,
which is peculiar to all Gods enemies, which must needs be hell, and not the
grave. And so much Calvin himself, who otherwise overmuch urges the right
sense of Sheol to be the grave, confesleth to be the true meaning of this
place." The Hebrew word Sheolah (to Sheol) (...) in (...) 9. v 1^.
which was ambiguous, I doubted not to translate by the name of hell. For
though it displease me not, that others translate it the grave, yet it is
certain, that somewhat here is noted by the Prophet besides the common death.
Otherwise he should say nothing of the wicked, that should not indifferently
agree to all the faithful. Observe this rule, which indeed is true, that when
the Scriptures threaten the wicked with Sheol, they mean not the grave, which
is common to all the godly; but that Sheol, which is appointed for the wicked,
from which the faithful shall be freed, and you may spare all your figures and
phrases, wherewith you load both your self and your Reader in this place to
no purpose. For there is a Sheol, as Solomon notes, that shall Prou. 1. v. 12.
swallow men alive and whole, which cannot be the grave, where there lies but
one part of man and that after his death. And since the Scripture in exact
terms makes a lower Sheol, which cannot be but in comparison of an higher,
with what face can you elude the lower Sheol to be nothing but the grave,
whereas one and the same thing cannot be by any means both lower and higher
in respect of it self? And therefore howsoever you could shuffle with the name
of Sheol, without addition against both learning and truth; yet to avouch the
lower Sheol to be only the grave, is only a point of your accustomed
impudency, which regards neither reason nor sense, so long as you may
ourface all with your private and witless fancy.

Come now to the place of Esaie the fourteenth, where you so prem^rily
pronounce, that whatsoever others think, the circumstances do convince the
grave only is there meant; and see your own folly, if pride have not so
closed your eyes, that you can discern nothing besides your own dreams. In
the words of Esaie are sundry circumstances, which plainly prove Sheol
there not to be taken for the grave only. The first is the situation of Sheol,
which the Prophet there says is below. Esai. 14. v. 9.
Sheol from below is stirred to meet thee; not meaning the dead should be then
raised to life, but the Ghostes below should be moved and affected with the
sudden fall of that mighty tyrant. It is also there opposed to heaven, as
the lowest place to the highest; for where through pride the king of Babylon
said in his heart, verse. 13.
I will ascend to heaven, and exalt my throne above the stars of God; the
Prophet replieth, verse. 15.
thou shall be thrust down to Sheol, to the sides of the lake. Secondly there
are in that place attributed to them in Sheol remembrance, admirance, irrision,
and speech, which by no means can agree to dead carcasses in the grave, but to
spirits and souls in hell; neither had the dead body of the king of Babylon
any sense, sorrow, or shame for his foul fall, which their insulting in hell
against him purposed to impresse. Thirdly the cruelty, tyranny, pride, and rage
of the king of Babylon against Gods people were greater then to be requited
only with the grave, as were all other men even the Jews themselves that were
the Servants of God and their most religious Kings. It was therefore no way
fitting for the justice of God against his enemies, nor for his love to his
own, to menace the oppressors and murderers of his people with no more, but
only with the grave. For since God by the same prophet threatened the king of
Asshur with Tophet for smiting his people, saying; Esai. 30. v. 33.
Tophet is prepared of old, it is even prepared for the king, he (to wit God)
has made it deep and wide, the burning thereof is fire, and much wood; the
breath of the Lord, like a river of brimstone, does kindle it: how should the
grave only be sufficient to revenge the outrages of the king of Babylon
against the Saints of God, whose city he utterly destroyed, and kept them
groaning in most miserable servitude? Lastly where you so confidently pronounce
the grave only is there meant, a man may soon see, how little care you take in
settling your sentence, since of all other things there specified, the grave is
namely excepted by the Prophet, as no part of Gods threats against that proud
tyrant. These are his words. Esai. 14. verse. 20. and. 19.
Thou shall not be joined with them in the grave, because thou have destroyed
thine own land, and slain thy people: thou art cast out of the grave, like an
abominable branch, as a carcass trodden under feet. So that here you are
taken tardie with a plain and presumptuous contradiction to the words of the
Prophet, that where he threatens, the king of Babel for his cruel oppression
shall not be partaker of a grave after his death, but be cast out as an
hateful care ass to be trodden under foot, you in your wisdom affirm the
g^ue is only here meant, whatsoever others think, yea though the Prophet
himself expressly say no. With such principles you proppe up your idle fancies
in the Hebrew tongue, whiles you would seem learned in giving the Prophet the
lie to his face.

But here you will say is mention of worms, that should spredde under him,
and co^er him, and of lying down to sleep.] This is all the show, that can be
made out of sixteen verses in that Chapter describing the destruction of the
king of Babylon and his issue, and yet these words neither do nor must
infer the grave, which he should lack, but the putrefying of his body,
though unburied; and his lying down to death, yet not in the grave. Neither is
it to be doubted, but when his soul descended to Sheol below, his body was
dead; the one does not exclude, but rather include the other, except men
descend alive to hell, as we read of some in the Scriptures; otherwise the
soul is first severed from the body, before she go to her own place, which
for the wicked is the lower Sheol.

Thus much you might have learned out of old and new interpreters, but that you
scorn to be directed by any man farther then your own fancy does lead you. Of
this place of Esaie Ierom thus writes. Hiero. in 14. ca. Esaiae.
He that through pride said, I will ascend to heaven, and be like the most
high, is thrust down; non solum ad infernum, sed ad inferorum vltimum, ^ot
only to hell, but to the lowest step of hell. So the deep of the lake does
signify, for which in the Gospel we read utter darkness, where is weeping
and gnashing of teeth. And withal we learn, that hell is under the earth, the
Scripture saying unto the bottom of the l^ke. Haymo on the same words. Haymo
in 14. ca. Esaiae.
Hence we learn, that hell is under the earth, whose inhabitants in this place
are designed by the name of hell. Hell is troubled to meet thee, because the
angel, who is President over infernal pains, has stirred up, to meet thee,
the Giants, that is the mighty princes of the earth, whom before thou did
heau^ly oppress. Lyra very skillful in the Hebrew tongue, as appears by his
often citing the Rabbis, upon the same place says. Lyra in 14. ca. Esaiae.
Here is the insultation of the dead, and first against the soul (of the king
of Babylon,) secondly as touching the burial of his body. Concerning the
first we must know, the Jews and Catholic write^s expound this place of
Nab^codonosors soul descending to the pains of the damned. But it must be
referred to Balthazar his Nephew, and so it is said. HELL.] That is the devil
the ruler of hell. UNDER THEE] because hell is said to be in the deep of the
earth. IS TROVBLED.] because the devils were busy about the receiving and
leading of his soul. Bullingere likewise. Bullingerus in 14 ca Esaiae.
The Prophet goes on to describe the wretchedness of Balthazar the wicked
king of Babylon. When therefore he was thrust through the body in many places
by the soldiers, that brake into his palace, his soul went straight to hell.
Where two things are to be observed; first that the soul of man does not die
with his body; next that hell is appointed as a certain place for the wicked,
which here is avouched to be beneath us. Oecolampadius. Oecolampadius in 14.
Esai^.
Thou art descended to hell, and thy glory and mirth with thee. And as the body
is devoured of worms, so the soul is tormented with the worms of an evil
conscience. These are the treasures of rich and mighty men, which oppress
others in this life; they carry nothing hence, but a wretched conscience into
the Gehenna sire, where their worm does not die, nor the fire quench.
Pelican. Pallicanus in 14. Esaiae.
The dead Princes in hell answer one another, deriding each the other,
vpbrayding violences, exercising wrath and indignation, raging with impatience
and injuries, worms meat, and most wretched with the perpetual gnawing of
conscience, even as in the kingdom of the blessed (Saints) they congratulate
one another, and rejoice each at others rewards and honors. Gualter. Gualterus
in 14. ca. Esaiae.
The sum of all that shall be said (by the Prophet) is this, that the Medes
should kill the king of Babylon, and his soul be cast down to hell, among
other tyrants to suffer everlasting torments. This place has an evident
testimony teaching us, that souls do not die with their bodies, but are
spirits immortal, and gathered into a place appointed for them; the wicked to
hell, where utter darkness is, and eternal weeping and gnashing of teeth.
Mollerus. Mollerus in ca. 14. Esai^.
In these verses is described the state of the dead, which depart this life in
their sins without repentance, as it is in the story of the rich glutton
(Lucae 16.) for as he was carried to hell, so this tyrant, and all others, that
die in their sins, descend to hell. Wigandus upon these words, W^gandus in
14. ca Esai^.
Hell below is stirred to meet thee. The Prophet says, that other Tyrants in
hell meet the Babylonian tyrant, and insult at him, qui iam in imum Tartarum
detractus, sibi ^iat similis, who being brought down to the deepest hell, is
now become like to them. As these learned interpreters rightly observe the
circumstances of Esaies words, so depart they not from the propriety of the
Hebrew phrase, which ^.
Munster confesses generally to be this. Munster^ annotation^s in ca. 4.
Euangel.
The wicked descend lishol tachtith, to the lower sheol, that is, to Gehenna,
where their fire quenches not for ever.

The words of Ezechiel 31 and 32, have as many and the same circumstances to
resute your folly, as the words of Esaias have, and make proof sufficient,
that those words do not import only the Grave, as you falsely presume. First
Rabbi Iehosuas and Midras Tehilim of good authority amongst the Jews, avouch
(as I have showed) erets tachtith, the lower carth, to be the description and
appellation of Hell in the Scriptures. Next, Mercer and Forster, and other
famous Hebricians observe, as also your self do yield, that erets tachtith
has manifestly the same sense and signification with Sheol Tachath in the
foureteenth of Esaias, of which there is now no doubt but hell is thereby
implied. Thirdly, Ezechiel purposely notes, and so names the same place,
where all the uncircumcised and wicked, that from the beginning were barbarous
and bloody enemies to the people of God, were gathered and received after this
life, whereof many thousand were drowned, and otherwise deprived of their
graves (except the name of grave be figuratively taken for death) when yet
Ezechiel pointed out the place, where they were at the time that he spoke these
words, even in the lower earth. Fourthly, Ezechiel gives them sight, speech
and affections, as Esaias did, in saying; Ez^h. 32. verse. 30.
They are now ashamed of their strength, by which they became terrors to the
living, and verse. 31.
see and 21.
speak each to others, insulting and vpbraiding one another, even as Esaias
before described them. Lastly, the self same phrase is found in David
threatening this vengeance to those who sought his soul to destroy it, that
they should go P^l 63. verse. 9. and ^ 10.
betachtijot^ h^arets, to the lower parts of the earth, and yet their carcasses
be left as a P^l 63. verse. 10.
porti^n to the foxes, that is, to be devoured of wild and ra^ening beasts.
What the Jews conceived by the lower earth appears by the prayer of King
Manass^s, which though it be not canonical, yet it is of credit enough to
expound that speech, wherein he besought God, Oration Regi^ Manassis.
not to be angry with him for ever nor to condemn (him) into the lower parts
of the earth. And the Hebrew translation of S. Matthews Gospel, which S. Ierom
testifies was long before his time, expresses the words of our Savior
touching his Church, the gates of hell shall not prevail against it, by
Hebraicum Euangelium Matthew. ca. 16.
sha^re tachijoth, the lower gates. So that the same reasons serve to limit
Ezechiels words, that served for Esaies, and you have none other objections
against them, but the self same that were before, which are very firuolous to
infer any such thing as you resolve, that only the grave is meant by Ezechiels
words. Yea the name of grave or sepulcher, which there is sometimes used,
though not alone, infers as well eternal as corporal death in the wicked,
the one being always consequent to the other in them. And so much Mercerus a
man of good judgment admonishes, Spul^hri nomine scriptura exitium Merc^rus
in 15. ca. Prou. verse. 24.
and mortem aeternam intelligit, ex externa morte internam accipiens. By the
name of (grave or) sepulcher the Scripture understands destruction and
eternal death, noting the inward death by the outward.

And as for interpreters new and old, they likewise concur in the exposition
of Ezechiels words, and of David's, that hell is meant by crets tachtith, the
lower earch, and tachtijoth arets, the lower part of the earth, no less then
it was by She^l tachath, the lower sheol in Esaias speech. Ierom. Hi^ro. in ca.
31. Ezechielis.
to the lower earth, hoc est ad infernum, that is, to hell, ad cos qui
desc^ndunt in Lacum, haud dubium, quin inferna significet, to those that
descend to the lake, it cannot be doubted, but he means hell. Lyra. Lyra in
ca. 31. Ezechielis.
To the lowest earth, that is, to hell as touching the soul, which the Doctors
say is in the deep of the earth. Munster. Munsterusi^ in annotation^bus 32.
cap. Ezech.
If thou ask where are the Assyrians buried? (Ezechiel) answers in the sides
of the lake, and in the lower parts of the earth, by which the Prophet
signifies the damnation of body and soul. Oecolampadius upon Ezechiels words,
There is Asshur and all his multitude: Oecolampad. in ca. 32. Ezech.
in Gehenna, in the place of the damned, amongst the uncircumcised Assyrians;
round about his grave or pit, that is, in the midst of hell. For with this
figure (of speech) the Prophets use to describe the damnation of the (wicked
or) accursed, who together with their souls are punished with everlasting
death. Pelican: Pellicanus in ca. 31. Ezech.
Ad terram vltimam, hoc est ad infernum. To the lowest earth, that is, to hell.
Idem in ca. 32
And they are said to be buried in pits (round about them) because they are
gathcred in hell to the fellowship of their forefathers, and such as were like
them; Ibidem.
who by their ^eenesse and cruelty against mankind, which they sought to
oppress, deserved reproach with the living in all ages, and in hell everlasting
punishment and fire. Lauater. Ibidem Lauaterus homil. 133. in Ezech.
non solum Rox ^d Tartara pr^cipitatus fuit, not only the king was cast down
to hell, but his wicked counselors, soldiers, and helpers. Ibidem.
By the uncircumcised he understands the d^ed, meaning the king should perish
body and soul. Ibidem.
Out of this place of the Prophet (Ezechiel) we understand first, that there is
an hell, or place appointed to punish the wicked; next that it is bene^h us,
thirdly, who shall be cast thither. The like is observed out of David's words,
by Ierom. Hieron. in Psalm. 62.
They shall go into the lower parts of the earth.] In inferno damnabuntur,
they shall be condemned to hell. Haymo. Haymo in Psalm. 62.
Into the lower parts of the earth, that is, into hell. Euthymius, Euthymius in
Psalm. 62.
After death they shall descend to hell. Lyra. Lyra in Psalm. 62.
Into the lower parts, that is, to Gehenna, which is in the lower parts of the
earth. So Pelican. Pellicanus in Psalm. 62.
They that seek me to death, shall fall on destruction, and be rather thrust
down to hell. Pomerane, Pomeranus in Psalm. 63.
These things show that all the endeavors of such, as be enemies to godliness,
shall be frustrate, and they shall descend to hell to everlasting death.
Westhmerus in Psalm. 63.
Westhmerus follows Pomerane word for word. Bucer, David Pomeranus in Psalm.
63.
denounces destruction to his enemies seeking his so^le to death, as that they
should be cast down to hell, which he means by the lower parts of the earth.
The verse ensuing fortelleth the reiection of their carca^es to be meat for
Foxes. Bucer^ in Psalm. 63.
Felinus insisteth on the very same words. Mollerus, Felinus in Psalm. 63.
They shall go to the lowest parts of the earth, that is, they shall utterly
perish, and descend to hell, and their carcasses be cast abroad in the fields
to be torn and de^oured of wild Beasts.

Having now found by the circumstances of the Scriptures themselves, as also by
the judgment of so many Jewish Rabbis, Christian writers, old and new
expositors that your heaping up of Hebrew phrases is but the vain broching of
your own fancies, and consequently that there is no cause for you to control
the full consent of so many learned Fathers, as have applied the Apostles
words to Christ's descent to the lower parts of the earth, that is to hell,
which the Scriptures place under the earth. Let us see, which of these two
senses, yours or mine, best fitteth the apostles purpose: Of yours I may safely
say, it has no coherence with the words, nor intent of the Apostle. For these
two verses, the ninth and the tenth, interposed wi^h a parenthesis, apparently
pertain to the verifying of David's words cited immediately before in the
eight verse, that Christ ascending on high, lead captivity captive. Before
Christ's ascending, by way of relation the Apostle puts Christ's descending;
and because descending and ascending must have contrary extremes, from which
and to which the motion is made, therefore to the highest heavens, above which
Christ ascended, Paul opposes the lowest parts of the earth, to which Christ
first descended. The end of his descending is comprised in David's words, to
lead Captivity Captive, which must be from the place of their chiefest
strength; even as the end of his ascending after he had led captivity
Captive, was to give gifts to men. Now these two are the greatest blessings
that Christ in this life bestows on his Church, and in order follow one the
other, as David first, and after him the Apostle sets them. For we were
first to be Luke 1.
delivered from our enemies, and from the hands of all that hate us, I mean
the enemies of our souls, as Zachary filled with the holy Ghost did prophecy
we should, before we could serve him without fear in holiness and
righteousness, as we ought to do, ^ll the days of our life. Deliverance
from the power of our enemies we had none, but by Christ's conquering them, and
leading them Captive. And full conquest over them Christ had none, but by
rising from the dead, and treading under his feet all their power and strength,
not only against himself, but against all his. And no place fitter to
dissolve and break all their force and might then in the chief castle of
their kingdom, which is hell seated in the lower parts of the earth. So that
this exposition of the learned and ancient Fathers, which I before abundantly
delivered in their own word^s, is so far from any just challenge, that it
orderly and plainly lightneth and justifies the words of David, which the
Apostle there takes upon him to illustrate. Now in your exposition there is no
such thing. For first the grave is not in the lower parts of the earth, nor
opposite to the height of heaven, whither Christ ascended, according to the
Apostles words. Next Christ descending to his grave, was rather lead captive
of death, then showed any conquest over death. Thirdly before Christ, many rose
from the grave, as well aunciently raised by Elias and Elizeus, as then newly
by Christ himself. But this conquest, which David here celebrateth, was not
over the grave only, but over hell, Satan, sin, death, and all the power and
fear of the enemy, which Christ led Captive, leaving none unconquered, and
made an open show of them, triumphing over them in his own person; as the same
Apostle elsewhere delivers. Therefore this place must stand for good, till
you or your friends bring better helps to vnioynt it, then your and their idle
phrasiologie gainsaying the whole Church of Christ for your private novelties
and vanities.

Defenc. page 151. li. 32.
Where you expound the text and say, he descended to the lowest, and ascended
to the highest, that he might fill all places with the presence of his manhood,
you speak both inconueniently and far from the Apostles meaning. Page 152.
li. 32.
You add to it (with his presence) very deceitfully in a differing letter like
the text, and together with the text. What censure this deserves the godly do
know.] What censure deserve you, that cannot speak three lines without an open
injury, or manifest folly? You first confess I expound the text, and then you
charge me with adding to the text; as if any man could possibly expound any
place of Scripture, and add nothing to the words. Then were plain reading of
the text, the best expounding of it; and so should all exposition be
superfluous and injurious, as most of your expositions are. And who, besides
you, so deeply doteth, as to charge an expositour with saying somewhat besides
the text? but I add it in a different letter like the text and together with
the text.] I cannot expound any place of Scripture, but I must insert the
words of the text which I expound, and join them together with mine own. The
text I cite not three lines before exactly as it lies in the apostles
writings, and set by the side the quotation of the place, Ephesians. 4. with a
direction to the words alleged by me out of the apostle. I then reason from
the true meaning of the apostles words, who says, that Christ first descended
to the lower parts of the earth, and ascending on high lead captivity captive.
Whence did Christ lead captivity captive, but from the lower parts of the
earth? If that were the purpose of his descending, the lower parts of the earth
were the place, whence he lead captivity (even all his and our enemies)
captive. And so I made the conclusion of mine own, and not a fresh allegation,
as you absurdly mistake, of the Apostles words; Christ then descended into the
lower parts of the earth, and thence lead captivity captive; that he might
fill all (places with his presence.) Where if your eyes were not more then
dim, you might soon see, I quoted no text, as I did before, but declared by
mine own words inserted, what I gathered out of the apostles speech, as the
words interposed in an other letter, and with two lines enclosed, (but that
the Printer did sometimes forget my marks and directions) do plainly
witness. And to what purpose I pray you Sir in common reason were it for me to
repeat a place fair and full as I do, and within two lines after to cite the
same again with six words added, which were not in the former; except it
were an exposition and no citation of the Apostles words? Wherefore your
wisdom might presently have perceived, that the half circle which stands
after (places) did in my coppie stand after ( presence) and that the Printer by
haste or neglect brought it nearer then he should. And those very words
(places with his presence) you find twice in the same section in an ordinary
letter, and cite them your self as an exposition and not an addition to the
Apostles words.

But my speech, you say, is both inconvenient and far from the Apostles
meaning.] Of that you are no fit judge, you must read more, and more
indifferently then you do, before you will come near the Apostles meaning.
Your exposition, that Christ first descended into the lower parts of the earth,
and (then) ascended far above all heavens, only to fill all his Church with
the gifts of his spirit, which by his ascending he promised to do; is far
from the Apostles words and meaning. For in these words (to fill all) the
apostle compriseth as well the benefits of Christ's descending as of his ascend
ing. And even by his ascending we are assured of other and greater gifts, then
those which are powered on his church here on earth for the support of his
Saints in this life. Christ's coming to judgment, his raising our bodies from
corruption, and conforming them to be like his glorious body, and bringing us
into the kingdom of his Father, where perfect, eternal, and celestial joy,
bliss, and glory shall be revealed on us; these be waightier and excellenter
gifts then the graces of this life; and yet by Christ's ascending into heaven
we have a manifest interest in all these. So that though it be true, that
Christ departing from us, provided sufficiently for us, whilcs here we live,
by the gifts and graces of his spirit; yet the kingdom of Christ, which
cxtendeth to things, places, and persons celestial, terrestrial; and
infernal, is far larger, then that part, which you mention, which comes
nothing near to the fullness of the Apostles words or sense. Since then by
descending to the lowest, and ascending to the highest, the apostle notes all
the places in the world, the earth not excepted, from which Christ both
descended, and ascended after he had finished the work of our redemption, and
by his presence in every place was acknowledged, his power and dominion over
all things in every of these places, hell it self being not able to make any
resistance to his person or pleasure: the sensc which I giuc to the apostlcs
words, that Christ descended and ascended to fill all places with the majesty
of his presence, and might of his word, better declares the greatness and
largeness of Christ's kingdom now sitting in heaven, then does the guiding of
his church in the miseries and infirmities of this life, though I do not deny,
but that is a worthy part of his excellent and supereminent power. And for
that application of the apostles words, which perhaps you find not in your
Note bookc, and so suspcct it to be the more inconvenient, Athanasius a man of
more judgment, then I or you, or any that you follow, for ought that I know,
first led me to it. Athanasius de Incarnatione Christ's.
Christ performed the condemnation of si^ne on the earth, the abolition of the
curse on the cross, the redemption of corruption in the grave, and the
dissolution of death in hell, Omnia loca permeans going to every place, that
he might every where work man's salvation. And againc, Athanas. de Incarnatione
verbi. De^.
As then Christ our Savior (...), filled all (places) on all sides with his
presence, so he filled all with the knowledge of himself. Man compassed on
every side and every where, that is in heaven in hell, in man, in earth, may
behold the Divinity of the Son of God unfolded (by his Manhood.)

Defenc. page 152. li. 18.
Third: you make much of that which does you not a pinnes worth of good: where
it is asked, who shall descend into the deep? that is to bring Christ again
from the dead. If the deep here did signify Hell, (which yet certainly it
does not, but suppose it does) how will that follow (which you presume) that
Christ dying descended into the deep. The text says no such To w^t dee^e
Christ descended.
thing. [You be a deinty divine, that think the Apostle here wandreth in his
question, and e^eth in his answer, abruptly and impertinently clapping things
vncoherent together. If the Apostle did not refer the former questions to
Christ, how then in his answer does head, this is to bring Christ down (from
heaven), and to bring Christ back from the dead? Will your wisdom then
learn, that the question must fit the answer, and the one be pinned at least
to the other. But Christ, you say, is not named in either of those questions,
who (shall or) can ascend to heaven? who (shall or) can descend to the deep?]
What thcn? are there not besides the answers, which name Christ, and so ^ie the
former question to the person of Christ; two manifest reasonsto restrain these
questionsvnto Christ? First that the co^snes of faith there mentioned by the
Apostle, which depends only and wholly on Christ, may move no such questions,
nor doubt no such things. For he that doubts, whether Christ dying descended
to the deep, or rising ascended to heaven; utterly frustrateth the faith, that
is in Christ. The persuasion then of faith, which must be far from moving
any such questions of Christ, proves those questions to pertain to Christ.
Secondly the questions themselves exactly comprise the person of Christ, and
consequently, though he be not there named, yet is he there ^nely intended, as
appears by the answer. For these interrogatiues, who can ascend to heaven,
or who can descend to the deep; are equivalent to these general Negatiues,
none can ascend to heaven, and none can descend to the deep, as is plain by
the perpetual use of the Scripture. 1. Cor. 4.
What have thou which thou have not received? Psalm. 34.
who is like to thee O Lord? Esa. 53.
his generation who shall declare? John. 8.
which of you reproves me of sin? Rom 8.
Who shall accuse the elect of God? Who shall separate us from the love of
Christ? And a thousand like examples do exquisitely prove these interrogatiues
to be resolute and absolute Negatiues. And so Job expounds them. Job. 14.
Who can make clean of unclean? not one. If NONE can ascend to heaven, or
descend to the deep, then NOT CHRIST; and so much the Apostle expresses, when
he says, that Christ is excluded from descending, and ascending by those
questions; and in that respect all, that will be faithful must forbear them.
Then notwithstanding your exception not worth a straw, these are two maine
grounds of the Christian faith, that Christ dying descended to the decpe, and
rising ascended to heaven, and he that but doubts in his heart of either of
these, by the apostles verdict emptieth and reuerseth Christ's death and
resurrection. And did not this latter question, ( who can descend to the deep)
pertain directly unto Christ, who only of all men that ever were descended to
the deep of Hell, and returned again with safety and glory: we might not
only justly doubt, whoe^er (besides Christ) descended to the deep of the
earth, but our faith teaches us plainly ^o den^e, that ever man (Christ
cxcepted) did descend to the deep (supposing now that to signify hell, as you
do) and yet does not our faith frustrate the death of Christ, but therein
rather commend it, and exalt it, that never man was able to do, as he did,
that is dying, and descending to subject hell under his power; and to deliver
all his from thence. So that if the deep here do signify hell, then is
here a plain resolution of the Apostle, that Christ dying descended to hell.

Now least you should take any pride in your pe^ting answer, not worth a tagge
of of a blew point, the Reader shall see, that all interpreters, old and new,
and even those, on whom you would seem most to rely, have with one consent
comprised the person of Christ in these two questions, and yielded the Apostles
answcre to be very extrauagant, which God forbid, unless Christ were comprised
as well in the questions, as in the answers. Oecumenius. Oecumenius in 10. ca.
Roma.
The Apostle refers these things to Christ. That is, waver not, neither say
in thy mind, how did Christ descend from heaven? or did Christ being dead rise
from the deep, that is from the lowest places? cast all such thoughts out of
thy mind. Theophylact. Theophylact. inca. 10. Roma.
Stagger not, (says the apostle) neither doubtingly cast this in thy mind, how
Christ descended from heaven, or how after death he rose from the deep, id
est, ex abditissimo and profundissimo loco, that is, from the deepest and most
hidden place. Erasmus. Erasmi annotationes in 10. c. Roma.
Who shall ascend to heaven? that being spoken of the Law, Paul interprets
and applies to Christ. For that is, says he, to draw Christ from heaven. Or
who shall descend into the deep? that is, who will believe the things that are
spoken of hell, except he see them? this is, says Paul, to draw Christ back
from the dead, as though he did not descend to hell, or they desired, that in
their sight he would again descend to hell. Peter Martyr thus sets the
Apostles questions. Petr. Martyr. in 10. ca. ad Roma.
Who shall ascend to heaven to see whether God be reconciled to us by Christ?
or who shall descend down into the deep to see everlasting death weakened and
abolished by him, that is by Christ? Bucere. Buceri interpretat. 10. ca. Roma.
The Apostle acknowledges in this question the denial of Christ, and that he
draws Christ down from heaven, which admits this doubt. It is evident
that the deep is taken pro inferis, for hell, and in this sense the Apostle
seems to have used this word the deep, for he adds, that is to bring
Christ back from the dead, to wit, to account his descent to hell to be void,
and his victory over death and Gehenna. Hyperi^s. Hy^erius in 10. ca. Roma.
Say not, who shall descend into the deep? thou art eased of this trouble by
Christ's resurrection from the dead, and from hell. Gualtere. Gualterus i^ 10
ca. Roma.
Who shall descend to the deep, to see whether death be disarmed, hell gates
broken open, the Devils kingdom subverted and we truly redeemed from all
these? do^ not they deny death to have been conquered by the merit and
resurrection of Christ, and therefore would have him again to die, and to
return to hell, to do that once more, which he has already performed?
Piscator. Pis^at. analy. 1. 0. ca Roma.
The heart of him that believes, does not descend by his thoughts to the
deep, to try whether victory be obtained against eternal death. For if he
doubt of this, he must also doubt whether Christ were dead, and ad inferos
descender it, and descended to hell. Beza. Beza annot. in ^ap. 10. Roma.
Because the law proposed heaven but under an impossible condition, and
threatened the deep, that is destruction, for the offense, to which we are all
subject, whosoever cleaves to the righteousness of the law, of force is
compelled to cry out, who shall ascend to heaven, or descena into the deep,
to take me hence, and lead me thither. But contrariwise faith suggesteth, that
Christ is he, which ascended to heaven to carry us th^ther with him, and
descended into the depth of death, to abolish him that had power of death. Take
which of these expositions you will, it is evident in every one of them, that
by the Christian faith both these impossible actions, as man thinks, of
ascending to heaven, and descending to the deep, were performed for us in the
person of Christ, and therefore now to doubt of either, is to weaken and
eneruate the power of Christ, who most perfectly has accomplished both, to
save us from one, and bring us to the other. And here also by the deep, those
whom you would seem to follow, understand destruction, and eternal death, as
all the rest do, from which Christ has freed us by descending, and destroying
them for us.

Defenc. page ^2. li 27.
This I say the dead here imports the general condition and state of all
the dead as it is opposed to the state of the living. Yea it is not unlikely
that the former word Abyss^ the deep is used also here by the Apostle to
signify (not hell but) even this condition and state of death, which is a
gulf bottomless never satisfied and unrecoverable: like as Sheol in Hebrew
does likewise properly signify.] You show your self by your saying to have
little care what you say, that not only you cross all Expositors without
exception, but even the Scriptures themselves without any respect of truth, or
touch of conscience. For where the Apostle proposes this last point, Who shall
descend to the deep, and return again, as possible only to Christ, and to
none else; by your vntidie tale; that the deep here signifies the general
condition of the dead opposed to the living, you make the apostle a weak
reasoner, or rather a plain liar. For could Paul at this time be ignorant,
that Elias and Elizeus raised some from the general condition of the dead,
that Christ restored three from death, and Peter did the like for Tabitha? Is
there not plain testimony given in the Scriptures, that through faith Hebr.
11.
the women received their dead raised to life? If this were not only possible,
but so usual, as the Scriptures declare, how could Paul make this actio^ of
descending to the deep possible but only to Christ? wherefore I say you must
be better advised, or else you show yourselfe in an open and impudent falsehood
to ruffle and revel with the holy Ghost testifying that many have gone to the
condition of the dead opposed to the living, and yet bin restored to life
again. And consequently in spite of your heart, Abyssus (the bottomless deep)
must not only keep his signification perpetual in the new Testament, which
is the place appointed for the devils, but descending thither with return must
import an impossible condition to all men, ^aue only to Christ; which in the
general condition and state of the dead is nothing so. Besides that the
condemned to hell are truly dead, and so called in the Scriptures, is unknown
to none of any learning save to you. Revel. 20.
Death and hell, says Saint John, delivered up their dead. And if the second
death b^ the truest and terriblest death, that is, wherein both soul and body
are for ever dead, then hell is most properly the place of the dead, since all
there are adjudged to everlasting death; where in the condition of death
opposed to the living here on earth, the souls of the Saints do live with
God, and taste neither torment nor death. Touching the word Abyssus the
bottomless pit, with which you play at your pleasure, this may suf^ce, that
throughout the Scriptures the word is never used for the grave. For the depth
of the sea, and bottom of earth it is used in the old Testament, and
metaphorically for the deep counsels of God, and desperate troubles of men;
but in the new Testament it is only used for the bottomless pit, whither
Devils are afraid to go, as appears by their petition to Christ, not to be
commanded to depart Luc. 8.
(...) into the bottomless deep, and where they are Revel. 20.
locked and kept, when pleases God.

Defenc. page 152 li. 37.
This meaning the Syriacke translator (an ancient writer of no small credit)
seems to have, since he turns it abyssum sepulchri, the deep of the grave.]
The Syriacke translation I reverence for antiquity, but you bring the Latin
tra^slator of the Syriacke, that is partial by your leave, and renders the
Syriacke word according to his own supposition. For though the man were very
learned, that made the Latin translation, yet in this and some other things he
yielded over much to the private affections of some men with whom he lived and
conuersed. The words in Syriacke are, who shall descend lat^ehuma dashiul, to
the deep of sheiul? Where sheiul in Syriacke has the same deriuation and
signification that Sheol has in Hebrew, and therefore stands as indifferent
to the She^l of souls, which is hell, as of bodies, which is the grave. Again
Tehuma in Syriacke being all one whith tehoma in Chalday, and thence taken, as
they both are from tehom in Hebrew, and throughout the Scriptures tehom the
deep being never applied to the grave, but to the great and unsearchable
deepes of the sea, of the earth, and of hell, it has neither sense nor truth,
that Luke ^.
Tehuma in this place should be applied to the six foot depth of a grave.
Lastly, Tehuma without addition is used by the Sayriack Translator for the
deep of hell, to which the Devils desired not to be sent. And sheiul alone is
also put by him to signify the place of torment, where the rich Gluttons soul
was punished after death. The Arabicke Translator keeps the same sense, which
the Syriack does, saying, who is he that descended ILEY AFFA^ LGIAHIM to the
lower places of hell GIAHIM being used by the same Translator in S. Lukes
Gospel to express the place, where the Rich man's soul after death was
tormented. So that the Syriacke and Arabicke Translators fully refute your
conceit of the grave, besides the sound and sufficient reason alleged
formerly by me, to which Translators must confirm their words, that the
Apostles speech here cannot be construed of the grave, without a manifest and
inexcusable falsehood. For where then the sense of these words must be, None
ever descended to the grave that returned, save Christ, this is so false, that
children will not endure it to be thought Apostolic: and therefore will you,
nill you, the bottomless deep here in this place of the apostle must signify
that deep: to which never man descended and returned, but only Christ. Which
if it be not hell, we desire to know of you and your friends, what place you
can plot us out to fit these words.

Defenc. page 153. li. 15. and 16.
The Apostle may (also) insinuate in this word a seeking to the deepest and
fardest parts of the sea, to learn somewhere (if it might be) among all the
creatures how to fulfill and keep the law. For so Moses (whom here he does
cite) expressly signifies then so the Apostle also signifies The true sense
of Paul's and Moses words.
the very same.] You thought the Sextens would deride you, if you should rest
on this resolution, that every day they dig bottomless pits to bury men in,
when they themselves so easily get out of them; and therefore you now put forth
to sea, and go a diuing to see whether you can catch cockles in the deep or
no, to learn of them how the law of God may be fulfilled. A pattern of your
profound learning if a man would seek, he shall need go no farther then this
Page and the next, where he shall find how ignorantly, absurdly, and untruly
you roue at the matter and meaning of Moses and Paul, and miss them both as
wide as the sea is broad. For Moses speaks no word of the depth of the sea,
much less of seeking to all creatures, how the law of God might be fulfilled.
Neither does the Apostle exactly cite the words of Moses, as you imagine, but
somewhat alters them, that he may fit them to Christ with greater effect
and comfort, then Moses could unto the law. Moses speech is fair and plain.
The Jews, to whom he delivered the law written, could not pretend the
knowledge of Gods will to be hid in heaven, nor far removed from them
beyond the seas, that they should wish some would Deuter. 30. verse. 12.
go up to heaven to bring it them, or verse. 13.
over the sea to fetch it, but the verse. 14.
word (says Moses to the people) is very near unto thee, in thy mouth, and in
thine heart for to do it: That is, written before thine eyes, that thou
might read it, and pronounced in thine ears, that thou may remember it,
if thou will take heed to observe it. I take heaven and earth to record, verse.
19.
I have set before thee life and death, blessing and cursing. Moses does not
say the performing of the law was not in heaven, nor beyond the sea: but the
knowledge of the law. Otherwise you make Moses teach, that the fulfilling of the
law was in their mouths and hearts, which is an open error, and repugnant to
the truth of the Gospel. For Galat. 2.
if righteousness (might be) by the law, then Christ died without cause. As
you come nothing near to Moses meaning, so you swerve farther from Paul's. The
right way to decline death threatened to the breakers of the law, and to obtain
life promised to the obseruers thereof, is not to look to the law, which we
cannot observe, but to Christ, who has destroyed death, and purchased life for
us. And therefore after Chri^s resurrection and ascension to ask who shall
ascend to heaven, to procure us life, or who shall descend into the deep to
destroy death for us, is to frustrate, through infidelity, that which Christ
has done for us. If we conf^sse with our mouths, and believe with our h^arts
that God has raised up Jesus from the dead, to be Lord over all, that is, to
give life, and save from death, whom he will, we shall be saved; this is the
Apostles purpose. As for merit-mongers, of whom you say the Apostle speaks
these words, it is an idle and drowsy conceit of yours. These words do no
ways fit presumers on their merits, for they think they shall ascend to
heaven by their works, they ask not who shall ascend: and in the bottom of
the sea what merits can you devise, or to what creatures there should Pharisees
seek, how to fulfill the law? what bables be these to be wreathed into the
Apostles words? or who but you would place all the creatures of God, either in
heaven or in the bottom of the sea? If you cannot write as a divine, speak yet
as a man of common sense or understanding. And all these senses, you say the
Apostle may insinuate in this word. I think as soon all as one, but that the
deep in one, and the same sentence should signify the grave, the bottom of
the sea, and the whole state of the dead, is a flower of your field, it grows
in no wise man's garden.

Defenc. page 154. li. 6.
I may not omit to show how you deal here again with the Text. You allege
it, ^e descended into the deep. But (he) is cunningly added, neither are these
words meant of him.] The Defender cannot d^scerne a con^lusion from a quotation.
Your eyes be not paires, that perceive not the difference betwixt a quotation
and a conclusion gathered out of the Apostles words. In the 220 page, with
which you cavil, the letter ( b) pointing to Romans 10. in the margin is set
after he, and next before Romans 10.
descended to the deep. So that any sober man might soon see, I alleged not
this word he, as out of the text, but inferred it as the true meaning of the
Apostle. And whether I have better reason to say these words are meant of
Christ, as all Interpreters new and old do, than you have to say, they are
meant of a Phar^aicall Merit-monger, that seeks to learn of fishes in the
deep of the sea, how to fulfill the Law; let the Reader judge, now he has
heard us both. h Page 154. li. 13.
[ The like pra^se you v^ again in the Psalm. There is no word to expr^sse
(beneath) which you put into the text of your own head.] Were there no word
importing so much, yet so long as the word added is expressly ratified by many
places of Scripture, as appears Esaias 14. verse. 9. and Proverbs 15. verse. 24.
in plain words, that Sheol is beneath; and the addition is in another letter
different from the rest before and after; your Mastership might have taken it
for an explication inserted, and not for any part of the text cited. But you
never suppose, that the Printer may sometimes mistake or mis-set my directions;
and that makes you so fast to foam at mouth with my falsifying the word of God
of purpose and for advantage; where you rather lie of purpose or for advantage,
since I do not offer there to build any thing on that word, nor so much as
mention it in my collection there, which if I would have done, Scriptures
enough besides this would warrant my assertion. And what if you whet your teeth
against the truth, and the word there, of it self will bear this addition
without any corruption, is not your time well spent, to play the Bedlom in this
sort, and in the end to betray your own ignorance and malice? The Septuagint
translate the word, (...), if I descend, or go down to Sheol, whom the Greek
Fathers follow. The West Church kept the same word, as is evident by all the
Latin Fathers. The Chaldaie paraphrase says, Veemuc lishjol, If I depresse
(or humble) my self down to Sheol, where the word is mac, to be depressed
down or humbled low. Ierom says, If I lie down in Sheol. New Writers well
skilled in the Hebrew tongue, as Pelican, Pomerane, and others continue the
word of descending, and many that change it, retain the same sense: as
Vatablus; Vatabli an^tationes in Psalm. 139.
He^raismus prosietiam descendam ad Ima, it is an Hebrew phrase importing thus
much, If I do descend to the parts beneath. Westhmerus expounds it;
W^sthmerus in Psalm. 139.
Si descendam in infima loca terrae. If I descend to the lowest places of the
earth. Mollerus: Melle^us ^n Psalm. 1^9.
Si ettam descendam ad Ima. If I should descend to the places beneath. David
Kimchi observes, that this word is not only to spread, but withal it has in
it the force of In S^er hasharashim.
lematta, below, beneath. August^us ^stinianus translated the Arabic with the
word of descending. If all these have falsified the word of God in so
translating and expounding this place, then have I mistaken in following their
judgments; but that I falsified of purpose or for an advantage, that is the
meal of your mouth not unlike the rest of your griest. Howbeit, it is e^ident
the Hebrew word has in it, as Kimchi notes, the signification of sub and
infra, and in that respect imports a bed, where a man lies down in a lower
position than he had before. For which cause I might lawfully render the word
as I did, If I lie down, or lodge (beneath) in sheol. Since Sheol by the
Scriptures is a place whither a man must descend, though indeed to prevent all
challenge, I was content to express the force of the word in another letter.

Defenc page 154. li. 27.
Our second and most principal reason is this; If there be not one place of
Scripture to prove that Christ's soul was in hell, then you ought to deny that
opinion: but you have not indeed any one place that proves it; therefore it
ought to be denied.] You show your Log^, where little need is, keep it, if you
be wi^e, till it may stand you in more steed. Every Child knows, or at least
has heard, that faith must depend on the word of God. Wherefore if it be no
where written, we mean not to believe it. But if when the words be plain you
will wrest them with figures and phrases to another purpose, then give us leave
if your proofs be not sound and good, to tell you that our faith relieth on
the singleness and plainness of the word of God, so received and believed
since Christ had a Church on earth. And though you can make shows with diverse
acceptions, and figurative senses of words, yet that is no reason to reuerse
the truth written. For give me the like liberty without regard of faith and
truth, and I can shift of any word whatsoever in the Scriptures, yea the
chiefest and mainest grounds of Religion I can elude with different
significations of the same word in other places of Scriptures. This therefore,
if you take not heed, is a vain ostentation of phrasiologie, wherewith you
think to make every thing of any thing with your figurative and phrasitiue
fancies.

Defenc. page 154. li. 31.
Against this argument you say you have one place, Acts 2. 27. even only one
where you think it is plain, that Christ says, God would not leave his soul
in hell.] That we have, or say we have but one place to prove Christ's
descent to hell, is a tale of your telling, who seldom speak truth; but that
you shall never with all the wits and shifts you have, euert the vigor of
this place, that I say, and you shall see by Gods grace I will p^orme it. But
omit your Prefaces and go to your proofs, and then it will soon be seen
where truth is.

Defenc. page 155. li. 4.
The Hebrew word controuersed is Sheol, the Greek Hades. Now must the word
Sheol and Hades needs signify hell, being applied to souls departed hence? so
indeed you avouch more confidently then truly: and h^reupon it seems you
pawn the trial of this question.] You be so fine in your phrases, that you
can not frame your lips to truth. I avouch indeed you can prove no such
thing, and so I suppose it will fall out. But in neither of these two pages
which you quote, do I pawn the question on that issue, and in the 312. by you
cited in your margin, I speak not a word of Sheol or Hades; so well couched
are your conceits, that you cite things neither written nor meant. Page 155. li.
12.
We hope then when this proof (which you ask for against your opinion) is
showed, you will correct your opinion in this point.] Your proofs I fear will
be so wide from the purpose, that they will rather confirm, then convince mine
assertion of Sheol; but never make so deintie to bring forth your choicest
stuff, it will be some great onset, that you make so many offers to it, before
you begin.

Defenc. page 155. li. 17.
Let it be considered which the Psalmist has of this matter: What man lives
and shall not see death? shall he deliver his soul from the hand of Sheol?
Here now the soul attributed to every man living must be properly taken, as
well as in the former place. Now then it is apparent, that here the souls of
all men living, both good and badde (after death) are appointed to Sheol. For
there is none that can possibly escape it, says the text. Therefore in the
Scripture sheol and Hades applied to departed souls is not always hell, but
the condition or place as well where the just men's souls are after death, as
that where the damned are.] Here is the Cannon that must craze the Creed, and
beat down the walls of Christ's Church; but your devices do not deceive
mine expectation. Set aside the words of the Psalmist, which you violently
draw to fit your dreams; there is not one true nor likely word in all this
reason. First you say, The soul attributed to every living man must be
properly taken (you mean for his immortal spirit) as well as in the former
place, where without question the soul of Christ, as after death, was severed
from his body. This is a foolish and false position openly impugned by the
Scriptures: for the soul attributed to every man living by the Scriptures
imports not only his life, which by death is dissolved and brought to Sheol,
but also his senses, desires, and even corporal affections and passions. Of
this can no man doubt, that ha^h read any part of the Scriptures. The soul is
there said to Psalm. 107.
hunger and Prou. 25.
thirst, to Psalm. 78.
lust, to Number 21.
loath meats, to Luc. 12.
Matthew. 6.
eat and drink, to Ierem. 13.
weep, to Can^. 5.
melt, to suffer all violence, to be Deuteronomy. 19. and 27.
strooken or Ierem. 4.
Luc. 2.
pierced with the sword. These things are attributed to the souls of men
living, by which not the substance of the soul, but the affections and
passions of the body, that are common to us with beasts, are intended. Much
more then, when the soul is said to have Genes. 9.
blood, to Job. 36.
die, or not to be delivered from the power of so^ol, are these things applied
to the life of men, which are most false of their souls once severed from
their bodies. So that no man is able to deliver his soul from the hand of
Sheol, but he must see death, as the words next before do import; but that
Sheol after death shall possess the souls of all men, there is no such thing
in the Prophets words by you produced. The hand or power of Sheol, which ends
this life, sundreth the soul from the body, that power of Sheol shall no man
escape, because it is appointed for all to die, or as it is in your allegation,
to see death: but what becomes of their souls after death, whether they be
in Sheol or in Paradise, this place expresses not. And therefore your
interlacing those words ( after death) of your own authority besides the
text, shows that you affirm so much, but the Psalmist says no such thing.
And because the Reader shall plainly see, how lamely and loosely you conclude,
and clean contrary to the direct words of the holy Ghost even in the Psalms,
he shall hear the words of David himself, whether his soul after death
should be subjected to the power of Sheol or no. Speaking of the foolish, he
says; Psalm. 48.
Like sheep they lie in Sheol, death deuoureth them: but God will deliver my
soul from the hand (or power) of sheol: for he will receive me. Where first is
a manifest contradiction to your maine collection out of the former place, that
Page 155. li. 29.
the souls of all men good and bad (after death) are appointed to Sh^l.
Secondly here is a full confirmatition of mine assertion; that whose souls God
receaueth, they are not in Sheol. But God receaueth the souls of his Saints:
their souls therefore are not in Sheol.

Neither is this confession to be found in the Psalms alone, Solomon
avouches the same. Prou. 23.
Thou shall smite (thy child) with the rod, and shald deliver his soul from
Sheol. Then are not the souls of all men in Sheol after death, since the soul
of a child well nurtered and in time chastened shall be delivered from Sheol.
And so shall the souls of all men, that after death live with God. Prou. 15.
The way of life is on high for him that understands to d^line from Sheol
below. Life is on high, Sheol is below; the Saints then whose souls live with
God, are freed from Sheol which is below. To be in both places at once, is
impossible for one and the same part of man. Then such as you grant are in any
part of heaven, can by no means remain in Sheol. But the souls of the
righteous are in a blessed rest with God, and as Christ promised the thief,
that was crucified with him at least in Paradise. They be therefore not in
Sheol. And as for the mirth, that you make with me and Saint Augustine, that
Page 156. li. 9.
O then this point of faith is grounded on Austin, it is his collection, (not
the text without him) that serves your turn; you and your friends will never
be able to ouermatch Saint Austins observation, that he never found in any
place of Scripture Inferi (which is the word that is used in Latin for sheol)
to be taken in any good sense and much less to make good proof by the word of
God, that the condition or place, in which the souls of the Saints are after
death, is called sheol or hades, since as I have sufficiently showed, Sheol is
opposite to heaven, and to every part thereof, as the lowest and woorst place
of abode to the highest and best, which things if you can glue together you
shall quit your self to be your crafts master.

Defenc. page 156. li. 22.
But first you must note, that we go not about to prove sheol or hades to be
heaven. We never thought it, the more is your injury, when you have nothing to
reproou^, yet with bitter reproaches to disgrace me as you do, and that even
for this your own mere conceit.] What time of the day is it, I pray you Sir,
that you awake so lately out of your deep and drowsy maze, or sleep (choose
which you will) that you now begin in sadness to disclaim, that you ever said
or meant Sheol was or could be heaven, or any part thereof? Is it so many
months agone, that positiuely and publicly you affirmed Defenc. page 155. li.
^4.
Sheol and Hades in the Scriptures to BE THE PLACE, where the just men's souls
are after death? Were the sections of your book framed so far a sunder, and
so very strangers each to other, that you forget it was a resolute position of
yours, or of some of your friends for you even in the very last section, and
but in the other side of the leaf that THE CONDITION OR PLACE, WHERE JUST MEN'S
SOVLES ARE AFTER DEATH, was SHEOL and HADES? and that which argues your
notable stupidity or folly, rejecting so violently the invention of Limbus,
which supposed the souls of the righteous deceased before Christ to be in
Sheol and Hades, as well as the souls of the damned, you now come to tell us
that Sheol and Hades Ibid. li. 35.
is the place as well where the just men's souls are after death, as that where
the damned are. You talk of witty reasons to solace your self withal, if
you could tell how; in truth this stuff better deserves to be tawed with
terms, then to be refuted with reason, since it has neither ground nor
proof nor so much as concordance with it self.

Defenc. page 156. li. 28.
Consider a word of like use in Latin. Defuncti signifying the dead, may be
applied generally to the souls deceased. Yet I hope notwithstanding Limbus may
be easily avoided. Are defuncti none other but the damned only in hell? li. 38.
the word is properly general signifying them that are gone hence, certainly
so does hades and sheol. All these (the Latin, the Gre^ and the Hebrew) words
are indifferent and common in themselves signifying indeed no positive thing
properly, but a mere privation of this life.] You shall do well to consider,
that you know not what you say, but as a man out of truth and tune you fall
from one absurdity to another, and trole out positions, that are mere
priuations of all sense and understanding: that such words, as only note the
privation of this life, or leaving this world, are common to all deceased and
departed hence, this Children know: We strive not for that: and so defuncti
importing such as have ended the course of this life, and are gone from hence,
may serve as well for those that are with Christ in rest and bliss, as for the
rest that are in the pains and torments of hell: but what is this to Sheol or
hades, or to the place where the one, or the other are? Is the PLACE, where
souls departing hence are received, no POSITIVE THING with you, but a MERE
PRIVATION? who ever said so, that was not merely deprived of his wits? the
places where souls after this life are disposed, are Paradise or as you say
heaven, and hell. Are heaven and hell, and the states of souls there, no
positive things, but mere priuations of this life? if this be the best way you
have to a^oid Limbus, in faith my reason will soon convince you to want more
then wit. You speak not of places, you will say, but of conditions. If you
did so, your error were gro^e enough, but by your leave, look on your own
words, you speak of the Page 155. li. 34.
PLACE WHERE JUST MEN'S SOVLES ARE AFTER DEATH, as well as of the condition; and
would you now shift your hands of both, and say you meant a mere privation of
this life? you would feign convey your self to your old castle of comfort,
which are empty words and phrases best fitting your wrangling humor; but we
must pray you to convince the Creed, and expound the Scriptures with more then
mere priuations, and idle observations, or else to let them stand in their
former truth and strength. Who knows not, that such as have ended this life
may be called defuncti or mortui the deceased or dead, in that their bodies lie
now in corruption, though their souls be in peace and rest with God? but what
is that to the place or state in which they are after death, which the
Scripture makes to be positive, though such a phrase-founder as you are, would
have it nothing else but privative? Of Enoch and Elias, who were translated
hence with their bodies living, it cannot be said, they are dead, because no
part of them was or is subjected to death, and yet are they gone from hence to
a more blessed and happy life. But Sheol in the Scriptures, as we have se^e by
the common and constant consent of Jewish and Christian Grammarians and
expositors, is a place under earth opposed to heaven, as the lowest to the
highest, and the word of God does exactly confirm that assertion of theirs.
Deuteronomy. 1^.
Moses, Job. ^1.
Job, Psalm. ^5.
Dani^, P^ou. 15.
and (...) 14.
Esaias teach, that Sheol is q below. Now above and beneath are positions of
places, and not differences of priuations. And so likewise Io^, David, Esaie,
and A^, use Sheol or the place mo^ opposite to (...). ^9.
(...) ^9.
(...) 14.
Amos 9.
heaven. Now if heaven be a po^ place and state, so is Sheol, though either of
them import a privation of this earthly life; Gods ordinance being such, that
this life shall end or change, before men go to heaven or hell. It is then a
weak and waterish collection, that because both the grave and hell, which in
the Scriptures are comprised in the name of Sheol, have in them the privation
of this life, therefore Sheol properly notes a me^re privation of this life,
and nothing else, unless you nourish this secret error in your bosom, that the
souls deceased sleep, and so have neither positive nor sensible joy or pain,
but a mere want of this world.

Defenc. page 157. li. 6.
In effect they are all one with Thanatos death, but that Thanatos belongs
properly to bodies, Hades and sheol sometimes to bodies, sometimes to souls of
men indifferently.] You may as well assume unto your self to make new
Lexicons, as new Creeds. Life and death being opposites, the force of death is
properly the privation of l^e. Howbeit, the continuance and necessary
consequents of death are usually comprised in this name: that sheol and hades
are likewise nothing properly but the m^e p^tion of this life, this is your new
made signification of these words, warranted by your self against the maine
resolution of all sorts of writers, Hebrew, Gr^ke and Latin; and even against
the Scriptures themselves. For if sheol be nothing but a mere privation of
this life, how does the Scripture avouch of Core, Dathan, and their company,
that the earth opening her mouth, Numb. 16.
They descended alive to Sh^l? How does S. John make Hades consequent after
Thanatos, and say Hades followed after him? after a mere privation of this
life can you devise a second privation th^of to follow the first? you take it
to be for your credit to cross the whole world with words; but you may do
well to spare the holy Ghost for fear of a^rclaps. And whence comes this new
skill, that Thanatos belongs properly to bodies? has not the soul of man a
life of grace and bliss, which is the life of God, or will you call that
improperly life? Then the Angels have properly no life, and God himself, who
is all life and that most properly, shall by your learning improperly live. If
the soul have truly and properly her life, then the privation thereof, as in
all the wicked, is truly and properly death. I mean not want of sense, which
she can not lack, but lo^ of grace, by which she lives. And were your false
position true, that only the body did live, and only might die, and there
were no death of the soul; the state of a dead body does it contain nothing
positive? what is corruption and dust, to which the body must return; are
they merely privative? And as for the souls of the righteous, which you say
are in Hades Sh^ol and death; forget you what our Savior teaches, God is ^ot
the God of the dead, but of the living? that is, they are not properly dead,
that live with God.

Defenc. page 157 li. 22.
In the 49. Psalm, where all express circumstances do show that the Prophet
speaks of this death, not of hell, yet David here says; Notwithstanding God
shall deliver my soul from the power of sheol, (that is death or the state of
death) when he shall receive me most mightily. So Tremelius turns it noting
here David's hope of the resurrection, which I think he has well understood
in this place.] You promised to Ibid. li. 13.
show even by the Scriptures, that Sheol and Hades are more then once used for
the general condition of death, wherein even just men's souls are held, or the
mansion of souls departed as well good as bad; and now you turn us over to
Tremelius translation, as if every word that Tremelius said, were Scripture,
whosoever says nay. But first you falsify Tremelius translation, for he does
not turn Sheol there, by death or the state of death* as you set it down, but
he translateth Sheol in the 15. verse by Infernus, hell, and in the 16. which
you cite, by sepulchrum the grave. And by his general observation overthrows
your idle speculation of Sheol to be merely and properly privative. His words
are. Scholi^ Trem^lij in Psalm. 49. verse. 15. num^ 22.
Vox Hebraica (Sheol) stationem quamlibet mortuorum in vniuersum notat, ideoque
modo ad sepulchrum, modo ad Infernum Synecdochice, modo ad vtramque simul
accommodanda est. The Hebrew word (Sheol) notes in general every station
(not state) of the dead, (that is of so much as is dead in men) and therefore
it must be applied sometimes to the grave, sometimes to hell, by Synecdoche (as
to parts thereof) and sometimes to both jointly. Then Sheol properly has
nothing to do with the general state of the dead common to good and badde,
but Sheol is every station or place under earth, as the grave and hell, where
any part of man subjected to death is received. If this be Tremelius meaning,
as his words import none other, then he agrees with the rest of the Jews and
Christian Hebraicians, who avouch the same: otherwise he is deceived, as
Mercere plainly proves against him, and you, and all that be so minded,
Mercerus in 42. ca, Genes.
Errant qui Sheol proprie locum animarum tam bonorum quam malorum esse putant,
cum Sheol proprie sit LOCVS SVBTERRANEVS generaliter, (and) general^us quam
Sepulchrum. THEY ERR, that think Sheol properly to be the place of souls as
well good as badde, since Sheol properly is any place under the earth in
general, and more general then the grave. This he confirms by the witness
of Aben Ezra upon the 37. of Genesis, that Mercerus in 37. ca. Genesis ex Aben
Ezra in ^undem loc^m.
the proper and right signification of Sheol is to signify all places under
earth, and not the pit or grave alone; Whereupon it is every where opposed to
heaven, which is the highest of all. Tremelius therefore makes nothing for
your conceit of Sheol; and if he did, you are both deceived, as I have formerly
showed by the testimonies of many Rabbis and learned Christians, whose
judgments ouerswaie Tremelius, since neither he nor you have any just proof
against them, but your own wresting the Scripture to your private purposes.
Howbeit I see no such thing in Tremelius as you pretend, and therefore do not
charge him with any such fault.

For your own collection, if you join it with Tremelius translation, you
hatch as gross an error touching the souls of just men after this life, as
has been heard of amongst Christians. For if the souls of the godly shall
not be delivered from Sheol; or, as Tremelius translateth it, from the grave
till the resurrection; and as you observe, the soul must here be taken
properly, that is, for the immortal spirit which is in man; and is therefore
in Sheol, because it shall not be delivered thence till the resurrection; then
are the spirits of al just men deceased, as yet in their graves under earth,
and there shall remain till their bodies rise, which is fit doctrine for such
a divine as you are. You might as well conclude out of Tremelius words, that
all the just are damned in hell, till the resurrection. For he thus expounds
David's meaning, Christ is my deliverer, a corruptione sepulchri, and inferni
damna^one, from the corruption of the g^e, and damnation of hell. And so by
your logike, in the mean time the souls of the just are subjected to both. To
labor much to reconcile wrested expositions of this or that w^ter, I have no
leisure; yet Tremelius may mean, that the souls of the just are not yet wholly
freed from the power of the grave, not that they are in the grave, as you
absurdly and falsely conceive and conclude, but that their bodies lie yet in
the grave, which is an impediment to the perfection of their celestial glory.
Otherwise against you, and all that out of this place surmise, that just men's
souls shall not be delivered out of Sheol till the resurrection, the sense and
words of David in this are pregnant enough. For David putting a difference in
th^se two verses betwixt himself and the wicked, and that with an aduersatiue
conjunction; since the souls of the wicked are in Sheol presently upon their
deaths, if David's must be there also, what distinction do his words make
between himself and those others, of whom he spoke before? Again he says,
God will deliver his soul from Sheol, ki, cum or quia, when he shall receive
me, or because he will receive me. Take which you will, it is plain by the
Scriptures, and by these very words of David, that so soon^ as God receives
the soul of man, it is delivered from Sheol. But he receives the souls of
his Saints instantly upon their deaths; they are therefore presently delivered
out of Sheol, and stay not there by any force of David's words until the
resurrection. Lord Jesus, said Steven even as he was stoned, Acts 7.
receive my spirit. Luke 16.
The beggar died, says the Gospel, and was carried by the Angels into Abraham's
bosom. Luke 23.
This day shall thou be with me in Paradise, said Christ to the thief. John 5.
He that believes in him, that sent me, says Christ, (...), is already passed
from death to life. If the faithful pass so soon to life, they be as soon
delivered from Sheol by David's own confession, against which I will hear
neither you, nor any man living.

Defenc page 157. li. 34.
Again that Psalm shows it also, where it is thus written, My soul is
filled with sorrows, and my li^e draws near to Sheol: by his life he
means his soul, the proper cause and fountain of life in him, which also in
^e first part of the sentence he names. By these rouing and licentious glozes
builded on the sands of your own saying, you think you may prove what you
will, and all shall be express Scripture, if you say the word. Life you will
have to be soul, drawing near to be abiding in, The grave to be the general
condition of souls deceased: and to warrant all this your self is the
soothsayer. li. 36.
By his life he means his soul, which also in the first part of the sentence
he names as the manner of phrase in the Psalm is, in the second part to
speak of the same things that are in the former.] Many verses in the Psalms
do illustrate the self same general with diverse parts, adjuncts, and
consequents; but that the words be of all one force or signification in every
such verse, this is an other of your new found methodes, which is nothing else
but a mere confusion of all things. For will you see with your manner of
phrase, as you fin^ly furbish it, what consequents hang on these kind of
collections. This life, of which David speaks, continues not in Sheol,
because it is utterly exstinguished by Sheol: ergo the soul likewise is
mortal, and wholly perishes in Sheol; for so does the life mentioned by David,
which you say is all one with the soul. Again if both these parts import one
sense, then the just in Sheol are filled with sorrows; for so are the former
words of David. And if that be true, how much has the spirit of God deceived
us, who bad S. John write, Revel. 14.
blessed are the dead, which hereafter die in the Lord: even so says the
spirit: for they rest from their labors. But that was the spirit of truth;
and therefore the spirit of error in you sucketh these absurdities out of the
Psalms by your misconstruction of them.

Defenc. page 15^. li. 4.
Indeed I deny not but life may signify here the whole person of man, and
so may nephesh the soul also very well: and then Sheol and Hades signify not
peculiarly and distinctly the grave, which is only for the carcass, but the
condition of the whole man after he has no being in this world. And per
adventure so it is understood here in th^se places, in which sense Sheol and
Hades are far from signifying hell, yea or heaven either, yea or only and
merely the grave: but it signisieth destruction out of this world, and not
being here any more as aforetime to the whole person, that is both to the
body and to the soul.] The idle devices of this wild-gooseracer who would
spend either time or pains to tracke, when he reeleth to and fro, like a man
pot-shotten, with it may be, and per adventure it is so; and closes up all in
the end with a dangerous destruction, which he makes to be just nothing. Boys
meanly Catechized can soon conceive, that death or the grave brings with it
an end of all earthly things, from which the wicked are loath to depart, as
having no farther nor better hope after this life; and therefore to them death
is a destruction indeed, that is a ceasing of all their pleasures, and an
increasing of all their pains. To Sheol is no destruction to the godly.
the godly, who put not their hearts to the things of this world, but desire to
be dissolved and to be with Christ, and in comparison of his presence account
all earthly things to be base, and burdenous, death is a gain, and no
destruction; because they renounced the love of all these worldly things
before hand, and sought for the permanent city, whose founder is God.
Wherefore to them this body is a burden, this life is a warefare, and this
world is a desert, full of snares and pits; Wherein they wander as pilgrims
and strangers. If then to lay aside these troubles and trifles, and to be freed
from all labors and dangers, and to come home to the countrcy and city which
God has provided for the faithful, be in any wise man's sense a destruction,
then have you some reason to call the general condition of death, as well to
the just as to the wicked, a destruction: but if that thought and speech be
void of all religion and reason, then do you houer in the midst between
heaven and hell, and huddle salvation and damnation in one general condition
or state, as you call it, and when you sce what inconvenience will follow
thereof, you make it nothing but a mere privation, or an end of things past.
And this you would apply as well to the person of Christ, whose soul you say
was in no Sheol but this; and as to al his members, whose souls shall not be
freed from this destruction and Sheol till the day of resurrection. Did you
speak of the nature of death in it self, or as it takes hold on the wicked,
I would allow the word destruction; which if it be well understood, is more
then a m^re privation: but when you presume to pervert the Scriptures with
peraduentures, and to sow to them what sense you list, as may best fit your
monstrous fancies; let no man be offended, if I often think it fit to reject
your conceits with rounder words, then to any learned or sober writer I would
willingly give.

That the grave then, by which death is meant, has in it or brings with it a
lack What Sheol is to the wicked, and what to the godly.
or loss of all earthly things, and that common to good and bad; this, as it
is not denied, so is it no special signification of Sheol, as you out of your
new found notes observe; but the general consequent of Sheol or the grave in
all men just or wicked, as also corruption and returning to dust is, from
whence they were taken. To the wicked, that wedde their souls to these earthly
vanities, and neglect God and his promises, the Prophets often threaten Sheol,
that is the place and state, where all these things shall want or perish to
them; but with the sheol of their bodies, which is the grave, is joined the
sheol of their souls, which is hell, though they not regarding or not believing
the later, are most often threatened with the former, which they every day saw
before their eyes, and so was like^st to move them most. To the godly the
remembrance of Sh^ol was sometimes grievous either because it was joined with an
untimely death to themselves, or with the dishonor of Gods name, or with the
danger of his Church, or signification of his dislike of their lives and
courses; which circumstances have often troubled the Saints at the sight or
foreshew of death. These things you stamp and strain with your distempered
and unlearned fancies, and then you produce a mere privation, which you call a
destruction of the whole man in Sheol. Now what if Job called the grave, Job 30.
an house appointed for every man living; or said the Job 17.
grave must be an habitation to him, as well as to others; does he mean that
the whole man, body and soul, shall dwell in the grave; or ^ome to corruption
as is presently added? Job. 17.
I shall say to corruption, thou art my Father, and to the worm, Thou art my
mother and my sister? Are you so good a Carpenter, that with a mere privation
you can make an habitation, and to furnish your house bring souls from heaven,
or the whole man to dwell with corruption and worms?

A seely reason like the rest you interpose, Defenc. page 158. li. 28.
That seeing Job speaks of Sh^ol as his continual habitation to the worlds
end, it can not be went only of the grave for his body, which endured but a
very short time, and had no being at all after it was turned to very How the
gra^ is an habitation to the godly
earth and worms.] Much less may it be meant of his soul, that turns
neither to earth nor worms; and least of all of his whole person, since in the
whole every part is contained, and if it be true of neither part, how can it be
verified of the whole? but such is your folly, that with your idle fancies you
call the maine grounds of Christian faith in question, and offer doubt how God
can raise his Saints out of their graves, when as their bodies being long
before turned to earth and ashes have no being at all. Sir if you speak in
earnest, these be wicked quarrels, and show that you would feign shake heaven
and earth to uphold your new found Sheol. Otherwise all the godly know, that
God has their ashes in sight before him, and will not mistake one earth for
another, though their dust were scattered over all the world. And so long as he
that will raise them by his mighty power, has in so certain number and
measure the whole and every the least dust, that came of their bodies, they lie
in their graves till the time of resurrection, and their maker will not miss
an hair of their head, nor a mote of their ashes; which if it be strange to
you, dispute against him that created heaven and earth of nothing, and not
against me, that believe the resurrection of men's bodies and flesh many
thousand years after they be turned to dust, and as you wickedly surmise, have
no being at all after they are turned to earth and worms.

Defenc. page ^8. (...). 33.
In greatest reason this is that which Jacob means when he says, he will go
down mourning to his Son in Sheol. His body he thought was devoured and
digested in the bel^es of wild beasts. Therefore he will go to the soul of
his son in sheol to enjoy the society of his dear So^e.] It is no marvel
you be so stiff-necked in rules of Discipline, when you ^e thus ^ad-headed in
points of doctrine. I pray you Sir where did Jacob thin^ that ^osephs soul was
after death, or that his own should be? in hell? in Abraham's boso^? or in some
place lately devised by your self to contain just men's souls? Or are souls
by your Divinity without all place, that the father might enjoy the socie^e of
his dear sons soul, and yet in no place? you may do well to declare us
these doubts, for I assure you, unless you plead dottage, these discourses
will amount to plain impiety. In hell there is no great enjoying one of an
other, I trow. In heaven you mean it not, for then you must confess heaven to
be Sheol, which you say you never thought. In the grave I hope souls do not
lodge: then must you find us a place, whither Jacob would descend to enjoy the
society of his dear sons soul. Will you call it a mere privation and
destruction, which are the graffes that you have newly planted? you must first
tell us what joy there is in privation and destruction. Next whether this
privation and destruction be any where, and so in some place; or no where, and
so a right creature of yours, as being a privation of all wit and truth.
Thirdly if Joseph's soul were neither in joy nor rest, what comfort Jacob could
take to find his dear sons soul in such a plight. And lastly whether the
Patr^arks had no promises of rest and receipt with God after this life, but that
they were to seek for the souls of their parents and children in your
privative Sheol which is neither hell, heaven, nor Abraham's bosom. For if it
be one of these, then is it not only positive, but also local, that is
somewhere, and has a state and condition agreeable to the mercies of God, and
the desire of the Saints. But why pursue I your follies so far, as if they
were not peevish pangues of your unsettled brains? Jacobs words without your
jests are plain enough to each good Christian; in saying he would go mourning
to she^l, that is, to his grave, assuring himself after death to have his
soul received into that place of rest, into which he did not doubt but the
soul of his innocent child was formerly admitted by the goodness of his God.
And if any man like Rabbi Selomoes exposition, that el in this place may
signify, over or for, as it often does; then Jacobs words are more easy,
that he will descend to Sheol mourning for his son. Howbeit Jacob knew well
enough, that Joseph's body though deuour^d and digested in the bodies of wild
beasts must return to earth, as to the place by the tenor and truth of Gods
judgment appointed for all men; Genes. 3.
Thou art dust and to d^st shall thou return (that is) to the earth out of
which thou wast taken, and to which Jacob would descend mourning all the days
of his life for the loss of his son, not meaning in Sheol to have joy with
the soul of his son; as you pervert his speech and sense; for then he would
have gone to Sheol not mourning, but rejoicing.

Defenc. page 159. li. 15.
Again to follow our purpose: good Ezechiah also looked for Sheol to be his
habitation likewise after this life. li. 26.
This cannot be understood of his carcass, rotting and wasting away to
nothing in the grave and therefore endures not as the word (Dori my m^nsion)
signifies. Therefore he means it of his souls abiding else where. li. 35.
Again Ezechiah was a godly man; therefore hell was not fit for him; and he
seems to insinuate that in the Land of the dead he might see (the Lord)
whither he was to go: and that must needs be in the place of blessed souls,
even that which here is noted by the word Sh^l.] You stumble still at the same
stone, that none of those things can be meant of the grave, because the body
rotteth and wastes to nothing in the grave. You must leave these falsehoods, if
you will but seem to be a Divine. The bodies of the Saints can not be raised
from their graves, if they be wasted wholly to nothing in their graves. And if
you follow this argument well, whatsoever your name be, that by this means
undermine the resurrection of the dead, your words will broach an open
heresy, though you slily urge them to establish your new found Sheol.
Wherefore I omit this desperate cavil as fighting rather against the faith,
then against the name of Sheol, wherein men's bodies after death, though turned
to dust, yet not to nothing, do still remain. Your next reason that the grave
can not be called Dor an habitation or a continuance, is idle and utterly
mistaken by you, as all the rest is. For Dor is the time of man's life here on
earth, as well as a place of abode. And what should hinder Ezechiah to say, the
time of my life is ended, or the place of mine abode here on earth is removed
or passed away? Must it needs follow, that he shall have a time to live in
Sheol, or a place for his soul to abide there, as you absurdly urge; or that
this habitation may not be said to be in the grave, where his body lies known
to God, though unknown to man? These be miserable shifts to hale in your
privative, positive, general, special, station, state, place without place,
of your first found Sheol. For where before you avouched that Sheol signified
indeed Page 157. li. 2.
no positive thing properly, but a mere privation of this life, you be now
come upon confidence of these rather riots then reasons, to resolve in plain
terms, that the place of blessed souls, where they see God, is Page 160. li.
2.
even that which here is noted by the word Sheol. The place of blessed souls,
where God is seen, I hope is first special to the godly; not general to good
and bad. Next it is positive, and not merely privative. Thirdly it is peculiar
to the souls of just men, not imparted as yet to their whole persons. Fourthly
it is not destruction, it is salvation. And lastly it is heaven, or Paradise a
part of the third heaven, which you never thought to be Sheol. These many
contrarieties you have contrived in less then two leaves, having none other
ground for all this, but only that the dead bodies of men turned to ashes, and
wasted to nothing, as you defend, can not be said to be any where, and so not
in Sheol; and since there is somewhat of just men in Sheol, as the Scriptures
witness, it must needs be the soul; and this erroneous and perfidious
position, that the body of man has no being at al after it is turned to dust,
is the sole foundation of your late made Sheol for just men's souls.

Defenc. page 160. li. 3.
It is a most vain reason, that you give that Sheol here is taken for hell,
because death to the wicked is the passage to hell, which death Ezechiah was
not neeere unto.] I doubt not but you will be as bold with me, as you are with
others, to corrupt or pervert every word you light on, so you may seem to say
somewhat. My words were, that death in his own nature was a passage to hell,
as we find yet by proof in all the wicked, though the faithful be freed from
it by the mercies of God in Christ. And therefore Ezechiah in the bitterness
of his soul might well call death the gates of hell, even as our Savior said,
The gates of hell should not prevail against (his Church) though they should
pursue it on earth, calling sin, error, and persecution the gates of hell,
albeit in the godly they work not so much, but in the wicked only. And in
death denounced by Esaie to Ezechiah, the king did not so much fear the
passage out of this life as the sudden change of Gods favor toward him, who
not long before with a mighty hand from heaven, and by a miraculous slaughter
of his enemies, saved him and his city from the rage of Senacherib, and on the
sudden Esa. 38.
about that very time, as the Scripture notes, struck him with sickness, and
sent him word to putt his house in order, for he should die. which message the
king feared was a sign of Gods displeasure against him, as judging him
unworthy to enjoy so great a deliverance. And this might make Ezechiah,
otherwise a good king, to tremble at that, which in Gods secret counsel he was
not near unto, though in the fear and g^iefe of his own heart, he might feel
in some fort the bitterness of death in that short pangue.

Defenc page 160. li. 12.
Another objection of yours is as weak, where you say; Sheol here must be the
grave, because it is said afterward, sheol does not confess thee, death cannot
praise thee: for it is evident that Ezechiah means not absolut^ly, there is
no praising of God in sh^l, but only be understands the outward frequenting
of the Temple, and publishing of Gods goodness to others. If you can shift of
one circumstance, or make a show with some ambiguity, you think your self
safe; neither care nor conscience leads you to look to the rest, that is
written either in the same or in other places of the sacred Scriptures. This
comparison made betwixt the living and the dead, that the living confesle and
praise God, which the dead cannot do, belongs in the living to the whole
man, that is, chiefly to the soul, the maker and directer of our prayers, but
associated with the body, whose parts and affections she guides and composeth,
even as she does the tongue to serve so good an action. In the dead this joint
devotion of body and soul, with heart and voice, cease by reason the body
severed from the soul by death c^n not concur with the soul in any speech,
action, or affection whatsoever. So ^uch then, as is dead in the just, is
utterly made unprofitable by death to perform any such duty to God. For that
which is dead, is deprived as of life, so of all sense and moti^n answerable to
that life, which is lost. But an utter want of praising God is in sh^l, as
Ezechiah declared, the place therefore where the souls of the just deceased
are, is not Sheol by the scriptures, since they do not cease to confess and
praise God. In Sheol, you say, there is no such praising of God as on earth.]
In Sheol, I say, there is no praising of God at all. Now let us see, to which
of these two the Scriptures accord. You thought with a wrench, as your manner
is, to decline the force of truth, and make way to your fancy, but the
Scriptures hold you faster then so. In the very same verse the next words are
Esa. 38. v. 13.
They that go down to the pit, cannot hope (on, in, or) for thy truth.
Whosoever confesses or praises God, must hope in the truth of God. They can
therefore no way confesle or praise God. Now the souls of the just no question
confess and praise God. They are not therefore in the pit, which the
Scriptures call Sheol. And so much you might plainly have perceived by the
words of Solomon, if truth had been in greater request with you, then your
own devices. Ecclesi^stes 9. verse. 5 and
The living says Solomon, know that they shall die, but the dead know nothing
at all. (...).
There is neither knowledge, n^r wisdom in Sheol, whither thou go. And of
David likewise, Psalm. ^8.
Shall thy wondrous works be known in the darcke? and thy righteousness in
the land of oblivion? If the souls of the just and blessed be in that place,
which the Scripture calls hSeol, as you stiffly maintain, then have they no
wisdom, knowledge, nor memory at all, no not of Gods righteousness and
truth. But that were to prop up error with open heresy, and as before you
gave a good push to deny the Resurrection of the flesh, by saying their bodies
wasted to dust had no being at all, so by this you fairly abolish the
immortality of the soul, and by consequent l^e everlasting. For if the body
be nothing after it returns to dust, and the soul after this life remaining
in Sheol (as you say) can have neither wisdom, nor knowledge, nor memory of
Gods righteousness and truth, as the Scriptures say, you must hold a new
creation of other bodies and other souls, before either souls or bodies can
be partakers of life everlasting.

This is your world of souls, for which you make so much work, and whither
you strive to bring the soul of Christ, defending that his soul was in your
Sheol, where the Scripture says is neither wisdom, knowledge, nor memory.
And so handsomely you have set up the sides of your Sheol, that by your
Resolution it is Page 157. li. 2.
indeed no positive, thing properly, but a mere privation of this life: Page
155. li. 34.
and yet it is the condition or place as well where the just men's souls are
after death, as that where the damned are: And lastly, Page 159. li 38.
it is the land of the dead, where they see him (even the Lord) which must
needs be the place of blessed souls: These many variations you have made us,
and all these be properly Sheol in the Scriptures, and yet Sheol is neither
hell nor heaven, but somewhere, no where, if you could tell what to make of it.
And the proof of all this is as precious, as the place it self. For since the
just go to Sheol as well as the wicked, and there remain til the
resurrection, the bodies of the Saints Page 159. li. 27.
waste away to nothing in the grave, Page 158. li. 30.
neither have any being at all, and consequently their souls must have their
Page 159. li.
habitation, mansion, and abode in Sheol, which is in the land of the dead
(souls,) where they see God, and yet this condition and place common to them
with the wicked, who can neither see God, nor have any bleslednesse. Much to
blame shall I be, if I correct not mine opinion upon such pregnancies as these
be.

The figurative senses of Sheol, as when men living think, or complain, they
are in Sheol, or other things besides man are said to go to Sheol, I purposely
let pass, the corruption of all earthly things returning to dust for the sin
of man, as man does. And the fear and force of destruction persuing man in
this life, if he seek not to God for help, are figurative significations of
Sheol in the Scriptures, but derived by resemblance from the proper
significations thereof, as likewise the consoquents depending on the higher
Sheol appointed for the bodies, or on the lower prepared for the souls, that
are dead, are sometimes intended by that word, and comprised in it, as
adherents and accessories unto it: These I say I omit, because we reason here
of the proper signification of Sheol, which con^th places under earth provided
for sinners, to which the bodies deprived of life, and souls forsaken of
grace, descend as to the mansions assigned them by the just judgment of God
for ever. That the souls of the Righteous are in Sheol till the Resurrection,
the more you labor to confirm, the less cause I find to believe, since you
therein w^der most unwisely not only with mere vn^tainties, and many
contrarities, but even to open and most desperate falsehoods.

Defenc. page 161. li 3.
To the very same purpose the Se^gint use Hades. For it is well and truly
acknowledged by you, that both Sheol and Hades are just all one.] I never
doubted but Hades in Greek was used by the Septuagint to express Sheol in
Hebrew, and with them did note as well the grave, where the bodies of men lie
silent and dead, as the place of punishment, whither the souls of the wicked
descend: but in the new Testament where our Savior often and openly revealed
the place and pains of the damned, there the Evangelists and Apostles
distinguishing the death of the body from the destruction of the soul, and
counting the one to be but a sleep to the godly; They separate Hades from
Thanatos, and use them diversely, referring hades to signify the place of
torment, whither the wicked are condemned, which is hell, and expressing by
Thanatos the dissolution of soul and body, save when they speak of the death
of the soul, either on earth, which is the loss of all grace, or in hell
which is an exclusion from all glo^ie, and a subjection to perpetual and
intolerable misery; in which case they do not forbear the word Thanatos,
death. The Greek fathers exactly follow this signification of hades for hell,
which they learned from the Evangelists and Apostles. Your fitting of David's
phrases to your own devices is a dangerous and deceitful course. For you make
what you will of his words, and then conclude your own conceits out of them.
Wherein if any man ask for proofs, your friends must reply with Pythagoras
Scholars, (...), he said the word. And you so entangle your self with terms,
that you do not see your own positions contradicted and confuted by your own
allegations. For where before you were peremptory that Sheol was properly a
mere privation of this life; now by misconstruing some speeches in the
Scriptures you will have life not only to be in hades, which you make all one
with Sheol and death, but there to continue and abide. And when against your
own positions, and against the grounds of all reason, you have vouched life to
be in hades which you say is death, then you turn round and would infer,
that since life cannot be in death, life there must be the soul, and so the
soul must be in hades. And thus you dance the Morrisco, that life is in
hades, and life is not in hades, not knowing or not caring what you say, so you
may still step forward, though it be over the shoes.

The words of David, My life drew near to Sheol, my soul had almost dwelt in
silence, Psalm. 88.
as likewise of E^hu in the book of Job, speaking of one that is visited with
sickness by the hand of God, and in great danger of death, so that Job. 33.
his soul drew near to corruption, and his life to the s^ers, are not spoken
of dead men that are in hades, as you misconceaue, but of men yet living, and
having both soul and body united together. And this phrase of drawing near to
Sheol or Hades, and almost dwelling there, notes only the danger of death
approaching, and ready to make an end of life, by seuering the soul from the
body. Neither are these the words of the Septuagint, his life (is) in Hades,
(this in me you would call a falsification of the text,) since the verb
precedent (...), his life drew near; must be repeated, and not the verb (is)
added at your pleasure. And where the speech in Greek his life (drew near) in
Hades, is somewhat defective, it must be supplied, as the former verb
requires, (...), and his life (drew near to those) in Hades, and not with a
new verb of your devising; specially since the Hebrew keeps lamed prefixed
before both the words, corruption and slayers which notes a motion toward
either, not a being in either. And yet if the Septuagint did swerve from the
original sense, as by this supply they do not; their authority is not
sufficient to establish any point of doctrine not delivered in the Authentike
words of the holy Ghost. They were Jews living in very corrupt times, and
ignorant of the true mysteries of Christ, to which all faith must be
proportioned; and therefore their words being not canonical must be leuelled
by the text, which they translate, or else refused as unsound. The phrase of
dwelling, in things that be contrary each to other, and so exstinguish each the
other, is as much as to be utterly oppressed without recovery: though the
soul may also be said to dwell in silence (which is the word that David uses)
when it is parted from the body, and has neither action, motion, nor speech,
but in silent and secret manner; where as by her body she performs all these
things even sensibly to the eyes and ^ares of others.

Defenc. page 161. li. 17.
Again it suffices for our purpose, that Hades and Sheol are often used even
indifferently for death, and as being in effect the same. Which also sometime
we may likewise conceive of the Latin Inferi, which is by the translatours
and other writers used for Sheol and Hades, though (I deny not) very
dangerously and corruptly indeed.] That, which is most corrupt and ambiguous,
best suffices your purpose, who seek nothing but a confusion in Scriptures,
Translatours, and Expositours, that you may say what you list: otherwise it
does you little good, that sometimes Sheol and Hades are used for death, since
with the Septuagint Hades imports the place and state of so much, as is dead,
either in the wicked, as of body and soul; or in the godly, as of body
alone. And so much does the Latin word Inferi signify with the old
translator, even places in the earth below for the dead bodies or souls;
though the Latin Fathers most usually take it for the receipts of souls below
the earth, to which they supposed all descended till Christ's coming. How the
Greek does sometimes render the word Sheol in Hebrew, either by Hades or
Thanatos, is little to the purpose; much less, that Sheol and Maueth are
sometimes joined together in the Canonical writers, either because they agree
in never being satisfied, or for that they are joined together, and the one is
the way to the other. For it is death, that brings the good to their graves,
though their souls be in rest; and the wicked to hell, when as yet their
bodies be in the dust. Your determining, what is meant in each place of
Scripture, is of as much force with me, as a feather in the air, that flies
every way; you can no more leave talking, then water can running, where it has
an issue; but you are as lame in your proofs, as you be lavish in your words;
you will say any thing, and prove nothing.

Defenc. page 161. li. 30.
That death cra^eth more then either hell or the gra^e strictly taken, is
vouched and proved after your manner, that is by your own authority; and has
no show of truth, except you suppose, that the souls of the righteous are
dead, against out Saviors assertion, who says of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob,
that they are not dead, meaning in soul, which should not always want her body;
and has therefore a day prefixed, when she shall receive her flesh raised out
of the grave. With like boldness you vouch, which is the maine question, that
Christ page 161. li., 7.
rejoiced, because God would deliver his soul from (Shcol) the condition of
death, after he was in it; settling your conclusion, as you do your religion
upon your own fantastical misconstering the Scriptures. With the same
discretion you add, that in this sense Defenc. page 162. li 3.
the reprobate and the elect after death are said to be together; and for
proof thereof you bring the devils words appearing in Samuels shape unto
Saul, as if the devil were lately become a teacher of truth, because he can
lie; or it were in you to pronounce, whether, or which of Saul's sons were
elect. page 162. li. 8.
Saint Austins meaning you are as near, as the North Pole is to the South:
Austin never thought of your world of souls (good and bad) in one common
condition, much less that the Saints in heaven might be said to be in Sheol.
He speaks of the condition of their bodies, on which death seaseth; not of
their souls, which pass from death to life, and are by no divinity called
dead, since they live with God, and are farther from death, then when they were
living here on earth.

Defenc. page 162.
Not that there is any positive thing common to the elect and r^probates after
death (which you observe well) but only that they alike remain in death.] I
assure my self, that my observation in that behalf is consonant to the word
of God, and is indeed the truth, as you now confess: but then your world of
souls and common condition of the dead must come to bare words, and mere
priuations; or else to a manifest and confessed falsehood. If Sheol and Hades in
the Scriptures be nothing but words, or priuations importing that men are
departed this life; then happy are the wicked, that have none other Sheol or
Hades, but only the want of this mortal and miserable life; and Atheists all
this while were true believers, if Moses and the Prophets threatened nothing
after death but a lack of life. And unhappy are the godly, page 160. li. 2.
if the place of blessed souls, noted (as you say) by the word Sheol, be
nothing else but an empty name and a mere privation. It were good you did a
little consider with your friends, how these things agree with the Christian
faith, that the STATE, CONDITION, AND PLACE of just men's souls departed this
life (for these three you contain in the name of Sheol and hades) should have
nothing in them positive, but all privative. The place of their souls I
suppose to be Paradise; and when you are in your good moodes, you make it not
only to be heaven, but above all the heavens, even where Christ is at the
right hand of the throne of majesty. Their state is blessed with rest and joy.
Has heavenly rest and bliss no positive thing in it, but only a privation of
this life? these be strange conceits; and yet if you will needs have one
common condition, state, and place, to good and bad, you must come to worse
consequents then these. There is indeed one common condition, state, and place
of the dead bodies of just and unjust, that is, to come to corruption in their
graves; but touching their souls no man besides you was ever so unwise, as to
avouch that there was one condition, state, and place of the dead; howsoever,
now and then, some men light on general words touching the dead, that require
a sober and heedefull interpreter. And by what authority do you call the
condition and state of blessed souls a mere privation, or a privation at all;
since to them their state is an exchange for a better life, in respect whereof
this life is but a shadow of death, and the vale of misery? Use we to say,
that men are deprived of their burdens, when they are eased of them? or
deprived of their bondage, when they are freed from it? or that the haven
depriueth Seamen of storms? No more may we rightly say, that the condition
or state of blessed souls is any privation, but rather a permutation of a
short and wretched life (so justly tempered for the desert of our sins) with
a perpetual and happy life given us by Gods mercies. The wicked, that are
excluded from all sense and hope of bli^e or ease, may be said to be deprived
of this life which they loved above all things: but the Saints, that were
otherwise minded, and are provided of a far better life, may not be said to
be deprived, but rather delivered of the manifold troubles and afflictions of
this life. But such is your conceited disposition, that if you may not have a
doctrine and discipline by your self, you loath the way of other Christian
believers.

Defenc. page 162. li. 13.
Thus the old Latin translator uses Infernum, as commonly for Hades, so
sometimes for Thanatos death, and sometimes Mors, death, for Hades. Epiphanius
reads the text, Acts 2. 24. indifferently Thanatou, or Hadou, as reckning
them in effect all one.] In your last pamphlet you were at defiance with all
the Fathers, Greek and Latin, Treat. page 96. li. 21.
for abusing the words HADES AND INFERI to signify Hell properly and
particularly, that is, the place of the damned, or a place under earth, a part
thereof, which the latter writers have since named Limbus: you now are taught
another lesson by some of your friends, whose fingers are in this second part
of your defense, that it is more for your credit rather to pervert the meaning
of each Father, then wholly to reject their writings. And therefore you, or they
turn quite about; and now without all question the Greek and Latin Fathers
(you say) meant by Hades and Inferi, not as they did before, hell or a part
thereof; but your privative world of souls, and that you take upon you to
justify with a round and ready course, as if it were no more masterie for you
to misconstrue their sayings, then the Scriptures. Notwithstanding by process
it will appear, how much your helpers have beguiled you, and brought you into
a fools Paradise, upon sight of one place, with which you might wrangle, to
think that all their testimonies were as soon avoided, or wrested to your
purpose. The place of the Acts 2. 24. which the old Translator renders by the
name of Infernus, and Epiphanius cites sometimes with Hadou, sometimes with
Thanatou, I omit till we come to the special handling thereof; in the mean
while let us here how well you prove your project of the rest of the Fathers.

Defenc. page 162. li. 16.
Iustine the Martyr long before says, Christ noted the folly of those men,
that thought him not to be Christ, but that he should die and remain in Hades
as a common man. He means not here as a wicked man in hell, but as auy
common man (whether good or bad) dying abides in death.] Could you find no
wiser men to ground your reason on, then such as Christ himself notes of
error and folly? makes it any matter to the truth, what cogitations fools
carried in their breasts? I pray you Sir why might not these unchristian fools
think, that all men's souls good and badde, went after death to the place
called Hades under the earth, as well as wiser men, who were of that opinion?
were you so near of their counsel, as to know their thoughts? not only Jews
and Pagans, but even Christians were of that persuasion, as appears by many
of the Fathers; much more then might fools be of that mind, and therefore
except you have some better stuff, we may note this allegation of folly, and
so let it pass. But if you would needs know, in what sense Iustine himself
uses the word Hades, and what manner of place for souls after death he took
it to be; read his answer to the 75. question touching Christian religion.
Justin. quest. and r^sponsio: ad Orthodox. r^sponsio. 75.
After the soul is departed from the body, straightwaies there is a separation
of the just from the unjust. For they are carried by Angels into places meet
for them; the souls of the just to Paradise, where is the fellowship and sight
of Angels and Archangels, with a kind of beholding of Christ our Savior.
(...), but the souls of the unjust (are carried) to places in Hades as it is
said of Nabuchod^nosor king of Babylon. Esa. 14.
(...), Hades below was stirred to meet thee. So likewise he cites and
allows Platoes words. When death draws near, Idem in co^ort. ad Graeco^.
the tales that are told, (...), of things in Hades, how he that here deals
unjustly, shall there be punished, and were laughed at, then trouble the soul,
least they prove true.

Defenc page 162. li. 24.
Ir^us says. Herein Christ, (legem mortuorum seruauit,) did as other do that
di^, and conuersed three days, vbi erant mortui (sancti) where the dead
(Saints) were. And this he calls locum inuisibilem; the unseen world. What
means thi^ but Hades as we take it? yea a little before he expressly calls
it Paradise. Nevertheless I gr^nt, that he thought this unseen world was
indeed beneath in the earth. Wherein his proofs do utterly fail him, as you
your self do fully grant, and profess in this point as well as we.] In time
you may learn some skill to alter and counterfeit the Fathers writings; but as
yet your cunning fails you. You do not mark, or will not see, that Irenaeus
in this Chapter expressly confuteth a number of your positions, and subuerteth
the whole frame of your mere privative Sheol; and not Irenaeus, but your sense
put to Irenaeus his words against his manifest meaning, is all the hold you
have in thisplace. Irenaeus condemns two of your assertions as erroneous; the
one that Christ's soul after death went upward to heaven, and descended not
downward to the lower parts of the earth. The next, that the souls of the
Saints, as soon as they die, ascend to the highest heavens. Ir^us li. 5. ca.
31.
Haeretici, simulatque mortui fuer^t, dic^t se supergredicaelos. Heretics, as
soon as they be dead, say they ascend above the heavens. They will not
understand, that if this were so as they say, the Lord himself surely would
not have made his resurrection on the third day, sed super crucem expirans
confestim vtique abi^sset sursum relinquens corpus terrae; but giving up the
ghost on the cross, would no doubt have straightwaies gone upward, leaving his
body to the earth. But now he stayed three days where the dead were.

As he refelleth your imaginations, so he nothing relieueth your assertions,
though you touch nothing of his, which you turn not awrie with corrupting his
sense or his sentence. Christ kept the law of the dead says Irenaeus; that is
say you, he did but as others that die, and conuersed three d^es where the dead
(Saints) were. The law of the dead, which Irenaeus here speaks of, is to
expect the resurrection of their bodies till the time prefixed by God. His
words are. As then our Master Iren^us vt supra.
non stati^ ^lans abi^; did not straight (after death) ascend up, but stayed
the time, appointed for his resurrection by the Father; so we ought to endure
the time of our resurrection prefixed by God, and so to be assumed, as many as
the Lord shall count worthy. You make a new law of your own for the dead,
which Irenaeus never thought of, and the i^sible place appointed for their
souls until the resurrection, if you will have it to be the same which
Irenaeus says Christ had, must be the lower parts of the earth, which I trust
is not Paradise. Li. 5. ca. 31.
If therefore (says he) the Lord observed the law of the dead, and staying
until the third day in the lower parts of the earth, then rose in his flesh,
and so ascended to his father, how should they not be confounded, who say,
their inward man leaving the body here in supercelestem ascendere locum,
ascends to the highest place of heaven.

Touching the place, where Christ's soul severed from his body was; as the
transcriber or printer before you mistook the word sanctorum in Irenaeus for
sanctus, so you the second time corrupt the same in saying, Christ conuersed
three days where the dead (Saints) were, in steed of, Vbi erant mortui, where
the dead were. This place is twice before alleged by Irenaeus, where the word
sanctus is referred to God, and not to the dead. Iren^. li. 3. ca. 23.
Commemoratus est dominus sanctus Israel mortuorum suorum (qui) dormierant in
terra sepultionis. The Lord the holy one of Israel remembered his dead, which
slept in the earth of their burial, and descended to them. So in his 4 book
and 39 chapter he repeateth it again. Idem li. 4. ca. 34.
Recommemoratus est dominus sanctus Israel mortuorum suorum qui pr^dormierunt
in terra defossionis. The Lord the holy one of Israel remembered his dead, which
before (his coming) had slept in the earth dug to lay them in, (that is in
their Graves.) Iustine Martyr cites the Greek words to like effect. Justinius
in dial^ cu^ Triphone.
The Lord God out of Israel remembered his dead, that slept (...), in their
graves. This being the true tenor, or translation of this sentence, it is
evident that the transcriber or printer of Ireneus mistook Sanctorum for
Sanctus, and you more wilfully presume to put the word Sanctus to the former
period; of purpose to imply that Christ went no whither but where the souls of
his (Saints) were. But you utterly pervert Ireneus meaning. for Christ's going
to them does not exclude his goinge else whither, and in those general words
Christ conuersed three days with the dead, are comprised not only the grave
and place of burial, where the Lords dead were; but as appears by Ireneus
proofs following, the Iren^us li. 5. ca. 31.
Heart and lower parts of the earth, and even the nethermost Infernum, hell,
where others were, which were no Saints, and the souls of the Saints were not;
except you mind to establish Limbus out of these words. Now what has your
privative Sheol and Hades to do with these words? here are places described in
the earth and under the earth, where if you set the souls of the Saints until
the day of resurrection, you empty Paradise, and quite deny the Saints deceased
to be in any part of heaven, since heaven is above and not under the earth. And
though you say Ireneus proofs do fail him for his purpose, they are plain
and full: as that Christ was Matthew. 12.
in the heart of the earth, and Ephesians. 4.
descended to the lower parts of the earth, and that of David applied by him to
Christ: Psalm. 85.
Thou have delivered my soul from the nethermost hell. There is therefore
nothing in these words of Ireneus, that favors your new found hades, though
the souls of Christ's disciples after death be granted Ireneus li. 5. ca. 31.
to go to an muisible place prepared for them by God, which whether it be
Paradise, or heaven, or a place under earth (for thither ^aith Ireneus Christ
descended, but he does not say that the souls of his Disciples shall thither
go till the resurrection, as you falsely collect) it cannot be your hades,
which is a mere privation of this life, and has no positive thing in it; much
les^e a certain and defined place for the souls of his Saints. And where you
presume, as your manner is, that Ireneus a little before calls this invisible
place expressly Paradise, if that were so, you must then confess your hades is
not common to good and bad, and has in it not only an heavenly place, but an
happy state, which I trust you will not allow to the wicked: and so hades and
heaven to be all one with you, which thing you so much disclaim. But by your
leave it is not so, your friends and you are ouerbold with Ireneus to make him
say what you list. Six and twenty Chapters before this he says, the elders,
which were the Apostles Disciples, delivered that li. 5. ca. 5.
such as were translated, (that is, removed hence with their bodies without
dying, as Enoch and Elias) were translated thither even to Paradise, and there
remain they which were translated even to the end; showing now a beginning of
incorruption.

Defenc. page 162. li. 32.
Again he further shows that in the Scripture he takes hades to be al one
with death or the dominion of death, where he reads the text thus, Vbi est
mors aculeus tuus? Vbi est mors victoria tua? Death where is thy sting? Death
where is thy victory?] You show your Iren^us wrote in Greek.
self to be well read in the fathers, that cannot tell whether Ireneus wrote
in Greek or in Latin, and therefore in steed of a most Hier. de scriptor.
ecclesiast. in Irenaeo.
learned and most eloquent writer, as Ierom calls him, you bring us the
authority of an unknown and obscure interpreter. Were there no more, but the
very place even now cited, and abused by your self, the parts whereof are
found in Ireneus thrice after three several interpretations, as for example,
in li. 3. ca. 23.
Terra sepultionis, in li. 4. ca. 39.
terra defossionis, in li. 5. ca. 31.
terra stipulationis; it were enough to show the Author never wrote in Latin,
that varieth so much from himself, and that the translator was very seely;
but there are other arguments infinite: the Greek words expressing the
conceits of heretics, above 120, every where be retained; the style throughout
exactly resembling the Greek phrase, the manifold citations thereof by the
Greek Fathers, as 18. whole Chapters by Epiphanius, 22. pieces and parts
thereof by Eusebius, and 14. by Theodoret, besides Polycarpe his instructor and
teacher even in his youth, who was altogether a Grecian. But we shall not need
to seek reasons for it, since Ierom so many hundred years ago, when the
original was extant, numbreth Ireneus amongst the Greek writers. Hierony. in
pro^ li. 18. Commenta^iorum in Esaiam.
We shall seem (says he) to cross the opinions of many ancient writers; of
the Latins, Tertullian, Victorinus, Lactantius: of the Greeks,: o omit the
rest, I will make mention only of Ireneus Bishop of Lions. And again I^em in
c. 36. Ezechielis.
To name the Greek writers, and to join the first and last together, Ireneus
and Apollinarius. Ireneus then writing in Greek, and citing the Apostles words
likewise in Greek, you cannot prove by the rude and late translation of his
works, which we have, how he read the Apostles text. Gregory Bishop of Rome
more then 600 years after Christ, says. Greg. R^gist. l^b. 9. c. 50.
Scripta beati Irenei iamdiu est, quod solicit quaesiuimus, sed hactenus ex
^is inueniri aliquid non potuit. The writings of blessed Ireneus we have long
and carefully sought for, but hitherto nothing of his can be found: he means
in Latin, for before and after every Greek divine, as Basil, Cyril, Theodoret,
Occumenius, Aretas, Anastasius, Damascen, Procopius, Nicetas, cite Irenaeus
works and words. The Latin translation of the Apostles words, 1 Corinthians: 15:
Death where is thy sting, death where is thy victory, I shall have fitter
occasion by and by to examine.

Defenc. page 163 li. 7.
Tertullian does likewise. For speaking of Inferi, which he takes for the same
that hades is, he notes it as the place, quo vniuersa humanitas trahitur;
whither all mankind must go, and therefore of Christ's going thither he says.
Because he was a man (therefore) he died according to the Scriptures, and was
buried according to the same, also here he satisfied the common law (of
nature) by following the form of men's dying (and going) to the world of the
dead.] If you should not pervert both Tertullians words and sense, neither
would make for your purpose. And though you gain not much by corrupting the
coherence of his words, yet are you so used to have all to your liking, that
you cannot hold your hand from disordering other men's speeches. Tertullian. de
anima ca. 55.
Christ (says Tertullian) being God, because he (was) also man, (and) died
according to the Scriptures, and (was) buried according to the same; even in
this satisfied the law (by) performing the course of an humane death, (apud
Inferos) in the places below. In steed of ( Legi, the law) you say the common
law (of nature); apud Inferos, you translate (going) to the world of the dead.
These be your fancies added to Tertullians words, and no parts of his
purpose. In the mean while you dissemble, and therein abuse both your self
and your Reader, that even in that Chapter, and the sentence before, Tertullian
describes Inferi to be a place under the earth, whither the souls of good and
bad descend after death, the good to a kind of refreshing, which is plainly
Limbus so much refused by your self, the bad to punishment. His words in the
five and fifty Chapter, which you quote, precedent to those which you cite are
these. Ibidem.
Nobis inferi non nuda cauositas, nec sub diualis aliqua mundi sentina
creduntur, sed in fossa Terrae and in alto vastitas, and in ipsis visceribus
eius abstrusa profunditas. Siquidem Christum in cord Terrae triduum mort is
legimus expunctum, id est in recessu intimo and interno, and in ipsa Terr^
operto, and intra ipsam cauato, and inferioribus adhuc abyssis superstructo. We
believe Inferi to be no bare hollownesse, nor any sincke under the world, but
in the gulf of the earth; and in the depth of vastitie, and in the very bowels
of the earth an abstruse profunditie. For we read that Christ was the three
days of his death in the heart of the earth, that is in an inward place within
the midst thereof; and covered with the earth, and hollowed within the same,
and seated over mighty deepes below. If this be your world of the dead, let any
man of understanding judge, whether this be not a plain and evident
description of that, which the latter writers called Limbus, and whether there
can be any fuller delineation of it, then a place under the earth, and in the
midst thereof, even hollowed in the bowels of the earth, and covered with the
same, having under it mighty deepes. And that in it there is as well rest for
the good, as torments for the wicked. And the continuation of the very same
sentence, which you guilefully bring for your world of dead, and the conclusion
of both are delivered by Tertullian in these words, ( Ibidem. ca. 55.
if Christ did perform the course of an humanc death in places below) neither
did ascend into the higth of the heavens, before he descended into the lower
parts of the earth, there to make the Patriarchs and Prophets partakers of him
self, habes regionem inferum subterrane am credere, thou must believe the
(place or) region of inferi to be under the earth. If you draw these words to
your world of the dead, then are the souls of the just neither in heaven nor
in Paradise, but under the earth, even in the heart or midst thereof, and there
shall remain until the resurrection, for so Tertullian resolves of his
inferi.

Defenc page 163. li. 35.
Which yet is farther most clearly to be seen. Lazarus apud inferos in sinu
Abrahae refrigerium consecutus, Lazarus in the world of the dead enioieth
comfort in Abraham's bosom, contrariewise the rich man is in the torments of
fire, both of them there receiving their diverse rewards. How clear is this
that he makes hades and inferos even in Luke also to be nothing but the common
state and world of the dead?] It is far cleerer, that you never read
Tertullian with indifferent care to try the truth of his meaning and words,
but only to abuse the Reader with a seely show not of his writings but of your
wrestings. For there can be no directer speech to prove, that inferi are
neither heaven nor Paradise but places under the earth, and in the midst
thereof, where bad and good, excepting only Martyrs, are kept in rest or pain
till the general day of judgment, then is found in these books of
Tertullian, from which you would gather your world of the dead. For even in the
five and fifty Chapter of his book De Anima, whence you first began to
weaue your world of the dead, he positiuely avouches, Tertullian^s de anima
ca. 55.
Nulli patet caelum; terra adhuc salua, ne dixerim clausa. Heaven is opened to
no man, so long as the earth is continued, that I say not closed (over them).
Together with the end of the world shall the kingdom of heaven be opened. And
touching Paradise he admits no souls to be there, but only Martyrs. And
therefore to this objection. Ibidem.
But thou will say (the dead are) in Paradise, whether the Patriarchs and
Prophets, that rose with our Lord, passed even then (ab Inferis) from the
places below: he answers: How then was the region of Paradise; which is under
the Altar, revealed to John in the spirit, to have none other souls in it
besides Martyrs? how did Perpetua the most valiant Martyr the day before her
suffering, when Paradise was revealed to her, see there only her fellow
martyrs, but because the glittering s^ord, that keeps the gate of Paradise,
yields to none save to such as die in Christ, that is, as Martyrs for Christ?
Tota Paradisi clauis tuus sanguis est. The only key to open Paradise, is thine
own blood (shed in Martyrdom). So that in as plain words, as Tertullian
uses any, Inferi are neither heaven nor Paradise, but Regio subterranea, a
place (or Region) under earth, and in the heart of the earth; where some souls
are in rest, as he thinks, and some in torments, which if you can turn to
your general and privative Hades, you shall work wonders. That other position
of his, constituimus omnem animam apud Inferos sequestrari in diem Domini; we
resolve that every soul is kept in Inferi till the day of the Lord (or of
judgment), as it is private to himself, and savoring of Montanisme, so it is
different from the rest of the Fathers, who confess not only Martyrs, as he
does, but all good Christians after this life to be received into Paradise.
This error if you be disposed, you may mainetaine with Tertullian, but you
shall never thence establish your world of souls, which you seek for.

Defenc. page 164. li. 3.
Whereupon the learned Iunius notes thus. Inferos Latini Patres (vt Graeci
Haden) pro omni loco aut statu mortuorum dixerunt promiscue. The Latin Fathers
use Inferi (as the Greek do Hades) for every place and state of the dead
indifferently.] That Iunius was very learned, I do not deny, but that learned
men may be partial, and many times addicted to their private collections and
opihions, I would God we had not so much experience as we have. If Iunius
mean, that Hades or Inferi were taken for every place and state of the dead,
under the earth, before Christ's coming, Iunius words are very true; that
many of the Fathers took Hades and Inferi for the place of all the dead, which
they thought to be under the earth before Christ's coming; but that they called
heaven or Paradise, which are places for the Saints deceased in Christ, by the
name of Inferi; or that they took Inferi for the state of the blessed souls
since Christ's resurrection, this I say neither Iunius was, nor any man living
is able to prove. And for Tertullians meaning, his words are so plain, that
neither Iunius, nor whosoever might or may ouerrule them. I repeated them
before, the effect is this. Tertullianus de anima ca. 55.
Inferi, says he, are believed of us to be a vastitie in the depth of the
earth; and an hid profunditie in the bowels thereof; for we read that Christ
was the three days of his death in the heart of the earth, that is in the
inward and middlemost receipt thereof covered in the earth, and hollowed (or
compassed on every side) with the earth, and seated upon the lower gulfes. If
these words be not plain enough, he adds, Ibidem.
Habes Regionem Inferum subterraneam credere; thou must believe the Region of
Inferi to be under the earth. I shall not need many words to show that Iunius
observation out of Tertullian is not true, except you add every place and
state of the dead under the earth, thereby to exclude the place and state of
the blessed in heaven and in Paradise; I leave it to the Judgment of any man,
that has learning or understanding, whether these words of Tertullian do not
define and describe a certain place under the earth, and within the earth, in
which he thought the souls of all men (Patriarchs and Prophets not exempted)
were before Christ's coming, and should be till the resurrection, save such
as rose with Christ, or suffered Martyrdom for Christ, (for that is his
exception afterward, as I have showed:) the good in rest, the badde in
punishment. To that end he says. Idem de Anima. cap. 58.
Omnes ergo animae penes inferos, inquis. Velis ac nolis, and supplicia iam
ILLIC, and REFRIGERIA; habes pauperem and diuitem. Cur enim non putes animam
and puniri and foueri in Inferis interim sub expectatione vtriusque iudicij?
All souls then you suppose, are in Inferi. Will you, ^ill you, you have THERE
already both punishment and comfort, the poor man and the rich. For why
should you not think the soul to be punished and cherished in Inferis, in
the places below, mean while under an expectation of either judgment? These
words you can allege, and neglecting how plainly Tertullian has taught
besore, that Inferi are places in the heart of the earth, and a region under
the earth, you wilfully change condition for regi^on, and state for place,
skipping clean, that all this is under earth, and then you say this is your
world of the dead, whereof part are in heaven by your own positions, and part
in hell. But this is too sensible a subuerting of Tertullians words, unfit
either for Iunius to begin, or for you to follow. If Tertullians words were
as true as they be plain, neither side might refuse his opinion.

Neither was Tertullian alone in this persuasion, that all departing this life
before Christ's death went to places below in the earth. Ireneus affirms
almost as much. Irenaeus li. 4. c^. 45.
Ea propter Dominum in ca, quae sunt sub terra descendisse euangelizantem and
illis aduentum suum. Therefore the Lord descended to the places under the earth
to preach (or publish) even to them his coming. And again, Christ conuersed
three days, Irenaeus li. 5. ca. 31.
where the dead were, yea where the souls of the dead were, and was in the
heart of the earth, and stayed till the third day in the lower parts of the
earth, where I trust you will not defend Heaven or Paradise to be. Ierom is
more plain in this point: Hieron. in 3. ca. Ecclesiastis.
Solomon speaks thus, says he, because before the coming of Christ, omnia
ad inferos pariter ducerentur, all were carried alike to the places below.
Wherefore Jacob says, He shall descend ad inferos, to the lower places. Et Job
pios and impios in inferno queritur retentari. And Job complains that the
godly and the wicked are detained in inferno, in the gulf below. And lest you
make what you list of the words Inferi and Infernus, as Iunius and some other
learned men by their leaves have done, you shall hear what Ierom himself
says of them both: Idem in Ose. ca. 13.
Inter mortem and inferos hoc interest, between death and inferi this is the
difference. Death is that whereby the soul is separated from the body.
Infernus locus, in quo animae includuntur sieve in refrigerio, sieve in poenis.
Infernus is the place in which the souls are shut up, either in refreshing or
in punishment. Now where this place was, and how long the souls of the just
stayed there, he does not dissemble. Idem in Os^. ca. 14.
We learn (by Esaias) says he, that Infernus is under the earth. And Hiero in
Epistol. ad Ephesians. ca. 4.
that Infernus is in the lower part of the earth, the Psalmist witnesses,
saying: The earth opened and swallowed Dathan, and covered the congregation of
Abiram. For Idem in Ion^. ca. 2.
as the heart is in the midst of the living creature, so Infernus is said to be
in the midst of the earth. And upon these words of Solomon, There is neither
thought, knowledge, nor wisdom in Infernus whither thou go, he says. Idem
in ca. 9. Ecclesiastis.
Nota vt Samuelem quoque vere in Inferno credas fuisse, and ante aduentum
Christi, quamuis sanctos, omnes Inferm lege detentos. Porro quod sancti post
resurrectionem Domini nequaquam teneantur Inferno testatur Apostolus dicens,
melius est dissolui and esse cum Christo. Qui autem cum Christo est, vtique non
tenetur in Inferno. Note, that thou may believe Samuel also was truly in
Infernus; and that before Christ's coming, all, though saints, were detained
under the law of Infernus. But that the saints after the Lords resurrection are
no longer in Infernus, the Apostle witnesses, saying: It is better to be
dissolved, and to be with Christ. Now he that is with Christ, certainly is not
held in Infernus. I would not repeat so much of this, which I do not
acknowledge to be undoubtedly true, were it not that you and some othe^s take
advantage of these sayings, (which yet you reject as utterly false) to
establish hence your new world of souls, and that after Christ's resurrection,
directly repugnant to their assertions, out of whose words you would seem to
derive your opinion. For you hold, that to this hour the souls of the just
are in hades and infernus and so shall be till the resurrection; since infernus
and hades, as you bear men in hand, import no more with the Latin and Greek
fathers but the condition and state of the dead in general, whether they be in
hell or in heaven. Well this may be your conceit, but no father Greek, or
Latin, ever made mention of any such thing, as you would gather out of their
words. That all men's souls before Christ's coming, good and bad, were in
places under the earth, the good in ease and comfort, the rest in pains and
torments, this some of the fathers both Greek and Latin avouch; but that the
just still remain now after Christ's resurrection either in hades or Infernus,
I find no man that avouches any such thing, save only Tertullian. The first I
must confess I do not believe, neither did Saint Austen before me, who
learnedly and truly concluded, that Abraham's bosom mentioned by our Savior
in the Gospel could be no part nor member of Infernus or hell; since the
Scripture says, there is a great and mighty gulf set between them, so that
the one can have no access to the other, and the just were above in comfort,
whiles the wicked were below in hades, a place of torment, punished with flames
of fire. But since the resurrection of Christ, no father (I still except
Tertullian) affirms the souls of the just to be in hades or infernus; but in
Paradise, which Tertullian yielded to none but to Martyrs, being himself
infected with the error of Montanus, when he wrote his book De anima, as shall
most plainly appear, though you never so stiffly deny it. Howbeit his opinion
in that was private, and different from the rest. For Ierom says. Hiero. in
Epitaphio Nepotiani.
Ante Christum Abraham apud Inferos post Christum latro in Paradiso. Before
Christ Abraham was in places below: after Christ the Thief was in Paradise.
Now the thief was justly punished for his offenses, and so no Martyr. Idem in
Zacharia. ca. 9.
And again. The munition, to which God exh^rteth the Prisoners of hope, we
ought to understand none other but the habitation of Paradise, to which the
Thief first entered with the Lord. For Idem tomo 3. ad Dardanum de terra
viuentium.
this is the Land of the living (in which the good things of the Lord are
prepared for meek and holy men,) to which before the coming of our Lord and
Savior in the flesh, neither Abraham, nor Isaac, nor Jacob, nor the Prophets,
nor other just men could attain. But even by Tertullian himself it is
evident, that your collection out of him is utterly false. For he excepteth
martyrs out of Inferi, and places them in Paradise, who yet I trust are in the
condition of the dead. And so by no means do inferi signify with Tertullian
the place or state of good and bad indifferently, that are dead, but only such
as were, or are in places under the earth, who are properly and truly called
inferi in respect of us and not those that are above us in heaven or Paradise,
where on every side we now confess the Saints are, though their bodies lie yet
in the dust under earth.

And because Chrysostom is quoted as one of the Patrons of these pretenses, I
am content to let you see, that Chrysostom is abused as well as the rest. For
howsoever Chrysostom be vehement and sometimes figurative in his speeches, yet
shall you not be able to prove, that he ever uses Hades after Christ's death
and resurrection for the place of just men's souls. Before that time (some of
the Greek Fathers supposing the souls of the just to be kept under the earth)
you may perchance find here and there a sentence where the just are said to
be in Hades: but you shall never be able to euince, that after Christ's
resurrection Hades is either the common condition or place of souls departed
good and bad, as you and some others would seem to observe out of the Greek
Fathers. I speak of no more then I have read in Greek, but for so much as is
extant of theirs, and I could get, I dare assure the Reader he shall find my
saying to be true. As for the Homily of Chrysostom, which you cite, it can
do you no great good. The Greek to my knowledge is not Printed, and therefore
you can conclude nothing for Hades, since the Grecians have and use many words
for Inferi besides Hades. Cyril of Jerusalem expressing in Greek that Article
of the Creed, descendit ad inferos, says, Cyrillus Hierosolymit. catechesi. 4.
(...). Christ descended to the places below (or under the earth) to redeem
thence the just. But grant the word Hades be used in that place of
Chrysostom, what prove you more then that Chrysostom was of opinion the
souls of the just before Christ's coming were not in heaven or Paradise, but
in Hades under the earth? neither shall we need for witness thereof to go any
farther then the same Homily, which you produce for your purpose. His words
even there are these. Chrysostom. tom, 2 homil. de diuite ex Luc. 16.
Simulque consider andum, quod Abraham apud inferos erat. Nondum enim Christus
resurrexerat, qui illum in Paradisum duceret. Antequam Christus moreretur, nemo
in Paradisum conscenderat nisi Latro. And withal we must consider, that
Abraham was yet ((...)) apud inferos, with those that were under the earth. For
Christ was not yet risen; who should bring him into Paradise. Before Christ
died, no man ascended to Paradise but the thief. No man could enter into
Paradise, which Christ had shut. The thief was the first, that entered with
Christ. The cross of Christ (is) the key of Paradise, the cross of Christ
opened Paradise. Ibidem.
Abraham is yet under the general condition of death; though his soul be in
Paradise: but Abraham is no longer in Hades, where he was before Christ's
coming by Chrysostoms opinion. Hades therefore is neither Paradise, nor the
general state of the dead after Christ's death and resurrection; which cannot
be strange to him that with any moderate pains peruseth Chrysostom.

Chrysostom. sermo. 5. in 5. seria ^ssion.
Nec mors tollere, nec infernus potuit hanc (animam) tenere; qua iubente
tremens etiam vinctas animas, quas tenebat, amisit. Ibidem.
Christo moriente d^tione Tartarus perdidit quos tenebat, abiecit infernus ius
potestatis antiquae. Neither could death take nor ^nfermis (or Hades) hold
Christ's soul, at whose commandment, hell (or Hades) trembling let go the
souls which he held bound. Christ dying hell lost out of his dition (or
custody) whom before it held. Infernus (or Hades) threw of the right of his
former power. And after his eloquent manner speaking in the person of Christ,
he says amongst other things. Idem sermon. 3. de Resurrect. tomo. 3.
I should have left ungrateful (men) to everlasting punishment; but mercy, I
confess, prevailed with me. I sent not an Angel, but I my self came down
for thee. I suffered my self to be slain, and sic ad istos Inseros veni; and
so came to these lower places. Go out now you that are bound; rise up ye that
are wretched; breath your selves ye prisoners. Behold I shine on you as light
unwonted, behold I break all your cords and chains. Ecce Tarteareas seeds,
noctemque profundam faetidumque chaos extermino. Behold, I abolish (to you
these) infernal seats, (this) dark mist, and stinking chaos. Here is
Chrysostomes hades, which I trust is not the general state nor place of all
men's souls under Christ: specially since Chrysostom in plain speech says,
Christ abolished and ended all these things to them that were in hell or hades.
If you stand on the Greek word, as not expressed in Chrysostoms Latin copies;
out of these Latin translations your Leaders by their leaves gathered their
observations (for these parts of Chrysostom are not yet printed in Greek) and
therefore rightly may they berefuted by the same. But though it be no small
defect, that we want as yet the most of Chrysostoms works in Greek,
nevertheless by part you shall perceive what he means by the word Hades
wheresoever it is occurrent in his writings. In his homily of the resurrection
(which I before cited, lying in the New College Library in Oxford) he has
these words: Chrysostom. aduersus Ebrios and de Resurrectione.
(...). The Lord came on his cross, and paid a death for (man) who was held
of the devil, that he might free him from the bands of hades. Where the bands
of hades are those wherein man was detained of the devil. And elsewhere
speaking of the cross of Christ: Chrysostom. in Matthew. ^6. ^om. 55.
(...); If (the cross of Christ) brake up the gates of hades; and set wide
open the arches of heaven; and renewed the entrance into Paradise; what marvel
is it, if it over came deadly poisons and cruel beasts. And so again, (God by
Christ) I^m tractat. 7. de gloriatione in tribulatione.
abolished the curse, (...), and brake in pieces the gates of hades, and opened
Paradise. And showing a general consent of all nations in this use of the
word, he says; Idem in 2. ad Corinth. homilia 9.
The Grecians, Barbarians, Poets and Philosophers, and all sorts of men consent
with us in this, though not after the same manner, (...), and say, that there
are certain judgments (or punishments) in hades. Which Theodoret likewise
confesses to betrue: Theodoret. sermo. 11. de sine and iudicio.
These speeches, says he, are sit for Philosophy ((...)) (...), to send the
souls, that have lived here well, to heaven, and those that have followed the
contrary, down to hades. And of Plato he says, Ibidem.
(...). In many places he affirms tortures in hades.

And least I should be thought to be lead with a desire to contradict without
cause, or upon some conceit to oppose my self against such learned men, as
have leaned that way supposing hades with the Greek Fathers to import the place
and state of good and bad after death, I am not unwilling, good Christian
Reader, if it be not tedious or troublesome to thee, to set down part (for the
whole would make a new volume) of that which in reading I have observed
touching the use of the word hades with ancient writers that were Christians,
who use not hades either for the place or state of the godly now deceased in
Christ, nor for the general or common condition of both elect and reprobate
since Christ's resurrection, but as we saw before in Iustine the martyr,
Chrysostom and Theodoret precisely for a place opposite to Paradise, and
heaven; where the wicked after this life find the due wages of their sins,
which is eternal dar^knesse and death, where the dwelling and dominion of
Devils is; and whence the Saints dead and living from the beginning of the
world to the end thereof we^e and are redeemed and delivered by Christ.

Josephus a Jew, and yet a fauour^r of Christian Religion, as appears by his
testimony, given of Christ, and one that lived even in the Apostles time, as
being a chief leader of the Jews in the battle against the Romans, and
taken by Ve^pasian, to whom he foretold by the gift of p^ophesie, whiles Nero
yet lived, that he should be Emperor, in his oration to dissuade them, that
would have killed themselves and him before he should yield to the Romans;
I^sephus de ca^tiuitate Iu^aica li. 3. ca. 25.
Know you not, says he, that such as go out of this life by the law (or
course) of nature, and rep^y the debt, which they r^ceaued of God, when he that
gave it, is willing to receive it, have immortal glory, an house and offspring
settled, and their souls cleansed and favored of God, inhabit the holiest
place of heaven: and I^sephus de ca^tiuitate Iu^aica li. 3. ca. 25.
whose hands wax mad against themselves, (...), THEIR SOVL^S HADES, that is,
dark, RECEIVES. Ignatius the third bishop of Antioch after the Apostles,
says of Christ: ^.
(...), (...). He descended alone to Hades (Hell) and threw down the rampire,
that had stood from the beginning; and brake up the partition wall thereof;
which kept men from heaven. To the state of the dead Christ's soul did not
descend alone, the thiefs soul was with him; neither had the rampire of bodily
death continued unbroken from the beginning, since many before Christ's
suffering rose from the general condition of the dead; but hell it was, to
which he alone, of all men that ever returned, went, and brake the strength and
force thereof, which till that time was untouched. Theophilus the sixth bishop
of Antioch, about 170 years after Christ, alleges against Autolycus a
maligner of Christian religion the verses of Sybilla, to prove that the
Gentiles did sacrifice to devils: ^.
(...). You made sacrifices to devils in hades. Clemens Alexandrinus not long
after laboring to prove that Peter's words, Christ preached to the spirits in
prison, pertained to the wicked, not to the godly, gives this reason: Cl^ens
Stroma^ li. (...).
(...); who being well advised, will think the souls of the just and of
sinners, to be in one cond^mnation? Whence he concludes, that none heard
Christ's voice there, but ^.
(...); such as were placed in hades; and had yielded themselves w^ttingly to
destruction. And for proof thereof alleges these words as out of the
Scripture: Cl^ens Stroma^ li. (...).
(...). Hades said to destruction, We saw not his shape, but we heard his
voice. I cite not these places to approve every allegation or opinion that is
occurrent, but to show in what sense the ancient Greek writers, that were
Christians, used the word Hades, not for the common condition and state of
souls just and unjust, which Clemens here disa^oweth; but for the place where
the wicked were detained, that wilfully wrought their own destruction.
Eusebius speaking in the person of Christ, says ^.
(...). I see my descent to Hades approach and the rebellion (against me) of the
contrary powers that are enemies to God; He says Eusebius went thither,
Ibidem.
(...), for the salvation of the souls that were in Hades, and descended to
break the brazen gates, (...); and to dismis those that before were prisoners
of hades. And out of Plato he alleges this for a truth Idem Euangeli^ae
preparat. lib. 13. quod Plato non per omni^ recte senserit de anima.
(...), that the souls of the wicked immediately after death departing hence,
endure the punishment in Hades, of their doings here.

Athanasius a man of no mean judgment, in whose confession or Creed allowed
in the Book of Common Prayer, we find it a part of the Christian faith, that
Christ descended to Hades, declares in infinite places what he means by the
word Hades. Athanas. in illud omnia mi^i tradita sunt a Patre.
After man had sinned, says he, and was fallen, by his fall death prevailed
from Adam until Christ; the earth was accursed, (...). Hades was opened;
Paradise was closed, Heaven was offended: but after all things were deliu^red
to Christ, the whole was reformed and persited, the earth in steed of a curse
was blessed, paradise was opened, (...), Hades shranke for fear, the gates of
heaven were left open. Ibidem.
He suffering for us recovered us, and hungring refreshed us; (...). And
descending to hades brought us back. Idem contra Arianos oration^ 2.
For if the Lord had not been made man, we had never risen from the dead as
redeemed from our sins, but had remained under the earth as dead, neither had
we ever been lifted up to heaven, (...), but had lien in hades. Again, Idem
de inca^natione Christi.
he that examined (man's) disobedience; and gave judgment, inflicted a double
punishment, saying to that which was earthly, Earth thou art, and to earth
shall thou return; and to the soul, Thou shall die the death; and so man was
distracted into two parts, and condemned to abide (after death) in two places.
If you can show an other place, whither man was condemned, well may you say man
was divided into three parts, and that being recovered out of two places, he
remains bound and chained in the third. (...), but if you can show none other
place besid^s the grave and hades (hell) out of which man was perfectly freed
by Christ, how say you then, that God is not yet reconciled to man? Ibidem.
This appears not only in us, but in the death of Christ; the body coming
to the grave, (...), and the soul descending to Hades, being places that are
severed with a great distance; the grave receiving his body, (for there it was
present) and hades his spirit (or soul.) else how did (Christ) present the
shape of his own soul to the souls detained in bands, (...), (that) he
might break in sunder the bands of the souls detained in hades? So likewise
speaking of Christ's persuing the devil by his life and death, he else where
says. Athanas. in passionem and crucem Domini.
The devil was fallen from heaven, he was cast from the earth, he was
persued in the air, every where conquered, and every where straightned, (...),
he determined to keep Hades (hell) for this place was yet left him. Ibidem.
But the Lord a true Savior would not lean his work unfinished, (...), nor
leave those that were in hades as yielded to the enemy. The devil therefore
Ibidem.
(...), thinking to kill one lost all, and hoping to carry one to Hades (hell)
was himself cast out of hades (hell.) Ibidem.
(...). Hades (hell) is abrogated, death no more prevailing, but all being
raised to life, neither can the devil stand up any more against us, but is
fallen, and indeed creeps on his breast and belly. And therefore of the
Saints he says, Ibidem.
(...): and in fine they saw Hades (hell) spoiled.

Epiphanius in sundry places expresses the parts and purpose of Christ's
descending to hell, or hades. Epiphanius in haer^m A^ ^aleosi,
He was crucified, buried, (...), He descended to the places under earth in
his divinity and in his soul, he took captivity captive, and rose again
the third day. What here he calls places under the earth, whither Christ's
soul went after his death, that elsewhere he calls Hades. Idem in li 2.
h^resi 69. contra Ariomanitas.
The Godhead of Christ would perform all things that perteined to the mystery
of his passion; (...), and would descend together with his soul to the
infernal places to work the salvation there of such as were before dead, I
mean the holy Patriarcks: (...), etc. that he might perform the things he
would against hades in the form of a man even in hades, that the chief Ruler
HADES and death thinking to lay hands on a man, and not knowing his Deity
united to his sacred soul, Hades himself might rather be surprised, and death
dissolved; and that fulfilled which was spoken, Thou will not leave my soul in
Hades. Basil: Basil. homilia quod Deus non est author malorum.
Death is not altogether evil, except you speak of the death of a sinner,
(...): because their departure hence is the beginning of their punishments in
hades; again, the eu^s that are in hades have not God for their cause, but our
selves, the head and root of sin is in us, and in our wills. And again:
Ibidem.
Dathan and Abiram were swallowed up of earth, the gulfes and clefts thereof
opening under them. Here were not they the better for this kind of
punishment: (...): for how should they be so, that went to hades (to hell) but
they made the rest the wiser by their example. And writing on the 48 Psalm:
I^m in Psalm. 4^.
Because (man) turned himself from the word of God and became a beast; the
enemy caught him as a sheep without a shepherd, (...), and put him in hades
(hell); but when he says, God will redeem my soul from the power of hades,
I^idem.
he does plainly prophecy, (...), the descent of the Lord to hades, who would
redeem the Prophets soul with others not to abide there. Nazianzene in his
second Oration against Julian the Ren^gate: Nazianzen. in Iu^ianum oratione 2.
(...). Stop thou thy secrets and ways that lead to hell (hades), I will
declare the plain ways which lead to heaven. And of Christ he says; Idem
oration. 1. d^ si^io.
Christ died, but he restored to life, and with his death abolished death. He
was buried, but he rose again. (...) He descended to hell (hades), but he
brought back souls, and ascended to heaven. Macarius: Macarius homil. 11.
When thou hear that Christ delivered souls (...), out of hell (hades) and
darkene^se, and, that the Lord descended to hades, and did an admirable work;
think not these thin^ to be far from thine own soul. And thus he makes
Christ to speak to death and to the devil; (...) etc. Ibi^.
I command thee hades and darkness and death restore the souls enclosed. And
so the wick^ powers trembling, refund man that was enclosed. Cyrill of
Alexandria: ^
In old times (before Christ) the souls of men departing from their bodies
were sent to fill the receptacles of death (...) in dens under the earth. But
after Christ commended his o^ne soul to his Father, he renewed the same way
for us: (...); And now we go not to bades from any place, but we follow him
rather in this, and committing our souls to a faithful Creator, we rest in
excellent hope. Yet of Christ he a^firmeth, ^
The soul which was coupled and united to the word (...) descended into hades;
and using the power and force of the Godhead (...), showed it self to the
spirits (or souls) there.

For we must not say that the Godhead of the only begotten, which is a nature
incapable of (...).
death, and no wa^ conquerable by it, (...); was brought back from the d^es
under the earth. Cyrill of Jerusalem like wise in his Catechismes upon those
words of the Psalm, If ascend to heaven, thou art there; if I go down to
hades, t^u art pre^ent says; ^
(...) etc. If t^ere ^e ^ing higher than the heavens, and hades be lower than
the earth, he that compre^ ^eth the ^owest, does also touch the earth. And to
those that were baptized, he says; ^.
When thou renouncest Satan, thou have utterly abrogated the covenant had with
him, (...) etc. even the old covenant ^ith hades (hell) and the Paradise of
God is opened to thee.

In the Homilies which Leo the Emperor made for the exercise of his st^le and
confession of his faith; it is said Leo Imperator hom. 2. in sanctam
Resurrectionem.
(...). Christ is risen bringing Hades prisoner with him, and proclaiming
lilibertie to the capitues. He that held others bound, is now in bonds
himself. (...), Christ is come from hades with the ensign of his triumph;
Ibidem.
the sour and heavy looks of those that are utterly overthrown, (...), as
of Hades, death, and the hateful devils. Damascene. Dam^sc. orthod^xae fidei
li. 3. cap. 22.
(...), etc. The soul deisied descended to Hades, that as to those on earth
the Son of righteousness was risen, (...) so to those that sat under the
earth in darkness and in the shadow, light might shine. Eiusdem homil. de
Sabbato sancto.
The brazen gates were torn, the iron bars were broken, (...), and the
keeper of Hades (hell) did shake for fear, and the foundations of the world
were laid open. Cydonius. Cydonius de morte contemnend^.
(...). That there is in hades (hell) vengeance for all sins here committed,
not only the consent of all wise men, but also the equality of the Divine
justice confirms and strengthmeth this opinion. Aeneas Gazeus. A^ae Gazei
Theophr^sius.
He that in a private life commits small sins, and lamenteth (them)
escapes (...) the punishments that are in Hades (hell.) Gregentius. Christ
Grege^tij disputat. cum Herbano Iudaeo.
took a rod out of the earth, which was his precious cross, and stretching
his right hand, struck all his enemies, and conquered them; (...), that is
Hades, death, sin, and that wil^e serpent. Theophylact. Theophrast. in 16. ca.
Lucae.
The rich man dying is not carried by the angels, (...), but is thr^wen down to
Hades. For he that minded never any high or heavenly thing, (...), was worthy
of the lowest place. In saying then he was buried, the Lord secretly
signifies, that his soul had the place, that was lowest and dark. And though
he there show the opinion of some, that thought hades to be rather the
condition of the soul after death then a place, yet he himself resolves the
contrary. Ibidem.
(...). What is hades? Some say it is a place of darkness under the earth,
others say Hades is the change of the soul from sensible to obscure and
unseen. And though the words of our Savior determine that doubt, who makes
the rich man call it (...), this place of torment, yet Theophylact himself
reasoning there against Origin out of Abraham's words, says; Ibidem.
As it is then impossible for any of the just to pass to the place of sinners,
so Abraham teaches us it is impossible (...), to pass from the place of
punishment to the place of the righteous.

And since their names do not appear that were of this opinion, and being
latter in age, deserve not the same credit for their judgments that the
ancient and learned Fathers do, I omit these petite masters, whom no man
knows, as fansing somewhat, if they could prove it, and will go forward
with the maine consent, as of all Greek divines that are extant; so of the
best and eldest commentators and expounders of Greek words, to show that Hades
is a place of darkness under earth for souls, where now none but wicked are
contained, and there punished. Eustathius Archbishop of Thessalonica, a man of
no mean skill in the Greek tongue, as appears by his commenting upon
Homere, says. Eus^athius in 1. I^ados.
Haides (which is Hades) is (...), a dark place under earth, unseen, and
appointed for souls. Phauorinus Bishop of Nuceria in his commentaries of the
Greek tongue, says likewise: ^hauorini Dictionarium in verbo (...).
(...), Hades is a place under the earth, secret and hid; which he also
calls, Id^m de verbo (...).
(...), a place without light, and filled with eternal darkness. The great
Etymologist of the Greek tongue concurreth with them. Etymo^ogicon m^ga in
verb^ (...).
(...). Hades is a place void of light, and full of everlasting darkness and
mists.

I shall not need with many words to urge the properties and conditions of
the place, which these Greek Fathers call Hades. It is apparent to any who
will p^ruse them, that they avouch it to be a place of darkness, opposed to
heaven and Paradise, and under the earth, where Devils are keepers and
tormentors of souls, and where the wicked after this life are kept prisoners,
and suffer punishments according to their deserts, and which Christ destroyed
and spoiled by his descent thither, delivering thence, that is from the fear,
power, and danger thereof, all such as before or after did or should believe in
him. And though some of these writers did happily think the souls of the
godly deceased before Christ's death were kept in a part thereof, in hope of
their deliverance thence; yet with one consent they witness it to be nothing
less then heaven or Paradise, or the state of the dead common to good and bad
after Christ's resurrection; as likewise they teach, that Christ delivered
thence, not only such of his elect as were dead before that time, but all the
faithful, as well then living, as yet unborn. And therefore a deliverance
thence does not exactly conclude a local detention and inclusion there, but a
quiting and disloluing of all the right, interest, and challenge; that hell or
Satan had for sin unto the servants and members of Christ, whenever they
lived or died. Only Tertullian is opposite to them all, who dreampt that the
souls of all the faithful, save Martyrs, were kept in places under the earth,
which he calls inferi, till the general resurrection; wherein, as in many
other points delivered in his book de Anima, he goes a private way by
himself without and against the maine resolution of the rest of the Fathers.

De^enc. pa. 164. li. 17.
He does not montanize in this (as you object) but consents with Irenaeus
before and with others after him, as shall appear, who were no Montanists.]
Your mistaking Irenaeus here, as you did before, little helps your market;
and others, when you bring them, shall have an answer fitting them. In the
mean while where you be so zealous to save Tertullian from Montanisme; he must
have a better proctor then you are to uphold his cause, or else it will soon
fall to the ground. That none but Martyrs are in Paradise, and all other the
faithful departing this life are in prisons and places under the earth till
the day of judgment, this is not only repugnant to the Scriptures and the
rest of the Fathers, but a plain branch of Montanus heresy, which Tertullian
deriueth from no grounds of holy Scripture, whence all truth must be fet; but
from certain Revelations and Prophesies different from the Scriptures, which
Montanus and others published as made by the holy Ghost after the writing of
the Scriptures; and which Tertullian in his writings colors with the name
and pretense of the Para^te; calling the true Christians, that refused his new
found doctrine, Psychicos natural men, and not led by the latter direction
of the spirit, as Montanus and others were; whom in exacting chastity,
abstinence, and Martyrdom more strictly then the Church of Christ did, he
followed. And therefore not only his doctrine in this place allowing Paradise
to none besides martyrs, but his alleging Montanus very words, and pretending
the Paraclete for his conceit no where written in the Scriptures, declare him
expressly in this to be a Montanist.

For plainer proof whereof, first Tertullian speaking of himself, when he
forsook the rest of the Christians to cleave to the revelations of Montanus
and his adherents, says, ^.
Et nos quidem postea agnitio Paracleti atque defensio disiunxit a Psychicis.
The agnising of the Paraclet (in the prophesies of Montanus) and defending
thereof did afterward disioine us from the carnal men. So he termed the Church
of Christ for refusing the new prophesies of Montanus, as appears evidently
by his book De ieiunio aduersus psyc^cos, of fasting against the car^all men,
which Saint Ierom says was written ^.
specialiter aduersum ecclesiam, particularly against the Church. Where he
likewise taxes the Christians for resisting the Paraclet, or new prophesies of
Montanus, covering them under the name of the Paraclet, and interpreting the
one by the other. ^.
Hiparaeleto controuer siam faciunt, propter hoc nouae prophetiae recusantur,
non quod alium Deum praedicent Montanus. Priscilla and Maximilla, sed quod
plane doceant saepius ieiunare qua^ nubere. These ^arnall men quarrel with the
Paraclet, and therefore are the new prophesies refused, not that Montanus.
Priscilla, and Maximilla preach another God, but that they plainly teach oftener
to fast then to marry. Now for these very points, that none are in Paradise
but only martvrs, and that the souls even of the Patriarks and Prophets and
all other godly Christians are apud inferos, in places under the earth, and so
shall be till the fullness of the resurrection, Tertullian urges in his book De
anima and in this chapter the authority of his paraclet, which was the founder
of Montanus new prophesies. Tertullia^ de anima ca. 55.
Agnosce differentiam Ethnici and fidelis in morte, si pro Deo occumbas, vt
p^racletus mo^et, non in mollibus febribus and in lectulis, sed in an.
Acknowledge the difference of an Ethnicke and a believer even in their deaths,
if thou die for Gods cause, as the Paraclet warns, not in casie agues and
soft beds, but in Martyrdomes. And that these were the very words of Montanus
new prophecy, may easily be perceived by Tertullian himself, who writing
against all flight in persecution (which book was De Script^ribus
Ecclesiasticis in Tertulliano.
specially written against the Church, by Ieroms own confession) cites them
as the words of the spirit, to wit in the new prophesies of Montanus.
Tertull. de fuga in persecutione.
Spiritum si consulas etc, omnes pene ad martyriuns exhortatur, non ad fugam,
vt and illius commem^ur: publicaris inquit; ^onum libi est. Qui enim non
publicatur in hominibus, publicatur in Domino. Sic and a^bi. Nolite in lectulis
and febribus m^llibus optare exire, sed in Martyrijs. If thou take counsel of
the spirit, he exhorts all very near to Martyrdom, not to flight; as to
remember you of that speech. Art thou made a public example, says he, it is
good for thee. He that is not made a public ^xample amgo^st men, shall be made
one with God. And so in another place desire not to depart this life in beds
and easy agues but in Martyrdomes. These words Tertullian alleges as
evidently written by the spirit, which since they be no where found in any part
of the new or old Testament, and disagree both in words and matter from the
style and truth of the sacred Scriptures, they savor of another spirit, and
must of force be referred to the prophesies of Montanus, who in this very point
was condemned by the church of Christ, against which, as Ierom avouches,
Tertuilian wrote this book in favor of Montanus heresy. And so much also that
learned obseruer Rhenanus affirms upon this place. Rhena^s in li. de suga in
persecutione numero. 9.
Verba sunt Prophetiae Paracleti Montanici, These are the words of the
prophecy of Montanus spirit. Your friends therefore, who lent you their
pains, were not well advised in excusing Tertullian in this matter from
Montanisme, since not only the error of Montanus is here defended, but the
very words of his new revelation are here alleged.

Defenc. page 164. li. 23.
Also in that objection of certain Heretics, whom he confuteth, not the true
Christians, as you misconceaue. They argued thus (as you do). In hoc Christus
inferos adijt, ne nos adiremus. Christ therefore went to hell, to the end we
should never come there. He answers them, that it is false, that Christ went
to inferos in that sense, that is, to hell. For then what difference is there
between the wicked heathen and the godly Christians, if one and the same prison
after death were for them both? taking it for a thing generally granted in the
Church that it were a WICKED AND HERETICAL THING to think, he went where the
damned were, that is, into hell.] Ignorance makes you not only blind and
bold, but presumptuous and saucy to acquit from heresy, and condemn for
heresy, whom pleases you. And therefore I must not think it strange to be
challenged by you, for a wicked and heretical opinion, since you grossly belie
the whole Church of Christ, and dippe them in the same vate of wicked and
heretical things with me. You wilfully wrest and misconstrue Tertullians words
smoothing him in a manifest error against the whole Church of Christ, and
roling them up with wicked heresy, that were the greatest lights of Christian
religion next after the Apostles. Tertullians resolutions in this very Chapter
are plain enough to him, that is not more then blind. Tertull. de Anima. ca.
55.
Habes de Paradiso anobie libellum, quo constituimus omnem animam apud inferos
sequestrari in diem Domini. Thou have a book of ours written touching Paradise,
wherein we determine all souls to be kept sequestered (apud inferos) in
infernal places till the day of the Lord. And in the sentence next before that
which you cite, he says with like confidence. Tertull. de Anima. ca. 55.
Habes and regionem inferum subterraneam credere, and illos cubito pellere qui
satis superbe y Ibidem.
non putent animas fideliu^ inferis dignas: serui super Dominu^, and Discipuli
super Magistru^, aspernati si forte in Abrahae sinu expectandae resurrectionis
solatium carpere. Thou have to believe, that the region of inferi is under the
earth, and to push them from their opinions, who proudly enough will not think
the souls of the faithful to be fit for infernal (or Iower) places:
servants above their Lord, and Scholars above their Masters, in that they
skorne perhaps to have the comfort of expecting the resurrection in Abraham's
bosom. Here Tertullian positiuely declares that he takes inferi for a place
or Region under the earth, and that such as thought not the souls of the
faithful fit for that place till the resurrection, did proudly presume to be
above their Lord and Master, and skorne Abraham's bosom, where the rest of the
Patriarks and Prophets are kept, (as he dreameth) and so shall be till the day of
judgment. Now whose opinion I pray you was this, that the souls of the
faithful after Christ's resurrection went to Paradise, and not to places under
the earth? was it not the maine confession of Christ's Church? Tertullian then
purposely refuting that opinion, what else does he but traduce the general
persuasion of the faithful in favor of his new prophecy, which reserved
Paradise only for Martyrs, and in that respect abandoned all the souls of the
godly dying in their beds to places under the earth, there to be kept till
Christ's coming.

But examine the words, which he rejects, and see if they savor of heresy
or Christianity. For thereby we shall best judge, whether they were Heretics
or Christians, whom he there impugned. His words are, Te^tull. de Anima. ca. 5^.
Sed in hoc, inquiunt, Christus inseros (...), ne nos adiremus. But to this
^rd, say they, Christ went to (inferi) the places b^low, that we should not
come thither. If these words imply heresy, then was Saint Austen a manifest
heretic, for he affirmed as much in effect, as this comes unto. A^ust in
Psalm. 85.
Ideo (Christus) peruenit vs^, ad infernum, ne nos maneremus in inferno.
Therefore Christ came even unto hell, that we should not remain in hell. Men
that come thither, abide there. If therefore Christ freed us by his descent
thither from remaining there, he freed us from coming thither. And Ambrose was
likewise an heretic in saying, ^.
descendens ad inferos genus humanum liberauit. Christ descending to hell
deliucred mankind; that is, as well from coming thither, as tarrying there. So
Hilarie, Hilar. de tri^itate li. 2.
Crux, Mors, Inferi, nostra salus est, Christ's Cross, death, descent to
(inferi) the places below, is our salvation. So Athanasius. A^hanas. in illud
omnia mihi tradita sunt a Patre.
(...). Christ descending to hades brought us back^, (that we should not go
thither). So Ierom, Hier. in Ose ca. 13.
Liberauit omnes Dominus, quando eius anima descendit ad infernum: The Lord
delivered all (his from thence) when his soul descended to hell. So
Fulgentius, Fulgent. ad Tr^simundum li. 3.
Hoc ideo factum est, vt per descendentem ad infernum animam iusti, dolores
soluerentur inferni: Ibidem.
solutis doloribus inferni, omnes sideles ad i^sdem doloribus liberauit. This
was therefore done that by the soul of the just descending to hell the sorrows
of hell might be loosed, (and) the sorrows of hell being loosed, he delivered
all the faithful from them. Our delivery thence, who were never there, must
needs be the keeping us from coming thither. If then Christ by his d^scending
thither delivered us and all his elect th^nce, it follows he saved them from
coming to that place, and that by his descent thither. And this speech Austen
proves to be right and true in this very case by many examples, from which he
thus concludes. August. in ^al. ^5.
In his omnibus non erant, sed quia talibus meritis agebantur, vt nisi
subuentum esset, ibi essent, inde se recte dicunt liberari, quo per liberatores
suos non sunt permissi perduci. In all these (mischiefs) men were not, but
because their deserts were such, that they should have been in them, had they
not been helped (from them) they rightly say they were THENCE DELIVERED,
whither they were not suffered to come, by such as delivered them. If then they
were Heretics that vpheld this position, the best learned of the fathers in
Christ's Church were plainly within the compass of heresy; and whether it be
safer to forsake Tertullian in his private conceit of Montanisme, or to muster
so many religious and Catholic writers for heretics, let the Reader judge.

And what if you take your self by the nose before you be ware, and plunge
your self into this wicked heresy (as you call it) far deeper then others
by alleging and yet refusing Tertullians fancies in this place, do you not
well to be so liberal of your terms, when you must bear the greatest weight
of them? I clear my self in saying and proouing, that these were Tertullians
private conceits con^onant to Montanus new prophesies, and repugnant to the
Church of Christ; and therefore unless these fathers were heretics I am none:
but you are caught like a Come with your loud ctowing, and cannot shift thence
but with your own shame. For you say, it was the objection of Defenc. page
164. li. 23.
certain heretics. Now if your self defend that, which Tertullian there
impugneth, then are you an heretic by your own confession. First then, that
Christ dying went ad inferos, that is, ad inferiora terrarum, to the lower
parts of the earth, Tertullian exactly avouches. His words of Christ, in this
very Chapter are, De Anima. ca. 55.
Forma humanae mortis apud inferos functus, nec ante ascendit in sublimior a
caelorum, quam descendit in inferior a terrarum. He performed the manner of an
humane death in the places below, neither did he ascend to the higher parts of
the heavens, before he descended to the lower parts of the earth. This
Tertullian brings as granted on all sides: for he refuses not that, which
himself affirms. The objection then of the heretics, as you name them, was
this; Ne nos adiremus, that we should not come thither; that is, ad regionem
inferum subterraneam, to the region of inferi under the earth, which is
Tertullians inferi whither he thought all must come. Now make your choice, wise
Sir, whether you will be one of the Heretics, as you say, whom Tertullian
refuteth, or hold this gross error with Tertullian, that all the Saints save
Martyrs, after this life are in places under the earth, there to remain till
the day of resurrection. But this you every where seem to disclaim as being
that Limbus, which you so much avoid. Then are you one of those heretics,
whose objection this is, and that which argues you to be a witt-all, as well as
an heretic of your own calling, you have not so much sense as to see, that
you yield your self to be an heretic for defending the truth.

Tertullian says, Defenc. page 164. li. 28.
it is false that Christ went to inferos, that is to hell.] You that rightly
understand not one word in this place of Tertullian, talk as if you were
authorized not only to contradict your own Author, but to pronounce them all
heretics, that gainesay your absurd and ignorant folly. Tertullian in this
place resolves, that Christ dying went ad Inferos, that is ad Regionem Inferum
subterraneam; to the Region of Inferi under earth, for so he expounds
himself; and concludes, that all the faithful after death (save Martyrs)
shall go to the same Region under earth, and there stay till the general
refurrection. This conclusion you deny as well as I do, and say they were
Heretics, that made that objection. But awake out of this maze or madness,
and see that Tertullian to strengthen the private opinions of Montanus in
aduauncing Martyrs and none else to Paradise, impugneth the profession of the
whole Church, that Christ's descending to Inferi, that is to the Region under
the earth, freed all the faithful from coming thither. With like stupiditie
you sever the reason of this position from the position it self, and make that
a refutation of the objection as you call it, which is a confirmation thereof.
For they which opposed the former words, Christ, therefore went ad inferos, to
the places below, least we should come thither: brought this for a reason of
their assertion. Tertull. de anima. ca. 55.
Caeterum quod discrimen Ethnicorum and Christianorum, si carcer mortu^s idem?
For what difference is there between Ethnicks and Christians, if they have one
and the same prison after death? You say this is Tertullians answer to them;
but your head is so heavy, that you do not perceive this makes for them, not
against them; and so rather confirms then answers their objection. They,
who made the former objection, that Christ went to the places below, least we
should come thither, never excepted infidels but Christians from coming to
those places. If Tertullian were of the same mind, he did rather confess, then
refell their objection. But his answer to these words comes after, which you
did not read, or not mark. Tertull. de anima ca. 55.
Agnosce differentiam Ethnici and fidelis in morte, si pro Deo occumbas vt
Paracletus monet, non in mollibus f^bribus and Lectulis, sed in Martyri^s. See
the difference betwixt an Ethnic and a believer, if thou die for Gods cause,
as the Paraclete warns, not in easy feauers and (soft) beds, but in
Martyrdomes. Where following not only the fancies, but the very phrases of
Montanus prophesies, as I have formerly showed, he makes no difference (as
touching the place) between Ethnicks and Christians after death, except they
be Martyrs: and thereby fastneth all the faithful, that die in their beds,
or of any sickness, (be it never so grievous) to Inferi, the Region under the
earth, which error was always condemned by the Church of Christ.

Defenc. page 164. li. 37.
Thus also is Augustine well understood, where he denies that the Patria^kes
were apud ^nferos in hell, namely the place of the damned, because they were in
Abraham's bosom. Which yet Epistola 57. and de ciui^ate 20. 15.
elsewhere he grants unto, that they might be apud inferos in the world of
the dead, and namely where the godly dead should be. So that thus if you had
but distinguished these and other Fathers like words, as you ought to have
done, there needed no such folly of contradiction to be imputed unto them, as
Page 188. 200. 204.
you do lay to their charge in this point, al^ogether undeservedly.] Indeed if
I would follow your example in drawing the Fathers words from their plain and
true meaning, and force them to a sense which they never thought, yea which
they directly rerute; I might easily make the fathers say, what pleased me, as
you do. But this with me, and with all that be wise, is the perverting, not
the producing of Fathers. And therefore I did them less wrong to show, where
they differed amongst themselves in some secret points not fully revealed to
men in this life, then to falsify them, and abuse them after this manner.
Neither said I any worse of them, then they say of themselves, that these
things are uncertain, and no man might be offended, if they were not able to
bring any settled (or assured) expositions (or resolutions) in these points,
which Austin openly In Psalm. 85.
professed of himself, as I told you in that Sermon. page 189.
place which you cite. But let us hear how you medicine these matters, and by
that we shall sound the depth of your skill.

If I would take Inferos in some places for hell, in other places for the world
of the dead, and namely where the godly dead should be, all were safe you
think: Saint Austin did no way disagree from him in those places, which I
cited, which were Epistola 99. 57. de Genesi ad literam li. 12. ca. 33. de
ciuitate Dei li. 20. ca. 15. To him that catches but after a word, and never
looks what is precedent or consequent, this may seem plaster of Paris to
amend this breach; but he that reads three lines on either side, shall soon
perceive how foolishly and grossly you make Saint Austin (...) to cross
himself, and yet evidently to subvert your whole building. Begin with that
place, which you quote last in your margin, and see how well you reconcile S.
Austins words to make for your assertions. August. de ciuitate Dei li. 20. ca.
15.
Si enim non absurd credi videtur, antiquos etiam sanctos, qui venturi Christi
tenuerunt fidem, locis quidem a torment is impioru^ remo^issimis, sed apud
Inferos fuisse, donec eos inde sanguis Christi, and ad ea locadesce^sus
erueret; profecto deinceps boni fideles effuso illo pretio iam redempti, PROR
SVS INFEROS N^SCIVNT, donec etiam receptis corporibus, bona recipiant quae
merentur. If it seem wit^out absurdity to be believed, that the Saints of the
old Testament, which kept the faith of Christ to come, were in places most
remote from the torments of the wicked, and yet apud inferos in infernal (or
lower) places, until the blood of Christ, and his descent thither did deliver
them thence; certainly after that time the god^y believers now red^med with
that price (of his blood) shed, never know (or try) any inferi, to the time
that recovering their bodies they receive the good things deserved by them, (or
prepared for them). If here we take Inferi for the world of the dead, as you
would have us, do not your ears glow to hear so vehement and violent a gunne
shot against all your devices, and namely against your world of the dead, that
certainly after the time, that Christ dscended to Inferi, the godly believers
PROR SVS INFEROS NESCIVNT, never come to any Inferi? Where if you put your
world of the dead for Inferi, and say the godly dying never come to be dead, or
to the place where the godly dead should be, the world of the living will
think you out of your wits, that so tempestuously tumble out falsehoodes and
contradictions. And what will you do with that position of Austins so often
repeated, and urged as the ground of his resolution, that he never found Inferi
in the Scriptures taken in any good signification? August. ^pist. 99.
Ne ipsos quidem Inferos vspiam Scripturarum in bono appell^tos potui inuenire;
I never could find in any part of the Scriptures Inferos used in any good
sense. And so again. Idem de Genesi ad lite^am li. 12. ca. 33
Illud me nondum inuenisse confiteor, Inferos appellatos vbi iustoru^ animae
requiescunt. I confess I have not yet sound that the place where the soul of
the righteous do rest, is called inferi. The like he says in his fifty seven
^pistle. You will expound Inferi in Austin for the place, where the godly dead
should be: Austen himself utterly disauoweth it, and expressly says, he
never could find the word taken in the Sc^iptures for any good, and therefore
never did use it in any such sense. Call you this the clearing, or the crossing
of Saint Austins words?

Even so another of your maine masts is overthrown by Saint Austin, though you
in your rancor or rage make it a Defenc. page 164. li. 33.
wicked and heretical thing to think, Christ went where the damned were, that
is into hell, which yet S. Austen believed and professed in those very places,
which you undertake to reconcile. August. epist. 57.
Quaeri solet, si non nisi paenalia recte intelliguntur Inferna, quo modo
animam Domini Christi pie credamus fuisse in inferno? Sed been respondetur ideo
descendisse, vt quibus oportuit subueniret. Some use to demand, if Inferna be
rightly taken for none other but for the places of punishments (after this
life) how may we safely believe, that the soul of the Lord Christ was (in
Inferno) in hell? but it is well answered, he descended (thither) to succor
those, that were to be succored. And so elsewhere. Idem de Genesi. ad liter.
li. 12. ca. 33.
Christi quidem animam venisse vsque ad ea loca, in quibus peccatores
cruciantur, vt eos solueret a tormentis, quos esse soluendos, occuli a nobis
sua iustitia iudicabat, non immerito creditur. That Christ's soul came even to
those places, in which sinners are tormented to deliver them from torments,
whom his justice unknown to us thought fit to deliver, is believed not without
good cause. Austen acknowledges the Church believed it in his time; howsoever
your tongue ouerrunneth your teeth to make it a wicked and heretical thing so
to think. Ambrose confesses the same. Ambros. de mysterio Paschae ca. 4.
Expers peccati Christus cum ad Tartari ima descenderet, vinctas peccato animas
mortis dominatione destructa e f^ucibus Diaboli reuocauit ad vitam. Christ free
from sin, when he descended to the lowest pit of hell, recalled to life out
of the devils jaws the souls that were bound with sin, destroying the
Dominion of death. And so does Ierom. Infernus locus suppliciorum atque
cruciatuum est, Hiero. in Esaiae ca. 14.
in quo videtur dives purpuratus; ad quem descendit and dominus, vt vinctos de
Carcere din itteret. Infernus is the place of punishments and torments, in
which the rich man clothed with purple was seen, and to which the Lord
descended to dimisse such, as were bound, out of prison. These I trust were no
Heretics, but if need were, and I would use that advantage against you, which
you insisting on Tertullians error seek against me, they would do little
less then prove you to be a refuser and peruerter of the faith received in
the Church of Christ, and professed not by them only, but by all those
Fathers, whom I Supra pa. 544.
formerly cited as concurring in this cause with them. But I smile at your
folly, and remit your reproaches to the Readers impartial Censure.

Defenc. page 165. li. 10.
Athanasius also saying, where humane souls were held by death, there Christ
brought his humane soul; means nothing else, but that his soul came under
the same condition of death, as other humane souls did: not that he went to
the place of the damned. Neither must he be understood after your partial
translation, when you say ex orco, out of hell, himself says ex Hadou, out of
the power of death.] You set your self to outface all the places, which I
brought out of the Fathers for Christ's descent to hell; and as you played your
part in wrenching and wrying the words of Tertullian and Austin from their
rightsense, so you continue in all the rest with like success, thinking it
enough for you to say the word, though it be never so false, and far from the
Fathers meaning. As first in Athanasius words; what double punishment was that
I pray, which God threatened to Adam for sin, in saying Athanas. de
incarnatione Christi.
to the earthly part, earth thou art, and to earth shall thou return; and to
the soul, thou shall die the death; for those are Athanasius words; and what
be the Ibidem.
two places, to which man after his dissolution was condemned? Did God threaten
nothing to Adam but the dissolution of body and soul, or did he threaten the
death of the soul also after this life, which properly notes hell, besides
the death of the body? I trust you be not so senseless as to say, that God
for sin threatened no more to Adam and his posterity but only a bodily
death; for so could none of Adams offspring by that sentence be adjudged to
hell, which yet we find daily performed by Gods justice. Then the death of man's
soul threatened by God for sin, and meant by Athanasius in those words,
which you would elude, was the place of perpetual torments, where the soul of
man was truly held in death, and not the condition of the soul severed from
the body without respect of any consequent misery. Therefore your maine
foundation is evidently false, that Athanasius by the death of man's soul
means nothing else, but the souls being apart from the body without regard
of punishment following: but in express words he notes the place, Ibidem.
Vbi tencbatur anima humana in morte, where the soul of man was held (captive)
in death; which spite of your heart must needs be hell. Again according to
the double death threatened for sin, Athanasius says, ^ Homo in duas parts
discerpitur, and vt ad duo loca discedat, condemnatur. Man Ibidem.
(dying) is distracted in two parts, and CONDEMNED TO TWO PLACES. Now in your
divinity is any man condemned to heaven, or to Paradise? you must find us then
two places of condemnation, whither either part of man dissolved was adjudged,
as his body to the grave, his soul to hades. So says Athanasius in express
words. If you ^ Ibidem.
can show me another place of condemnation, well you may say, that a man is
divided (...), (into three places), and that being revoked out of two places he
remains bound in the third; but if you can show none other place (of
condemnation) (...), besides the grave and Hades, from which man is perfectly
freed, Christ delivering us, how say you then, that God is not reconciled unto
mankind? If then Hades be a place of condemnation ^or sin, where the soul
of man was bound, till it was freed by Christ, (...) certainly Hades with
Athanasius is neither Paradise nor heaven, but only hell.

Again if by death reigning in the soul of man, Athanasius intended nothing
but the condition of death common to good and bad, and even to Christ himself,
how could h^ say of Christ, that he was then and there Ibidem.
inuiolus a morte, not subject to death, or that he brake (...), the bands of
the souls detained in hades? Has heaven or Paradise any bands, that must be
broken? And as for you last conceit, that Defenc. page 165. li. 23.
Hades being enemy and opposite to the immortality and resurrection of men's
persons, cannot by any means be hell for in hell shall be immortality and
resurrection, as well as in heaven; it is so like to the rest of your
diuinitic, that I doc not over much marvel at it. If hades be enemy and
opposite to immortality, as you confess out of Athanasius, then Hades is
neither heaven nor Paradise, for they are both places of immortality; there is
no death, but life in either of them. And though you cunningly shift hands,
and change men's persons for men's soul^s, of which Athanasius speaks, when he
says, (...), where man's soul was held in death, there Christ presented his
humane soul to break the chains of death, even in hades; yet that
immortality is as well in hell as in heaven, is a phrase of your own framing
to put all truth and faith out of joint, The Scriptures teach most truly,
that God alone has 1. Tim. 6.
immortality. It then you have found us a new immortality in hell, you have
found us a new God also. And what is immortality, but without all death? since
then in h^ll there is nothing but death, and that eternal as well of soul as
of body, your devices are very del^cate, in everlasting death to find no
death. But dally not thus with the grounds of Religion, least God do not dally
with you: if by your assertion the deliverance from death, and immortality
which Christ brought to his elect, be none other then such as men in hell shall
have; pray God your brains be not as much crazed, as your faith is. And as for
your interpreting Athanasius words, and gessing at his meaning, when we use
mad men to give advise, we will send for you to make comments upon their
counsels.

Where you make Athanasius say, Defenc. page 165. li. 32.
Christ was held in this death till ^e spoiled and conquered it, which (you
conclude) cannot be hell out of question; You speak not one true word.
Athanasius has no such words, that Christ was held in death. Of man's soul he
says, De In^arnat. Christi.
(...), that was held in death, but of Christ in that very sentence he
avouches the clean contrary, saying, (...), be could not be held in death.
Secondly that hades was spoiled of all his power, right, and claim, to or over
all Christ's elect, and we delivered thence; Athanasius, as well as the rest,
bears plentiful witness. But that Christ spoiled heaven or Paradise, where
the souls of the Saints were severed from their bodies, and brought us thence,
is not only a false fable, but a pestilent error. Christ raising his body from
the grave (by Athanasius judgment) gave us hope of the resurrection of our
bodies, and bringing back his soul from hades, as not only untouched of any
death there, but also loosing the bands (...), of souls surprised by hades, he
made us partakers of his immortality, which the strength of hades could not
touch. In illud omnia ^ihi tradita sunt a Patre.
Descending to hades Christ brought us back, says Athanasius of himself, and
of all Christ's members as then not borne. Christ did not bring all the faithful
of the old Testament from the condition of death, much less brought he the
rest thence, that were not either dead or borne. We die still, and so the
condition of death is common to us after Christ's resurrection as it was to the
fathers before Christ's death and birth; but hell has now no right to us, nor
power over us, since Christ our head conquered and spoiled Satan of all
interest and challenge to any of his members. And where you pretend, that hades
is spoiled, because our souls shall be joined again to our bodies at the
resurrection; know you good Sir, that the separation of the soul from the
body was to dure by Gods ordinance but for a time, as well in the wicked as in
the godly, that is until the general judgment. And you that defend a
resurrection and immortality as well of the wicked in hell, as of the Saints in
Paradise, what reason can you give, why the condition of the soul separated
from the body is more conquered by Christ for his members, then by Satan for
his partners? for that separation shall cease in both; and consequently the
force of death seuering the soul from the body is spoiled as well for the
reprobate, as for the elect. Yea the continuing of the godly souls asunder
from their ^odies till the last day is rather a furnishing and storing of your
hades, then a conquering and spoiling of it. And therefore mock not with these
matters, they be of more importance, then that they may be thus idly carried.

Defenc page 165. li. 35.
Hilarie verily has this meaning also saying, this is the law of humane
necessity, that their bodies go down to the grave, their souls to the world
of the dead, ad inferos. Which descent the Lord did not refuse that he might
prove himself in every point to be true man. And Page 166. li. 5.
this (for his soul to come under the power of death) was indeed the law of
humane necessity (after the like phrase as Iustine, Irenaeus, and Tertullian
also speak) but not to go to hell.] Your head is so fraighted with
falseshoods, that truth can take no place there; and so little is your skill,
though your pride be great, that you do not know, for ought that I see, how
necessity of death came into man's nature. Whiles man was free from sin, he
was free from death. Romans 5.
By sin came death. When man lost his innocence, he lost his liberty, and
fell both within the servitude of sin, and necessity of death. Now death
being the wages of sin reaches as well to the soul after this life, as to
the body to be deprived of this life. Romans 5. v. 18.
By one offense (came guiltiness) on all men unto condemnation. The law then
of humane necessity for sin (without Christ Jesus in whom we recover liberty)
is for the body to go to corruption, and for the soul to descend to
destruction, and not only to be severed from the body, as you would feign
mistake the words of Hilarie. It is no part of humane necessity for the soul
severed from the body to ascend to heaven or to Paradise; that is the honor
and favor of our Redemption purchased by Christ our Savior, but necessity of
death in us, which is the reward of sin, draws the whole man body and soul
unto condemnation. This you might have found to be Hilaries meaning by the
words precedent, which occasioned this conclusion. Si descendero in infernum,
ades. If I go down to hell, thou art there; Which Hilarie shows to be
verified in Christ, by the words that you bring; meaning, that as men by sin
Hilar. in Psalm. 138.
came to this necessity, that their bodies lying in the grave, their souls
descended to hell: So Christ the redeemer of man, refused not even this descent
to hell, ad consummationem very hominis, to consummate true man, or to recover
and restore both parts of man, to wit, body and soul, whereof a true man
consists. That Christ should descend to places unseen and unknown to prove
himself a true man, what sense can this have, since no man living was present
to see the proof thereof? and he that doubted, whether Christ living were a
true man, would much more doubt, whether Christ rising in that glorious body,
which never man saw before, no^ the like, were a true man or no. I think
therefore by your leave, that as Christ died, not to prove himself a true
man, but to ransom our sins, so he descended to the places below, not to
make proof to us, that he was a true man, but to work our salvation and
consummation, as elsewhere the same Father says; Crux, mors, inferi, nostra
salus est. Christ's cross, death, and descent to inferi, are parts of our
salvation. And of Christ he voucheth, mortem in inferno perimens, he killed
death in hell. And yet if with you we should take consummation for
demonstration, which is far fet; and say Christ re^used not that descent to
show himself a true man, it nothing hurts me, since that burden of necessity
lay on all men, for desert of sin, till they were delivered by Christ, to
have their bodies go to the grave, and their souls to the place of
punishment: both which Christ refused not, though he were in the one without
any corruption, in the other without any condemnation, but as conqueror of
both.

Of Iustine, Irenaeus and Tertullian we have spoken before, we shall not need
to iterate your ouersights; Iustine speaks of no law at all, Irenaeus notes
the law of the dead to be this, that they must stay a time dead before their
resurrection; and Tertullian names the law either threatening Adam, if he
sinned; or the Law of Moses punishing sin committed by men; either of which
stretches farther then the separation of the soul from the body. As for
Defenc. page 166. li. 17.
the law of our nature, which you say is to die, and no more; you talk
thereof, as if you were rather a profane Philosopher, then any piece of a
Divine, since this law was laid on our nature for sin, and forces as well
our souls to hell, if we be not thence redeemed by Christ, as our bodies to
the grave. That in death the whole man is dissolved, the soul separated from
the body, and the body left void of sense and life, what is this to your
purpose? will this conclude, that the soul in heaven or in paradise, being not
only in rest, but in joy, feels still the sting of death, which she felt at
her parting from her body, before she tasted the life to come? Will you
continue the power and sense of death even in heaven, because the soul assured
of Gods goodness and promise expects her body to be partaker of the same
bliss with her, and to receive the crown of righteousness laid up in store
for all, that love Christ's coming? or if you be so venturous in favor of
your own conceits, that you will mingle darkness with light, death with
life, and the fear of hell with the joy of heaven, think you to find any man
so unwise, as to tread your steps in these unchristian devices?

Defenc. page 166. li. 30.
Chrysostom and Basil likewise (with the rest of the Greeks) may be noted,
how they yield Hades to the souls of the godly and just men deceased remaining
in joys.] If you speak of the time before Christ's coming, and take Hades for
places under the earth, you may chance to find some such thing in Chrysostom
and Basil; but that either of them after Christ's resurrection yields Hades to
the souls of the blessed, is a manifest untruth. And since I have handled
these places before, I shall not need to repeat them again.

Defenc. page 166. li. 33.
Also Ambrose is to be considered, who right according to all the rest, says;
Souls departed from their bodies did go to Hades, that is to an invisible
place, which in Latin we call Infernum.] Could you allege the Fathers words
rightly, you might happily sometimes understand them; but always perverting
them as you do, what marvel if always you miss their meaning? Ambrose does
not there deliver either his own opinion, or the persuasion of any Christians,
but speaks of Heathen Philosophers, who knew nothing of our salvation by
Christ, and of them says. Ambros. de bono mortis. ca. 10.
Satis fuerat dixisse illis, quod liberatae animae de corporibus (...)
peterent, idest locum, qui non videtur, quem locum Latin infernum dicimus. It
had been enough for them (being Pagans) to have said, that the souls severed
from (their) bodies went to Aides, that is to a place unseen, which in Latin
we call Infernus (hell). If you be a Pagan, we look for none other confession
at your hands; he that is ignorant of the faith, must needs be ignorant of the
truth; but if you be a Christian, you may not say as the Pagans did, that the
souls of the godly, who are with Christ, go to Hades or Infernus. Ambrose
himself will tell you so much. Ambros. de Tobia. ca. 19.
In Inferno semper est, qui non ascendit ad Christum. He that ascends not to
Christ, is always in hell. As for Christ's descending he says, Idem. in Psalm.
45.
Dominus in Infernum descendit, vt and illi, qui in Infernis erant, a perpetuis
vinculis soluerentur. The Lord descended to hell, that they which were in
places below, might be loosed from perpetual chains. You have found out the
death of the soul in heaven, can you find us there perpetual chains also?

Defenc. page 166. li. 36.
And Ierom: Infernus is a place where the souls are included either in rest or
pains.] It is no news for him that has no sense of truth, to have no shame
of falsehood. If Ie^om were not plain enough, that he has no such words or
meaning, as to bestow the souls of the saints in Inferno after Christ's
resurrection, you might be borne with; but when expressly he voucheth and
proves the contrary, what can be in you but precise impudence to outface
your Reader with Ieroms name against Ieroms most manifest assertion? Hiero. in
Ecclesia. ca. 9.
Porro quod sancti post resurrectionem Christine nequaquam teneantur in
Inferno, testatur Apostolus dicens: Melius est dissolui and esse cum Christo.
Qui autem cum Christo est, vtique non tenetur in Inferno. That the Saints,
says Ierom, are not after Christ's resurrection detained in Infernus, the
Apostle witnesses, saying: it is better to be dissolved, and to be with
Christ. Now he that is with Christ, surely is not held in Infernus. And again.
Idem in Epitaphio Nepotiani.
Quid simile Infernus, and regna caelorum? what likeness (or neerenesse) has
Infernus to the kingdom of heaven? and this the situation of Infernus every
where urged by Ierom will prove. Idem in Esai^ ca. 14.
Simul discimus, quod infernus sub terra sit, dicente scriptura, vsque ad
fundamenta Laci. Withal, says he, we learn, that Infernus is under the
earth, the Scripture saying, even unto the bottom of the lake. And again. Idem
in epist. ad Ephesians. ca. 4.
Inferiora terrarum infernus accipitur, ad quem Dominus noster saluatorque
descendit. The lower parts of the earth are taken for Infernus, to which our
Lord and Savior descended. Ibidem.
Quod autem Infernus in inferiore part terrae sit, Psalmista testatur. And
that Infernus is in the lower part of the earth, the Psalmist testi^ieth
saying; The earth opened, and swallowed Dathan, and covered the congregation of
Abiram. And in an other place we read, let death come upon them, and let them
descend alive to Infernus. If you will place the souls of the Saints deceased
in Christ below in the earth, then may you have some hold in Ierom, that they
are yet in Infernus; but if that be repugnant to the Scriptures, to the
Fathers, to Ieroms express words, and even to your own positions; why use
you, or rather so openly abuse you Ieroms speech against so maine and manifest
a truth, not distinguishing the time whereof he spoke, but confounding the old
and new Testament together, to give place to your lame collections?

Defenc. page 166. li. 37.
Ruffinus upon Descendit ad Inferna, gives this sense, Descendit in mortem, He
submitted unto death.] If death had none other sense nor force, but the death
of the body, your saying were somewhat, but since death for sin reigns
as well in hell over the Soul, as in the grave over the body, the name of death
does not exclude Christ's descent to hell; and so much Ruffinus words will
easily convince. Ruffinus in Symbolum Apostol.
Eousque ille miserando descendit; vsque quo tu peccando deiectus es. So far
Christ of mercy descended, how far thou by sinning wast de^ected. Now if we
by sinning were in danger of none other but a bodily death, then Christ
descended only to the grave; but if the desert of our sin tied us as guilty
to the torments of hell, then Christ by Ruffinus confession so far descended,
how far we were by Gods justice dejected, that is to the place of
condemnation for sin. And therefore Ruffinus does not only knit these
speeches together in the person of Christ, as expounding one the other. Ibidem.
Eduxisti de Inferno animam meam, and de abysso terrae ^erum adduxisti me; thou
have brought my soul from Infernus, ( and) have brought me back again from
the deep of the earth: But of the devil he says, Ibidem.
Qui mortis habebat imperium, disruptis Inferni claustris, velut de profundo
tractus traditur: he that had Rule of death, (was) drawn as it were out of the
deep, the cloisters of Infernus being broken open. The place where the devil
was, and whence he was drawn, when he was spoiled and triumphed by Christ, was
not the separation of the Soul from the Body, which the devil has not, but it
was the deep of hell, which here is called Infernus.

Defenc. page 167. li. 1.
So that it is certain by all the Fathers generally, First, that Hades and
Sheol are taken for the state of death common to the Souls of good and bad.
Secondly, Christ went not into hell the place of the damned, as you hold, but
to the habitation of the blessed deceased.] If I have not convinced both these
collections to be false by the manifest Testimonies of the Fathers, (for out of
them you gather these observations) then I desire no man's consent to any thing
that I have said: but if you grossly mistake and misuse all the Fathers names
and speeches; then I trust the Reader will better consider what credit is to be
given to your certainties; and give me leave to be shorter in slipping over
your idle, presumptuous, vain crafts and false collections; which are almost
all that is behind. A taste whereof if he will take, let him hear these
bragges of yours following.

Defenc. page 167. li. 22.
Thus your vain boasting of all the Fathers is but a bubble; So that if you
consent (as you say) to be tried by all the Fathers, Greek and Latin; they
quite overthrow you notwithstanding your great words. If your vain and
shameless boasting were not by this time well known, I would give some fresh
assault to these bulwarks of falsitie and insolen^; but the proofs being
evident and precedent, which I leave to the Readers indifferent judgment, I
will ouerskip this, and a great deal more of the same kind, as the bubbles or
your vanity; and if ought be said to any purpose, I will refute that; otherw^e
I will bestow no more paper and incke on your wandering and wild conceits.

Defenc. page 167. li. 2^.
Only Austen doubtingly and waueringly differs from all the rest; for thus he
says, I confess I have not yet found, that Inferi are named, where the just
men's souls are at peace.] You might have done well to have learned of Austen
this sober and modest course, not by vaunting and outfacing, but by plain and
fair confessing, to show the ground of your opinion, as Austen does of his.
Wherein he differs not from all the rest, as you confidently, yet most
injuriously report of him: but in this he exactly and resolutely consents
with them all (Tertullians error still excepted) that after Christ's
resurrection; August. de ciuitate Dei li. 20. ca. 1^.
Deinceps boni fideles prorsus Inferos nesciunt, Good Christians (dying) come
not to Inferi at all. And as for the former opinion, that the godly deceased
before Christ's death went ad Inferos, to places below in the earth, though not
to torments, which is the stone that still you stumble at, and make it the very
heart of all your defense, deceitfully applying that to the time since Christ's
resurrection, which the Fathers ever intended and expressed to pertain to the
time before Christ's coming; S. Austen though he yield so far to former
writers, as to say, Ibidem.
If it may seem t^ be believed without absurdity, yet he every where
professes, he could find no such use of the word Inferi in any place of the
sacred Scriptures; and that Abraham's bosom, where the Saints did rest before
Christ's death, was a part or skirt of hell, he utterly refuses that, as no way
consonant to the words of Christ in the Gospel. And therefore when he
proposes the other opinion with a condition, if it may be believed without
absurdity; even there he retains his own resolution, that Abraham's bosom
was in locis a tormentis impiorum remotissimis; in places most remote from the
torments of the wicked; and to believe otherwise were an absurdity, as he
concludes in his 99. Epistle.

Against Austin you object: Defenc page 160 li. 3.
First, that surely the ancients named the places for all deceased good and
badde, Inferos: as they named the world, (where both wicked and good do live)
Superos. Secondly, that Austen, (if he had well marked it) might have found
even this, (which he says he found not) in the Latin translation of the
Scripture. (...) 88.
What man is there that shall deliver his soul from the hand of inferi, that
is death? Page 16^. li. 3.
Where the soul being taken properly for the soul, then Inferi is found
applied to just men's souls deceased, as well as to the wicked: which Augustine
might have observed. Were you masking, this might make mirth; but being in
earnest, it is more then idle. What if Arnobius in respect of hell being in the
earth beneath us, call us that live on earth, superos; those above; is that a
proof that the godly deceased are called inferi? who knows not, that infra
and supra are differences of place, which in diverse respects may be diversely
varied? To those that are in heaven, we are Inferi, that is beneath them, and
in that reference to heaven, which is above us, Augustine himself doubts not
to call the earth Infernum. August. in Psa^. 85.
Ad hoc infernum missus est (filius Dei) nascendo, ad illud (inferius)
moriendo. To this (earth) below was the Son of God sent, when he was borne,
to that other place beneath (us) when he died. But if no special comparison of
place be expressed, then Superi and Inferi, the Saints above, and the spirits
beneath, are generally so called in regard of us, who dwell on earth, and
speak on earth, and are by position of place in the midst, that is lower
then the highest, and higher then the lowest. And because under us there are
none living but those in hell, therefore Inferi, whom the Apostle calls
(...), are spirits under the earth, whether men or devils. As for that other
objection out of the Psalms, it is not only a bubble soon blown away, but a
babble not worth the bringing. The translation of Tremelius and Iunius, to whom
you most appeal for these matters, has In Psalm. 98.
eripiat seipsum a sepulchro; shall he save himself from the grave? that is,
can he keep himself that he shall not die? and where you take hold on the
word soul, as if that must be either in the grave, which is absurd, or in the
hand of Inferi, which is that you would have; your hasty head does not
perceive, that take the word SOVLE, which way you will, either for the life of
man, which is an usual speech in the Scriptures, or for the soul properly;
neither of them does steed you a rush. For no man can preserve his life from
the grave, that he shall not die; neither can any man withstand the hand or
power of death, that it shall not sever the soul from the body; since that is
the ordinance of God against all men. Saint Austen gives you a third sense,
taking the soul there for the soul separate from the body, which is more
then ever you would be able to prove, and yet that makes nothing to your
purpose. August, in Psalm. 88.
The rest of the faithful, says he, shall rise from the dead, and live for
ever, and not see death; and yet can they not deliver their own souls from
the hands of hell. He which delivered his own soul from the hands of hell,
he has delivered the souls of his faithful, they cannot deliver themselves.
This S. Austen could observe, though he regarded none of your vain supposals.

And where you say, Defenc. page 168. li.
Austen himself elsewhere grants the just in peace might be in infernus
after death You might have observed the difference betwixt a condition and a
position, which you do not; and therefore you wrong him the more in saying,
that he grants any such thing. He says, August de ciuitate De^ li. 20. ca.
15.
Si non absurd credi videtur, if it seem to be believed without an
absurdity; not affirming it might be believed without an absur ditie, but
respecting it with a conditional, least he should show himself over
peremptory in condemning others, that were of that opinion. Otherwise his own
assertion and conclusion are earnest enough. Epistola 99.
Non vtique sinus ille Abrahae aliqua pars inferorum esse credenda est. The
bosom of Abraham is not to be believed to be any part of inferi. Ibidem.
In his ipsis tanti Magistri verbis, satis (vt opinor) apparet, non esse
quandam partem and quasi membrum inferorum tantae illius felicitatis sinum. In
these very words of so great a teacher (as Christ) it appears sufficiently,
(as I think) that the bosom of so great felicity is not any part or member
of hell. In Christ's descent to hell Saint Austen is more resolute. Of that he
pronounces. Satis constat, it is clear enough. Yea he puts more weight
unto it, and says; For neither can the Prophecy be contradicted, which said,
thou will not leave my soul in hell; nor Peter's words by which he affirms,
Christ loosed the sorrows of hell, wherein it was not possible he should be
held. And so concludes, who Ibidem.
then but an infidel will deny, Christ was in hell? And again. Ibidem.
Euidentia testimonia and insernum commemorant, and dolores. Evident
testimonies (of the Scriptures) mention both hell, and the pains thereof.
These be no coniecturall inclinations, they be judicial assertions,
whatsoever you say to the contrary.

Defenc. page 168. li. 13.
Fulgentius denies not inferos to the godly deceased, nor that Christ was
locally only with them in inferis. So that in saying he was where the wicked
are tormented, he means that in respect of the common place, which in the
whole he calls infernum.] Here is a hole, where through your wit is wholly
run, and not your wit alone, but your religion, learning, and conscience are
run after. Plainer words then those of Fulgentius, I neither do, nor can
speak any. (Christus) Fulgentius ad Trasimundum li. 3.
illuc vsque descendit, quousque homo separatus a Deo peccati merito
cecidisset, id est ad infernum, vbi solebat anima peccatoris torqueri. Christ
descended even thither, whither man severed from God by desert of sin was
fallen, that is to infernus, where the soul of a sinner uses to be
tormented. What does your wisdom answer to this? He means that in respect
of the common place, which in the whole he calls inf^rnum.] Is there any one
place common to the Saints in heaven, and to the damned in hell? You have
learned belike of Parmenides the riddle-maker, that all is one; and because the
world is but one, that heaven and hell make one common place. Whether fell man,
I pray you, by the desert of sin, to heaven or to hell? not to heaven, I
hope; for then man sinning should approach to Gods Throne; who, Fulgentius
says, was severed from God. to hell then he fell: ergo Christ descended to
hell by Fulgentius assertion, and that place, where the souls of sinners are
wont to be tormenmented, he calls Infernum; which if you can prove to be
heaven, you shall do greater wonders, then M. Hugh Broughton can do. For he
makes but a great ditch betwixt heaven and hell. You fill up that ditch of M.
Broughtons digging, and say both hell and heaven are one place common to Saints
and Devils. For Infernus is the singular number, and by the rules of Grammar,
if any rules will hold you, must note but one place, in which if both the
blessed and the damned are, then heaven and hell are both but one place. Again
you far pass M. Broughtons skill, in that he says, they are much deceived,
who think hell to be below in the earth, though Saint Paul distribute all
reasonable creatures subjected to Christ's kingdom, into things Phil. 2.
in heaven, on earth, and under the earth. You change the whole site of the
world, and say heaven is below. For where insernus is derived from infra, which
is below, if heaven be called infernus, then surely heaven is below; and then
must the Apostle recall his error in saying, Colos. 3.
seek the things which are above, where Christ is sitting at the right hand of
God; he should have said by your doctrine, seek the things which are below;
where the souls of the wicked are tormented; for that is heaven with you. But
if at your next exercise you should pray for your Auditorie to come to
infernus, where the wicked are punished, I win they would think you more
mad, then M. Broughton is. Howbe it with this one answer you give the lie
as well to Prophets, as Apostles. For where David says to God, Psalm. 30.
Thou have brought my soul out of infernus, that cannot be by your rules,
since heaven and hell make but one place, and the earth being in the midst of
them must needs be one place with both extremes, and have the same name with
both. So that David's soul wheresoever it was, was not out of Infernus. Again
where he says in the person of Christ, Psalm. 16.
Thou will not leave my soul in infernus; that is false by your doctrine, who
teach that Christ and all his Saints deceased are yet in a common place with
the damned, the whole being called Infernus. And where before you were very
angry, That I said you made ascending to be descending, and heaven to be hell;
to decline the force of Fulgentius words, you fairly answer, that Christ's
descending to infernus, where the souls of sinners are tormented, was his
going to heaven, because they both are but one place common to good and bad,
and the whole has one name, which is Infernus.

A special spleen you bear against S. Austin, and disgrace him you would, if
you could tell how, that you might be freed from the weight of his judgment in
matters of faith: but you want both wit and learning for such an enterprise,
and therefore you resist his opinion with more lies then lines. Defenc. page
(...). (...). 7.
Austins differing from you, you say is to little purpose.] and why? [ li. 1^.
First because it is contrary to all the ancient Fathers before him, with him
and since him.] Here are three lies in one line, all the Fathers before him,
with him, and since him do not dissent from him, and with you not one of them
consents. [ li 20.
Secondly we must not esteem his saying by the Latin word inferi, but by the
Original Sheol and hades, which are more against him, as before I have
showed.] Though he did follow the Latin translation then received in the Church
where he lived; yet neither the Hebrew, nor the Greek words are against him.
For you shall never show that Sheol or Hades throughout the Scripture are taken
for any good condition or receptacle of the dead, which is Austins a^rtion of
the word Inferi; much less that either of those words, Sheol or Hades, do
any where in the Scriptures import the place or state of the blessed souls,
which is your error, and which you have no way proved, though you have spent
much paper and pains to make some show for it. [ (...) 22.
Thirdly it is waueringly delivered and with doubt in himself, yea contrary to
himself, as I have showed.] Here are three lies more in another line, besides
those that swarmed in the midst. Austin does deliver his opinion constantly,
consonantly to himself; and you have showed no such thing as you pretend; but
the contrary is evident to him that will but either peruse what I have said, or
will but reuiew the manner of his setting down that opinion upon the eighty
five Psalm, where he says, al^m etiam opinionem dicam, I will set down
another opinion, or the opinion of others.

Defenc page 108. li. 24.
Fourthly, he seeks to maintain it erroneously: for he gives this reason
and end of Christ's going to hell; (the place of the damned) that he might
deliver some of the damned out of hell torments; which most strange conceit of
his your self conf^e rightly.] The end of Christ's descending to hell is by the
Fathers confessed to be double; the one to destroy death, and the Ruler
thereof, even the devil; the other, to deliver all his Elect from the power,
danger, and fear of hell. The Scriptures do not conc^le, that Christ by his
death and resurrection wrought these things. Hebr. ^.
By death (Christ) de^royed him, that had the rule of death, even the devil,
and delivered all them, which for f^re of death were all their l^fe long
subject to bondage. Rising again, he Acts 2.
loosed the sorrows of death, Coloss. 2.
spoiled Principalities and powers, and made an open snew of them, triumphing
over them in his own person. Had Christ died and not risen, we had 1. Cor. 15.
verse. 18.
perished, as Paul confesses. The conquering then of hell and Satan, and the
delivering of us from the power and ^are of either, though this were purchased
by Christ's obedience unto death, yet was it e^ected and performed by his
resurrection from the dead. And so much the Council of Alexandria in their
letters to Nestorius profess, which the general Council of Ephesus repeated
and allowed, and the fifth general E^ 5 Synod Constantino^ol. s^ssio. 6.
Counc^ll Inter Acta Conc^ij (...) (...).
of Constantinople afterward confirmed: (...). Christ rose to life the third
day, having spoiled hades (hell). So Ierom: Hiero. in Psalm. 15.
Propterea illuc (in infernum) descendit, vt Electos suos exinde eijceret, and
Diabolum ligaret. Christ descended to hell for this cause, that he might cl^ere
his Elect thence, and bind the devil. This end of Christ's de^cending to hell
and hades to deliver not only the dead, but the living from thence, the Fathers
Greek and Latin every where confess. The Christians in Tertullian say, as I
have formerly proved notwithstanding your idle exceptions; Tertull. de Anima.
ca. 55.
In hoc Christus inferos adijt, ne nos adiremus. Christ to this end went to
hell, that we should not come thither. Athanasins: Christ descending to hades,
Athanas. in illud omnia mi^i tradita sunt.
(...), brought us back. Idem de Salutari aduent^ Ch^sti.
Nostram detentionem relaxans, loosing our detention (there). He speaks of
himself and others then living, which we^e not in hades; but must have gone
thither, if Christ had not freed them from coming there. For of the souls
departed he says: Ibidem.
In the soul of (him that was) God, the power of death was loosed, his raising
from hades was performed; (...), and declared to the souls (deceased).
Hilarie: Hi^ar. de Trinitate. li. 2.
Christ's descent to hell salus nostra est, is our sal^ation. So Nazianzen:
Nazianz. in Christo patiente.
(...). Thou will deliver all, (from hades) being only free thy self. As Ierom
likewise says: H^ro in Os^ae ca. 13.
Liberauit omnes Dominus, quando anima eius descendit in infernum; The Lord
delivered all, when his soul descended into hell: meaning all Christ's Elect
both living and dead. So Fulgentius expresses this point: Fulgentius ad
Trasimundum li. 3.
As dying for us, Christ made us all to die with him, so loosing the sorrows
of hell, omnes fideles ab ijsdem doloribus liberauit, he delivered all the
faithful from the same (fears and) sorrows. Which Ambrose calls mankind.
Ambros. in cap. 3. Epistola ad Galat.
Descendens ad inferos genus humanum liberauit. Christ descending to hell
delivered (thence) mankind. With these S. Austen agrees, and says: August. in
Psalm. 85.
Ideo ille vsque ad infernum peruenit, ne nos maneremus in infern^. Therefore
Christ went even unto hell, that we should not remain in hell. Austen knowing
this end of Christ's descending to hell, why should he not say, Christ went
thither to deliver those, Idem epistola. 99.
quos esse soluendos occulta nobis sua iustitia iudicabat, whom in his justice
secret to us he thought fit to be delivered? Since then there are so sufficient
causes acknowledged by the Fathers and by Austen himself of Christ's descent
to hell, which you can not refute; what reason has it, that his maine opinion
of Christ's spoiling hades and hell, approved by so many Fathers and by
Councels provincial and general, should be false, though in the manner thereof
he did somewhat vary from the rest? which yet I neither do, nor need grant, if
we take his own exposition elsewhere; that Idem in Psalm. 85.
there they were not, but because such were their deserts, that there they had
been, unless they had been helped, they are rightly said to be delivered
from thence, whither they were not suffered to come by Christ their deliverer.

Defenc. page 169 li. 2.
As for Austens opposing against this our sense of Hades, saying, In Grac a
lingua origo nominis, quo appellantur Inferi, ex eo quod nihil suaue habeant
reson^re perhibetur: it shows his mistaking more, yea the very ground of all
his mistaking, as I think.] Though Austens skill in the Greek tongue was not
so great, that he could readily August. in proaemio li. 3. de Trinitat^.
read and understand the writings of the Grecians, as himself confesses; yet
wanting that, he kept himself to the best and most approved translation of
the Latin; and gat so much knowledge at length, that he could compare the
original Greek with the translation, and see the difference betwixt them, as
is evident in many Epist. 59. 78. 89 de Trinit. li. 1. ca. 6 quest. s^per
Exodum ^. 3. 28. 32. and sapius alibi.
places of his works. The deriuation, which you so much deprave, was made by
many Grecians as well as by Saint Austen, and therefore he may the better be
excused in joining with them. Eustathius the learned expounder of Homer, says
that many derived Hades without contraction, and did not subscribe (...) under
the first letter, as you have it, (...): but Eustathius in 1. Liados fol. 13.
affirm hades to be derived from hedo by a kind of antiphrasis, because no man
delights or reioiceth therein: and so Hesychius the great Grammarian
witnesses, that Ades in the Greek tongue does signify Hesychij Dictionar. in
verbo (...).
(...), unsweet or unpleasant: and Hades has his h of aspiration from the
Atticke, and not from the common Greek tongue, as Eustathius notes. So that
there is no cause why you should so much revel at Saint Austens ignorance in
the Greek tongue, as you do, he followed whom he liked, and yet
notwithstanding he wanted the perfection of the Grecke tongue, he goes
righter to the nature and force of Infer^ and Hades, then you and your pa^ners
with your glut of Greek. For Austen says two things of Inferi, which you
would feign impugn, if you could tell how: the one is. August. de Genesi ad
literam li. 12. ca. 34.
Inferi eo quod infra sunt, Latin appellantur, Inferi are in Latin so called,
because they are below: The other: Sicut secundum corpus inferiora sunt omnia
grauiora, ita secundum spiritum inferiora sunt omnia tristiora. As all bodily
things, the lower their (natural) place, the waightier they are; so all
spiritual things the lower, the gri^uouser they are. You against all reason,
and learning contradict both these: for you say that heaven is infernus, which
by force of the word must needs be below; and you bring death, which is a most
grievous thing, into heaven; though it be the highest place and state, that men
can or shall have. Besides you stick not to alter your authors, Irenaeus,
Tertullian, and Ambrose, whom you bring for your pretense; and where they talk
of an innisible place or prison, you turn their words to an invisible state
common to good and bad. Irenaeus in that place says nothing of Hades; Ambrose
says, the heathen were of opinion, that souls loosed from their bodies went
to aides, a place not seen, which the Latins call infernus. Tertullian says,
Tertull de anima ca. 58.
Carcerem illum, quod Euangelium demonstrat, inferos intelligimus. That prison
which the Gospel mentions, we understand to be inferi. What is this to
heaven or paradise, or to the state of blessed souls departed this life?

Defenc. page 169. li. 17.
(Hades) signifies sometimes darkness, or a place of darkness, not that the
state of all the dead generally was thought to be in darkness, but because
death took them out of this cheerful worlds light, and covered them (as it
were) with darkness and oblivion from the worlds sight and knowledge.] You
would feign shift off the description of Hades made by Greek Fathers, which by
no means can agree to heaven or paradise; but your shifts are all of one sort,
that is deuoid of learning, truth, and sense. The Greek writers of all ages
that were Christians, acknowledge Hades to be full of fearful and eternal
darkness. As Nazianzene. N^zianzen. in Christo patiente.
(...), Christ coming to the house of Hades all full of mist and darkness.
And Chrysostom. Chrysostom. de R^surrect. s^m. 7.
The Lord descending into the dark mist of Hades. Eustathius. Fustath. in 1.
lit^dos.
(...). Hades is a dark place under earth. Nicetas Choniates. Nicetas Choniat.
in Bal.
(...). The dark and dreadful tab^nacles of Hades. Nicephorus Gregoras (...).
Gregoras hist. R^ma. li. 8.
We walked in gross darkness, as they say of those, that destend to Hades.
Phauorinus. Phauorinus in verbo (...).
(...). Hades is a plac^ void of light, and full of eternal darkness. These
and the like testimonies when you cannot avoid; you answer, that the souls of
the godly are taken out of this cheerful worlds light, and covered as it were
with darkness and oblivion, from the worlds sight, and knowledge: as if this
world were cheerful light, and the light of heaven must for your pleasure be
counted darkness, or the sight of Christ and his Saints might be called (as it
were) oblivion, that we should take more joy and comfort in the faces of
mortal men, then of the Lord Jesus. This conceit would well become him, that
had no heaven but this world; otherwise to change the natures and names of
earthly and heavenly things vpside down, and to di^grace eternal bliss with
the not^ of darkness and oblivion, preferring temporal ease or honor before
it, as cheerful light; this is fit for a Pagan, but not for a Christian.

Defenc. page 170. li. 27.
I come from the ancients to the later learned writers: that we may not
neglect their judgment in this q^stion, li 31.
who were observed before, yet because you let them go without saluting them,
they shall be noted once more, that I may press you with them. As you have
handled the ancients, so do you the later writers: you do not, or will not
understand them, but keep on your perverting of these, as you did of the
other. I could easily have saluted them, if leisure had then served to me to
discuss all your untoward assertions and allegations, which because it did
not, you will once more press me with them: Well then let us hear them.

Defenc. page 170. li. 35. (...)
Bucere says, the Scripture no where speaks or hades of infernum, but as
being common as well to the blessed as to the damned.] When you allege but
little, you should allege Had^s with (...) writers is the grave or hell.
it right, and not add what pleases you, to other men's words. In this place
which you bring out of Bucere, he makes no mention of hades at all, that is
your interlacing; and by Infernus he means the g^aue, which is common to good
and bad. His own words are. Bucerus in 27 Matthew. verse.
Quid hic sit ad infernum descendere, aliud quam recondi corpus sub terra. What
is here descending to infernus, but the body to be covered under earth. The
reason whereof he gives; Ibidem.
Sheol enim pro quo in Scripturis n^s fere infernus legimus, sepulchr^
significat. Sheol, for which in the Scriptures we read almost every where
infernus, signifies the grave. And so he there interprets himself. Ibidem.
Sanctos qui in inferno erant, id est dormiebant corpore in puluere terrae. The
Saints which were in infernus, that is, which slept with their bodies in the
dust of the earth. And therefore that which follows and is by you cited,
Defenc. page 171. li. 1.
By this which we confess that the Lord descended to infernus, we must
understand that the Lord joined himself in spirit to the spirits of the Saints
deceased; that I say is added as a consequent to Christ's death, and not as the
proper signification of the phrase. For it were more then absurd by your leave,
that one and the same word, which he says signifies the grave, should
properly note the burying of the body in earth below, and the ascending of the
spirit to heaven on high, though in all the Saints the one is performed as well
as the other. And where Bucere seems to impugn the sense, which the fathers
gave of this Article; as his reasons be none, so his words in no wise man's
judgment can ouersway theirs.

Defenc. page 171. li. 3.
Peter martyr, that Christ descended to inferos (or hades) signifies nothing
else, but that he did under go the same state, as other souls do that depart
this life.] Why stop you there? are you bleere eied, that you cannot see what
presently follows; or short winded, that you can read no farther? the very
next words will plainly show with what sincerity and fidelity you be conversant
in old and new writers. Peter Martyrs words are these. Petri Martyris loci com.
in Exposition^ Symboli.
Eundem subijt statum, quem reliquae animae a corpore seiunctae experiuntur,
quae aut in Sanctorum societatem coaptantur, aut cum damnatorum spiritibus in
aeternum exitium detruduntur. Et vero vna atque altera tum piorum spirituum,
tum eorum qui damnati essent, societas, animae Christi praesentiam persensit.
The soul of Christ did undergo the same state, (by going to the same place)
which the rest of the souls severed from the body do try, that are either
admitted into the fellowship of the saints, or cast into everlasting
destruction with the spirits of the damned. For both the one and the other
society, as well of godly souls, as of those that were damned, perceived the
presence of Christ's soul. The soul then of Christ by Peter Martyrs judgment
clean contrary to Bucers, went as well to the place of the damned; as to the
seats of the blessed, and either society perceived the presence of his soul
severed from his body.

Defenc. page 171. li. 6.
Mollerus, (touching Sheol, Hades, and infernum ascribed to Christ) says they
do signisie but that Christ died: and to be no more then if he should say in
the Psalm, therefore I rejoice because I know, that although I die, yet I
shall rise to life again.] Of Sheol Mollerus says, Saepe pro sepulchro
dic^tur, it is often taken for the grave, which no man denies. Of hades and
infernus he speaks not a word. And albeit he be of opinion, that Christ's
descent to hell, sat is certo euinci non potest ex hoc loco, cannot clearly
and fully be euinced out of this place of the Psalm, by reason (as he
thinks) the words may be wrested to diverse senses; yet touching Christ's
descent to hell he says; Mollerus in Psalm. 16.
We understand that Article of the Creed simply and without allegory, and we
believe that Christ truly descended to the lower parts of the earth, as Paul
speaks Ephesians. 4. and his victory he would show to the Devils after a special
manner, to strike perpetual terrors into them, and to free us from the fear
of their tyranny.

Defenc. page 171. li. 10.
Bullinger (speaking of Christ and indifferently of the godly,) shows that to
go to infernus is to go to Abraham's bosom, that is into heaven, not into
hell. And that inferi and hades do mak^ difference only between the living
and the dead, and nothing else. Bullinger brings four senses of that Article
of the Creed, Christ descended to Inferna. The first, that is all one with, he
was buried; which exposition he says others mislike. The second is Austens,
who in his Epistle to Dardanus writes; Bulling. sermon. 7. de Symbolo Apostol.
The Lord descended to Tartarus, but felt there no torment. The third, to which
he more inclines, Long simplicius videbimur hunc articulum intelligere si
senserimus virtutem mortis Christi dimanasse etiam ad defunctos, and his
profuisse. We shall seem far more simply to understand this article, if we
think that the force of Christ's death pierced even to the dead, and profited
them. The fourth is, Vel certe per inferos and inferna intelligimus, non locum
certe destinatum impijs, sed defunctos fideles. Or else by inferi and inferna we
understand not the place of punishment appointed for the wicked, but the
faithful deceased. Here are all four senses. He likes best, that the virtue
and force of Christ's death descended and was showed both to the blessed and to
the damned; as Saint Peter Ibidem.
tells us, that the Lord went in spirit and preached to the spirits, that
were inobedient and kept in prison. Nimirum innotuit and his just a damnationis
ex morte Christi sententia. For even to the damned appeared the sentence of
their condemnation to be just by the death of Christ. This he confesses Christ
did in spirit. If by Christ's spirit he meant Christ's soul, he expressly
refuteh your conceits. If he mean, the force of Christ's divine spirit
descended, he has Athanasius, Cyril, and others opposite against him.
Athanasius says: (...) Athanas. de salu^ri aduent^ Christi.
(...); How could the word (or Son of God) descend to Hades? And again:
Ibid. de Incarnat. Christi.
(...); How could he descend with his Godhead open and uncovered? Ibidem.
(...). Neither could hades endure the access of his Godhead uncovered. And so
Cyrill: Cyrill. de fide ad Thesdosium.
(...). Neither in any wise may we say, that the Godhead of the only begotten
was brought from (hades or) the dens under the earth: for that was not worthy
of woondering, if the Son of God were not left in hades. Exactly they teach,
that the Deity of Christ, or his divine spirit could by no means be said to
descend to hades, or to return from thence, but it must be verified of his
humane soul, which revealed it self, and the virtue of his death as well to
the damned, as to the blessed.

Defenc page 167. li. 13.
Lauater says Hades in Gre^ke is a general word for the condition of the dead
both in torments and in peace.] Lauater says of hades as he does of Sheol,
that Lauater. bo^il. 133. in 31. cap. Ezechiel.
Non solum locum Damnatorum, sed S^pulchrum vel statum mortuorum passim in
Scripturis signisicat, it signisieth not only the place of the damned, but
also the grave or state of the dead. And so does Hades with the septuagint, who
always render Sheol by that word. Now the grave or state of the dead (the one
being an exposition of the other) reaches not to the Souls of the godly
(which are not in their graves) but to their bodies; and has in it corruption,
silence, oblivion and privation of all things in this life, from which the
grave excludes them, be they never so blessed. And so that rest, which
Lauatere names, is not the joy of heaven; but rest from the labors of this
life, which our bodies attain in the grave, specially when the Soul enjoys
her eternal and happy rest; which the wicked want, that are adjudged to the
place of torments.

Defenc. page 171. li. 15.
Tremellius says: This Hebrew word Sheol does signify any station or state of
the dead in general in very many places of Scripture, and hell it may sometime
signify, but by a figure Synecdoche. Tremellius has been once before alleged
and answered. He does not say that Sheol signifies Heaven or Paradise, but the
Stations of the dead he makes to be Sepulchrum or infernum, the grave for dead
bodies, or Hell for the dead Souls; to both which Sheol is a common name, and
sometimes imports the one, sometimes the other, and sometimes both. When both
are intended, the word has his full force; when only one, the figure
Synecdoche is used as he thinks. But what is this to your purpose? show that
ever Tremellius translateth Sheol by Heaven or Paradise, and then you sa^
^mewhat, though I be not bound to Tremellius authority, farther then he makes
fair and clear proof of his assertion. Otherwise this is a plain con^ction
of your falsehoode, if you pretend by mistaking Tremellius words, that Sheol
signi^eth as well Heaven, as Hell and the grave; and when you be asked for an
example of that signification in the Scriptures, you can produce no one place
in the whole Bible, where Tremellius himself has so translated Sheol. Of
^nius I have formerly spoken; he was very learned, but he took hold of
Tertullians error repugnant to all the Fathers, as I have showed before. He
likewise mistook Chrysostom: for Chrysostom supposes Abraham to be in hades
before Christ's resurrection, but not after. Irenaeus says the souls of
Christ's Disciples have an invisible place defined them of God, but he
expresses neither name nor site thereof. What proof make any of these, that
heaven or paradise is called infernus or hades? or that there is a state of the
dead in one place common to good and bad, as you defend out of Fulgentius?

Defenc. page 171. li. 25.
The rather this sens^ of hades we are to acknowledge, because it has been
the ancient phrase and common vs^ of speech before Christianity, which
sufficiently ^ showed before out of Homer, Plato, and others.] The heathen
writers fitted their phrases to their heathen errors; and therefore except you
be disposed to revive their profane fancies of Infernus and Hades, which they
thought common to good and bad, you have no reason to follow their phrase
either in Hades or Inferi. What has heaven or paradise to do with Plutoes
kingdom under earth, where the Pagan Poets and Philosophers placed both
torments for the wicked and pleasant fields for the godly? And therefore your
idle and fruitless discourse of almost three whole leaves tending only to
smooth up the unchristian follies and phrases of Pagans, I omit as not worth
the answering; and as you refer them to the judgment of the learned and wise
Reader, so do I; not doubting but if he be learned or wise, he will not suffer
you to expound the Scriptures by fabulous Poets, or erroneous Philosophers,
altogether strangers to the Christian religion; but will keep you rather to
the rules and directions of the holy Ghost, whose sense is the safest and
surest way to measure matters of faith. Only I will touch two or three of your
foolish ouersights and bold presumptions, lest my silence should breed you
confidence in your conceits.

Defenc. page 172. li. 22.
The holy Apostles do teach the heavenly truth, with the very words and
Grammar of the heathen men: whereunto that serves which is written of them; we
every man hear them speak in our own tongues and languages, wherein we were
borne.] Why speak you of Grammar, which is common to all professions, and skip
the signification and meaning of these words, which are proper to Christians?
who though they use many words abused by Pagans to ignorant and false
apprehensions, yet retain they such sense of those words, as the truth of God
prescribes, and not as Pagans and Idolaters imagined. And to whom did the
Apostles speak in this Acts 2.
place which you cite, to profane and heathen men, or to Jews, that were well
acquainted with Moses and the Prophets, though they were borne in diverse places
of the world, and understood the languages of many other nations? the Scripture
says even of this multitude then assembled to hear the Apostles speak with
diverse tongues; Acts 2. v. 5.
There were dwelling at Jerusalem Jews, men Religious, (or fearing God) of
every nation under heaven. Else to what end did Peter allege to them the
Prophets Joel and David, if they knew the writings of neither? but that whole
Sermon of Peter's proves, that they were familiarly conversant in the
Scriptures; and therefore the Apostles speaking strange languages so tempered
their words and sense, as men trained up in Moses might well understand their
meaning. And when the Apostles spoke or wrote in other tongues besides the
Hebrew, trow you they retained the same sense and understanding in every word,
that the Pagans did, who knew nothing of Christ? how many words are there,
which the writings of the Evangelists and Apostles turn from their general
and usual signification amongst the heathen, to express things proper to
Christian religion? shall Euangelium, fides, spiritus, ecclesia, episcopus,
diaconus, presbyter, martyr, diabolus, and many such import no more with
Christians then they did with Pagans? who ever was so blind, that ever read any
thing? Hades then the apostles might and did use for a place under earth, where
the wicked after this life were tormented; so far they agreed with the use of
the word formerly received: but where unbelievers thought the souls of the
godly were likewise in the same place under the earth, tho gh in more rest or
in some pleasures, such as natural men could device; the Apostles and
Evangelists instructed no doubt by their Master, and by his example correcting
that error, named the place, where the souls of the faithful were received
after death, Luke 23.
Paradise, and an 2. Cor. 5.
heavenly habitation. And where the Jews used Sheol for all that was under the
earth, were it the grave for dead bodies, or hell for wicked soul^s; the new
Testament distinguishing hades from death, and making the one a consequent to
the other in the wicked, proves hades there to be taken only for the Luke 16.
place of torment after this life.

Defenc. page 172. li. 36.
I thought that those few all^gations which I brought out of Plato, Homer and
Plutark for the Greek, and of the Latins for the Latin would have sufficed to
cause you not to deny so clear and manifest a truth. Page 173. li. 7.
That hades with them did signify the world of souls without any limitation
(in the very word it self) either of state or place.] Had the Pagans any
hades, which they thought was in no place? or were the souls of good and bad
in no state? do not the very rules of Grammar expressed in every Lexicon,
require necessarily, that (...) every where used by Greek writers in verse and
in prose after (...), and (...), as (...) and (...) and such like, should be
supplied with (...) or some such word importing a place or house before it can
be excused from false Greek? how then are you so ignorant or impudent (choose
which you will) as to say that hades is the world of souls without limitation
of place or state? have you forgotten what Eustathius says of the very word it
self? Eustath. in 1. Iliados
(...): Hades is a dark place under the earth. And Phauorinus? Phauori. in
verbo (...).
(...). Hades is a Region without light. Or what Lucian reports of all the
people, who were Grecians, that persuaded by Homer, Hesiode and the rest of the
Poets, took Hades to be Lucia. de luctu.
(...), a place under the earth, deep, great, and dark? If the word then of it
self import a place under the earth, and that deep and dark, what truth is
there in your words, or what force in your allegations; which prove nothing
against any thing that I said; nor for your new made world of souls without
limitation of place or state?

Defenc. page 173. li. 15.
The common Epithet of hades is hades pandocheus, hades receiving all both good
and bad.] And what then? was hades therefore either not under the earth, or not
a place of darkness, because all men good and bad after death by the Pagans
opinion, went to hades? if hades withal your profane writers (save once in a
special conceit of Socrates) were below in the earth, and a dwelling in
darkness; then does the word it self bear in it a limitation of place below
under the earth, not above in heaven, and a state in darkness, not in light.
Against this speaks not one of your authors, whom here you huddle most
idly, not regarding what I admit or reject. That which I say, they confess
with one consent, as I have Conclus. pa. 369. 371.
elsewhere showed; and if those testimonies were not sufficient, you might have
ten times as many. But to make short work Clemens Alexandrinus shall let you
see, how peeuishly you impugn my assertion. He alleges out of Diphilus an
ancient comicall Poet, as follows; Clemens mateo^. li. 5. ex Diphilo.
(...). In hades we resolve there are two ways, on for the just, the other for
the wicked. Howbeit the earth does cover them both. Your self is a witness
against your self, that to this place (Hades) Defenc. page 173. li. 19.
come not the wicked only, but the noblest and best also. Now where this place
was in their opinion to which all come after death, if you doubt, Homer tells
you, it was Homer. Odysscae li. 24.
(...). In the house of hades under the dens (or darkness) of the earth.
Theognis says in like words, Theognidis gnomae.
(...). They go to the house of hades under the dens (or closets) of the
earth. Mimnermus says Mimnermus de ^ita quod brcuis sit.
(...). He goes to hades under the earth. Euripides. E^ipides in (...).
(...). Under the earth to hades there being. Sophocles. Sophocles in ^ace
Flagell.
(...). They come to the closets of the God below. Aristophanes. Ariscoph.
(...) Rani^.
(...) I will go with speed to hades below. So that your great Masters of the
Greek tongue, if ever you saw them or read the^, exactly resolve against you,
that your hades pandocheus, whither all go both good and bad, is under the
earth, and so can no way be proportioned to heaven or paradise, which are far
above the stars of heaven, and are habitations of light and bliss; where
your hades of the blessed, in the opinion of Pagans and Christians, was a place
of darkness, though mixed with ease and comfort as they supposed. And
touching the Latin Inferi, of which you seem to make such account by pretense
of Ciceroes words, but without all cause; I reply with the words of
Lactantius, whom the Christians called their Cicero. I actant. de falsa
religion. li. 2. ca. 2.
Nihil terra inferius, and humilius, nisi mors and inferi. Nothing is lower and
baser then the earth, but death and inferi. And because Hen: Iac: is become of
late so devout a Patron of Ciceroes, that he may not suffer his Paganish
errors to be reproved; and is angry that any man takes his beedleship from
him, let him read but the next chapter of Lactantius against Cicero by name,
and he shall see what honor is to be yielded to heathen Idolaters against the
truth.

Defenc. page 173. li 27.
Homer describes, Tartarus to be so much beneath hades as heaven is from the
earth.] What if Hades or hell be exceeding deep; is that a proof that the top
thereof is no part of Hades, because the bottom is far beneath it? Are not
the parts of heaven Tartarus a part of hades with the Poets.
infinitely one above another, and yet all are heaven? In my fathers house,
says our Savior, are many mansions; and yet they all are but one house.
Though then the Poet feign that Hades has in it deep pits; yet all is
contained in the general name of Hades, specially since both Pagans and
Christians confess, that men are punished in Hades, and not under Hades.
Iustine the Martyr alleges out of Philemon. Justinius de Mornar^hta D^.
(...). There is judgment in Hades. Theodoretus says of Plato: Theodoret.
s^rmo. 11. de fine and iud. cio.
(...). Many times he affirms places of punishment in Hades. Cydonius says
generally. Cydonius de morte contemnenda.
(...); that there is vengeance in Hades for offenses here committed; not
only the consent of all wise men; but the equity of Gods justice approoueth
this opinion. The Gospel calls Hades Luke 16.
a place of torments. Your self all this while have maintained Hades to be a
place as well of rest as of punishment; that is of both at least. And would you
now with a Poetical fiction or comparison strike out all, that you and others
have said, and appoint punishments not in, but under Hades? Poets have their
special fancies of Tartarus, and therein agree not one with another. Hesiode
says; Hesiod. in Theogoni^.
(...). The dungeon of Tartarus is so far under the earth, as heaven is above
the earth. Virgil says,

Virgil. Aeneid. 6.
Tartarus ipse bis patet in praeceps tantum. Tartarus is twice as deep, as
heaven is high. And though Homer were blind, yet he never intended to make
Tartarus no part, but the lowest part of Hades. And therefore he placed it
deep under the higher hades, where dead bodies are, which Hesiode called the
earth. For Hades is common as well to the bodies buried, as to the souls
received under the earth. And therefore your citing Sophocles and Aeschylus
using Hades for the grave, where our bodies rest, is an answer to that which
you bring out of Homer, and an heaping up of matter no way pertinent to your
purpose. For think you that the grave has no limitation of place? why then
are you so copious in things not doubted, and wholly speechles^e in that which
you should prove?

With as little skill (you say) Defenc. page 174. li. 3.
(...) in the words of Orpheus are to be construed together and not
separately, as I read them; but why, can you tell? What shall become of the
conjunction (...), between them, if the construction must be aither aides as
you set it? the interpreter, a man well learned, does render it thus in Latin.
O Rex caeli and inferni, O King of heaven and of hell. And the conjunction
(...) is often copulative with the Poets, and stands for (...), as your
Lexicons will teach you. Besides Orpheus purpose is to confess him, whom
devils do tremble at, and Angels do fear, as his words presently following
do declare. And therefore his meaning was rather to celebrate the Lord of all,
that is of heaven and hell; sea and land; then of part.

Defenc page 174 li. 13. and 15.
You expressly collect and confess (page 371.) that within Plutoes kingdom
under the earth, which they call Hades, as well the places and pleasures for
the good, as the prisons and punishments for the bad, are in their conceit
prepared and settled.] That the Pagans so thought, I do not deny, yet they
never called Hades heaven, as you do, but confessed heaven to be on hie over
their heads; where the Gods immortal were as they supposed, not under the
earth where hades was. And can you be so sottish as to say I contradict my
self, because I vouch they limited hades to a place even under the earth, and
to darkness in respect of the light of the Sun, which we here enjoy? Again
(you confess) Page 174. li. 18.
Hades with them was the Ruler or place of souls, were they in rest o^ pain.]
Were you ever prentice to learn to lie, or have you this facility by nature?
You can not touch a place which you do not falsify. I said, with them
(speaking of Infidels)

Conclu page 337. li. 9.
Hades was the Ruler or place of souls, that were beneath under the earth,
were they in rest, or in pain. How is this repugnant either to my self, or to
the truth? ( Defenc. page 174. li. 20.
You make a strange answer, that Christian Religion will assure, this place
must needs be hell. What that place where some good men's souls deceased are
in rest? Is this hell? Is it hell in Christian Religion? who then will
henceforth care for hell, if some souls have rest and pleasures in hell?] Know
you not who rides you, when you break your spurs on a bench, and think you
be on horseback? That hades is beneath under the earth, as the Pagans
confessed, and must needs be hell, (since Christian religion acknowledges no
place under the earth for souls deceased, besides hell) I avouched: what then?
what fault finds your mastership therewith? are any there in rest, you ask?
The Pagans so drempt; and therefore I say, with them it was so; that is, they
supposed it to be so; but Christian Religion, I replied, assures us, there is
no place under the earth for souls, but only hell. Where are now your quick
and thick punctilioes and easy hell that you so plea withal? The Pagans were
of that mind, if you list to be one of them, you may hope for rest in hell:
but Christian religion, to which I appealed, assures us that it is a place of
torment. Cannot your heavy head discern, when I report and refute Pagans
opinions, and when I propose points of Christian religion?

Defenc. page 174. li. 24.
But you say also, that those heathen Greeks did think this place of souls
was under the earth. It is true they thought so indeed: and it was their
error.] Then have you all this while out-faced the truth, when you derived
from them a world of souls without limitation of place; and your exposition of
the Creed according to their sense must needs infer, that Christ's soul
after death descended under the earth, for there is hades by the maine consent
of the heathen Greeks, as you now confess. And if you place heaven or
paradise (where the souls of the righteous now are) under the earth to uphold
your Greek conceits; you shall deserve a garland in your new made hades, but I
dare promise you no rest in your heaven under earth, except you restore it to
the place where God set it, that is above us, and not beneath us.

That Hades was the proper name of a person, and secondly of the place, Page
175. li. 2.
this is not material, nor to any purpose: Page 174. li. 34.
yet it is questionless utterly untrue.] Is it utterly untrue, that the Pagan
Poets (for of them I speak) took Hades chiefly for the ruler of the dead, and
in that respect called his kingdom under the earth, also Hades? I omit what
Diodorus Siculus reports as well of antiquity as of the Poets, that they
took Diodorus Siculus li. 5.
(...) Hades (the third son of Saturnus) to be the inuentor of graves and
funerals, which was the cause that he was thought to be the God of the dead,
Ibidem.
Antiquity attributing to him the beginning and care of these things. To go
beyond the surmises of the Grecians, who took their learning and antiquities
from the Egyptians, as appears by Orpheus and Homers iourneyes thither to
increase their knowledge: the wise men amongst the Chaldeans, called with them
Magi, who were far more ancient then the Egyptians as Aristotle and others
witness, taught two chief authors of all things; Diogen^ Laerti^ in Pro^mio.
(...), A good God, and a bad spirit, and the good was called Zeus or
Oromasdes; the other was named Hades or Aremanios. And to this give testimony
Theopompus, Eudoxus, Hernippus, ancient writers among the Grecians, besides
Aristotle, who concurreth with them; and Plutarke, who says, Plutarch. de
Iside and Osiride.
(...), this is the opinion of the most and the wisest. Yea Zoroastres himself
was of that opinion, who lived some thousands of years before the battle of
Troy, as Plutarke writes, and is taken for Cham the son of Noah by our
Historiographers. Plinij natural. hist. li. 3. ca. 10.
Pliny makes him elder then Moses by many thousands of years. Show me now as
ancient testimonies, that the place was called Hades, as I show you, that the
person was so named, and I will yield. If you can not, prate not so
presumptuously, that questionless this is utterly untrue.

To my assertion, there is no one place in truth common to all souls departed
this life, but some are in heaven, and some are in hell, you answer: Defenc page
175. li. 17.
yet nevertheless As they are some where within the compass of the created
world, so are they in a common place. The whole created world is hades with the
defender.
This As does so haunt you, that you can do nothing without it. As they are in
the created world, so they are in one common place. Then hell and heaven with
you make but one place, and consequently Christ sitting at the right hand of
God, is with all the elect angels in the same place with the devil and the
damned; and we living here on earth since we are in the created world, are
both in the same place with Christ, and also in the same place with the damned.
Such new Cosmographie well becomes your new Divinity; without such misshapen
Asses you are not able to open your mouth. But if this be your best defense for
your new found Hades, your Reader I trust will be better advised, before he
will be in the same place or mind with you. The Scriptures teach us to
distinguish places according to their names given them by God himself, as
heaven, earth and hell, and not to make all one common place, or world of
souls which you have newly created.

Page 175. li. 22.
We stand not so much on this, that by hades must be understood any one place
common to all the dead, but the state and condition of death among the dead.]
All this while you have been proving, that hades is an invisible place, and so
does Ambrosse expound it, aides is a place not seen, which we call Hell; now
you can not tell how to bring heaven and hell (which are so far distant
asunder) to be one common place, you would feign reduce them to one common
state or condition of death, when the Scriptures every where make them
opposite, ascribing light and life to the one, and darkness and death to the
other. But you have found one common condition of death in both, which is to
want their bodies.] What say you then to Elias, who was carried up to heaven or
to Paradise alive, and never died? Are he and the rest, who rose from their
graves with Christ, in the common condition of death? What say you to Core,
Dathan Abiram, and their company, who descended alive to hades; are they free
from the condition of death in hades, because they have their bodies? Mere
priuations are no conditions or states. And therefore to want their bodies for
a time either in heaven or in hell, makes no common estate to both, no more
than that they are all souls, and contained in some certain limitation of
place, which nothing touch their condition or state: otherwise the damned in
hell and the blessed in heaven shall always have one common state and
condition, because they shall eternally be fastened to their places, and shall
have their souls united to their bodies; and shall remember things past, and
such like; which yet do not perform one common estate or condition to both,
since they shall have so many contraries to make them differ, even as now they
have; though degrees of joy and pain shall then increase.

The Pagans Defenc page 176. li. 5.
esteemed indeed a part of his dominion to be hell properly, but a part also to
be the region of the happy.] This is like the rest of your trueths. Did the
Pagans know or acknowledge none other heaven but hades? Did ever man so write
or speak, that had read but one leaf of prose or Poetry? never read you what
Cicero cites out of Ennius? Cicero Tuscul^st. li. 1.
Romulus in caelo cum Dijs agit aeuum. Romulus enjoys eternity with the Gods
in heaven. And adds of his own: Ibidem.
Quid totum prope coelum, nonne humano genere completum est? The whole heaven
is it not almost replenished with mankind? Homer and the rest of the Greek
Poets were not ignorant hereof, nor silent herein. Of Hercules Homer says;
(...): He does solace himself with the immortal Gods. And what was ouranos
with them, if hades were their heaven? Arristotle says: Arist. de mundo.
(...). The highest place of the world, being the seat or habitation of God, is
called heaven. To this heaven the Poets admitted the sons of their Gods,
obscurely lighting on that rule of true religion, the sons of God shall inherit
the kingdom of God: but the Philosophers plainly affirm of justice and
piety, Cicero in Somnio S^pionis.
ea vita via est in coelum: such a life is the way to heaven. And for all the
helpers, encreasers, and preseruers of their country, Ibidem.
certum esse in coelo ac d^finitum locum, vbi beati aeuo sempiterno fruantur;
there is a set and certain place in heaven where they shall enjoy everlasting
blessedness. The Greek Poets then were not ignorant of heaven above, when
they sent most men departing this life to Hades beneath; but they had heard
somewhat of that divine sentence, which adjudged mankind for sin to death
both of body and Soul, and thereupon, as there manner is to multiply their
own fancies and fables, they placed all mortal men in Hades below; and yet
allowed the better sort of men some ease and comfort; though they never brought
them to heaven, except they thought them the sons of some God. What is this
to the true heaven; which is the glorious seat of God, and the everlasting
habitation of his Angels and Saints? Why yoke you Gods truth with Poetical
fables and humane fancies, as if the one were not only a meet pattern for the
other, but the same place with the other? How comes hades to be al one with
the created world, and so not only men living are in hades, but Saints and
Angels, yea Christ himself is still in hades, since neither he nor they are
without the compass of the created world? So large is your predicament of
hades, that the whole world is scant wide enough for it.

After this you read us a lecture of more than two leaves, how Defenc. page
176. li. 23.
the Apostles taught the truth of the Gospel with the very words of the
heathens; and as you make rules for their speech at your pleasure, so you take
pains to bring no author, for all that you say, besides your self. I have
heard so many of your trifling and wandering discourses, that I am stark
weary with reading them; and if it have no better weight than your word, you
may keep your wind, and save your labor. Who doubts, but the Holy Ghost
might and did correct as well the words as errors of the heathens, and reduced
both their ears and hearts to the understanding and embracing of the Gospel?
Wherefore such words as Infidels abused and defiled with their wicked
imaginations, the Apostles of Christ restrained and applied to express the
truth, thereby teaching the heathen to keep their words and leave their
errors, and not framing the Gospel to the profane sense or use of their
speech. What conclude you hence for hades? That the Apostles retained the
erroneous sense of that word, and made it worse than the Pagans did? For the
heathen used that word for places under the earth, where souls after this life
were kept; and you would have the Apostles use it for Heaven and Paradise,
where the souls of the righteous are, as well as for hell where the damned
are. Leave therefore your idle vagaries; the Apostles used the word hades for
the places under the earth, where souls were detained, as the heathen did: but
in this they redressed the Pagans conceits, that they as natural men dreamed
of bodily pleasures in hades, which the Scriptures make a place of torment with
perpetual fire. Put this correction to the Poets opinion of hades, as touching
the condition of souls thither adjudged, and I see no danger in the use of
hades for hell, since the Pagans by that word intended the places under earth,
where the wicked after this life were punished.

Defenc. page 177. li. 4.
A Philosopher will rarely and sometime perhaps note the air by Tartarus; yet
usually and in a manner always they meant hell by it. Yet Peter not Canonizing
their dreams of hell, notwithstanding signifies hell indeed by that word of
theirs according to the common use thereof.] Though the Poets use not Tartarus,
as often as they do Hades, for the receite of souls after death; yet it is
false, which you say, that in a manner always they meant (the dungeon of) hell
by it; It is an usual phrase among the Poets for the place, where souls were
bestowed after death, as Hades is. Pindarus expressing the inconstancy of man's
life says: Apud Plutar. de consolations ad Apollonium.
(...). Thou must go to the deep of dark Tartarus by inevitable necessity.
Moschus wishes he might go thither to hear Bion sing there. Moschus in
Epitap. Bionis.
(...). O if I might go down to Tartarus, as did Orpheus, Ulysses, or
Hercules. Hesiode shows, how the destenies, as soon as any man was wounded
or slain, seized on him, and sent his soul Hesiod, in scuto Herculis
(...), to cold Tartarus. Anacreon giving a reason, why though he be old, he is
loath to die, says. Anacreontis Carmina.
(...), I sigh often, fearing Tartarus; for the chamber of Hades is grievous.
So Theognis and others use Tartarus for Hades without any distinction betwixt
them. And where you say, Peter signifies hell indeed by that word, you may
meet with many that will tell you, Saint Peter there calls the air about
Tartarus taken for the air over us.
and above the earth by that name, as well as the places under the earth; and
that in respect of the light, which the reprobate Angels did before enjoy in
heaven, this world may justly be called darkness. Zanchius says. Zanchius de
operibus Dei li. 4. ca. 4.
By this name Peter understood not the place only, which is under the earth,
sed imprimis ipsum aerem but chiefly this air; and the whole space beneath
this moon. For in this regio^ are the devils kept captives as the Apostle
teaches, calling the devil the Prince of this air. Saint Austin says as
much. August. de Genesi ad literam li. 11. ca. 26
Let us not doubt but the sinful Angels were cast into this aeriall mist about
the earth, as into a prison, (according to the Apostles faith), kept to be
punished in judgment. In ca. 2. epist. 2. Petri.
Aretius, Hiperius, Beza and others are of the same mind. So that this
signification of Tartarus was not taken from the heathen, as you presume, but
is a comparison with their former In Epistolam Iudae.
state, when they were Angels of light, and adorned with brightness within and
without, who now are thrown from their hight and plunged into outward and
inward darkness.

Defenc. page 178. li. 28.
The very natural Etymology of the word according to the Grammar does
properly signify UNSEEN or not seen any more in this world: topos aides an
unseen place as Plato calls it. Where note it cannot be referred to the
estate of Angels, but of them that had once a visible and ordinary being and
conversation here in this world.] You hang this geere together with hooks.
Hades you say is properly, not seen any more in this world; yet it is topos
aides, an unseen place, as Plato calls it. You have gotten you three
starting holes under the covert of Hades, the place unseen, the person not
seen any more in this world, the state invisible: but you hide your self so
unhandsomely in them, that when you think your self most invisible, all the
world may see your open folly. Was the place of Hades ever seen in this
world? I trust not. Then Hades is topos aides a place, which never man living
saw; for a man must be dead before he can come to that place. You grant the
Grammatical Etymology of the word Hades is to signify a place unseen, as
Plato calls it. How come you then to apply this to the person or state, not
seen any more in this world, by which you would exclude Angels from being in
hades? It is evident that the Poets made Hades a person, and supply (...)
hadou very often with domous or such like, as (...), to the housen of Hades;
and call him Euripides in Aicestide.
(...), Hades the God with the black locks of hair. Was this ruler of the
places below, which is the devil, ever alive with us in this world? If he
never had no visible state in this life, and yet is properly and originally
called Hades, as I have showed before, then Hades is that, which was never
seen in this world; and does agree as well to Angels (for all your noting) as
to devils, if it import no more, but that which is unseen of us. But who
warranteth this interpretation besides your self? Let aides stand for unseen;
how prove you, as you conceive, that it infers a state once seen in this
world, and now by death unseen? I say, unseen applied to hades, is never
seen of any man living, and not as you wrest it, now no longer seen. And so
your Etymology makes nothing for you. And what if hades derived from aides
signify that place where nothing can be seen for lack of light, do you not
finely strip your Reader with an unseen sleite, as you think; but indeed with
a sensible deluding of the truth? peruse your masters of the Greek tongue,
and tell me whether the^ do not take hades for the place, where nothing can be
seen by reason of darkness. Sophocles calls it Sopho. in Ocdi^.
(...), black Hades. Euripides calleih it Euritides in Aic-stide.
(...); the house without sun light. Theognis calls it Theognid^s gnomae.
(...) the black gates. Homer says, Homeri ^iad. 15.
(...): Hades had for his share the dark mist (to dwell in). Plutarch says of
Hades, Plutarch. de ^apud D^lthos.
(...), he is dark, and master of the black night. The great and learned
Etymologist of the Greek tongue, whom your Lexicons refuse not in most words
to follow, gives this exposition. Etymologicon mega in verbo (...).
(...), aides is that (place) wherein we see nothing. For Hades is an house of
darkness. The place then, wherein nothing can be seen for darkness, is
properly by the masters of the Greek tongue, and by the right Etymologic of
the word, called Hades; and all your expositions and applications be forced and
framed to your own fancies without any just cause or reason, but only to
serve your own humors.

(The Apostles Defenc page 180. li. 30.
took the word Gehenna from the Hebrews, and used it properly for hell.
Therefore they need not alter hades for that purpose; for which they had
another proper word. Christ speaking to the Jews used the word Gehenna for
hell fire, which they best understood; and Saint James writing to the Jews
dispersed says, The tongue is inflamed of Gehenna. But the rest of the
Apostles, that instructed the Gentiles, never Gehenna not used in speaking to
the Gentiles.
used that word, which the heathen at that time did not understand; but where
occasion so required, they retained the word hades, and applied it to the place
of torment, and to the ruler thereof, which things were not strange to the
Gentiles. Since then the Evangelist and Apostles never meant to confirm or
continue the erroneous fancies of the Pagans, and yet used their words; it is
evident they understood so much by these words, as was not repugnant to the
Christian faith. Now hades with the Pagans was a place under the earth, where
the wicked after this life were punished. This was agreeable to the truth, and
for that cause the Apostles retained that sense and force of the word. That the
souls of the just were also kept under the earth in rest and ease; this was
the error of the heathen; though both Jews and Christians lighted afterward
on that fancy. This the Apostles do not ratify in using the word hades, for
that it was not consonant to the grounds of true religion, from which they
never meant to depart by using any words accustomed among the heathen. And as
the Gentiles, before they believed, used hades for the chief ruler of those
Infernal places, so does Saint John not refuse to attribute that name to the
devil in his Revelation. And so without your conceits or discourses we have
shortly and plainly the cause and course why and how the Canonical writers
concurred with the Grecians in using the word hades, and yet corrected their
error. Howbeit I think the Apostles had chief respect to the Septuagint, who
translating the Hebrew into Greek (then rife in many learned men's hands) and
expressing there the sense of Sheol, used Hades, for the death of the body in
the grave, and for the death of the soul in hell: after whose example the
sacred writers of the new Testament speaking of the wicked, or joining death
with hades, note what hades is besides the death of the body, which they
intend by Thanatos. And therefore though Hades in the old Testament import the
places of death for body and soul, I mean the grave, and hell; yet
throughout the new Testament that word being always opposed to heaven, applied
to the wicked, or connexed with other words that signify the death of the
body, it must of force be taken for the power and place that kills the
souls of all men approaching it, except only Christ's, to whom all powers and
principalities in heaven and earth and hell were and are submitted and
subjected.

Defenc. page 181. li. 17.
Hitherto we have tried the nature and use of Hades, and have found it to be
not properly hell, as you avouch; no, not when it is applied to souls of men
deceased. And therefore also that it cannot be so understood in Acts 2.27.
where it is applied to Christ's soul after he was dead: which yet is the only
place you have to pretend.] Hitherto you have prated, what pleased you, and
proved nothing; and notwithstanding your vain euasions mere priuations,
invincible conditions, and plain visible contradictions, Hades is found by the
full consent of Christian and heathen writers to be a place under the earth
and in darkness; where the souls of the dead adjudged to that place were and
are detained under the Dominion of the Devil, though the Pagans in their
wandering from their truth, imagined him to be a God, and dreampt of earthly
pleasures there, to comfort their dejected spirits against the terror of death.
And since Christ's soul was not left in hades after death, as appears, Acts
2.31. what have you, or any man living to say, why Christ's descent to Hades,
that is (as the Gospel expounds this word) to the Lucae. 16.
place of torment, (of which it was impossible for him to be held, or to be
therewith touched,) should not be justly grounded on this place? [ we may
Defenc. page 181. li. 27.
simply take hades for the invisible state or place of the deceased.] If for
the place, then for heaven, where you say Christ's soul was after death. And
would Christ so greatly rejoice that his soul should not be left in heaven? [
Ibidem li. 31.
Otherwise we may take it simply for deaths force and power, supplying also the
same words eis ton topon, or ten choran hadou, in that place where the power
and strength of death prevails and holds the deceased How the defender
wauereth about Hades.
souls from their bodies.] You have so many senses, that you have never a
good. First you took hades for a state or place, and then you supplied it, as
indeed you must, with topon or choran, a place or region. And so your sense
went round like a wheel. Thou will not leave my soul in the place of place,
or state which is not seen; that is not in heaven. Now you renew your strength
to take better hold; and say, Thou will not leave my soul to the place of
deaths power. Where we must note, that heaven (for there was Christ's soul, as
you grant) is by you appointed to be the place of deaths power, and so you have
brought us the strength and power of death and darkness prevailing in heaven,
and even on Christ's soul. [ Ibidem li. 35.
This is the world of the dead implying nothing else but an estate opposite to
our visible state in this world.] Are the places or states of heaven and hell
nothing, but an opposition to our visible estate in this world? There are
bodies both in heaven and in hell by the consent of the best Divines, new and
old. How then is their state opposite to our visible state? Moses and Elias
were seen talking with Christ in the mount. What place will you appoint for
them since they were visible? And if the world of the dead be nothing else but
an estate opposite to our visible estate, then Christ after his resurrection
relapsed often to hades, and to the world of the dead; for he was invisible to
all men as long as he stayed on earth, but when and where he was pleased to
show himself. And if that be true which you your self do say, that l in very
deed hades has properly but a privative Defenc. page 17.8 li. 35.
sense, and not any thing positive in it, then your additions of place and
region be repugnant to the nature of hades, except you can bring us a place and
region of mere priuations, in which is nothing positive; and consequently your
varieties and expositions of hades be mere illusions, and have nothing in them
but lies and mockeries. For hades is a place below in the earth, and dark by
condition, as wherein nothing is seen, as both Christians and Pagans affirm.
Hades therefore is no mecre privation. If the soul of Christ then after death
were in hades, it was not at the same time in heaven, for heaven is opposite
throughout the Scriptures to hades; and your own common and invisible place of
both is a private and palpable error of your own.

Defenc. page 182. li. 1. li. 10.
Last of all we may take Hades here by a prosopopaea conceauing it to be (as
it were) some person of irresistable power taking away and withholding from
hence all men's souls departed. This last way is not the unlikeliest.] You have
created us new places of mere priuations, which never were, now you take upon
you to create some new persons of irresistable power; and all this you confess
is your conceauing and drawing Saint Lukes words whither you list. But what
has the Christian faith to do with these monstrous and impious conceits of
yours? For even here, where you speak of Christ, you conceive as it were, some
person of irresistable power, which you call hades, that did and does take his
and all men's souls from hence. Had hades any power over Christ, which he could
not resist? Will you begin to play the Manichee in conceauing a power of
evil irresistable to the Son of God? and why run you hunting after strange
senses and significations of the word hades, when you have the same Canonical
writer whose words you would interpret, expounding this very word in the
Gospel, which he likewise wrote, as well as he did the Acts of the Apostles?
The Luke 16. verse. 23.
place of torment, where the rich man was punished after death, Saint Luke in
his Gospel expressly calls (...), hades. Would you wish any better expositor
of Saint Lukes words, then Saint Luke himself, who tells you that he
calls the place of torment for the wicked after this life by the name of
Hades? Put his own exposition to his own words, and you may soon see the
truth; if you have not sworn to resist it. Thou will not leave my soul in
hades, that is the place of torment for the wicked. Against this exposition,
though it be Saint Lukes, you bend your wits; and though you fear no
shadows, as you told us even now, having hades for your helper, yet you catch
after shadows, and cannot see the light of truth, you beat your brains so
much about figures and phrases, which have no warrant but in your slender
conceit and slipperie tongue. Howbeit let us here them, since you rest so
assured of them.

Defenc. page 182. li. 13.
You object we must not make a figurative sense but where manifest need is.
Here is no need of a figurative sense: therefore here ought to be no sigure
to be supposed. I answer: First we grant your conclusion. Whether of the two
former ways we take hades, there is simply no figure at all therein.] If you
take hades for the place, where souls after this life are kept in darkness
and destruction under the earth, you make no figure indeed by the verdict of
holy Scriptures; else, take it how you will, it is a figure, or a mere fiction
of yours, which is worse then a figure. For since hades by your confession is
originally the place, where nothing is seen, if you take hades either for the
state of souls in that place, or for the power, or person of him who is ruler
of that place, you do neither of these without a figure. As for the privation
of this life, which must usually be precedent before a man can go to that
place, because it is a place for the dead and not for the living, (some only
excepted, who descended to hades alive); That is a passage to the place or
state of hades, it is not the place or state of it self, since either of these
is positive and not merely privative, and expresses the condition of souls
received in that place, and not only the want of this life. As for one common
place or state of all souls deceased, this is your unwise fancy, which has
no ground either in divinity or humane learning, by reason you take the
forsaking and lacking of this life, for a state or place of men departed, in
which no man staieth; but is presently carried by angels good or badde, to the
places of receipt, where they remain in joy or pain, according to the
difference of their mansions, which are either heaven or hell.

Defenc. page 182. li. 18.
Then your own sense of hell in this place is clean overthrown by your
self. For whenever Hades or Sheol do signify hell, it is indeed by a
figure Synecdoche, where the whole is set for a part, which I have proved at
large before, and particularly by Tremellius a sufficient man for his Hebrew
skill.] Of Sheol Tremellius speaks, of Hades he says nothing; and his rule
concerns the use of that word in the old Testament, where Sheol imports
both the grave and hell, he speaks not of the new Testament, where hades is
distinguished in manifest words from Thanatos, death; and is by Saint John
made consequent after death. Since then hades in Saint Lukes words is a
different thing from the death of Christ's flesh, which was not left in
corruption, and a place appointed for the souls adjudged to torments after
this life, as appears by his Gospel; I make no figure in these words, Thou will not leave my soul in hell, for all your large brags and weak proofs.
And yet when I spoke of no figurative sense, I thereby excluded all
metaphorical significations of the word hades, and not Synecdoche which
admits the sense to be proper as well in a part as in the whole.

Defenc. page 182. li. 24.
Thirdly it seems convenient, and also likely to take hades here by a
Prosopopaea after our third sense before noted. Which kind of figure supposes
as it were a person of that thing which otherwise the word properly
signifies.] He that cares for no truth, may new cast the Scriptures into
what sense he will by empty figures. To take the place for the persons
possessing it, is not unusual in the Scriptures. And so S. John says, Revel.
20.
Hades (shall be) cast into the lake of fire, meaning the devil and his
angels, and not your emphaticall power of death. But this is nothing to Saint
Lukes words, thou will not leave my soul in hades, since it can have no sense,
that Christ's soul should not be left in the devil. The rest of the places,
which here you repeat, and apply them with seeming to your senses, we shall
have occasion after to rippe up: there we shall speak farther of them. In the
mean space you will prove without figures, that in the words of Saint Luke
expressing David's sentence, page 182. li. 38.
there ought of necessity to be understood a figurative sense. and page 183.
li. 1.
For take them literally (as I do) and they impugn the grounds of faith and
charity, which is sufficient to cause a figurative sense in the Scriptures.] I
marvel all this while, that having so sound exceptions against the literal
sense, as you talk of, you spend so much time in trifles, and let the maine
matters alone. This is worth the hearing if you can perform what you promise:
otherwise a mountain does hatch a mouse, which the proverb tells you will
move laughter. But how does the sense, which I give, impugn faith and
charity?

Defenc. page 183. li. 5.
Verily this your sense implies by the way and consequently, that a good and
sinnelesse man (yea the best that ever was) worthy of Paradise and the
highest heavens, yet after death did go to hell. And further that being in
heaven, yet stayed not there (as you say) but immediately came out again to
go to hell. Again that an humane soul being in the depth of hell, yet should
feel no pains; and that being locally in hell, it should come out thence
also: What can be more against the general rules of the Scriptures then these
things?] You have labored heard, and caught a herring. With much a do you
have found at length, that Christ was a good man; he is more beholding to you
now then before, when you told us, he was all defiled, accursed, and hateful to
God for and with our sins. Your leisure did not serve you to think, that he
was also the true and eternal Son of God; and therefore no force of death or
hell could prevail on his body or soul, farther then he was willing for the
declaration of his humility, and manifestation of his power and glory. Is it
against your faith and charity, that Phil. 2.
all knees of those in heaven and earth, and hell, should stoop and bow to the
humane nature of the son of God? Is your Creed so crazed, that you can not
believe that Christ rising Coloss. 2.
spoiled Principalities and powers, and made an open show of them; triumphing
over them in his own person? Is grace so far gone from you, that you may not
endure to hear that Christ Ephesians. 4.
descended first into the lower parts of the earth, and then ascended (again)
on hie, and led captivity captive, and gave gifts to men, whereof
deliverance and freedom from all power and danger of hell and Satan were not
the last nor least? But he was a man you say, though a good man, and therefore
you think he must be subjected to the same straights, that other mortal and
sinful men are, to feel pains in hell, and not to come out from thence.]
This, which you call faith, is infidelity against the Son of God, whiles you
seek to tie him with the same chains of darkness and weakness, wherewith
wicked and sinful men are tied, that are adjudged to everlasting damnation.
To be condemned to hell is for misbeleeuers and misliuers; to destroy the power
and strength of hell was meet only for the manhood of the Son of God. That
he felt no pains there, and returned thence, were the smallest parts of his
glorious triumph over hell and Satan. It was impossible as Peter teaches, that
the pains of death or hell should take hold on him, and his soul could not be
left there. As for coming out of heaven to go to hell to subdue and destroy
the same, what more inconvenience is in that, then in coming from heaven to
the grave, there to take up his body, when he restored it to life? that wicked
men condemned to hell cannot come thence, nor find ease there, I find it
testified in the parable of the rich man and Lazarus; that the Son of God in
his humane soul could not go thither without abiding there for ever, and
suffering the pains of hell as well as others; I find no such grounds in all
the Scriptures. He says of himself, Revel. 1.
I have the keys of hell and of death; that is all power and command over
them. He had power then not only to free himself from your faithless doubts
and dangers in hell, but to free all his elect from thence, and to 1. Co^. 15.
subject all things, and enemies (and so the strength and rage of hell and
Satan) under his feet. If the truth of God bind you to beleene, that an Angel
coming down from heaven, cast the Dwell into the bottomless pit, and there
bound him, and loosed him, as he was prescribed; does not your faith serve you
to confess, that all power in heaven and in earth, and much more in hell, was
given unto Christ; and that as well over rebellious Devils, as obedient Angels,
who adored him when he was brought into the world, and served him the time that
he was in the world, and are not stronger then his humane nature, but receive
power from him as being personally God and Man? these be the grounds not of
faith, but of ignorance, which fail under your feet, and show that you build
on Sand, which has no force, when it comes to be sifted.

From the grounds of faith, which are none, you come to the circumstances of
the place it self, and say, they are all against me; but I that hitherto have
tried you so false conceited in every thing, will not trust you to be
true-tonged in this, whatsoever you pretend. Sermo. page 169. li. 10.
These words (of David) thou will not leave my soul in hades, nor suffer
thine holy one to see corruption; I said, contained a special prerogative
verified in none, but in the true Messiah and Savior of the world. To this you
reply, [ Defenc. page 183. li. 25.
I deny it, here is no such prerogative mentioned.] It is all one skill in
you to denic trueths, and affirm falsehoodes: you cannot do the one without
the other. And here your fancies thrung so fast one on another, that they
thrust each other out of doors. [The maine scope of Saint Peter's purpose in
this place you do not, or will not understand, and on that error you build the
rest of your reasons, which are all erroneous like the root whence they come.
Saint Peter, you say, Defenc. page 18. li. 37. and 17.
intending only in all this speech to show the Jews, that this Jesus whom
they had slame was not now dead, but risen again, plainly grants all this
matter of David, as well as of Christ.] Here are two monstrous falseshoods, on
which all the rest of your running reasons are settled. It had been to small
purpose for Peter to prove to the Jews, that Christ by them slain was raised
from the grave and restored to life, if there he had rested, or intended that
only as you stiffly avouch: what could he by this have inferred more touching
Christ, then any man might likewise of Lazarus, whom Christ raised from the
grave? This therefore was not Peter's scope, he had an higher and farther reach
in that long Sermon of his, which he thoroughly expresses afterward, and that
was: Therefore let all the house of Israel know for a suertie, that God Act. 2.
v. 36.
has made him both LORD AND CHRIST, this Jesus (I say) whom ye have crucified.
To conclude this, Peter does not reason so weakly, as you imagine; Christ's
soul is joined again to his body, though they crucified him; ergo, Christ is
the true Messiah and Savior of the world. This were like one of your reasons,
which have nor head nor tail. But Peter endued with the holy Ghost, reasoned
very truly and sufficiently, and in effect thus. The prophecy of David which
never was nor could be fulfilled in any, no not in David himself, but only in
the Messiah, that his soul should not be left in hades, nor his flesh see
corruption, is fulfilled in Christ, whom you crucified: he is risen Lord of all
his enemies in his own person, the sorrows of death being losed before him;
he is ascended up to heaven, as David likewise foretold of him, and there
sits at the right hand of God, until all his enemies in the rest of his
members be made his footstool; and thence has he shed forth this, which you
now see and hear, even the promise of the holy Ghost received of the Father
for all his. Know ye therefore for a suertie, that God has made him both Lord
over all in heaven, earth, and hell; and Christ, even the anointed Savior of
all his elect. Against this illation neither all the miscreants in earth, nor
all the Devils in hell can open their mouths. Where first we may see, that
Peter rests more on the manner and power of Christ's resurrection, then simply
on this, that his soul was reunited to his body, from which by death it was
severed. Secondly, he brings the words of David to show, that either part of
the Messiah submitted to death for the time, was to return again to life with
greater glory; the flesh free from all corruption, the soul superior to all
destruction. Thirdly, that these things neither were, nor could be verified in
David, since David saw corruption, as his sepulcher proved remaining to that
day, and David was not as then ascended to heaven, much less made Lord over
all his enemies.

Defenc. page 183. li. 25.
Here is no such prerogative mentioned.] If this were common to Christ with
David and others of the faithful, how could Peter hence conclude, that this
was not spoken of David but only of the Messiah? Again if this were no
prerogative, what need was there, that David should be a Prophet by special
revelation to know this much? and that which David knew, was not only this
that Christ should rise to life again, but the words are, that Act. 2. v. 30.
God would raise up Christ (after death) to set him on his throne; that is, to
give him an everlasting kingdom, even all power in heaven and earth,
subiecting all his enemies under his feet. So that simply to rise from death
was no prerogative, nor proper to Christ; but to rise Lord over all, death and
hell not excepted, this was peculiar to Christ, and not common to him with
David; and therefore must needs be a special privilege to the manhood of
Christ, which is expressed chiefly in these words, Thou will not forsake my
soul in hades, but bring me thence conqueror of all mine enemies.

Defenc page 183. li. 35.
You add, no flesh (dead) was ever free from corruption but only Christ's,
what then? ergo his soul was in hell?] Why winch you, where no man touches
you? does any man say Christ's soul was in hell, because his flesh saw no
corruption, or rather that David's words are as plain and peculiar to Christ
in the one, that Christ's soul was not forsaken in hell; as in the other, that
God would not suffer his flesh to see corruption? and both being affirmed of
Christ by way of special prerogative, why should not both be likewise
performed in Christ? [ li. 38.
were not some being dead raised to life again, before their flesh putrified?]
The promise of God to Christ, that his flesh should not see Christ's flesh
could not putrify.
corruption, does not only assure a speedy resurrection, but an
impossibility, that any corruption could prevail against his flesh: since the
return of his flesh to dust, to which all others are judged, would be the
dissolution of his person, for the time, which by no means might befall him,
his Godhead being united unto flesh, and not unto dust. In these words
therefore of David, the soul and body of Christ were appointed to be
superior to all contrary powers, that is the soul to hell, the flesh to the
grave; and from both was Christ to rise as subduer of both, that he might sit
on his heavenly Throne, as Lord over all, not by promise only as before, but
by proof also, as appeared in his resurrection. And yet so many days, as
Christ did, lies no man in his grave without some taint of corruption, which
in Christ was utterly none.

Defenc page 184. li 7.
It is a strange absurdity, still to abuse your Reader, calling this word
hell, which indeed is nothing but death in effect. Again to presume that we
take it for Paradise, or heaven, or hell: when we refer it always to the
general state of the dead, and no farther immediately.] Then when you expound
the words of the Creed Christ descended to hades, your

meaning is nothing in effect, but that Christ died, which was before delivered
in plained and shorter words; and so your exposition is an idle and obscure
repetition. Again, hades in the new Testament is never taken for the death of
the body, since it is annexed to bodily death, as a consequent after it: and
so your acception of it is repugnant to the truth of the Scriptures. And where
you will at no time have Hades taken for Paradise, Heaven, or Hell, as here you
pretend; when you thereby note the place of souls deceased, mean you they are
neither in Heaven, Paradise, nor Hell? are you not a wise man to talk so much
of an invisible place; and when you come to the point, you will have it no
place at all? but you refer it always to the general state of the dead, and
no farther immediately.] An invisible place you refer immediately to no place,
and thus when you will be frantike or foolish, words shall loose their proper
and plain signification, and contain no more then pleases you. Show us a
place, where souls deceased are besides Paradise, Heaven, and Hell; and we
will grant, you may exclude these three by some pretense, when you spoke of
the place of hades: but if you cannot, then topos aides, a place unseen, which
you have so much bowled at, will be a place in spite of your heart, and that
immediately; and consequently will be Paradise, Heaven, or Hell, whatsoever
you presume or dream to the contrary.

Defenc. page 184 li. 17.
Christ had another inestimable cause to rejoice that he was raised to life
again, namely that he might fulfill his whole work for our salvation, which
before his resurrection and ascension he could not accomplish.] When I told
you, that Christ after death was to conquer Hell, and to free us thence; you
would needs defend, that Christ on the Cross perfited our redemption, and
wrought our salvation; and now you say, which I take to be the truer, though
you mean not to be constant therein, that before his resurrection and
ascension he could not accomplish the work of our salvation.

Defenc. page 184 li. 27.
The text says, God raised him up, loosing the sorrows of death; because it
was impossible for him to be holden fast of it. Will you conclude from hence:
ergo there were present sorrows How Christ loosed the sorrows of death.
in the place where Christ was? there is no strength in this reason.] There is
more strength in it, then either you will acknowledge, or can answer. The
sorrows of bodily death are all dissolved by the separating of the soul from
the body. Then after death there are no sorrows of bodily death. But God
raised up Christ, loosing the sorrows of (Hades or) death. The sorrows of
death (by Peter's words) were then loosed, when Christ was raised, because it
was not possible for him to be held thereof. So that this pertains nothing to
the sorrows, which he felt dying; they ended all with death; but the sorrows
of an other death, even of death in hell, were loosed when he was raised,
because it was not possible for that kind of death to take hold on him. Your
two or three things, wherewith you would shift of the Apostles words, do you
no good. That God li 32.
loosed death from him, are not the Apostles words; you make a gloze upon your
own words, and not upon the Apostles. Such liberty you take to change the
text to serve your turn. The next is farther of from the reference of Peter's
words. God loosed the sorrows of death (or Hades) at Christ's rising, that is
say you, because his death had been most painful, before his Soul was
severed from his body. So Peter talks of Christ's rising, and you wrest it to
Christ's dying on the Cross. And here your hebraisme will not steed you. For
God did not loose the sorrowful death of Christ on the Cross at his rising,
but at his dying. And therefore you are wider of, then you were before. Thus
then it follows even by the Text, that there were sorrows in Hades, where
Christ was, but they could not take hold of him. The sorrows of Hades must
needs be the sorrows in Hades: otherwise if they were not in Hades, they were
not the sorrows of Hades. As the joys of heaven are in heaven; so the sorrows
of Hades must be in Hades, where Christ was, and not where Christ was not.

Defenc. page 185. li. 4.
The very text implies, that Christ was holden in this, which was loosed from
him.] Saint Austen says you fitten. Snares may be broken and loosed, ne
tencant, non quia tenuerunt, not because they have taken hold, but that they
should not take hold. [((...)) you say is to be holden fast.] Your Greekish
conceits crossing Saint Austins judgment, taste more of will then of skill.
Kratcisthai has many significations, amongst others it What Kratcisthai
signify
signifies to touch, to take, to hold; and in the the new Testament it is
specially observed by those, that are learned, that it signifies, prehendere
or tenere, to take, or to hold. The Mary's that went to Christ's Sepulcher,
meeting him as they came thence, Mat. 28. v
(...), touched his feet, and worshipped him. When Simons mother in law was
sick of a fever, Christ Mar. 1.
(...), taking her by the hand, lift her up. The rulers daughter of the
Synagogue, Christ likewise, Matthew. 9.
(...) took her by the hand, and the maid arose. Your Lexicons will tell you,
that (...) stands often for (...) to touch. Now if you may choose, what
signification you will have in every word, you are no Reader, but an over ruler
of the Scriptures. Howbeit we now see Saint Austin has better warrant in the
Scriptures for his tenere, then you were ware of.

Thou will not leave my soul in Hades. Defenc. p 185. li. 1^
I say he was now in the same, wherein he was not left nor forsaken.] I say the
same, and by your own saying convince you, that if S. Luke by Hades here
signify hell, as he does in his Gospel; Christ's soul was in hell (by your
own illation), in which it was not left nor forsaken. [ li. 12.
But he was in no sorrows at all now.] Then is Saint Austins assertion
confessed by your self, the sorrows of death were loosed at Christ's rising,
not that they had taken hold on him, but that they should not take any hold of
him, or so much as touch him. [ If he were in them, I think he should have
felt them.] The Scripture says his soul was not left (...), in (the place of)
Hades: it speaks not there of the sorrows of Hades, as if Christ were not
forsaken in them. But God, as Peter says, loosed them, when he raised Christ;
that is, he made Christ the subduer and dissoluer of them at his resurrection.
[ li. 27.
You mightily urge that it is Austins collection, from this text. I perceive
your argument is from Austin, and not from Peter, as you pretend.] It is better
to imitate Austen and his collections, then to rest on your idle brain, as you
do; and when you have clean mistaken both the scope and words of the text,
to range after butterflies. Howbeit if it had pleased you to look better into
the 169. and 170. Page of my Sermons, you should have sound more reasons there
then Austins collections. But your answers and disproofes a man may soon
perceive come out of the bottom of your pocket, for there is neither truth
nor learning in them.

Defenc. page 185. li. 35.
Austen missed in his translation of these words. Thus he reads, solutis
doloribus Inferni, quia impossible erat teneri cum in illis: God raised up
Christ loosing the sorrows of hell, because it was impossible he should be
held in them. But the text has loosing the sorrows of death, seeing it was
impossible he should be holden fast, or strongly holden of it. Seeing therefore
he failed in expressing the text, no marvel if his collection from it were
wide.] He that never saw water but the Themes, will think there is none other
Sea. You never look neither to the diverse readings, nor significations of
words in the new Testament, and that makes you so hastily to pronounce, that
Ibidem li. 33.
Austins collection has no ground nor reason in the text, but is wholly
disprooued by it. Austen followed the ancient and received translation of the
Church in his time, and missed not so much, as you imagine. For that Text has
two readings, some books having Thanatou death, Many Greek copies have the
sorrows of Hades.
some having Hadou, which the old translator calls infernum, the places
below, or hell. Peruse the new Testament in Greek of the larger volume printed
by Robert Steven at Paris Anno 1550. and see whether he put not Hadou over
right this place in the margin, as standing yet in many copies. The Greek
Bible printed at Frankford, Anno 1596. consesseth the like variety of reading.
Athanasius uses sometimes Athanas. in passion. and crucem Domini.
(...), he loosed the sorrows of Hades; and someties Athanas. in passion. and
crucem Domini.
(...), the sorrows of death. So does Epiphanius: Peter says, It was
impossible (Christ) should be held (...) Epipha. in Anchorat.
(...), of it, that is of hades. And against the Arians. It is said by the
Apostle, it was impossible that he should be held Idem here is. 69. contra.
Ariomanitas.
(...) of hades. The Syriack translation reverenced for antiquity and
fidelity, keeps the word Sheiul twice in the four and twentieth verse of
this Chapter, and says. Syriacatranst. Act. 2. v. 24.
But God raised him up and loosed the sorrows deshiul (of Shool which Saint
Luke calls hades) because it was impossible he should be detained bashiul,
(in Sheol or hades). The Arabicke translator does the like. He retains in the
same verse the word ^.
hawwito twice, saying as Iunius renders it, ^
God raised him up, and scattered the sorrows of perditien, because it was not
possible that he should be conquered of perdition. Where Iunius plainly
yields, that this word in Arabicke answers the Greek word f hadou, not
thanatou which appears ^
also in the 6 verse of the same chap. Thou will not leave my soul ph^ hawwito
in perdition Which Saint Luke calls hades: and in the 10 Christ was not left
in perdition. So that Austen had some reason more then you knew, to follow the
first translator concurring with many Greek copies, that then were, and yet
are extant, and with the Syricke and Arabicke translations, who followed the
same copies with the Latin church. This text is cited in Ireneus: ^ whom God
raised, s^lutis deloribus inferorum, quia non erat ^
possible teneri eum ab eis, loosing the sorrows of hell, because it was not
possible for him to be held of them. Cyprian thus expresses it. ^
Impossible quippe erat sanctam illam animam teneri ab inferis. It was
impossible for that sacred soul to be held of hell. Fulgentius cites ^
it, Solutis inferni doloribus, the sorrows of hell being loosed. Bid takes
both for one ^
in this place. k Solutosper Dominum dicit dolores inferni, sieve mortis. Peter
says the sorows of hell, or death were dissolved by Christ. Since then both
are found in many Greek ^
copies, and neither can be rejected as false; the name of death (if you
retain it) must be so expounded, as it may not impugn the force of hades: and
death, having a double power place, and subject; as the death of the body here
on earth, and the death of the soul in hell hereafter; this later death and
hell do rightly match together, the sorrows of which were losed by Christ,
because it was impossible for him to be taken or touched by them.

You quarrel also with the translation, which Austen followed, for saying, in
illis in ^
them; though that be the right intent of the text; and you stick not to
strain Peter's words to what higth you list. So that you keep the words, and
alter the sense; and Austen keeps the sense, though he vary somewhat from the
words. For that was loosed, of which it was impossible Christ should be held,
and even therefore was it to be loosed, because he could not be held therein.
But the sorrows of death or hell were loosed. It was therefore impossible
Christ should be held of them; I mean of the sorrows of either. The sense
then is rightly and aptly taken, though the plural be put in stood of the
singular; and Calvin himself in respect of the sense retains that change,
though the words do somewhat differ from the text. ^
In this sense Peter says, Christ rose, the sorrows of death being loosed, ^a
quibus impossible erat ipsum tenert, of which (sorrows) it was impossible he
should be held. Now if you or any man else can find us those sorrows after
Christ's bodily death, we are ready to hear you, for they were loosed, when
Christ was raised: but if you cannot, as in vain you have proffered to do,
then must the words be expounded, that though the soul of Christ after death
were in hades, even in the place of torment, where it was not left nor
forsaken; yet the sorrows thereof could not touch him, but he loosed and
scattered them, when he was raised to immortality, and heavenly power and glory.

^ persuaded of this point, hear him again in the same Epistle. Ibidem.
Quamobrem teneamus firmissime, quod fides habet fundatissima authoritate
sirmata, quia Christus mortuus est secundum Scripturas, and quia sepultus est,
and quia resurrexit tertia die secundum Scripturas and cetera quae de illo
testatissima veritate conscripta sunt. In quibus etiam hoc est, quod apud
inferos fuit, solutis eorum doloribus, quibus eum erat impossible teneri.
Wherefore let us most firmly hold that, which our faith has being confirmed
by most grounded authority, as that Christ died according to the Scriptures,
and was buried, and rose the third day according to the Scriptures, and the
rest of those things, which are written of him in truth most clearly
testified. Amongst which this is also one point, that he was in hell, and
loosed the sorrows thereof, of which it was impossible he should be held. This
is such a resolution, that if you were soberly minded, and not phantastically
conceited, as well in doctrine as in Discipline, you would beware how you
crossed the faith of the whole Church without more pregnant and evident matter,
then you have any; and not think it enough to shift with Poetical fancies,
metaphorical senses, and palpable contrarieties, and falsities, such as few
men would fall into besides your self. And as for the exposition of Peter's
words, which Austen leaves indifferent, if it dislike any man; that
concerns the place of Peter's first Epistle the third Chapter, beginning at
the 18. verse, How Christ in spirit went, and preached unto the spirits in
prison, who were disobedient in the days of Noe: Which was the question
proposed to him by Euodius, to whom he wrote his 99. Epistle. And of that he
says. Ibidem epistola 99.
Consider yet, least happily all that which Peter speaks of spirits closed in
prison, which believed not in the days of Noe, omnino ad inferos non
pertineat, sed ad illa potius tempora, quorum formam ad haec tempora
transtulit: pertain not at all to hell, but to those times, which Peter
compares with these times. And after large discoursing how that comparison
might stand, he concludes with your words. This exposition of Peter's words, if
it dislike any, or do not satisfy, quaerat ea In fine epistolae 99.
secundum Inferos intelligere, let him seek (in Gods Name) how to fit the
things (there written) to them in hell. So that his exposition subjected to
other men's liking, did not concern hell at all, nor Christ's preaching there,
but the preaching of repentance in the days of Noah by the spirit of Christ;
and if any man liked not that exposition of Peter's words, he might seek how to
make Peter's words agree with things done in hell, if he could tell how to
perform it.

Defenc. page 186. li. 16.
More circumstances of this text (Acts 2.) do make affirmatively for us: first
Peter plainly grants all this matter of David, as well as of Christ.] But
that I am well acquainted with your pertinacie, I should muze at this
insolency. Peter does exactly prove, that this prophecy was never verified in
David, because David's flesh saw corruption, as was evident by his Acts 2. v. 29.
Sepulcher remaining with them to that day. Since then it was not true of
David's person, that he saw no corruption; he spoke this as a Ibid. ver. 30.
Prophet, knowing that God had sworn to raise up Christ concerning the flesh,
to set him upon his throne. You may do well to leave this outfacing Scriptures
and Fathers, it may seem a shift for a time, but it will end with your shame.
[ Defenc page 186. li. 24.
By the whole text it is evident Peter had no reason nor purpose to speak to
the Jews of Christ's soul being in hell.] If you may be judge, Peter shall
say nothing, but what hitteth your hand right. It is more then plain How Christ
must rise from the dead.
by the whole purport of Peter's speech, that he meant to prove Christ to be
raised up as Lord of all his enemies, and Savior of all that obey him. To rise
simply from death, was not sufficient to show the eternity and sovereignty of
Christ's kingdom; but he must be raised as the only Lord, that should sit on
David's throne, and have all things in heaven, earth, and hell, subjected unto
him. From our enemies if he could not deliver us, he could be no Savior of
ours: he must therefore tread them all under his feet, when he rose from
death, before we could hope to be freed from them by his force. And to this end
Peter expressly makes mention, that God scattered the sorrows of death and
hell before him, when he raised him up, that all the faithful might be
assured, as Christ conquered and destroyed the devil in his own person, when
he rose from the grave, so he could and would do the like for all his members
by freeing them from the power of Hades, and conforming them to his death and
resurrection. This God had promised to his people by his Prophet, saying: Oseae
13.
I will The Jews were promised their Messiah should conquer hell.
redeem them from the hand of hell, I will deliver them from death. O death, I
will be thy death. O hell, I will be thy destruction. Repentance is hid from
mine eyes. This David foretold the Messiah should perform, in that his soul
should not be forsaken (that is, left destitute of power or honor) no not in
hell. Of this deliverance from their enemies, and from the hands of all that
hated them, Lucae 1.
spoke the Prophets, that were from the beginning of the world. This was the
oath, that God swear to Abraham, that they being delivered out of the hands of
their enemies, should serve him without fear, of sin, death, or hell. This
the Jews believed, and expected in the Messiah; and therefore neither were
they, (I mean the elect among them) so Defenc. page 186. li 33.
ignorant, unbelieving, and stubborn, as you pretend, three thousand being
converted with this one Sermon: neither was this so strange and uncouth a
thing, as you imagine, being so often promised and prophesied unto them:
Neither did Peter intend only Christ's resurrection, as you suppose, his
chief scope being to show them the strength and height of Christ's heavenly
kingdom.

And where you flourish, that this was Defenc page 186. li. 35. ^
not subject to sense, and without all example of the like in the whole law,
and namely no figure foreshewing any such thing: these be objections meeter for
perfidious Jews, then for those that would seem to be believers. How many
points of faith are not subject to sense? Christ's sitting at the right hand
of God in glory, will you not believe, because it is not subject to sense, and
without an example of the like, and no figure foreshadowing any such matter? Of
Christ's ascending to heaven, and his return to judge the quick and the dead,
have you any examples or figures in the whole law? and yet it is no such hard
matter to proportion our deliverance from hell and Satan to the bondage of
Israel in Egypt, and the ouerwhelming of Pharoh and all his host in the bottom
of the red sea. The like might be said of Sampsons death, who being weak and
bound slew all his enemies; of David, and Goliath, of Daniell in the Lions den
without harm, of Jonas lying in the Whales belly, and such like, which though
in all things they match not Christ's conquest over Satan, and the destruction
of him and his kingdom, as no figures can do, yet are they resemblances of
that which you so much dissemble. Howbeit, as I said, of Christ's birth,
burial, descending to Hades, rising, ascending, sitting in heaven, and coming
to judge, the law did not yield any express and visible figures, as it did of
his death and sacrifice.

Defenc. page 187. li. 9.
We have seen that Hades has no such meaning in the Acts; which yet is the
only place whereon you build. This were sufficient to end this argument: but
yet it shall be good to try whether any where hades properly signifies hell.
Verily it does so signify no where at all in the Scriptures. Yet I grant it
is and ought to be translated hell in two places, Matthew. 16. v. 18. Luke 16. v.
23. not that the word it self does necessarily signify hell, but because the
circumstances here do require that meaning as the fittest and best for these
particular purposes.] We have seen you beat your brains about Hades to make
it any thing rather then tha tindeed it is both by the general opinion of all
Pagan Poets, and by the constant assertion of all the Greek Fathers. We have
also seen you turn and wind your self, you know not whither; sometimes to
have it the place for souls departed this world, sometimes the state of such
souls; sometimes the power of death, and sometimes the privation of this life;
and so to cross and control your own conceits, that you could not tell where
to set foot without falling. Now as he that is blind, makes no difference
betwixt day and night, no more does your wilful, yet witless imagination
perceive any distance betwixt truth and falsehood. And having held your own so
well, that no shifting or shuffling can make you ashamed, you will now proceed
to a farther trial of other texts of Scriptures, to see whether you can outface
them with your fancies and figures, as you have done them that be already
ouerpast. I make no doubt, but if you may sit sole Judge in your own cause,
you will quickly pronounce How hades is used in the new Testament.
for your self; but if you must prove as well as pronounce, you will make as
many errors in your proceedings, as there be holes in a sieue. Howbeit you
grant, that in two places of the new Testament Hades is and ought to be
translated hell, not for that the word of it self does so necessarily signify,
but because the circumstances require that meaning. Which is as much as if you
said, there are two places in the new Testament, where hades is and must be
taken for hell; neither can you with all your sleights and shifts avoid the
same; the circumstances of the text so evidently demonstrate, the Evangelists
took hades for hell. This by your leave is some prejudice to your cause, and a
bridle to your boldness, that the holy Ghost does twice in the Gospels by your
own confession use hades for hell: and why he does not use it in that sense in
other places, there is no impediment, but your proud will and waste words.
Saint Luke is so clear, as no exception can be taken to it, that Luke. 16.
Hades is the place of torment after this life; and not one common place for
all in pain and rest, with nothing but a ditch betwixt them. So likewise
Christ promised, Matthew. 16.
the gates of hades should not prevail against his Church; where if you
defend, that the godly shall not have their souls separated from their bodies
by death, and yet hell may prevail against their souls, you maintain two as
manifest lies, as a man may utter. Spite of your heart therefore, Hades must
signify hell in the 16. of Saint Matthewes Gospel; and so it does in all
other places of the new Testament, though the circumstances of each place be not
so pregnant as these are. And though in the old Testament Zuinglius and
Mollerus observe, The gates of Sheol, and Hades with the Septuagint, may
signify the danger of death approaching, when it is referred to the godly, yet
Hades in the new Testament never signifies the death of the body, but it is a
thing distinguished from it, and consequent to it, as Saint John in plain
words does witness. his name, that sat on the pale horse, was Death, and
Hades followed after him (or close to him.)

Defenc. page 188. li. 3.
The worthy Master Bucer notes well saying; Dives non simpliciter scribitur
esse in hade, sed in gehenna quia in torment is and flammis. The rich is not
said to be simply in hades, but also in hell: because he is said to be in
fiery torments.] Master Bucere I honor for his learning and Religion, yet not
so, that all his words are Gospel, or that I receive him before or against all
the Fathers. And by his leave in this place his words are out of square. He
says, The Rich man is not simply written to be in Hades; but if mine eyes were
matches, when I read Saint Lukes Gospel last, it cannot be more simply written
then it is there. Luke. 16.
(...), And in Hades, lifting up his eyes. Now what place Hades is, the
Evangelist expresses, when he says; being in torments. Had Hades been used
alone without explication, men might and would have questioned this, as they
do other places, where Hades is used alone. But Luke noting afterward, what
manner of place Hades is, even a place of Torment, he proves exactly that
Hades alone without any addition joined to it is used for hell in the new
Testament. [Will you Page ibid. 8.
conclude from this, as you do about Abyssus? In the Revelation and in Luke
Abyssus is used to signify Hell. Therefore it signifies Hell in the Romans,
or therefore every where properly it signifies Hell.] If Abyslus be the
bottomless pit properly, and Abyssus in the new Testament is hell.
hell be so called both in the Gospel and in the Revelation; and no reason can
be given, why either the grave, or the Sea should properly be called
bottomless; then since figures are not to be brought into the Scriptures but
upon necessity, you must show us more necessity, then hitherto you have done,
why hell may not be understood in that place, or else we must cleave to the
natural sense of the word, and leave your figures, till you can better fasten
them. That Abyssus may metaphorically be applied to other things, I never
denied; but in Saint Paul's words to the Romans you must show us a pit, that
properly is bottomless and opposite to heaven; and to which Christ descended,
before you can exclude hell as not meant by the Apostle in that place. But of
this I have spoken before, whither I refer you for fuller answer Ibid. li.
11.
death sometimes is the 2 death, ergo, it is so Acts 2. 24.] The sorrows of
the first death end with this life, and in the grave there is neither sorrow
nor sense. But the sorrows of that death, which Peter meant, were loosed at
Christ's rising to life. Those were therefore the sorrows of another death,
which must be the second death, which were loosed and scattered with Christ's
resurrection. Again the text has there a double reading; death or hades. Then
that death must be understood, which is in hades, and not the sorrows and
pains, which are in this life; since hades by your own confession is a state
opposite to the world. Thirdly, the loosing of the sorrows of that death which
Peter there intended, proves Christ to be Lord of all. But a simple rising
unto life again proves no such thing. That therefore was neither pertinent
nor sufficient for Peter's purpose.

Defenc. page 108. li. 16.
Next let us consider, and thou Capernaum; which art lift up to heaven, shall
be brought down to hades, to destruction. I say hades here is not hell; but
the destruction of Capernaum the city. Christ threatens the city it self with
destruction, and razing out from the face of the earth, which he means by
hades. The inhabitants the wicked people thereof he threatens with damnation
in hell.] A grave and wise construction. Christ threatens the stones and
timber of the city with hades for not hearing his word, and regarding his
miracles. In the 20 verse of this very chapter, where it is said, Matthew. 11.
verse. 20.
Christ began to vpbraid the cities (whereof Capernaum was one) because they
repented not; of whom spoke Christ of the men, or of the walls of those cities?
it may be you will find out repentance for stones; but our Savior names the
place for the persons, which is as usual in the Scriptures, as any thing may
be. Matthew. 23. verse 37.
Jerusalem, Jerusalem, which killest the Prophets, and stonest those, that be
sent unto thee. Christ speaks not there of the housen, but of the
Inhabitants. So does he here; for neither were the stones of this city capable
of repentance, nor exalted up to heaven, nor intelligent of Christ's words or
works, nor punishable at the day of judgment; all which things Christ here
ascribes to Capernaum. Then if the stones of Capernaum were not exalted to
heaven, they were not threatened by Christ, to be depressed down to hades. And
so hades here was not threatened to the place, but to the persons. Now the
persons by your own confession, and by the righteous judgment of Christ, were
threatened with damnation in hell. Hades then in these words of Christ does
exactly signify hell, and implies as much as follows in the next verse; It
shall be easier for the land of Sodom in the day of judgment, then for thee;
Which is likewise spoken to the city, though meant of the unbelievers there. Now
if we make the former words interrogatiue, as some Greek copies have them, and
the Latin translator puts them, And thou Capernaum will thou be exalted to
heaven? You must give will to stones, as well as sense, before these words can
agree to the city it self. The Gospel of Saint Matthew translated into the
Hebrew tongue long before Saint Ieroms time, (if it were not written in Hebrew
by the Evangelist himself, as Ierom thinks,) thus expresses the words of
our Savior. Hiero. de scriptur. Eccles. in Matt^eo.


Matthew Euangel. hebraicum.
And thou Capernaum, will thou be exalted to heaven? adh Gehinnom teredi, thou
shall descend to Gehenna. And if that which you have said all this while, have
any truth in it, that hades is the privation of this life or power of death;
had the stones of Capernaum ever any life, that they might be deprived of it,
and come under the power of death?

Defenc page 188. li. 30.
It is not so often applied to other things; notwithstanding we may find it
applied to other things, as where Plato (which you stumble at) says in hades
were birds, beasts, trees, flowers fruits. I deny not but they had toyish
co^ceits, but wise me^ may see how their meaning was these unreasonable
creatures being once brought to destruction, they yielded hades to them also.]
Is it not enough to draw the Scriptures to Platoes fabulous conceits, but you
must grossly falsify Plato to fit your new made hades? Where Plato says, there
were Plato in Phed^ne ad finem.
trees flowers, fruits, and beasts in hades, does he not there also say, there
were Plato in Phed^ne ad finem.
men that lived long, and without sickness, and temples, in which the Gods
dwell familiarly, and that Plato in Phed^ne ad finem.
to see these things, is the sight of the blessed? Was this meant of
destruction, as you expound The Defender abuses Plato and Piutarch to have a
Sheol for all things.
your hades; or was it a Pagans imagination of an earthly heaven far above
us, in which he described all things here found with us, but in greater
perfection and excellency, then here on earth? thus wrest you not only the
words of our Savior from their right sense, but you force other writers
directly against their words and meaning that you may seem in them to have
some show for your licentious exposition of the Scriptures; as here you
plainly pervert Plato, to make a preface to your mistaking destruction in
steed of perfection. The like wrong you offer to Plutarke, whose name you
abuse without either word or syllable sounding toward your intent, as if you
meant to overthrow the whole world to enlarge your hades.

Defenc page 18. li. 5.
Thus it seems Moses also uses Sheol, when he says men, women, children and
cattle alive, yea houses and riches went to Sheol.] If Moses had said so,
calling that vast and deep gulf of the earth, into which the tents and stuff
of Corah and his company The defender proves Moses and David to have a Sheol
for sheep and cattle.
fell, Sheol; yet unless you can prove, that the city of Capernaum was in
like sort swallowed up (housen and implements as well as men) in the same deep
gulf of the earth, Moses Sheol makes nothing for the ruin and destruction of
cities, where the buildings thereof fall to the ground, and lie on the ground,
as in decays they doc. But though you were both with Plato and Plutarke,
thinking it no sin to father your fancies on them, you may not do the like
with Moses without more blame then you will willingly bear. Moses has no such
words, that houses and riches went to Sheol, but they were swallowed up in the
cleft of the earth, as well as the rest; yet nothing went to Sheol, save what
was living, because the Scripture says, they descended alive to Sheol. Now if
you can prove tents and household stuff to be alive, you may chance to say
somewhat, though not much, for your destroying Hades; but if that be false and
absurd, then have you no words in Moses to prove that riches went to Sheol or
Hades. The words of Moses are plain enough, and exclude as well your cattle,
as your cofers from Hades. Nnmb. 16. verse. 30.
If the earth open her mouth, and swallow them; and all that they have, and
they descend alive to Sheol, you shall know that these men have provoked the
Lord. Themselves descended alive to Sheol, the rest was swallowed up by the
earth. verse 31.
For the ground brake under them, and the earth opened her mouth, and swallowed
them, verse. 32.
and their housen, (or families) and every man that belonged to Corah, and all
(their) substance. verse. 33.
And they descended, and all (the men) that pertained to them, alive to Sheol.
Who pertained to them, the Scripture expresses before, namely their wives,
their children, and their families. All their goods were swallowed up in the
gulf of the earth, but of the men that were living and belonging to them, and
not of their cattle, the Scripture says; they descended alive to Sheol.

That they had any cattle at this time save for sacrifices, it cannot be
proved: they did eat no flesh of beasts, nor 6.
bread; Deuteronomy. 29. v. 5.
garments they changed not, on foot they traveled, servants they had to do
their 11
works and to bear their burdens: and yet were it granted, they had some
cattle for carriage; they kept them not in their tents, which were swallowed
up in the cleft of the earth. These are Moses words to the people; Numb 16.
verse. 26.
Depart, I pray you from the tents of these wicked men, and touch nothing of
theirs, least you perish in all their sins. For their tents, with all that
was in them, fell into the earth, and the persons descended alive to Sheol. Now
that they descended alive to hell, not only the ancient Fathers, Cyprianus in
resurrect. Christi.
Cyprian, Hiero. in 4. ca. ad Ephesians.
Ierom, Basil. homil. quod Deus non est author malorum.
Basil, August. in Psalm. 54.
Austin, Epiphanius in Anchorato.
Epiphanius and others teach, but our new writers therein agree with them; as
namely Pelican in Numerorum ca. 16. verse. 32. Aretius in his problemes de
inferno loc. 162. Bullingere in 28. cap. Mat. de morte aeterna. Gualtere.
homil. 89. in Esaiam. and homilia 158. in Lucam. Lauatere in ca. 15. Proverb.
verse. 24. So that you must seek farther for your Sheol and Hades of
unreasonable beasts; since to descend alive to Sheol, is the terrible judgment
of God against seditious rebels, and not against sheep or oxen.

Defenc. page 189. li. 13.
After this manner also those sheep in Sheol (which you turn to the worst) may
be understood.] If you can prove there be sheep in Sheol, we will give ear
to it; but if you tell us nothing besides your seeming and saying, you show
your self to be like a sheep out of Sheol. And here the Reader may see, how
certain a leader he shall have of you: for in the half of this one side you
deliver six or seven expositions and resolutions with no better warrant, then
Page 189.
It seems, and this may be; and yet with these you patch up your predicament
of Hades to contain all things, even stones, cattle, and sheep. But has
this any seeming worth the speaking of, that because David says of the wicked,
like sheep they lie in Sheol; you should conclude, ergo there be sheep in
Sheol? you need not fear my turning of this to the worst, I cannot well turn
it to worse, then it is. The wise man says, Ecclesiast. 4.
be not like a Lion in thine own house. Does that infer every man to have
Lions in his house? Psalm. 28.
Thy children, says the Psalmist, shall be like olive plants round about thy
table. Has every good man therefore Olive plants about his table? The wicked
be in Sheol like sheep; that is, either Matthew. 22.
bound hand and foot, and cast into utter darkness, as sheep are bound by
all four, when they are prepared for the slaughter; or void of reason and
unable to help themselves like sheep. That the word Sheol stands next to
sheep in the Hebrew, and the verb comes after, Like sheep in Sheol shall
they be put; is the occasion, but no justification of your error; since the
verb ( they shall be laid or put) has no sense at all, except you repeat
Sheol with the preposition after it, and say; they shall be laid in Sheol like
sheep. So that unless you will be more then like a sheep, you must leave
this kind of collecting.

Your quoting of the Prophet Abacuk, and of the Proverbs to show that all
things are in Hades, because neither Hades nor death can be satisfied, is much
like your sheep in Sheol. Do proud men covet chaulke and chibols, because in
the same verse The defenders most absurd proofs for his Sheol of all things.
it is said, they can be no more satisfied, then death and Sheol? I win not;
but rather as death and Sheol cannot be satisfied with bodies, and souls of
men, which are things by them desired and received, no more can the proud
oppressor be satisfied with the spoils of many countries, but seeks Abac.
2. v. 5.
to gather unto him all nations, and to heap unto him all people, even as
death and Sheol do. The place of the Proverbs, which you bring, joins with
Sheol Prou. 30. v. 16.
a barren womb; and the earth, which cannot be satisfied with water. And
thence you can no more conclude, that all kind of creatures are in Sheol, then
that they are in a woman's womb, which is barren. And but that I see men loose
their wits, as well as their senses in Hades, I should much marvel, what were
become of yours all this while, that speak not only so impertinently and
untowardly, but so absurdly and ridiculously, that men will stop their ears
for very shame, if you will not stop your mouth.

Defenc. page 189. li. 25.
Yet we must comeneerer. You allege two friuilous proofs of sheols signifying
hell: viz. when it has opposition to beauen, and situation as the lowest. For
the situation of hell it is a secret, which Gods word has not revealed at all.
Neither ought we to determine, as you very rashly do, if hell be any where,
there can be no doubt, but it must be in the lower parts of the earth.] You,
that have ranged so far both from the truth, and from the matter in
question, had need at length come somewhat nearer. The proofs produced by me,
that Sheol, when it is opposed to heaven, or described to be in the lowest
parts of the earth, imports hell, are not so frivolous as your folly makes
them, they are grounded on better and surer rules of holy Scriptures, then are
your toys of birds, and beasts in Hades. And first touching the place of hell
below in the earth, which you labor to cross as much as you can; though I
before have showed the constant opinion of old and new writers, yet can I be
content to reason it farther with you, because you and your friends are devising
new hels and heavens, even as you are hammering of a new Hades. That hell is
Luk 16. v. 28.
a place of torment, the Gospel is evident. Being a place, it must be either in
heaven above us, or in earth beneath us, except you will coin us a new Creed
and say, God is creator of heaven, and earth, and of hell also, which is
neither in heaven nor in earth. But you may not control the Creed, except you
will also correct the Scriptures. For that division of the created world into
heaven and earth is witnessed in infinite Esa. 37. Iere. ^2.
places of holy Scripture to be most sufficient. Hell then, since it is ^ Gene.
2. v. 1. 4. and 14 v. 19 22.
somewhere, must be within the earth under us, except you will make it a part
of heaven over us; and then must men ascend to hell, as they do to heaven, and
no longer ^ Psalm. 115. 121 124.
descend. But the Scriptures are plain, that hell is beneath us, if they make
mention at all of any hell, which perhaps you will call in question, as well as
you do the rest. Those, whom the Apostle calls Philip. 2.
(...), which stoop to the power of Christ's kingdom, and confess him to be
their Lord; who are they, but reprobate and condemned men and Angels? and where
is the place of the punishment, but under the earth, since dead bodies can
neither yield subjection, nor make confession unto Christ? you self grant,
Defenc. page 189. li. 11. 12
Abyssus in the Scripture does signify a vast and deep gulf in the earth;
and Abyssus is a place, whither the Devils fear Luke 8.
to be sent, and where they are Revel. 20.
chained and bound, when pleases God. Now evidently by the Scriptures from
this Abyssus to the earth is an Revel. 9 v. 2. 11. v. 7 17. v. 8.
ascent no descent. And therefore the dungeon for devils, which is hell, is
under us that are in earth, not above us. The very name of Gehenna, used by our
Savior for hell, and confessed by you to be the most proper name of hell, does
it not convince hell to be Gehennam ignis, a vale of fire? and where are there
vales, but in earth? hell is called Ge-hinnon says Peter Martyr, Petri
Martyris loci comm^nes Clas. 3. ca. 16. numero 12.
because a vale being a low and deep place does resemble hell, quod infra
terram esse creditur, which is believed to be under the earth. The pit and lake
also, which are words used bythe holy Ghost to express hell, as ( Psalm. 55.
the pit of perdition, and Revel. 20.
lake burning with fire and brimstone) do confirm the same, since there are
no pits nor lakes, but in the earth. By Moses God says, Deuteronomy. 32.
A fire is kindled in my wrath, and shall burn to the lower Sheol, and inflame
the foundations of the Mountains. A man would think these words were plain
enough to prove the lower Sheol to be under the foundations of the hills, and
that there burns the fire of Gods wrath, with which the wicked are punished
after this life. Of the Supra pa. 556. 561. 562.
lower earth I have spoken before, and proved it to be equivalent with hell in
the judgment of the best Hebraicians and Divines of our times. And if the
lower earth be hell; then is hell without question in the lower parts of the
earth. Bullingere says. Bullinger. in Mat. cap. 28. de morte aeterna.
As touching the place of punishment, where the souls and bodies of the wicked
are tormented; the Scripture simply pronounces, saying; the wicked descend to
hell: vnde constat inferos esse infra nos Gualterus in homil. 158. in Lucam.
in terris constitutos, whereby it is certain, that hell is beneath us, that
abide here on earth. We must thoroughly maintain against scoffing Epicures,
says Gualtere, that there is a certain place prepared for the wicked, into
which their souls straight after death, and their bodies after the
resurrection are received. Of which (place) Moses speaks when he writes,
that Core, Dathan and Abiram were swallowed up with the gaping of the earth,
and descended alive with all theirs to hell. But having treated thereof in
sundry places before, I will end with a verse of Sibyllaes prophecy (alleged
and allowed for a Christian truth by Lactant. de diuino praemio li. 7. ca. 20.
Lactantius, August. de ciuitaete Dei li. 18. ca. 23.
Austin, and Prosper de promiss and predicat Dei part. 2. promiss. 28.
Prosper) where speaking of the last judgment, and the signs and consequents
of that day, she says. (...). The earth gaping, (or cleaving in sunder) shall
then show (or lay open) the very Tartarean Chaos (or dungeon) of hell.

Defenc. page 189. li. 31.
You know the Apostle mentions the Air, and that on high, as being the place
of devils. Notwithstanding far be it from me to affirm, that hell certainly
is not beneath. Yet your pretended Scriptures are merely forced to prove it.]
Your are lighted just on Master Broughtons argument, whose folly has filled
many sheets before, and now all his Religion, learning and reasons are emptied
in the fourth part of one poor printed sheet of the lesser size of paper.
Only in this he showed some wit, that he foresaw of such brainesicke stuff,
the least would be the best. But do you understand (for he is not worthy an
answer, who can frame himself to nothing but to rage and riddles) that, which
the Psalmist says of the elect Angels; God shall give his Psalm. 91.
Angels charge over thee, to keep thee in all thy ways? or which the Apostle
says, Heb. 1.
They are all ministering spirits sent forth for their sakes, which shall be
heirs of Salvation? Does this prove there are no Angels in heaven? I troe
not. Their office is here to attend and defend the faithful, and yet heaven is
the place of their habitation, whither they repair with unspeakable
celeritie, when their special service is finished. So the devils have hell
appointed for the place of their condemnation, and thither they carry, and there
they torment the wicked, as also they are commanded to the deep, and chained
there at Gods beck; notwithstanding some of them are by Gods wisdom and
patience permitted to wander in the air, and compass the earth, to tempt the
wicked, to try the godly, to show their power upon the creatures, and bewray
their malice against the Church of God. Wherefore the air and earth are the
places of their seeing and assaulting us, but hell is their home, to be
remanded thither upon any the least occasion, when pleases God. The grief,
terror, and torment of their inward confusion, obscuration, malediction, and
condemnation they always bear about them, and within them; being no way freed
or eased of that, wheresoever they go; but they are often spared from the
place of torment, which is the deep, that they fear and shun, and yet know
they must all thither at last to be terribly and eternally plagued and punished
there for all their hateful impieties and villainies. They therefore (during
the time of our warfare and conflict with them,) govern the Ephesians. 6. and
darkness of this world, and 2.
Rule in the Air, yet not all, nor only there; they have their chief, their
powers and principalities, and their kingdom is not divided against it self:
yet the strength and terror of their kingdom is in hell, which they neither
do, will, nor can forsake, how fearful soever the place be to themselves, as
well for the present pains there, as for remembrance it shall be in the end
of the world their perpetual prison, when their torments shall be exceedingly
increased, and they not suffered to start from thence.

The Scriptures which I brought you say are merely forced to prove Hell to be
beneath.] And why? because Sheol in the Scriptures by your conceit does no
where signify hell? that Pa^. 190. li. 5.
Sheol is a vast and deep gulf in the earth, the bottom whereof we know not,
your self admit. Then if the wicked dead or alive descend to this vast deep
and unknown gulf in the earth, whither go they I pray you; to the grave, or
to hell? To go alive to the grave were somewhat strange, and yet the grave is
no deep nor unknown gulf: but to descend alive or dead to the bottom of the
earth were more stranger, if hell be not meant by that gulf in the earth. And
if no more be meant by descending alive to Sheol, then to fall alive into a
cleft of the earth and there to die: the terrible judgment of God executed on
Core and his company for their rebellion, in the sight of all Israel, is
utterly cluded, since to fall into a deep well or Cole-pit, and there to die,
is as great a punishment as they suffered, and is a descending alive to Sheol,
as theirs was. And where is the fire of Gods wrath, Deuter. 32.
inflaming the foundations of the hills, and burning to the bottom of Sheol? is
that also in your gulf of the earth; and not in hell, which Moses says is the
lower Sheol? And how can dead men, whose carcasses either lie on the earth Esa.
14. v. 19.
unburied, as the King of Babylon did, or are laid in their graves, descend to
Verse. ^.
Sheol beneath, or to Ezech. 32. verse 24.
the lower earth; if neither of these import hell, but a vast and deep gulf
in the earth, whither dead bodies never come? this for the Situation of Sheol;
what say you now to the opposition of Sheol, to heaven?

Defenc. page 189. li. ^7.
Every opposition between Shammaijm the heavens or skies and Sheol does not
signify the opposition between heaven and hell. Shammaijm thus placed
signifies the skies, not the very place of Gods heavenly glory in the presence
of God, which in English we call heaven.] When Sheol is opposed is opposed in
the Scriptures to Shammaijm, the ground of the opposition Why the heavens are
compared with hell in the Scriptures.
is either the height of the one, and the depth of the other; or the glory and
felicity in the one, and destruction and misery in the other. In those three
places, Job 11. verse. 8. Psalm. 139. verse. 8. Amos 9. verse. 2. the perfection,
presence, and power of God are expressed to be higher then Shammaijm, and
deeper then Sheol. Now does your religion serve you to restrain any of these
three to the skies and the grave, and not to make them superior to the highest
heaven, and deeper then the lowest Sheol? Shammaijm, you say, is the sky, as
well as the heaven of the blessed. Shammaijm is the air also, where birds
fly; as well as the skies. Do you therefore think it a meet comparison for
the presence or power of God, to say that, if you clime to the top of an high
steeple, which stands in the air, the hand of God can reach you there? as
though it were enough for the perfection, presence, and power of God to reach
to the skies, and you were skant resolved, whether you should grant it to
stretch any farther. But though you cavil with Hades, quarrel not with God.
His perfection, presence and power are infinite above the highest heaven, and
beneath the deepest Sheol; yea these comparisons do not match him, but lead us
to those places, where the most wonderful works of God are, to which no man
living can ascend or descend; much less can we search or attain to the height
or depth of him or his perfection, presence, or power. And this is so plainly
comprised in those places, that none but an irreligious and impious conceiter
will doubt thereof. Job. 11.
Can thou by searching sink out God, or trace the Al^ghtic to his
perfection? says the book of Job. the heavens are high (where his glory
dwells) what can thou do? it is deeper then Sheol, how can thou know it?
Shall it sui^ce in this place to say, the clouds are high, the stars are
higher, all which we see with our eyes, and can observe their course: or must
we cast our thoughts on the highest heaven, wherein we neither see nor know any
thing, but what God reuealeth by his word, and which is the chiefest place of
his perfection? So David. Whither shall I fly from thy presence? If I ascend
into heaven, thou art there: Psalm 139.
if ^ get down to Sheol below, thou art there also. If I take the wings of the
morning and d^d in the furd^ct parts of the Sea (there) thy right hand shall
hold me. Ascending to the highest, descending to the lowest, and going to the
fardest, we pass through all places. If God be then in the highest, in the
lowest, and in the midst; whither can we flee from him, who is every where? all
places being here contained, the highest heavens are not omitted. The Prophet
Amos has the like both purpose and partition, where God assures Israel, they
cannot decline his hand, whither soever they could or would go; whether Amos 9.
to heaven on high, to Sheol below, to the breadth of the mountains, or to the
depth of the Sea. If out of his division you exclude hell or heaven, as places
whither Gods hand can not reach, do you not with your impertinent Sophistry
broch us a manifest heresy? wherefore Shammaijm here is any or every part of
heaven, even as the earth is divided by breadth and depth, into the hills, the
Seas, and Sheol underneath, which is here convinced to be in the earth, because
God says; though they dig into Sheol; teaching us that the lowest Sheol is
in the earth, which only can be dug, and not either in water or air, which
can not be dug.

As for the 14 of Esaias, from which Christ derived his threatening to Capernaum
as resembling the pride and deserving the punishment of the king of Babel; the
words there are so direct for Shammaijm to be the highest heaven, even the
place of Gods throne, that you thought best to skippe it over with a false
translation, and not to trouble your self any farther. The pride of the King of
Babylon, is there thus expressed. Esa. 14. v. 13.
Thou said in thine heart, I will ascend to heaven, and will exalt my Throne
above the stars of God. 14.
I will ascend above the higth of the clouds, and will be like the most highest.
15.


But thou shall be drawn down to Sheol; even to the sides (or lowest parts)
of the pit. Shammaijm comprising three regions at least; the clouds, the
stars, the place of Gods throne; the king of Babylon in his proud ambition
said, he would ascend above the higth of the clouds, above the stars of God,
and would exalt his throne like to the most highest. I hope Shammaijm here, to
which the king of Babylon would ascend, was neither the clouds nor the stars
(they both are by name excluded:) and consequently not the skies, as you fasly
translate the Prophets words; but it was the resemblance of Gods throne, and
the place of his glory, to which that proud tyrant aspired. Neither meant he
there to be one of Gods Saints, as you would childishly challenge your opponent,
but what place of glory others get at Gods hands by obedience and humility he
would in his arrogant heart assume unto himself with rebellion and emulation
of Gods greatness; even as Adam and Eve never meant to be Saints, when they
accepted the Devils offer, Genes. 3.
ye shall be as Gods, but desired no longer to be subject to God, and sought to
get a similitude, if not an equality with God. So did the King of Babel affect
to be like the most highest; though he were fardest from it of all others. For
the Prophet does not in these words express, what the king of Babylon was
indeed, but what his arrogant spirit conceived in thinking there was no God
greater then himself. This monstrous pride of his being the higth of all
impiety and blasphemy, what reward in your conscience was it worthy to have? a
plain no being any longer amongst the living? which you say Daniel affirms
of Page 189. li. 22.
the Messiah; or a judgment proportionable to his wickedness, that is to be
cast down to the bottom of hell, for exalting himself to the top of heaven?

Your spinning of cobwebbes about Page 190. li. 21.
an inglorious destruction, is no way sufficient for this offense, except you
mean destruction of body and soul in hell, with the sight and shame of his
folly: and so if you join the utter and eternal destruction of his person and
his pride, you agnise Sheol to be hell, as I do; and have not the wit to
see, that when a man is taken hence to that terrible and intolerable vengeance,
all worldly things first fail him, and the remembrance of his form: plenty
and glory augmenteth the grief of his present penury and misery. Else how
avoid you contradiction as well to the truth, as to your self in your two
signification of Sheol? Sheol opposed to Shammaijm, you say Page 190. li. 4
(...) 5.
signifies not hell the place of torments, but a^ vast and deep guise only,
or pit in the earth, the bottom where of we know not. If you derive this vast
and deep gulf in the earth, from the warrant of holy Scripture, I must ask
you; first, how many of these gulses the scripture admits to be in the
earth? and next, what use there is of them? The Scripture mentions the lower
Sheol indeed, so called in respect of the higher, which is the grave, common to
the bodies of good and bad. Other Sheols in the earth the Scripture knows
none. Now for whom is this lower gulf in the earth provided? for men? or for
oxen and sheep? which you were placing there even now by warrant pretended
from Moses and the Psalmist, but that you foully mistook the words of both.
When God opens the earth to swallow up men, and all that belongs to them,
as he did to the rebels in the wilderness, he has room enough in the earth
to cover and close that, which does not descend to Sheol, without your vast and
deep gulf. If you confess this vast and deep gulf in the earth, to serve
for wicked men after death, then come you nearer to the Scriptures, but as
near to hell. For David saying unto God;" Thou have delivered my soul from ^
Psalm. 86.
the lower Sheol; declares the lower Sheol to be a receptacle for the souls
of such, as God does not show mercy unto. Salomo^ says of such as haunted
harlots, Proverb. 9.
Her guests are in the depth of Sheol. Moses tells you, Deuteronomy. 32.
The sire of Gods wrath burns to the lower Sheol. In the lower Sheol then are
the souls of the wicked, and fire there burning for them. If your vast and
deep gulf in the earth be all one with this, we know the place to be hell and
the use thereof the punishment of the wicked. If it differ from this, you must
tell us by the word of God, wherefore it serves. For that a vast and deep
gulf in the earth should be nothing else, but an abolishing of Page 190. li. 9.
any visible creatures hence or that this should be the most proper sense of
Sheol, and your vast and deep gulf a resemblance thereof, this has neither
top nor toe. If Sheol be properly nothing but a privation, how can it be a vast
and deep gulf in the earth, or what proportion or similitude has the one
with the other? These are therefore nothing but your fictions imagined of your
own brain to delude the Scriptures, and to avoid the lower Sheol indeed,
which is the place of torment for the damned.

How Capernaum was exalted to heaven, whether in her own proud conceit after
the example of the king of Babylon, of whom Esaie speaks; or whether Christ
meant, that by reason of his often preaching and working miracles amongst them,
the kingdom of God was in the midst of them, but not received nor regarded by
them, which some think to be the meaning of this place: I stand indifferent,
so long as we keep Sheol opposite to heaven, I mean not to the clouds, nor to
the skies, as you would shift the matter, but to the place above, where the way
of life is, and the brightness of Gods glory, that thereby we may conceive in
the lower sheol darkness and death for ever, even as in the higher sheol, both
are for the time. Proverb 15.
The way of life, says Solomon, is on high; (neither in the clouds nor
stars, but in the seat of the blessed, even in heaven) to him that declineth
Sheol below. Where speaking of eternal life, (since bodily life is here on
earth) he warns us, that eternal death is in sheol below. The rest of your
stuff is not worth the sticking at. For what if God by Jeremy threatened
Babylon, that though Ier. 51. v. 58.
her walls were thick, and her gates high, the one should be broken, and the
other burned: and though she should mount up to heaven by raising her walls
never so high, yet her destroyers should come from God: Does this being spoken
of the walls and gates, which should be razed, prove that her walls and
gates should descend to Sheol? Where has the prophet any such words of the
walls, gates, or buildings of Babylon? And for you to expound Sheol by what
you list, is a larger commission, then I know any you have. I have no doubt,
but walls and gates cannot reach unto the clouds, much less to the stars,
and therefore heaven applied to them stands for that which rises on high in
the air; but that the pride of the king of Babel, lifted it self above the
clouds and stars; I have proved by the plain report of the Prophet, against
which no exception can be taken.

Defenc. page 191. li. 13.
Next let us view the Corinthians. O death where is thy victory, o hades, o
destruction, or o power of death, where is thy sting? Here it is referred to
the destruction of the whole and entire persons of men taken away by death out
of this world.] What is now become of your world of souls, which you so often
urged as properly signified by hades? What is become of your vast and deep
gulf in the earth; which sheol and hades did import, as yon told us but even
now? Nay, what is become of your destruction of stones, and their descending to
Hades. which you said was threatened to Capernaum? Are all these out of date,
and in every new place must you be forced to frame us a new Hades? You will
rest somewhere at last, if it be possible for your unquiet head to have or like
any rest. Well now then hades is the li 19.
destruction of the whole person of man taken out of this world by death. And
why should not hades here be taken for hell? [ The whole scope and drift of
the Apostle here, is to speak of the resurrection of the body, and you
grant it.] What then? The Saints receiving their bodies endued with
immortality, may they not rejoice in their deliverance from corruption, and
insult, as having then the full victory, over hell and death? li. 24.
Our full deliverance from hell and from Satan is obtained in this life, as it
is written, we being delivered from our enemies, and from the hands of all
that hate us.] We are so delivered from their hands or power, (which is all
one) that we shall not need to fear them; but we are not yet actually freed
from their snares, since we daily must pray, not to be led (or left) into
temptation; neither are all our enemies yet fully destroyed; since as the
Apostle says; 1. Cor. 15. verse. 26.
the last enemy, that shall be destroyed, is death. If all Christ's enemies
were put under his and our feet, he should no longer reign as Redeemer and
Savior of his Church; verse. 25.
for he must reign till he has put all his enemies under his feet, and then
shall verse. 24.
deliver up the kingdom to God, even the Father, which is not before the end.
And yet were all things granted which you intend, it helps you not one whit:
for may not the saints give thanks for all even then, when all is fully
finished, though part be before performed? And may they not justly rejoice
against all the power of Satan, I mean sin, hell, and death, when the last
enemy is in sight conquered, though they be formerly freed from sin, and
fully delivered from the danger and fear of hell?

Defenc. page 191. li. 31.
Your speech is very bad and scandalous, where you say the bodies of the Saints
lying in their graves, are in the devils walk. Page 189. li. 31.
For then the graves, where bodies lie senseless, are a part of hell properly
taken.] You told us even now, that the air on high was the place of devils,
and think you much that upon occasion I should say the graves under the earth
are within Satan's walk? The book of Job says, Job. 1.
Satan compasses the earth, and walks in it. And Peter confirms the same,
saying, He 1. Peter. 5.
walks about, seeking whom he may devour. So that the devils walk (for all
your saying) is far larger then hell. And if our Lord and master most truly
said of the woman, which was crooked, and could not lift up herself in any
wise, that Luke 13.
Satan had bound that daughter of Abraham, lo, eighteen years; may not the
dead bodies of Abraham's children be in Satan's walk, as well as their living
bodies be in Satan's bands? And you, that be so curious in other men's speeches,
do you look to your own? Do not you defend, that the souls of the blessed
in heaven may be said Page 168.
to be in inferno, and 166.
under the power of death, whereof the Devil has the rule by the Apostles
doctrine? [ Pa. 191. li. 28.
we being here truly justified by Gods grace are fully freed, and delivered
from all the power of our enemies.] Are we so fully freed, that we can neither
sin, nor die? or are sin and death no parts of Satan's power? When I speak
of a full conquest over hell and death, in both parts of man, soul and body,
which is not performed before the body rise to glory; you turn it, as if I
professed our redemption from hell to be imperfect till the last day. And when
I mention with Saint Paul the redemption of our bodies from corruption, which
shall not be before the resurrection; you would infer thereupon, if you could
tell how, that the bodies of the Saints Page 192. li. 1.
remain subject to the power of hell, to the curse of the law, and to the
claim of Satan. Thus you run on, like a riotous spaniel, chalenging upon
every foot, but finding nothing. With like wit and truth you infer upon my
words, where I say the death of the body was inflicted on mankind as part of
the wages of sin, that therefore Page 192. li. 3.
the godly must pay a part of their own redemption and satisfaction for sin;
and then Christ was not our only and absolute redeemer. But which way does
this follow, can you tell? punishment for sin is in our persons neither
redemption, nor satisfaction for sin; in Christ's person it was both. Know you
not the difference betwixt Christ's person and ours?

li. 9.
But I say pa. 216. that the bodies of the dead Saints are in the possession of
hell, and in the handfact of hell.] In wresting and wrangling is all your
grace. Where some ancient writers seem to say, that Christ delivered Sermon.
page 216.
some of the Saints out of the present possession of hell; all the defense (I
said) that could any way be made out of the Scriptures to excuse this, was to
take hell improperly for the sting and wound of bodily death, which Satan the
ruler of hell procured to man by sin. For sin, death, and corruption are
the works of the Devil, which Christ came to dissolve. Wisdom. 1. 2.
God made not death, as the wiseman observes, but created man without
corruption; and through the envy of the Devil came death into the world. This
then being one of the wounds, which Satan through sin gave unto our first
father and all his offspring, this is not perfectly cured, but with the
resurrection of our bodies to eternal life, though the poison of this wound
be in the mean time allayed, and the danger secured. And thus, whiles I seek
to mitigate other men's words, and to extenuate the name and power of hell,
understanding thereby nothing but the dissolution of man's life, and corruption
of man's body, which Satan occasioned by sin; you make the Reader believe, I
take the name of hell properly for the power and right, that hell has over the
bodies of the wicked, and teach, that the Saints are not delivered from hell,
till their bodies rise from death, which when you list you can find to be
refuted elsewhere by me; and therefore to be no part of my meaning here.

How death is an enemy, which must be destroyed, as well as sin and hell, we
need not your commentary; except it were stoared with better Divinity. It
hinders the Saints. you grant, Page 192. li. 22.
from enjoying their appointed felicity, yet as a peaceable and quiet stop.
Ascribe you this peace and quietness to their bodies void of life and sense,
or to their souls stayed from the full fruition of eternal glory by that
means? And troe The Saint in heaven most eanestly desire their bodies.
you, the souls of the Saints be well and quietly content to lack their
appointed felicity? not at all to desire it, or not earnestly to pray for it;
were plainly to loath it, and not obediently to expect it. Wherefore they
exceedingly affect, and instantly pray for the destruction of this enemy, that
keeps their bodies in dishonor and corruption, and hinders their spirits
from enjoying that glory, which shall be reucaled in the last time; which
appears by their vehement prayer in the Revelation; Reuelat. 6.
how long, O Lord, holy and true, do thou not judge, and avenge our blood on
them, that dwell on the earth? Where they in heaven seek not revenge on them,
for whom they prayed in earth, but they express their continual and ardent
desire for that day, when they shall be wholly conformed to Christ their head.
And when they are willed to rest for a season, they gladly submit themselves to
the will and wisdom of God; but mean while they hate death, as an hinderer
of that bliss and joy, which they so much love and long for; and shall no
doubt rejoice exceedingly, when this last enemy is swallowed up in victory,
as the rest were before. But let death be an enemy which way you will, how
does this conclude, that Hades here (1. Corinthians. 15.) in no sort signifies
hell?

Defenc. page 192. li. 28.
The very text seems thus to expound it self, saying, where is thy sting O
Hades? the sting of death is sin. Where the later seems a direct exposition
of the former, noting these two words, (Hades and death) as Synonymas for one
thing, being applied to men.] When you talk of the text of holy Scripture, you
should not leave the words, that are extant in all our printed copies,
retained and alleged by the best and most of the Greek Fathers, as likewise
of our new writers; and clean to the single conceit of some one man taking
upon him to correct all the printed copies, that ever he saw, and of his own
authority to alter the Original. I do not therefore by your, and his leave
admit this for Saint Paul's text; since it is his private change of the words
in the Greek against all the copies, that are either manu-scripts or printed
at this day. His own confession is this. Bezae annot at. in ^ Corinth. 1^.
verse. 55.
Contrario ordine legunt hunc locum, non modo Graeci omnes codices, quos
inspeximus sed etiam Syrus and Arabs interpretes. Not only all the Greek
copies, that we have seen, but the Syriack and Arabic Interpreters read this
place in a contrary order; that is, they put these words ( o Hades where is
thy victory?) in the last place, which you set in the first; and the other
words ( o death where is thy sting?) they set first, which you will have to be
last. Thus then stand the Apostles words, clean contrary to that which you
bring. (...); O death where is thy sting? O Hades where is thy victory? And in
this order do In 13. ca Oseae
Luther, In 1. Cor. 15.
Erasmus, In 1. Cor. 15.
Zuinglius, In 1. Cor. 15.
Peter Martyr, In 1. Cor. 15.
Calvin, In 1. Cor. 15.
Bullingere, In 1. Cor. 15.
Gualtere, In 1. Cor. 15.
Aretius, In 1. Cor. 15.
Hemmingius, In 1. Cor. 15.
Hyperius, In 1. Cor. 15.
Osiander, In 1. Cor. 15.
Marlorate, and I know not how many more, both keep and cite that text in
Latin, vbi tuus, mors, aculeus? vbi tua, Inferne, victoria? Where is thy sting,
O death? where is thy victory, O hell? And touching the Greek copies and
Fathers, that are ancient, and observe the same order of the words for the
Apostles text, we have Origin. li. 5. in ca. 5. ad Roma.
Origin, Athanas. de. incar. verbi Dei and in pass. and cruerm Domini and
contra omn^s qui negent seruat. sumps^sse primitia, ^x natura nosira.
Athanasius, Nazianz. de san^ pasch ate.
Nazianzene, Nyssenus de 40 Martyribus oratione 2.
Nyssene, Epiphanius heresi 66. contra Manichees.
Epiphanius, x Chrysostom, x Oecumenius; and though the translatours of x
Theodoret and x Theophylact retain the words of the old Latin Bible in this
place for the text, yet there is no likelihood that these two in their own
tongue varied from the rest, specially Theophylact who in his commenting on
this place makes an exact difference betwixt death and Hades, for that Hades
contains souls, and deadbodies, where the Latin in both places has death,
and no more.

The Latin Fathers, you will say, do all follow the old Latin translator, and
he places the word, sting, last as you do.] There is no one place in the new
Testament, that has received more variety of translating and ordering then
this. Tertull. de resurrectione carnis.
Tertullian cites it thrice in one book after this sort. Vbi est, mors,
aculeus tuus? vbi est, mors, aculeus? Where is thy sting, o death? Where is thy
strife, o death? reading (...) for (...), strife for victory. Cyprianus ad
Quirinum li. 3. ca. 5^.
Cyprian cites it in the same order and words, as Tertullian does. Ambros. in
1. Corinthians. 15.
Ambrose returns nearer to the Greek, and says; vbiest, mors, stimulus
tuus? vbi est, mors, victoria tua? o death, where is thy sting? o death, where
is thy victory? even as the interpreter of Hiero li. 5. ca. 13.
Ireneaus does, though he inuert that order in an Idem. l. 3. ca ^8.
other place, and In 1 Corin. 15.
follow the Septuagint, which Hiero. in Osca ca. 13.
Ierom, and other of the Latin Fathers also do. And least you should think,
as you do, that the old translator, who very scrupulously keeps the word
Infernum for Hades through out the Bible, did here translate it by death, you
shall see that Eusebius lighted on a Greek copy, where the word Thanatos,
death, was twice repeated, and the parts changed as they stand in the Latin.
Eusebius de demonstrat. Euang li 4. ca 12.
(...); o death where is thy victory? o death where is thy sting? Elsewhere
the same Author keeps the word, death, twice; but alters the order. Ibidem
li. 10. ca. 1.
(...); o death, where is thy sting? o death where is thy victory? In this
diversity of reading and relating the Apostles words, it is each man's duty
not to run which way he will, though perhaps he may bring some one president
for his purpose, but to hold that for the true and Authenticke text, to which
most copies and writers agree. And therefore since your exposition of hades and
death to be Synonymas, depends upon your private changing the order of the
apostles words, I see no need to make any answer to it, specially when as the
Latin translator might, and no doubt did light on such a copy, as Eusebius
did, which had the word, Thanatos, death, twice in that place. Otherwise it
could not be that he, who was over diligent in all other places, would be so
negligent in this. A farther answer to the frame of your words, as you have
placed them, if any man for his satisfaction would receive; the name of death,
which compriseth both temporal and eternal death, and by sin ga^ the
victory of our first parents, (but that the elect by Christ have again
recovered the victory over all sorts of death) gives answer enough. For
sin, which the Apostle here calls the sting of death, did not only sting
Adam and his offspring with the death of the body, but also with the death of
the soul: (the wages of sin being death in all parts of man, and in all
places of his abode); and therefore sin of his own nature and force, till it
be pardoned by Christ, is the sting no less of hell, as in all the wicked;
then of bodily death, as in all the Saints. And here by the way the Reader may
observe, that for advantage you are content to make bodily death in the Saints
the sting of sin, which I trust is as much, as the punishment of sin, since
it stingeth unto death.

Defenc page 193. li. 2.
The grave of the wicked is not to be named or reckned hell properly.] Whom
does the Apostle make to speak in that place; the godly, who have the victory
over sin, hell, and death; or the wicked, over whom those three get the
conquest, since the wicked do not rise from death to life, as the Saints do;
but their bodides rising out of one pit fall into a far worse, which is the
bottomless pit of eternal death and damnation?

Defenc page 193 li. 7.
Hades is adversary to the resurrection. But hell here would not be adversary
to the resurrection. Therefore hades here is not hell, no not to the wicked.]
Does the Apostle dispute here of the resurrection of the wicked to death
everlasting, or of the Saints to celestial bliss and glory? though it be
true, that the bodies of the reprobate shall rise up from the earth where they
rested; and be cast with their souls into everlasting fire; yet the Apostle
here debateth and proves the raising up of Christ's members to bear the
image of the heavenly Adam, and to have death swallowed up in victory. Look on
the Apostles reasons and comparisons in this whole chapter, and if any one of
them natural or theological, agree to the resurrection of the wicked, then
let the Reader think you have some understanding of this place, which now is
utterly none. 1. Cor 15. verse. 7.
If Christ be not risen, your faith is in vain (says Paul) and you are yet in
your sins. verse. 22.
As in Adam all died, so in Christ all shall be quickened: verse. 23.
every one in his order. Christ's as the first fruits, then those that are
Christ's, at his coming. 41.
There is one glory of the Sun, another of the Moon, and another of the
Stars. 42.
So also (shall be) the resurrection of the dead. The body is sown in
corruption, 43.
dishonor, and weakness, it shall rise in incorruption, in glory, in power.
54.
When this corruptible has put on incorruption, and this mortal has put on
immortality, then shall be performed that, which is written, Death is swallowed
up in victory, (and the Saints shall have just cause to say) 55.
o death, where is thy sting? o hades (hell) where is thy victory? 57.
Thanks be to God, which has given us victory through our Lord Jesus Christ.
How far are these things from all communion of the wicked? though hell at
that day shall be increased and advanced, (as you call it) with the bodies of all
the wicked, yet may the godly Saints (of whom the Apostle speaks) most justly
rejoice against hell and death, as being now swallowed up in victory, that is,
utterly defeated of all force to kill the body any more, or to stay the soul
any longer by means of death from her crown of glory. For the victory which
God will give us through Christ our Lord against hell and death, is not yet
full, till our souls and bodies be brought to eternal bliss. And were it
possible (which is not) that the souls of the Saints could for ever enioie the
rest and bliss, which now they have without their bodies; even in this want of
one half, Satan should still have some victory over them, that is, over their
bodies, though not over their souls. Wherefore the victory is then full, when
both parts of man are freed from all things, that hinder their heavenly
inheritance. And this the best interpreters confess. Peter Martyr, Peter
Martyr in 1. Corint. 15.
Interim videas ordine quodam nostros i^micos recenseri: insernum sieve
gehennam, mortem, peccatum and legem. In the mean while thou must see our
enemies (here) numbered in order: hell or gehenna, death, sin, and the law.
Christ has gotten the victory over all these, and the fruit of that victory
redoundeth to us. Bullinger, Bullingerus ^ 1. Corinit. 5.
The Apostle declares, that the victory over sin death and hell is gotten by
the might and merits, not of the saints, but of Christ, to whom the saints must
yield all glory, praise, and thanks. And this explanation has very excellent
degrees. First ^ hell to wit, the excrlasting punishment whereby the dead are
condemned to the second death: the second is sin, which is the force of death
and hell. For by sin came death. The third is the law, the strength of sin.
The law being then taken away, the force of sin decaieth; sin being
abolished, the power of death cease; death being disarmed hell is
overthrown. Hyperius, Hyperius in 1. Corinthians. 15.
If death shall then have no more rule, it follows that neither hell shall
prevail against the godly. For this must be understood of them, since the
wicked shall not be delivered from the power of hell. In these words, o death
where is thy sting? o hell where is thy victory? either God, as conqueror; or
the saints, as giving the praise of the conquest to God, in a sort reproach
death and hell, with the loss of their power and strength. And very aptly is
death put first, and then hell. For men die before they be cast into hell, in
which the wicked taste the second or eternal death. More might be brought; but
with wise men there can be no question, that the Saints at the last day being
then fully freed from all their enemies, may give thanks to God for the victory
purchased by Christ against them all, hell and Satan not excepted.

Defenc. page 193. li. 16.
Also we are to note that the Apostle here plainly alludeth to that of
Hoseah. O Sheol, o kingdom of death, I will be thy destruction, not o hell. The
Prophet speaks this to comfort Israel in their captivity against their
continual destruction, and raizings out of this world.] You will soon breast
other men, that will beard the Apostle in this matter so boldly as you do.
Indeed you and some others think it a glory to take part with the Jews
contradicting all that the Evangelists and Apostles allege out of the law and
the Prophets touching Christ and his kingdom; and you vouchsafe to yield to
the holy Ghost speaking in them, no more skill or understanding of the old
Testament, but to allude to it, and as it were to play with it, when the true
literal sense of most places, as you think, is far from that, which they
intend. But this Iudaizing, whiles you would seem, more then others, to smatch
of a little Hebrew, I for my part detest; and profess to the world, I take
that every where to be the true and direct meaning of Moses and the Prophets,
which Christ and his Apostles collect from their words. And therefore Ierom
says of this very place, as I say of all others. Hiero. in 13. ca. Os^ae.
That which the Apostle refers to the resurrection of the Lord, nos aliter
interpretari nec possumui, nec audemus, we neither can, nor dare interpret
otherwise. Yea so well learned you are in the circumstances of the Prophets
speech, that you pronounce, [ Page 193. li. 19.
The Prophet speaks this to comfort Israel in their captivity, showing that
now the Lord would stay his judgment that way and death should now destroy them
no more; Whereas Israel was then in no captivity, as appears by the 16 verse
of the same chapter; Samaria shall be desolute: And God had no meaning to tell
the people, he would now stay his hand, and they should be destroyed no more,
because in the two next verses he threatens, They should be verse. 15.
spoiled, dried, and verse. 16.
desolate, they should fall by the sword, their infants should be dashed in
pieces, and their women with child should be rip^. Wherefore except you will
have the holy Ghost to speak contradictions, as your manner is, you must
acknowledge, that amidst the fearful troubles, destructions, and desolations
then and before denounced by the Prophet against the whole kingdom of Israel,
God does comfort his elect amongst them, that whatsoever became of their bodies
in this affliction approaching, he had his time, when he would utterly destroy
the power of all their enemies, not only freeing them by death from tyrants
and persecutors, but saving them from death and hell by his anointed Messiah,
who should be a death to death, and a destruction to hell. And as this was the
greatest comfort and only hope, that Gods children in their miseries could
expect or desire; so the Apostle keeps right the Prophets meaning, and
shows the time, when all this shall be performed; that is, when all tears
shall be wiped from the eyes of Gods elect; and all their enemies sin, death,
and hell trodden under their feet. In this comfort and promise, as hell was the
chiefest enemy, so, of all others, that must be contained within the limits of
Gods assurance, and their deliverance. In vain are all other promises of
grace, whiles that enemy stands unvanquished. And therefore as we most
needed, so God most promised, and Christ most performed the destruction of hell
above and before the death of the body, which you so much talk of, and from
which you give to the reprobate a resurrection, as well as to the godly, which
is but a cold comfort to him, that duly considers it.

Defenc. page 193. li. 31.
Next we come to the Revelation. First I have the keys of Hades (that is of
destruction or of the kingdom of death) and of death. Or we may take them as
two words for o^ and the same thing. That is both of them for death. What show
of reason have you to bring in here Christ's power over the damned souls in
hell? because there is mention else where of the key of hell; therefore the key
of Hades here is the same. What color of reason is there in this? Even so much
as you can not resist. For if it be certain, which the Scripture confirms,
that Christ has the keys of both, that is as well of hell as of death; and
gate them both by submitting himself to death; And Hades in the new Testament
How Hades is used in the Revelation.
is taken for hell, as hitherto we have seen; and even with Saint John the
writer of this Revelation it is a different thing from death; what can Hades be
here but hell? That Christ by his obedience unto death had all power in heaven,
and earth, and hell given him, the Apostle is very plain. Philip. 2.
Christ became obedient to the death, even the death of the Cross. Wherefore
(or for which cause) God highly exalted him, and gave him a Name above every
name, that at the name of Jesus every knee of those in heaven, on earth, and
under the earth should bow, and every tongue confess, that Jesus is the Lord.
As he himself also witnessed, when he said, after his resurrection, Matthew. 28.
all power in heaven and earth (that is, in all places and over all things
created) is given unto me. Since then without question Christ had the keys as
well of death and hell, as of heaven; and so that sense of his words is most
true; let us see which of our expositions has best reason. When John for fear
fell as dead at Christ's feet, would Christ to comfort John in that plight, say
no more but that he Page 193. li. 36.
himself was once dead, and now alive, and had power to die no more, as you
expound Christ's words? how could this strengthen or restore John, that was even
dead for fear? or did Christ rather encourage John not to fear without cause,
seeing he himself not only was risen from the dead, but had all power over
death and hell, that is the keys of both to dispose of each man's life and Soul
at his pleasure? when therefore Christ, that had all power of life and death,
Salvation and damnation laid his right hand on John to protect him, and bad him
not fear, but write the things, which he saw; had not John just cause to cast
away all fear, and cheerfully to obey the voice of him, that was so able and
ready to rescue him from all fear and danger whatsoever?

Christ's power over death, you will say, was enough to preserve John's life, and
therefore mention of the key of hell was superfluous. John was to see, and
write the things, that were, and after should be in heaven, earth and hell, as
is evident in his Revelations: yea the opening and shutting of the bottomless
pit, the chaining of Satan there, the coming of the Locusts and the beast from
thence, and the lake of fire and brimstone everlastingly burning there, and who
should be thrown into it, were to be revealed unto him. Lest therefore the
sight of these things should amaze John, or the reporting of them should want
credit with us, Christ did profess, which is most true, that he had the keys,
that is all power even over these secret and fearful places; so that John
should neither shrink at the vision, nor we distrust the Relation of them. And
though my reason of mentioning here the keys of hell be such, as you shall
never counteruaile; yet do I not run proudly and peremptorily, as you do,
in mine own conceits; I have the judgment of the best Interpreters, old and
new, that have intermedled with the opening of these revelations. Andreas Arch
Bishop of the same Caesaria, that Saint Basil was, and within 600. years after
Christ, though you skornfully reject him, as you do that venerable writer
Bid; expounding these words of Christ, ^.
I have the keys of death and of Hades: says; (...), that is of the death of
the Body, and of the Soul. Primasius expounds them thus. ^.
I have the keys of death and hell, idest, Diaboli, and totius corporis eius,
that is over the devil, and all his body, (or society.) The exposition of the
Apocalypse extant in Saint Austens works; thus. In Apocalyp. homil. 2 inter ^era
August. Tom. 9.
I have the keys of death and Hell; because he that believes, and is
baptized, is delivered from death and from hell. Haymo thus. Haymo in 1. Apoc.
By the name of the keys is showed (Christ's) eternal power; by death the
devil is understood, by whose envy death came into the world. And by hell, his
members that shall come to the torments of hell. Lyra. Lyra in 1. Apoc.
I have the keys of death and of hell; that is power to deliver thence the
just, which Christ did in his Resurrection; and to enclose there the wicked,
which he shall chiefly do in the last judgment. Of our new writers,
Bullingere. Bulling. in Apocalyp. con^one. 6.
Christ then has the keys of death and hell, because whom he will, he
delivers from the perpetual damnation of death; and whom he will, he
suffers justly to remain in that peril of damnation. Christ has the
supreme government of the house or kingdom of God; to quicken whom he will,
and to draw them from hell and damnation; and whom he will damn, with his just
judgment to destroy. For he has most full power over death and hell. He
conquered and disabled both, as it is Osee. 13. and 1. Corinthians. 15. Aretius.
Aretij problemata de clauibus Lcclesiae, locus. 61.
He that resembled the Son of Man in the Apocalypse, said; I have the keys of
hell, and death, hoc est in damnatos, damnandos, and damnatorum loca; that is
over those that are damned; or shall be damned; and over the places of the
damned. Chytreus. Chytreus in 1. ca. Apoc.
Christ delivers his Church from the captivity of death and hell, and
casts the wicked into the Dungeon of hell and of eternal death. For he has
the keys, that is most full power over death and hell. Sebastian Meyer whom
Marlorate follows. Meyer in ca. 1. Apoc.
I have the keys of death and hell, that is power to pardon sins, which
being abolished, both death and hell are deprived of their strength. Osiander.
Osiander in 1. ca Apoc.
I have the keys of death and hell, that is, it is in my hand to kill, and
quicken; to damn and sauc. These men had both learning and reason to say, as
they did; neither will any pick them over the perch, as you do Andreas
Caesariensis and Bid, but he that has neither.

Defenc page 194. li. 3.
Again one sits on a pale horse, whose name was death and Hades
(destruction, the world of the dead, or the kingdom of death) followed after
him. This in no wise can be hell: because the Text adds, power was given them
to slay with the sword; and with famine, and with death, and with wild beasts.
Hell slays none in that sort, these are not the weapons of hell.] You lack
three Gennets to set your three poppets on horseback. If by these three,
destruction, the world of the dead, the kingdom of death, you mean in Page
181. li. 38.
Page 192. li. 38.
effect nothing but death, as you use to expound your self, that is expressed
before, and Saint John says, Hades followed after him. Does any thing follow
after it self? Again, will you bring your world of the dead, that is, all the
Souls in heaven and hell, to ride on Hades follows aster death.
horseback, and that in the show and shape of one person? you would make good
dumb shows, you have such pretty fancies, to make death go first alone, and
his kingdom to come after him. But though you play with Saint John's visions,
you have no warrant to mistake Saint John's words, and to muster your own
errors under his colors. Saint John does not say, that power was given to
death and Hades to kill with the sword, with famine, and with death, as you
dream; but Saint John having represented the sword, or war by the red horse
verse 4. and famine by the black horse, verse 5. and all sorts of diseases and
pestilences by the pale horse, verse 8. he says, power was given to them, that
is, to the riders on these three horses to kill the fourth of the earth with
war, hunger, and sickness. And because these three come not one after
another, but when God is greatly provoked with the heinous sins, and
impenitent hearts of men; therefore Hades, hell, is said to come after the
third, in respect that the rebellions of men against God are ripe for hell,
when no plagues can convert them from their wicked ways. This the ancient
Expositor in Austens works observes. Hell follows after. Homil. 6. in Apoc.
Idest, expectat deuorationem multarum animarum: that is, it expects to
devour many souls (slain with these plagues.) Bid says. B^da in 6. ca.
Apoc.
It may simply be understood, that such as are spiritually dead, eternal
punishment does there follow. Lyra says the meaning is, Lyra in 6. ca. Apoc.
post cursum vitae praesent is statim captus est ad poenam gehennae. After the
course of this present life, (the wicked) is straight way carried to the
torments of Gehenna. Bullingere says. Bulling. homil. 31. in ca. 6. Apoc.
If thou understand this wholly of the place of the damned, they are surely
thrown headlong to hell, as many as being here consumed with diseases, die
without faith and repentance. Rightly therefore does hell follow after death.
Marlorate. Marlorat. i^ ca. 6. Apoc.
And Hades follows after (death;) This seems to be added to terrify
hypocrites, that they may certainly know Gehenna is prepared for them, except
they repent in time. Osiander. Osiand. in ca. 6. Apoc.
Hades followed after death, that i^, the Images of some Insernall punishments
followed. It was permitted to death to take (...) away not only by the sword,
and famine, but by the pestilence, and (...) (...), is, and to deliver a great
part of them to be tormented in hell. For hell follows the death not of the
godly, but of the wicked; which repent not their contempt, and persuing of the
Gospel. Th^se after their corporal death descend directly to hell.

Full wisely you add, where I say, God sometimes uses the devil to slay the
bodies of wicked men, whose souls are presently carried to hell; that this is
not the torments Page 194. li. 13.
of hell in the place of the damned; as if hell had not gates prevailing here
on earth against the wicked, and snares here laid to catch them, that shall be
damned; and the devil did not walk about devouring the souls of the
reprobate, and in many of them, both souls and bodies. Wherefore if this be
your best skill in points of Divinity, you may go to your old occupation,
which is filling your paper with phrases, when you lack matter: The Scriptures
need not your sound of words, without any sense, to declare their meaning.
Show first substantially, where the Scriptures use these idle variations of
yours, and then we will after argue how well they sit the circumstances of
each place; otherwise it is madness to admit your imaginations for the meaning
of the holy Ghost. As you now confess you never esteemed your old objection
(though you earnestly urged it) of the fourth part of the (...) (...) ^o Page
194. li. 24.
hell at once, because it is no new thing in the Scriptures to take a (...)
(...) (...) ^or an uncertain: so when you have thoroughly reuised all th^se
^lle and trifling conjectures now made against the use of the word Hades for
hell, you may as (...), (...) all as one.

Defenc. page 194. li. 24.
The last place is death and Hades (that is the dominion or power of death)
were cast into hell. I said it was absurd to say hell was cast into hell: You
answer, it is more (...) (...), the world of souls was cast into hell. Where
you do but dally with words. For (...) that term, the world of souls.] Then
yet at last you be weary of one of your whitlesse phrases; you may as well
recall the rest, as this. Howbeit your head was so busied with this reuocation,
that you remembered not Saint John's words, which you took upon you to allege,
and on which you grounded the sorce of your fond objection. Page 195. li. 3.
[ It sounds, senseless ^ your ears. (you proclaim) many sort to say, that
hell shall be cast into hell. But it is more senseless and truethlesse in
mine, that you plainly falsify S. John's The Defender (...) (...) Saint John's
words, and on that errou^ groundeth all (...) reasons.
words and then refute your own folly. Saint John has no such words, that
death and hades were cast into hell; though you cite them in S. John's name, and
quote Revel. 20. verse. 14. for them; his words are, Revel 20. verse. 14.
Death and Hades were cast into the lake of fire. Where if we take death and
hades for those, that are the Rulers and governors of death and Hades, as the
Scripture often by the name of the place intend the persons; then is there no
absurdity, but an evident verity in this, that the d^ll and his Angels shall
be cast into perpetual fire, or into the lake of fire. And so you sport your
self all this while with your own falsitie and vanity. And yet have you not
avoided that, which you would so same decline, that it is more absurd to say,
Your world of s^les wast cast into hell; for then the souls of all Gods Saints
must be cast into hell fire; which blasphemic how your back will bear, I do
not know. But you renounce that exposition of Hades, and say You use not that
term. Then blush at your former presumption, and later oblivion, that having
told us, this was the true and authentike and familiar (...) of (...) you now
deny that ever you used that term. Look in your worthy Treatise, page 97.
and tell me whether those words be there or no. Treat. page 97. li. 6.
The masters of the Greek^ tongue do use hades in proper sense only in
general for the state of the dead the world of the dead, THE WORID OF SOVLLS
departed, indifferently and indefinitely meaning as well these in eternal
ioies, as those in pains. And over right these words in the Margin you say;
In Margin Ibidem.
The true and authentike and familiar sense of Hades. I leave you now to your
own devotion, whether you will recant, or continue this proper, true, and
authentike exposition, that Hades, (meaning indifferently and indefinitely as
well th^se in eternal joys, as those in pains) was cast into hell.

Defenc. page 194. li 38.
There is no absurdity to say, that at the last day the power, kingdom and
dominion of death shall be cast into hell, that is eternally abolished.] We
ask for truth and sense, and you give us empty words and phrases. You toss
these terms, as Soldiers do pikes, and then you say, there is no absurdity
in them. You have been squaring and rounding of Hades, sometimes for the
unseen place of souls, sometimes for the mere privation of this life,
sometimes for the world of the dead in general, which compriseth the souls
and bodies of all that be dead, be they good or bad; sometimes also for the
power, dominion, and kingdom of death, which you enlarge as well to heaven,
where the Saints are; as to hell, where the damned are; Now which of all these
shall be cast into hell? not the place: for then not only hell shall be cast
into hell, which you say sounds senselesle in your ears, but heaven also,
which is most senseless in mine: not the world of the dead; for so should the
bodies and souls of all the Saints be thrown into hell fire, which I trust
you dare not endure. Perhaps your mere priuations shall be everlastingly
punished in hell, the danger is not great for them, since nothing can be no
where, nor feel no pain, and so not in hell. But after many devices and
aduices, you say, the power and dominion of death shall be cast into hell. That
shall utterly cease at the resurrection, when all souls are joined to their
bodies again. How then shall that, which wholly and finally cease, be cast
into hell? You mean it shall be Page 195. li. 1.
eternally abolished. This is an erection of a new hell; and no part of the
old. Happy were the damned, both men and spirits, if they might be cast into
this new hell of yours, that is utterly and eternally be abolished. But these
be mockeries in themselves, and falsities against the Christian faith. That
which is cast into the lake of fire, shall there everlastingly burn, and not
consume, but dure in perpetual torment. Shall your dominion of bodily death
everlastingly burn in hell? And shall it also feel the force of that fire?
You must then make Hades a person; for besides persons nothing shall be cast into
hell fire. And if it be a person, it must be a devil, or a man; except you
will find out a place for it amongst your sheep and cattle, that you sent
alive to Hell. But such childish and peevish devices are not worth the
refuting. The Reader may see, what it is for men to forsake the learned and
sound expositions and assertions of ancient Fathers, and betake themselves to
their fresh and new fancies, of which thy cannot tell what to make, nor how to
speak.

Defenc. page 195. li. 4.
Though you mean the containing to be put for the contained, hell for the
devils of hell, as one Andreas and Bid likewise understand it; yet neither
you, nor they (it seems) do consider, that this place assigns them to
hell, at the last day, who yet then are not in hell. li. 7.
But the Devils are in hell already. Therefore the devils cannot be understood
here by Hades.] Can a man be so sottish, unless he were besides himself, as
not to find, that all this while he refuteth his own falsifications of Saint
John's words, and not any position of mine, nor of these two learned writers,
whom he disdaineth as not considering where the devils are before the day of
judgment? They do not say the devils shall then be cast into hell; this is
your coltish conceit, from which you will not depart; but into the lake of fire
prepared (as our Savior pronounces,) for the devil and his Angels. And how
come you now in your heat so hastily to determine, where hell is, which not
long since you called rashness in me? you told us ere while, Page 189. li. 31.
The Apostle mentions the air on high, as being the place of Devils. Put to
this that, which here you say; the Devils are in hell already; you mean the
place of hell, or else you The defender makes three hels instead of one.
say nothing against Andreas and Bid, whom you would confute, as not
considering where the Devils are. Do not you then determine, that hell is in
the air on high, and so not only condemn your self of rashness by your
own verdict, but gainesay the Scriptures, who testify that the devils desired
Christ Luke 8.
not to command them into the deep? Yea by this resolution of yours the face
of the earth, where we live, is hell; since the devils are here also, and Job
1.
compass the earth and walk therein. So that if we let you alone, in steed of
one hell you will make us three; the air, the earth, the deep, since in all
these three it cannot be denied but the Devils are. And yet for all your
tripping so light on the toe, the devils may and shall be at the last day cast
into hell, that is affixed to the place and torments there, from which they
shall not stir, as now they do, whiles the justice of God does suffer them
to uphold and increase their kingdom here on earth. And where you vouch of
your hades, that it shall at the last day of judgment be thrown into hell,
that is eternally be abolished; as you conceive and derive your Hades, that day
shall enlarge it more then ever before, and so continue it so reuer. For all
visible creatures in heaven and earth (save men) shall after that day have no
more any being at all; yea the first heaven, and the first earth (shall) pass
away, and there (shall be) no more any sea; which will greatly enrich your
general Hades, that contains the Page 183. li. 25. 29.
destruction of unreasonable things; and the perishing of visible creatures
from hence, as the proper Etymology thereof admits. Nay if the Page 178. li
28.
very natural Etymology of the word according to Grammar do properly
signify, NOT SEEN ANY MORE IN THIS WORLD, as you affirm it does; then all,
both good and bad, be they in heaven or hell, shall after the day of judgment
be properly and everlastingly in Hades. For they shall never be seen any more
in this world, whose 1. Cor. 7.
figure passes away without returning, and gives place for ever to the world
to come. And this your Hades, which you would cast into hell there to be for
ever abolished, shall by the natural Etymology, and proper signification
thereof, confessed and urged by your self, not only continue in hell and in
heaven, but comprise them both, seeing the Citizens of either shall not be
seen any more in this world.

Defenc. page 195. li. 16.
Lastly here is showed the most general and universal rendering up of all the
dead whatsoever to judgment. But hell plainly has not all the dead. Therefore
death and Hades do not here properly signify the devil and Hell.] When you
say, here is showed the universal rendering up of all the dead whatsoever to
judgment, If you mean this of death and hades, that they rendered up all the
dead, that came to judgment; you vouch a manifest untruth repugnant to the
very words of Saint John going next before, for thus his words stand. Revel.
20. v. 13.
And the sea gave up her dead, which were in her, and death and Hades delivered
up the dead, which were in them. So that all the dead were not rendered to
judgment by death and Hades, the Sea had part by Saint John's own speech; and
therefore death and Hades here do not signify the Dominion of death, which
reaches to the sea, as well as to the earth. Again Saint John in the twelfth
verse, Revel. 20. v. 12.
saw the dead both great and small stand before God. And in the thirteenth he
adds, the 13.
Sea also gave up her dead, and death and hell delivered up the dead which were
in them. He saw then some dead stand before God, which neither the Sea, nor
hades delivered. And since Paul tells us, that the 1 Thessalonians. 4. v. 16.
dead in Christ shall rise first; and God will bring them, which sleep in
Jesus, with him (to judgment); what hinders, but the dead in the twelfth of
Saint John may be the elect, and the rest be delivered up from the deep of the
Sea, and of Hades, as is mentioned in the thirteenth verse? If you like not
this, show us a reason, why the earth is here ouerskipt, in which are the most
of the dead bodies both of good and bad, (unless it were because no doubt was
of the earth in refunding her dead) and we will make you a playner explication
of these parts, which now seem somewhat doubtful. Howbeit death and Hades
cannot stand for one and the self same thing, as you would have them, since
the holy Ghost applies the plural number to them, and makes them places (not
phrases) to contain the dead in them; by saying, death and Hades gave up the
dead, which were in them. Words have no dead in them, but places have; which
because S. John makes to be plural, death and Hades cannot here be taken for
one thing.

Neither were those writers, whom you reject, so inconsiderate as not easily to
wipe away the force of your faint reasons. Bid upon these words, the Sea,
death, and hell, gave up their dead, says, Beda in cap. 20. Apocalyp.
John signifies the bodies shall be gathered from the earth, and their souls
from their (several) places. The good under the name of death, which suffered
only the dissolution of their bodies, and no (farther) punishment: the evil
he designeth by the name of hell. Andreas Caesariensis takes the Sea for the
earth, as Bede does; either because they thought the earth should then be
plain like the sea, as Sibylla prophesied, August. de Ciuitate Dei. lib. 18.
cap. ^. ^ide Lactant. de diuino praemio li. 7. cap. 1^.
Equ^ntur campis montes, hills and vales shall then be all even; or because
heaven and earth were before said to be Revel. 20. verse 11.
fled away from his face, that sat on the throne, and their place no more to
be found; or for that at the mutation of the world the earth shall melt, and
burn all over like a sea of fire: and of the rest he says. Andreas C^sarien.
in 20. cap. Ap^c.
Death is the separation of the soul from the body. Hades is a place to us
unseen, that is, dark and unknown, which receaueth the (dead) souls
departing hence. And those souls are dead which carry with them dead works. For
the souls of the just, as the wise man says, are in the hands of God, and no
torment shall touch them. (Dead) souls I read with the interpreter, and not
our souls, as the Printer in Greek has mistaken the word (...) for (...),
not only because the interpreter had first the copy before him, and took
more care to render it right then the Printer, but also for that the Author in
the very next words declares, what he meant by dead souls before: of which
there is no mention precedent, if that word be not kept, where the translator
puts it. Saint Austen takes the sea for this world, and showing how those
that live on earth may be called dead even by warrant of holy Scripture, and
this life be counted no better then a death; adds August. d^ ciuitate Dei
lib. 20. ca. 15.
Nec frustra fortasse non satis fuit vt diceret mors, aut infernus, sed
vtrumque dictum est. Neither happily without cause was it not enough to say
death or hell, but both are named, death for the good, who might suffer only
death, and not also hell: and hell for the wicked; which are punished in hell.
And of the next words, death and hell were cast into the lake of fire, he
says. Ibidem.
His nominibus significans Diabolum, quoniam mortis est author, and infernarum
poenarum; vniuersamque simul Daemonum societatem. By these names Saint John
signifies the devil, because he is the Author (or first occasioner) of death
and hell-paines, withal the whole multitude of devils. Primasius as he was S.
Austens scholar, so does he writing upon the revelation retain S. Austens
sense and Primas. in 20. cap. Apocalyp.
sentences, as they are alleged next before. Aretas writing on the same words,
Aretas in Apocalypse. cap. 65.
S. John, says he, means those that have done things worthy of this
punishment, (...), making up the people of the second death. [ Death and hades
gave up their dead.] By death says Haymo Haymo in Apocalyp. c. 2 (...).
we may simply understand the death of the flesh, by hell the places of
darkensse. [ Death and hades] that is, all the members of the Devil with their
head [ were cast into the lake of fire] that is, into the deep damnation of
hell. And rightly are all the reprobate figured by hell, either because abiding
there they make but one house with hell, in which they abide; or else for that
imitating the wor^s of the Devil, they are never satisfied with evil, as hell
never says, it suffices. The new writers do not dissent, if it were worth
the time to repeat many of them. Bullinger. Bullinger. homil. 90. in Apoc.
Death and hell were cast into the lake of fire. Hades (hell) here does
signify not the place of punishment, but those that are or were in hell: whose
souls were hitherto detained in hell, or such as are appointed for hell. Death
also signifies those, that are dead in sin, and which from a spiritual and
temporal death, directly pass to eternal death. Aretas and Primasius are of
the same opinion with us. Chytreus. Chytreus in 2^. ca. Apo. de extremo Iudicio.
Death shall restore all the bodies slain by him; and hell shall refund the
souls of the wicked to be joined to their bodies. Ibidem numero 7. de poe^is
Impiorum.
Hades in Greek is derived from (...) and (...), that is, not to see, or a
place lacking light, which in the 22 of Matthew is called utter darkness,
where the wicked deprived of the sight, light, comfort, and life of God not
only suffer perpetual night (or darkness) but great and unspeakable pains
and torments of soul and body. The Latins call it infernus, because the place
of the damned is thought to be somewhere in the earth beneath us, as it is said
in the 16 of Numbers, they descended alive to hell, and the earth covered them.

Thus have we for your pleasure run over all the places of the new Testament,
Why hades does signify hell in the new Testament.
where hades is used; and for ought we see, or you say, find the plain and
perpetual use of hades to signify hell; and not any such priuations,
destructions, conditions, and dominions of bodily death, as you dream of. And
as for the circumstances of the places, they all concur exactly and directly
with this signification of hades, which I observe; notwithstanding your
Cabbinet of conceits, that hades shall design you know not what, where, nor
when. The reasons of my observations are manifest. For where throughout the old
Testament with the Septuagint hades does always import the pit for dead bodies
or souls: that is, the grave common to good and bad, or hell peculiar to the
souls of the reprobate, with the consequents of either; and the writers of the
new purposely distinguish (...) death from hades, and mention death expressly,
that is, by name or by description, in every of those places, where hades is
found in the new Testament, save in Christ's threatening of Capernaum, in which
it is opposed to heaven, as fardest distant from it, and most repugnant to it:
It is a plain and true rule in mine opinion, that the Evangelists and Apostles
every where by Hades intended hell, and none of your wandering, or straggling
fancies. Besides the Greek Fathers with one consent use Hades after the
direction of the Canonical writers, for a place of darkness under the earth,
provided to receive and detain the Souls of men. And in this sense neither
the Scriptures nor the Fathers departed much from the ancient and true use of
the word amongst heathen and profane Authors; saving that the Pagans made it
common to the Souls of just and unjust, which the Scriptures never do, and
the Fathers utterly refuse after Christ's Resurrection, whatsoever they do
before. Since then Hades by the manifest exposition of Saint Luke in his
Gospel, is the place of torment, where the wicked after death are punished;
and the same Evangelist expresses David's meaning to be this, that Christ's
Soul after death was not left or forsaken in Hades; what cause or reason has
any man to deny that Christ dying descended to hell; there to spoil powers
and principalities, and thence to lead Captivity Captive, that as he ascended
to the highest heavens, there to sit superior to all the Elect Angels, so he
first descended to the bottomless deep, there to subject the Reprobate Angels
unto his humane nature, and to dissolve the power and sorrows of hell, of
which it was impossible he should be held.

Defenc. page 195. li. 36.
Here we must consider a maine objection of yours, even those words of our
common Creed, he descended into hell; originally it is he descended into Hades,
and in truth this is all you have to allege for your opinion: but I answer
two ways: first admitting, then denying the Authority of these words in our
common Creed.] You have seen by this time what I have to allege; for that
which I defend may besafely conceived of the Creed. The words themselves, he
descended to Hades, have evident warrant in the holy Scriptures, and Peter
exactly concludes out of David's words, that Christ's Acts. 2. v 31.
Soul was not left in Hades. What Hades is with S. Luke the writer of the
Acts, we likewise have seen. It is even the place, where the wicked are
tormented after death. Put these together, and tell me what they want of
Christ's descending into hell before he rose from the dead. The words in
English, he descended into hell; are confirmed by the public authority of
this Realm, as well in the Book of common prayer, as in the Articles of
Religion agreed on by the Convocation, and ratified by Act of Parliament. So
that all your euasions and elusions of the privation, condition, and dominion
of death to be meant thereby are utterly rejected and condemned by general and
full consent of Prince, Pastors and people within this Realm; and Christ's
descent to hell after death has been constantly and continually professed and
believed in the Church of England ever since the Gospel was here established.
What you have said against it, I leave to the Readers wise and indifferent
judgment, who will easily tell you, you must bring better sluffe then either
phrases or fancies before the common Creed may be thus rejected and despised.

Defenc. page 196.
You enjoin us three Rules to be exactly and precisely kept in the expounding
of these words; Namely, 1. distinction of Matter. 2. consequence of order. 3.
propriety of words. Might not those godly men (think you) miss in some such
circumstances, although the Scripture cannot?] The first compilers of the
Creed meaning shortly, orderly, and plainly to deliver the sum of the
Christian faith, as touching the three persons in Trinity, and the chiefest
blessings which God bestows on his Church in this life and the next by Jesus
Christ our Lord, might not with any discretion in so brief and compendious
assume of Christian Religon proposed to the simple and vulgar sort of all ages
and sexes, use either any needless repetition, disordered confusion, or
obscure inuolution of things requisite to our Salvation. To these Rules agree
all that have expounded the Creed in the Church of Christ to this very day,
save your self, and such as have opened you the gap to these innouations. And
these Rules allowed do clean cast your exposition out of doors. For where it
is most plainly said that Christ died, and was buried; which words no plowman,
woman, nor child of reasonable years can mistake; you after Christ's burial
come in with a dark and figurative phrase of descending to Hades, which in
effect you confess is no more but what was said before in known and open
speech, that Christ died. And this obscure and strange circumlocution of death
you will have to be an Article of your faith, as if every Christian creature
were bound upon danger of his salvation to understand what Sheol or Hades does
signify in the Greek and Hebrew Tongues; which is a position meet for such a
Divine as you are. Your exposition therefore is repugnant to all three Rules.
For it is a superfluous, unorderly, and enigmaticall iteration of that which
was before expressed in due place with as plain and easy words, as any might
be spoken by the tongue of man. Now with what Arguments you or any man living
(Hu. Bro. not excepted,) can prove that Hebrew or Greek phrases are Articles
of Religion, and must be conceived and believed of all men before they can be
saved, as yet I do not understand. And this is the misery of your cause, that
not only you have no word in Latin, English, nor in any tongue else
answerable to your Sheol or Hades, but when you come to lay open your own
phrases, the exposition is more ridiculous then the Translation. For by Christ's
descending to Hades, which you call the power, dominion and kingdom of death,
you mean no more, but that Christ's Soul severed from his Body went to heaven
to the rest of the blessed Souls there. And here I report me to him that will
vouchsafe to read your 196. and 197. pages, whether you have any thing there
but store of phrases, extending, intending, enlarging, amplifying the name,
power, and dominion of death; which when all is done and said, amounts to
this much, that Christ's soul severed by death from his body submitted it
self to the base and low condition of the dead, by taking the pains to go to
heaven to the rest of the Saints there. This is all in effect that your
Periphrasis and Emphasis moriendi do contain; and the great fall or whole
casting down of Christ's person, which you so Rhetorically set out with terms
of the broadest and longest size, has nothing in it, but only this, that his
soul after death which dissolved his person, ascended to the society of the
blessed souls in heaven. The rest is your emphaticall and paraphrasticall
vanity swelling with words, and shrinking in sense; which needs none other
refutation but sober observation, that when two sides are spent, nothing is
said; but you are where you began. For would you not vary so many phrases as
you do, tending all to express one thing; but seek a little to show us what
matter is contained in them, you should soon see what labor you have lost in
this Carrecke of words, which you have newly brought us home.

Defenc. page 196. li. 34.
Your mere and simple death, which you say is nothing else but the going
asunder of the soul from the body, has of necessity thus much in it. It is
the separation of the soul from the body, which is the cause of life in the
body, It is the dissolution of the person, which consists of body and soul:
It is the privation of life which ends with the departing What things the
death of the body does import.
of the soul: It is the continuing of death, since possibly there is no
regresse from the privation to the habit without the mighty hand of God
working above nature. For the soul departing never returns, till God
command, by whose word heaven and earth were made. What now after death
becomes of both parts of man, is no hard matter to conceive. Solomon says,
Ecclesiast. 1^
Dust (meaning flesh, first made of dust) returns to earth as it was, and the
spirit, to God that gave it; by him to be disposed and adjudged to joy or
pain, as pleases him. The body then goes to corruption, the soul receaueth
judgment, where it shall remain in hell or heaven, till the body be restored
again, which shall be at the last day. Descending to hades after death cannot
be verified of the whole person of man, but in respect of the parts. Referred
to the body, it is as much as buried and laid in the place, where it shall
putrify and return to dust. Applied to the soul, it must signify the place
to which the soul is carried, which I say must be under earth, since heaven is
never called by that name, nor expressed by that word, either in the
Scriptures, or in any other sacred or profane writers. The power and dominion
of death, which you so much speak of, is nothing else but Gods ordinance, that
from death there is no return to life till he appoint. If then there be no
dominion nor kingdom of death prevailing or ruling in heaven, where the souls
of the Saints are without their bodies, then Christ in ascending to heaven
descended not to Hades. Again with what truth can you avouch Christ's soul
came under the full Page 196. li. 33.
power and dominion of death, since death had no power over the body or soul
of Christ longer or farther then he himself would permit; and his soul free
from all bands and pains of death, destroyed the dominion and kingdom of
death, to which it was always superior and never subject, but only that he
might show himself with greater power to be conqueror of death rather in
rising from the dead, then in declining the force of death, as if he were not
able after death and in death, to dissolve the dominion and power of death?
Wherefore your exaggerating the power and dominion of death OVER THE SOVLE of
Christ, and that IN HEAVEN; whither you grant Christ's soul went after death,
is not only a vain and idle flourish, but a poisoned and pestilent doctrine,
if you take not heed to it; since no power of death, but Christ's will to show
himself Lord of life and death, either severed his soul from his body, or
bestowed his soul in any place after death, or detained him in the condition
of death; but he was free to die when he would, and rise from death when he
would, which euerteth all power and dominion of death over him, how much soever
in wastefull words you avouch the contrary.

Touching the propriety of words, that you say is as true as the rest. For
Hades has no such Defenc. page 197. li. 28.
native and proper sense, as you talk of, but exactly and directly (when it is
referred to a place and not to a person) signifies a place of darkness where
nothing can be seen, as with one consent Heathen and Christian writers
acknowledge. And the word descending after death, which you must apply to the
soul ascending to heaven, you childishly change into the li. 35.
fall of the person from lise to death, or inconstantly vary you know not how,
to Christ's submission Page 198. li. 1.
when he died, or his abasement by 4.
lying held and subdued so long time in death. Where again you incur the
same sands, that you did before in affirming Christ was held and subdued of
death for the time, which is plainly false doctrine, since he would abide that
time in death, least any should think him not truly dead, but was never under
the power and dominion of death. And as for Ibid. li. 4.
lying held in death, that phrase is strangely referred to the soul of Christ,
which ascended to the third heaven with more honor and joy, then it received
in this life here on earth. What Ruffine says, is not much to be regarded; if
we believe S. In Apologia aduersus Ruffin^m.
Ierom, neither was Ruffines faith sound, nor his authority any thing in the
Church, and yet were he worth the respecting, he makes more against you then
for you. For first these words are not used as an exposition of Christ's
descent to Hades, but Ruffine says, Ruffinus in Symbolum Apost.
Diuina natura in mortem per carnem descendit, non vt lege mortalium
detiner^tur a Morte, sed vt per se resurrecturus ianuas mortis aperiret. The
divine nature (of Christ) descended to death by (his) flesh, not to be held of
death after the law of mortal men, but that rising of himself he might open
the gates of death. Where he says, the divine nature descended to death, he
speaks not of the soul, but of the godhead of Christ: which words by your
leave require a sober interpretation; and yet in respect of the divine glory,
the phrase of descending unto death signifies Christ's submission to die, not
his descent after death. And withal he refelleth two of your fancies, first
that Christ was was not held of death, which you say he was: Secondly, that he
followed not herein the l^w of man's nature, which you say he did. And that
Christ's soul descended to hell by Ruffines opinion, his words are plain
enough in many places. He applies that to Christ, which David says; Thou have
brought my soul out of hell; and alleging the place of Peter, In his spirit
(Christ preached) to them which were in prison: herein says ^e it is
declared, quid oper^ ^gerit in Inferno, What Christ did in hell. So that the
less hold you take of Ruffine, the better for you and your cause; he will do
more harm then good.

^
If any think this to be somewhat figurative, yet is it verily so familiar and
easy to all people, as that other word in the Creed is, he sits at the
right hand of God, yea it is far easier.] When you can diue deep into your
own fancies, you think them as familiar to all others, as to your self. If
this were so easy and ready with the simpler sort, as you make it, me thinks
it should not so much trouble you to express it rightly. But you vary so
often, and say nothing in the end, that your hearers can hardly sound the
bottom of your Hades. That God has no hands as we have, this every What is
meant by sitting at Gods right hand.
mean Christian does or should know. Since then this similitude is taken from
men, and with them it is not strange to put those on their right hand, whom
they will honor and advance, it is easy for the simple to learn that
Christ's sitting at the right hand of God is as much as his sitting in glory
and Majesty with God; which though they cannot presently perceive how great it
is, yet may they readily conceive what the meaning thereof is. In your
descending to Hades it is nothing so. Your inconstancy and variety in
expounding that phrase is a proof what difficulty there is in it; and your
predicament of twelve parts at the end of your book is a laborinth long enough
for simple Christians to loose themselves therein. Though therefore your
devices be familiar to your self, who night and day dream thereof, yet that
makes them no whit the easier to the simple; who can quickly apprehend that
Christ was content to die for their sins, and to be buried for the more
certain trial of death, and to have his soul bestowed where pleased
himself, till his resurrection, when he raised himself from death as the
vanquisher and commander of death, and of the whole power and Dominion of
Satan, death and hell: but that Christ soul after death descended to Hades,
that is to the general indefinite condition and Dominion of death without any
mention of the place, where it abode; this is more like one of Aristotle's
Metaphysicall abstracts, then any part of the Christian faith.

Defenc. page 198. li. 11.
Herein all the later, famous and godly restoarers of religion in a manner do
join with us; as Master Bucer, P. Martyr, Bullingere, Oleuian. etc. yea master
Calvin liked this also well enough, though yet he seems to lean more to
another sense.] If you mean, those learned men were of opinion, that
descending to Sheol (which the Septuagint call hades) referred to the bodies or
lives of good or bad, did in the old Testament signify their going to the
grave, I am of the same opinion with them, I have not once nor twice professed
as much: but if any of them did think, as none of them do, that Sheol in the
Hebrew tongue, or in the Scriptures imports not hell, but only the grave, I
must have leave to dissent from such as be of that mind. Howbeit neither Peter
Martyr, nor Bullingere, nor Bucer, nor Oleuian, nor Calvin are of that mind,
notwithstanding they diuersely expound this Article. What Calvin thinks of
Christ's suffering hell pains, is not to this purpose; but most certainly he
takes Hades in the Creed for hell, and for the pains thereof. Of the rest,
excepting Oleuian, I have spoken before: and Oleuians reasons to prefer his
sense before all other senses of this Article are very weak; and not worthy a
man of his learning. He lays this for the Oleuians conectures are but weak.
maine ground thereof (which is not granted, and cannot be proved) That this
Article, of Christ's descending to Hades was Christ's extremest and lowest
humiliation, and no part of his exaltation. Which way will you, or Oleuian
prove that? and yet this is the only cause, why he would have Hades signify
the ignominious state of Christ's body in the grave, where he lay oppressed,
and as it were swallowed up of death. But Oleuians suppositio^, that certainly
Peter in the second of the Acts spoke of Christ's extremest humiliation, and
derived it from David's words, is utterly void of all just proof. For Peter
proposes the manner and power of Christ's resurrection. Now that was no part
of Christ's humiliation. Again the words, which Peter cites out of David,
argue rather the singular prerogative, which Christ had over death above David
and others, that his flesh saw no corruption, nor his soul was for saken in
hell; which things whatsoever their meaning be, sound rather to Christ's honor
and Soueraignitie, then to his abasement and humility. Thirdly Oleuian
refers this to the baseness of the grave; where I hope Christ's soul was
not. And if you make heaven or Paradise, where Christ's soul was, the lowest
abasement that Christ could suffer, you will prove a mad merry divine. Lastly
where Oleuian would have the shame of the grave to be the victory of those
hellish pains, which he supposes Christ suffered on the cross, call you that
the victory of hell over Christ's soul, when it ascends with honor and
bliss to heaven and the society of all the Saints? These things must hang
better together before I can be induced to admit them, whosoever offers them:
though I make it as lawful for me to refuse Oleuians conjectures, as he makes
it for himself to leave all the Fathers, and the reformed churches of the
Augustane confession expounding that article of the Creed, as I do.

Defenc. page 198. li. 23.
But we are to know that (as you cite them and urge them) they have no such
authority and credit as hitherto we have yielded unto them. And that for three
causes. First, for that your translating and turning them, he descended into
hell, is corrupt, partial and untrue.] The exceptions, which you take against
these words, are three. First, that they are ill translated by me. Secondly,
that they were lately put into the Apostles Creed. Thirdly, that they contain
an error, which was Christ's going to Limbus to fetch the Patriarks thence. If
the rest be no truer then the first, we shall soon have done with them. Is this
my translation of the Creed, he descended into hell? Can you show us, since
this Hell in the Creed is no new translation.
Realm spoke English, or since it received the Christian faith, that ever it
had any other word in this place of the Creed but hell, or a word equivalent to
it? The Saxons before us said; And he ny (...) (...) ^o hell; and he down
went to hell. The Britons before them, if that tongue be not changed,
Descenawdd y yffern, he descended to inferne. So that in calling this
translation corrupt, partial, and untrue; you show that you have lately
devised a sense of that article, which these parts of the Christian world never
heard before. And where you would have me Page 198. li. 34.
evidently and soundly convince you by Greek authority, that hades is never
applied to the state and condition of the godly deceased, and then you will
yield: I like well your wit, that will be sure to say what you list without
warrant or proof, and then lay the burden on others. Must I prove the
negative or you rather not be believed till you have justly proved by the
Sctiptures and by the ancient Greek fathers, that hades with them did
signify the place where the souls of the righteous were received after
Christ's resurrection: or that hades with them was not a place of darkness
under the earth, which what that be in Christian religion besides hell, I leave
to the judgment of the wise and indifferent Reader. Your weak and seely
proofs taking hold of the Pagans error, that thought good and bad after death
were under the earth in Plutoes kingdom, whom they called hades, will never
convince our English translation to be partial or false. Besides in the mean
time you must remember, you reject and impugn the words received and allowed
by the public authority of this Realm; and so convince your self to refuse an
article of the faith confirmed by the laws of the land.

Defenc. page 199. li. 3.
This clause of Christ's descending to hades or to infernum is new or lately put
into our vulgar Creed called the Apostles Creed. Ruffinus witnesses (who lived
about five hundred years after Christ) that it was not at all in the Creed in
his time.] You mistake every thing that you meddle with. Ruffine lived in
Ieroms time, and wrote against him, which was within 400 years after Christ;
and says the Church of Rome, and (some) Churches of the East had not those
words (he descended to hell) in their Creeds. Whence you most untruly
conclude, li. 13.
There was no such article as this, nor any such words any where in the Creed
for the space of 500 years after Christ. To clap in five hundred for four,
and the whole world for some Churches of the East, are small matters with you,
respecting how else where you intrude upon others; but this is more have then
good speed, what your Author does not say, to supply of your own. [ Will you
say Ruffine lies? or can you bring to the contrary any proof? I think not,
yea I am sure, you cannot.] Whatsoever I say, Ruffine says; you do little
better then lie. For in that exposition of the Creed, which you cite, he
sets down this for a part of the Creed, Ruffimus in Symbolum Apostolorum.
Crucisixus sub Pontio Pilato, descendit ad inferna. Crucified under Pontius
Pilate, he descended to hell. And therefore out of his report to infer, there
were not any such words any where in the Creed, for the space of 500 years
after Christ, is to bring your own witness to give the budge. That this
clause was not contained in the Creed of some Churches, may well be confessed;
that it was no where received and professed as a part of the Creed for 500
years after Christ, is a manifest untruth, though Ruffine had said it, which
yet he does not. Cyrill Bishop of Jerusalem 360. years after Christ repeating
and expounding ten points of the Creed for the better remembance of those, that
were baptized, after the crucifying, and burying of Christ, and before his
resurrection rehearses this as one of the ten, Cyrill. Hieros^ly. Catech. 4.
(...), he descended to the places under the earth. Chrysostom a Presbyter of
Antioch 400 years after Christ, repeateth the same as a part of the Creed.
Chrysosi. de expositione Symboli, homil 2.
Crucified under Pontius Pilate, he was buried. Descendit ad infernum, he
descended to hell, that this also might not want a wonder. Angustine in his
Sermon, ad competentes, to those that desired baptism, rehearses the whole
Creed, and this article as a part, descendit ad inferna; Christ descended to
hell; and thus expounds it. Augusi. sermo. 131. de ten pore.
Dum corpus in sepulchro iacuit, anima illa de infernis triumphauit, whiles
Christ's body lay in the grave, his soul triumphed over hell. And elsewhere
repeating it by parts, says, Idem sermo. 195.
Credit passum sub Pontio Pilato, credit crucisixum, credit mortuum and
sepultum, credit eum ad inferna descendisse. Believe that Christ suffered
under Pontius Pilate, believe that he was crucisied, believe that he died and
was buried, believe that he descended to hell. Your self, if you vary not in
this as you do in other things touching this cause since the making of your
Treatise, acknowledge so much. Treat. pa^. 94. li 25.
We know (the Creed) to be most ancient and very near to the Apostles times:
Page 93. li. 7.
yea this very article of Christ's descending to hades; because Ignatius
speaks of it, and others most ancient likewise. And howsoever you eleuate
the credit of Eusebij hist. ecclesiast. lib. 1. ca. 13.
Eusebius report, whereof we shall speak anon more largely, the city of Edessa
kept in their public monuments from the Apostles times the chief parts of
the Apostles Creed, touching the work of our redemption by Christ, and amongst
them this one, (...), he descended to hades. Which Ignatius one of S. John the
Evangelists scholars likewise numbreth amongst the special matters of our
redemption; as that Ignatij epist. ad Trallianos.
truly, and not in opinion only, Christ was crucified, died, (...), descended
to hades, and rose the third day, and was assumed up to his father, and sits
at his right hand.

Defenc. page 199. li ^8.
This Erasmus may seem to have some color for his conjecture, that about
Thomas Aquinas his time they might (peradventure) be put into the Creed.] You
can have no color for your error in mistaking Erasmus words. Could not
Erasmus, being a man of that learning and reading which he was, tell whether
this Article were in the Creed before Aquinas time or no? and could Aquinas so
easily put this clause into all the Creedes that were used amongst Christians
throughout the world? Innocentius the third, above 60. years before Aquinas,
expressing the mysteries of their mass, sets down the twelve parts of the
Apostles Creed, and this for the fifth Article, Innocent 3. de mysterijs
Missae. li 2. cap. 15.
Descendit ad Inferna, tertia die resurrexit a mortuis. He descended to Hell,
and rose the third day from the dead. The same Innocentius in his great
Laterane Council proposing the Catholic faith, as he calls it, puts
down this for a part thereof. Council. lateranens. sub Innocent. 3. cap. 1. de
fide Catholica.
Descendit ad Inferos, resurrexit a mortuis. Sed descendit in anima, resurrexit
in carne. Christ descended to hell, and rose from the dead: but he descended in
Soul, and rose with his flesh. Of this could not Erasmus be ignorant, since it
was openly published to all men's eyes in the Decretals of Gregory: li. 1. Tit.
1. de summa Trinitate and fide Catholica cap. 1. Erasmus therefore had no such
meaning, that Thomas Aquinas was the first, that added this clause to the
Creed, as you and others much mistake his words; but doubts whether Aquinas
in commenting on the Creed expounded that Article, or no. And that appears
by his next words clean contrary to your conceit, which you never took the
pains to view. Eras. in Symbolum Catechesi. 4.
Nonnulla suspitio est, hanc particulam ab alio adiectam, velhoc argumento,
quod non est suo loco. There is some suspicion, that this part (he descended to
hell) was added (to Thomas exposition of the Creed) by some other, even for
this reason, because it is not put in his due place. For where he makes the
Resurrection to be the third article, the descent to hell he makes the fourth:
unless happily he thought, that Christ returning from death to life descended to
hell both in Body and Soul. Erasmus says no such thing, that Aquinas was the
first, who added this Article to the Creed; but he would seem to suspect,
that Thomas did not accept this as a part of the Creed in his time, for that
he does not set it in the right place, where it should be, but puts it after
the Resurrection. Howbeit Erasmus might have suspected, that some other had
changed Aquinas order, as well as augmented Aquinas work. For it is evident,
that Aquinas in his sum of Divinity acknowledges that Article (of Christ's
descent to hell) 9 and 28.
to come from the Apostles, and numbereth it in the Aquinas 2. 2. quest. 1.
Articulo.
4. place before the Resurrection of Christ from the dead. And this reason he
gives, why it was not mentioned in the Creedes of the Fathers, because no
heresy was then risen about that point, and therefore they still presupposed
it as foredetermined in the Apostles Creed. And yet there want not Councels
and Fathers declaring and confirming this to be a part of the Catholic and
Christian faith. The Council of Orleance kept in the 46. year of Charles the
great, in the profession of their faith, say thus. Synod. Arelaten sub Carolo.
ca. 1.
Descendit ad Inferos, he descended to hell to deliver the Saints, which there
were held, deuictoque mortis Imperio, and subduing the kingdom of death, rose
again: concluding also thus: this is the faith of the Catholic Church, this
confession we keep and hold. The Council of Foroiulij otherwise called
Aquileia, (in which City Ruffinus, that expounds the Creed, was a
Presbyter) made this exposition of the Creed in the time of Carolus Martellus,
and Pipine his Son, Father to Charles the great. Council. Foroiu^tens. in
Symboio fide^.
In Eadem dignatus est mori, sepeliri, ad Inferos descendere, tertia dei
resurgere. In the same (humane nature) Christ vouchsafed to die, to be buried,
to descend to hell, to rise again the third day. Which they close with this
attestation. Ibidem.
This most sincere purity of the Catholic faith we will all degrees of the
Church distinctly to learn and commit to memory, it a vt ne vnus quidem apex
intermittatur vel augeatur, so that not one the least point of it be omitted or
increased. The 4. Council of Toledo in the time of Sisenandus King of Spain,
about 630. years after Christ, made the same profession word for word, which
the Council of Orleance did after imitate. Concilium Toleta. 4 cap. 10.
Christ descended to hell to deliver the Saints, which there were held, and
subduing the kingdom of death rose again. Venantius Bishop of Poictiers in
France, that dedicated some of his poems to Gregory the first, commenting on
the Apostles Creed distinctly rehearsed the Article, Venantius in Symbolum
Aposto.
descendit ad Infernum, he descended to hell, among the rest; and says farther
of it; but descending to hell Christ suffered no injury, for that he did it in
respect of (his) mercy. As if a King should enter a prison, not to be there
held himself, but to loose such as were guilty.

Defenc. page 199. li. 21.
We can not see but that whenever, whosoever put it first into this place,
they signified thereby, it seems, that Christ went to Limbus a place under
the earth, where they imagined the blessed Patriarchs rested.] When this clause
was first inserted into the Creed, no man can directly pronounce. Some places
had it not for a time, and some had it aunciently transmitted from the first
founders of their Churches; which being duly considered by the rest, that
wanted it, and the Article on every side confessed to be true, it was at length
generally received throughout the Church, not as a thing newly devised by
themselves, but formerly commended to many Churches even from their first
erection [ Page 199. li. 32.
Thaddeus, Ignatius, and Athanasius have these very words: yet say they not any
where that they were in that set form of the Apostles Creed, which we now
have.] If Thaddeus delivered it to the Church of Edessa at the first preaching
of the faith unto them, and they kept a record thereof in the public monuments
of their City to the time of Eusebius; why should it not be counted and call
a part of the Apostles Creed, that is, of the short and plain form of the
faith delivered to the people, when they first received the Gospel of Christ?
And how should Ignatius, Athanasius, and all the ancient Fathers both Greek
and Latin throughout the world light on the same words in effect, and agnise
them for a point of Christian faith, if sundry Churches had not retained that
Article in the Summarie confession of their faith even from the beginning?
Ruffine alleges truly these words, descendit ad Inferna, ^ Page 199. li. 38.
but not out of any example of the Apostles Creed, yea he expressly denies it
to be therein any where at that time.] Cyrill and Chrysostom expound these
words as parts of the common Creed received in their Churches, and called
Apostolic, because it was descended from the Apostles times. Ruffine does the
like for the Church of Aquileia, where he was a Presbyter; he sets down
these words as a part of the common Creed, which he expounds, and names
Apostolic. And here for trial of your truth and modesty, (if you know what
those things mean) I refer my self to the printed Copies of Cyprians and
Ieroms works, (where this exposition is extant,) whether these words,
crucifixus sub Pontio Pilato, and sepultus, descendit ad Inferna, He was
crucified under Pontius Pilate, and buried, he descended to hell: be not
expressly set down as a part of the Creed, which Ruffine expounds and
calls Apostolic. The Copies printed at Bafile by Frobenius, and at Lions by
Gryphius, 1537; at Basile by Heruagius 1540; at Antuerpe by Crinitus, and at
Paris by Stephan Petit. 1541; sever these words with an half moon from
Ruffinus explication, as they do the rest of the Creed. Those printed at Rome
by Paulus Manutius, 1563; at Antuerpe by Stelsius 1561; by Peter Bellerus 1589;
and by John de Preux 1593. at Paris by Sebastian Niuellius 1603. distinguish
them by greater or different letters from the rest. So that your denying them
to be part of the Creed, which Ruffine brings for Apostolic, is a manifest
mentirie.

As you pervert Ruffines words, so you do his meaning. For he does not say,
that Christ's descent to hell was all one with his burial; but where the
Church of Rome with some others wanted those words, he descended to hell; yet
with them the effect thereof was contained in the word, buried. And no
marvel, that the Church of Rome (for that he chiefly notes by the Latin
word, sepultus) extended the word burial to hell; since they did, and to this
day do follow the old Latin translation of the Bible Luke 16. where it is
written, the rich man was buried in hell. It was an easy matter therefore for
them by Christ's burial to understand his descent to hell, since as they
thought, they found the word so far extended in the Scriptures. And grant
that Ruffine and others of the ancients (as you affirm) did think it
consequent as an effect to Christ's burial, that his soul did descend to hell;
what prove you by this, but against your self, that such as had not those
words expressed in their Creed, yet retained the sense and meaning of them in
that they were persuaded, this was the law of humane necessity, without
Christ, that as men's bodies were buried, so their souls descended to hell;
which descent Christ refused not to restore men, as Hilarie and others avouch.
This you say was Ruffines own meaning, who [ Defenc. page 200. li. 24.
going about to prove by the Scripture that Christ descended to Infernum,
shows that he means his death hereby and his burial.] I suppose few men
will trust you, having tried you false so often. Ruffine going about to prove
by the Scripture of the old Testament, that every part of Christ's passion and
his resurrection was fore-shewed in the law and the Prophets, plainly
distinguishes his death, burial, and descent to Hell. For Christ's death he
says; Ruffinus in expositione Symboli Apost. What Ruffinus means by Christ's
descent to hell.
spiritum post haec scribitur reddidisse; after this it is written, that he
gave up the Ghost. This was fore spoken by the Prophet saying; into thy hands
I commend my spirit. Sepultus quoque perhibetur. He is then said to be buried.
For which he alleges a place of Jeremy, and adds. Euidentissima haec
Sepulturae eius indicia propheticis vocibus designata sunt, accipe tamen and
alia. These most manifest signs of his burial are expressed in the Prophets
speeches, and yet thou shall have other. Where he alleges three other places
of Scripture; how fitly to his purpose, I need not pronounce. Then comes he
to Christ's descent to hell, and says; Sed and quod in Infernum descendit,
euidenter praenunciatur in Psalmis. That also he descended to hell, is
evidently fore told in the Psalms. Now whether his places be aptly cited or
no, is not to the question, though you make that your whole advantage. For
first, they be as aptly cited, as the rest. Next they have every one of them
somewhat more in Rusfines apprehension, then of Christ's burial. For he
stands not only on those words, the dust and corruption of death, but he
fastneth most on the words of descending and bringing down in limum profundi,
to the mire of the deep. Which things though you flurt at, as waighing light
in your eyes, it is certain, he intended thereby more then the grave as is
evident by his own words. For citing the place of Peter thus. In which
(spirit) Christ descended to preach to the spirits enclosed in prison which
were incredulous in the days of Noe, he adds, in quo quid operis eger^m in
Inferno, declaratur; in which it is declared, what Christ did in hell. In the
grave I trust Christ did nothing. In Paradise he did not preach to those, that
were in prison (and disobedient) in the days of Noe. Since then this end of
Christ's descent to hell is expressed by Ruffinus, and this could not be done
either in the grave, where nothing can be done; or in heaven, where these
disobedients were not in prison: It is clear that Ruffinus had no such
meaning, as you make him by Christ's descent to intend no more but his death
and burial.

Defenc. page 2. c. h 5.
He holds indeed that Christ went down to Infernum, that is to Limbus
patrum, as an opinion then common among them, and worthy (as he thought) to be
believed.] If he meant this, as you now confess; then he meant more by Christ's
descending to Infernum then Christ's death and burial. And so by your own
mouth you are convinced of a lie fathered on Ruffinus against both his words
and meaning. And yet I find no such express mention or description of Limbus
in Ruffines words, as you would seem to impose upon him. He mentions Christ's
conquest over hell; (...) in Symbol. Apost.
quod Inferna sibi Regna (...), that Christ would subject the Infernali
kingdom to himself; and qui mortis habebat Imperium, disruptis Inferni
claustris, velut de profundo tractus; he that had the rule of death, was drawn
as it were from the deep, the cloisters of hell being broken open. He says
also, Animabus de Inferni captiuit ate reuocatis, the souls being revoked from
the captivity of hell; but whom he thereby means, he expressed before with
the Apostles words, when he said, Ephesians. 1.
qui simul consuscitauit nos, simulque sedere fecit in caelestibus: Christ
raised us up together with himself, and made us sit in heavenly places with
him. So that if you and your friends when you prate so much against all or the
most of the ancient fathers as upholding Limbus, would bethink your selves,
that most of them speak indifferently as well of the living and yet unborn,
as of the dead before Christ's time, when they say that souls were delivered
out of the bondage and captivity of hell and Satan, you should do them less
wrong, and less deceive your selves, then now you do. And for those fathers,
that indeed were of this opinion, that before Christ's The place of Abraham's
bosom unknown.
resurrection Abraham's bosom was under the earth, you shall do well to think
and speak more reverently of them, considering what master Bullingere, a
learned and grave Divine resolved even of that point. Bullingerus in Lucae ca.
16.
Sinus Abrahae aliud non est quam portus salutis: vbi autem fuerat quonda^ hic
locus, an apud superos, an apud inferos, nolo pronunciare, imo malo ignorare,
quam temere definire, quodliteris sacris expressum non habeo. In his vt
curiosus esse nolo, ita nihil desinio, cum nemine super hac re contendere volo.
Satis mihi est intelligere and fateri veteres sanctos in refrigerio, loco
vtique certo, non in tormentis, ante ascensionem Domini fuisse, vt maxim
ignorem, vbi ille locus fuerit. The bosom of Abraham is nothing else but an
(entrance or) port of salvation. Where this place formerly was, whether above
in (some part of) the heavens, or below (under the earth) I will not pronounce.
Yea I had rather be ignorant thereof, then roshly to define that, which I find
not expressed in the Scriptures. In these things, as I will not be curious, so
do I determine nothing, neither will I contend with any man about this matter.
It shall suffice me to understand and confess, that the godly of the old
Testament were in a certain place of rest not in terments before the oscension
of Christ, though I know not where that place was. That it was no part nor
member of hell, we have S. ^.
Austins firm resolution, grounding himself on the words, which our Savior
in the Gospel ascribes to Abraham. Luke 16.
Between you and us there is a great gulf setl^d. But whether it were under
the earth till Christ's resurrection, of that some fathers doubted; wherein we
may not be reproachful to them, though we dissent from them, since the
Scriptures, as this great Divine thinks, expressly decide not the question.

Defenc page 20. li. ^.
Ignatius you think is clearly yours: likewise one Thaddeus, by Eusebius
report, one of the 70. disciples, which the Evangelist Luke speaks of. Also
Athanasius Creed. Ignati^ saying Christ des^ended to hades alone, but rose
again with many, means evidently his burial, and going down into his
grave: as you acknowledge that hades many times may well signify.] With the
septuagint, that were Jews, (and translated the old Testament Hades with
Ignatius is not the grave.
out of Hebrew into Greek almost 300. years before Christ's birth) I said
indeed Hades stood as well for the grave as for hell, even as the Pagans also
did use it: but the Evangelists and Apostles retaining a difference between
Thanatos, death, and Hades, take Hades for hell, and never for the grave: whose
example the Greek Divines do follow; and therefore Hades with them does not
signify the grave, but the place where the wicked are tormented after death,
as it does in the Gospel of S. Luke. Secondly the words of Ignatius agree not
with that in Matthew, by which you would expound them. For Matthew says,
Matthew. 27.
the graves did open (at Christ's death) and many bodies of the Saints, that
slept, arose; and coming out of their graves, (...), after his resurrection,
came into the holy city, and appeared to many. They did not rise with Christ,
but after him, as August. ep. 99.
Austen well expounds it; that Christ alone might be 1. Cor. 1.
the first fruits, and Colos. 1.
first borne from the dead. And therefore Ignatius did not speak this of
Christ's resurrection, but of his ascension, even as Thaddeus did in the self
same sort. Eusebius. Eccle. hist. li. 1. ca. 13.
(...) He descended alone (to Hades) but he ascended to his Father with a great
multitude. That Ignatius here notes Christ's burial in none Defenc. page 201.
li. 15.
other words besides; If you mean in the same sentence, there was no cause
nor need he should; if you mean in the same place, it is not true: for the
next sentence sauc one is this. Ignat. epist. ad Trallianos.
The day before the Sabbath at the third hour Christ received sentence of
condemnation from Pilate, at the sixth hour he was crucified, at the ninth he
breathed out his spirit, and before the Sunne-set he was laid in his grave. The
Sabbath day he stayed under the earth in his grave; and at the dawning of the
Lords day he rose from the dead. But that Ignatius words can not be verified
of Christ's burial, is evident by the very purport of the words themselves,
he descended to hades alone, says Ignatius. To his grave Christ descended not
alone. Those that were crucified with him, were buried at the same time with
him. Besides he descended alone, is as much as of his own accord, and by his
own force, no man helping, or accompanying him; which was not the manner of his
burial. For his body was buried by others, and could not of it self descend
to the grave. His descending to hades was a voluntary action, even as his
ascending from it was; which in a dead body no man can imagine. Lastly the
wall never broken before, can not be understood of the grave, since from the
grave some others rose long before the death and birth of Christ, as is plain
by the story of him, that was 2. Kings 13.
cast dead into Eliseus grave, and of John 11.
Lazarus.

Feign you would slubber up these things, but they hang in your teeth, and will
not go down. [ The power of the grave, or the strength of death, which
remained indeed from the beginning of the world as a mighty wall not broken
down, was now (you say) by Christ's death utterly overcome and dissolved.] In
this answer you enclose three untruths. First, The wall of hades never broken
but by Christ.
Christ never descended into the power of the grave, nor strength of death, as
you conceive; they had no power or dominion over him, he breathed out his own
soul at his own pleasure; to be resumed again when pleased himself; though
for the proof of his death to be true and unfeigned, he was content his body
should lie in the grave till the third day. Again, the power of the grave or
strength of death was no wall unbroken from the foundation of the world. Many
rose from the dead before Christ, and some were translated, that Heb. 11. v. 5.
they should not see death. Thirdly, it is not yet, as you affirm, utterly
over come and dissolved. For the bodies of the Saints are under it, and so
shall be till the last day; when the wicked shall rise from their graves as well
as the Saints, though not to heavenly bliss, as they shall. Besides this, the
words as well of Ignatius, as these of Thaddeus, must be performed between
Christ's descent to hades and his resurrection. For so Eusebius reports the
words of Thaddeus. Eusebij hist. li. 1. cap. 13.
Christ descended to hades, and brake the wall never broken before since the
world began. And rose again, and raised the dead, which had slept from the
beginning. Hades then has a partition, which never man brake, as Abraham told
the rich man: Only Christ, who was God and man, voluntarily descended thither,
and with his return thence broke the wall, that was never broken before.

Defenc. page 202. li. 4.
Though some being dead did rise to life again before Christ's resurrection.
(as touching the time) yet the virtue and power of Christ's resurrection was
before them, by which only and merely they rose again. Neither yet was
resurrection to al^ the dead forthwith performed by the resurrection of Christ:
nevertheless purchased it was even then, and by the only power and virtue
thereof is and shall be performed to all in d^e time. You would seem in this to
answer me, but indeed you refute your self. For you confeste, that this
partition between death and life was often broken before Christ's resurrection,
b^it the power of Christ's resurrection, you say, was before them, by which
only they rose again. But both Ignatius and Thaddens say, it was never broken
before the time, that Christ descended to hades. They therefore do not mean
the grave, as you do. If you say, the grave was a partition to stay men from
heaven till Christ was risen, then were not the souls of the Saints in heaven,
whose bodies were in the grave, which is repugnant to your own position. So
that the grave, neither hindering the body from life, nor the soul from heaven
before Christ's coming, was not the wall unbroken till Christ's descent to
hades, of which these ancient writers speak. Our resurrection was purchased
by Christ's death, and openly confirmed, and assured to us by Christ's
resurrection; but since it shall not be performed unto us till the last day,
this wall is not vet actually broken down to all Christ's elect, no more then
death is abolished to them, which is the last enemy, that shall be destroyed, but
is not yet sub^ected under Christ's feet in respect of his members, which do
and shall l^e in their graves to the end of the world. Neither does the Apostle
call Christ the first fruits of the dead, (as you intend) because others, who
rose from the grave before Christ, did rise by the virtue and power of his
resurrection: you commit herein a double error. Christ was truly the first,
that ever rose from death to an immortal and celestial life, and the power
and force of his resurrection brings not men back to a mortal and miserable
life in this world, but to be conformed to his glorious body, that is, to
incorruption and immortality.

g Thus I understand your Thaddeus, also Athanasius in his Creed (as it seems
most Defenc page 202.
reasonably and necessarily) because they express neither his death nor his
burial at all in any other words save these, he descended to hades. You run
so fast on your own conceits, that you see not what you pass by. Has
Thaddeus no words touching Christ's death? what make you then of these scant a
line before; Eusebius. hist. li. 1. ca. 13.
(...), how Christ humbled himself and died? And though the Creed, provided
for the simpler sort, distinguishes Christ's crucifying, death, burial, and
descent to hell; yet what need is there, that the learned every time they talk
of Christ's cross or death, should number all these severally and orderly as
they stand in the Creed? crucifying is enough to note his death, for they
crucified him unto death. Christ's burial had in it no more but the certainty
of his death, and by Gods providence the vigilanc^e of his enemies, that his
body should not be thought to be stolen away by his own Disciples. Other
moment or matter of our redemption there was none in Christ's burial. The
goodly words, with which you would feed us, that in the grave he came under the
power, strength, dominion, and kingdom of death, are rather variations for a
nouice, then any points of sensible doctrine for a divine. So that Athanasius
expressing Christ's suffering for our salvation, his descending to hades, and
rising the third day from the dead, fully compriseth all the principal works,
which Christ performed for our salvation from his cross to his resurrection.
Now what Athanasius means by hades, since his works are extant in Greek, we
shall not need to depend on your partial conjectures. We have many plain and
perspicuous places, which deliver his sense and meaning unto us. I have showed
before, which I must not so often repeat, that Athanasius makes two places of
condemnation, whither man after death was adjudged for sin: Athanas. de ^car.
Christ's.
(...), the grave and hades. And of Christ's body and soul he directly says,
Ibidem.
(...). The body (of Christ) went to the grave, the soul to hades: these
places being divided with a great distance: and the grave receiving the
presence of his body, (for there was his body present) and hades receiving his
(humane) spirit. Think you this to be plain enough, that Christ's descent to
hades was not his burial, where his body lay; but the going of his soul to
hades, whither man was condemned for sin, and which Athanasius says, The
Devil kept as the only place of his strength? The enemy says he, fallen
from heaven, removed from the earth, expelled from the air; Idem in passione^
and crucem Domini.
(...); every where vanquished, determined, if he could, to keep hades safe.
For this place was yet left unto him. But Ibidem.
as soon as Christ died, the world wanted the light of her Sun, the Veil of
the temple rent, the earth trembled, the Rocks did cleave in sunder, (...), and
the soldiers together with the keepers of Hades did shake for fear Ibidem.
(...). And the Devil thi^ing to carry (Christ) to hades, was himself thrown
out of hades. Ibid.
(...). For it was not long after, but (Christ) loosed the (sorrows or) pains
of hades. Athanasius then without peraduentures takes hades for hell, and
Christ's descent thither in soul to work the subversion of Satan's kingdom,
and deliverance of all his elect thence, were they living, dead, or yet unborn.

Defenc. page 202. li. 27.
Your seeking to pervert this reason because the ancient Creedes want sundry
other Articles, which now are in our Creed, is to no purpose. For so much as
they all do evermore intend to set down perfectly the sum of Christ's
accomplished Redemption and mediation at the least. Not any of those his maine
works are in them omitted.] If your pride were not greater then your skill, we
should have a great deal less prating from you. The ancient Creeds are
imperfect in words.
How shall the Reader believe your report of Fathers and their meanings, when
you never saw so much as the Creedes of the ancient Councels, and yet
pronounce so boldly of them, as if you had perused them all but yesterday. The
great Nicene Creed makes no mention of Christ's death or burial; but says.
Symbolum Niceni concilij.
He suffered, and rose the third day. The first general Council of
Constantinople, whose Creed was after used in the Church Service, says;
Christ Symbolum Constantinop.
suffered, and was b^ied, and rose the third day; omitting his crucifixion and
death. The great Council Council.
of Aphrica, and the general Council of Concilium Ephesians. ca. 13.
Ephesus concur with the Nicene, and say, he suffered, and rose the third
day. What truth then is there in your words, where you say, they all Aphrica.
ca. 104.
do evermore intend perfectly to set down the Sum of Christ's Redemption for
us; not any of those his maine works are in them omitted? Is the death of
Christ none of his maine works for our Redemption? find you now, that his
burial may be omitted, and yet the Creed not be imperfect? These things, good
Sir, are employed as consequent or antecedent to the parts expressed. For if
Christ did rise the third day, he rose from the Grave, where he had lien three
days; and buried he was not, before he was dead. As also he rose not but from
the dead. Wherefore in his resurrection are both his death and his burial
comprised. Besides he suffered unto death. Which things were all plainly
proposed to the simple in their Creed called Aposto like, but not in the
Creedes concluded by the learned Pastors in their Councels. The same course
kept the Greek and Latin Fathers, sometimes expressing Christ's death, burial,
and descent to hell: sometimes omitting some of them, as the cause required.
Epiphanius says, Epiphanius in ^eresium Anacephalai^st.
(...). Christ says he speaking of the things as they were done, is crucified,
buried, he descended to the places under the earth in his Deity and in his
soul, he leads Captivity Captive, and rises the third day. Vigilius.
Vigilius contra (...). li. 2. ca. 3.
Constat Dominum nostrum Iesum Christum sexta feria crucifixum, and ipsa die ad
Infernum descendisse, ipsa die in sepul^hris iacuisse, ipsa die Latroni
dixisse, hodie mecum eris in Paradiso. It is certain, that our Lord Jesus
Christ was crucified on the sixth day, and that day descended to hell, that day
lay in the grave; and that day said to the These; This day shall thou be with
me in Paradise. And declaring how this was verified in Christ; Ibidem.
ergo dicimu^ Dominum iacuisse in sepulchro, sed in sola carne, and Dominum
descendisse ad infernum, sed in sola anima. Then we say, that the Lord lay in
his grave, but with his Body alone, and descended to hell, but with his Soul
alone, without his Body.

Defenc page 203. li. 2.
Howbeit to speak plainly your Thaddeus whom you so highly esteem, is a mere
counterfeit. You say this report of him in Eusebius by some men is counted
fabulous. Nay who ever since Eusebius, I think, held it for better?] Were
there no more in it but the records of Edessa then remaining, and the report of
Eusebius translating the same, they fairly prove this clause of Christ's
descending to Hades, to have been aunciently Eusebius report allowed by the
best Historiographers.
and openly received and professed in the Primative Church. Otherwise the
religious of those Ages, that lived with and after Eusebius, if he had under
this pretense broched any new point of faith; as in duty they were bound, so
no doubt they would have resisted and refuted it. But the whole Church
accepting and allowing that History, has likewise admitted and approved this
Article of Christ's descent to Hades, to be a part of the Christian faith; and
the best learned of those times in their writings acknowledge the same. And
where you ask, Who ever since Eusebius held it for better then a fable; it is
a sign how little conversant you are in any man's labors, that fit not your
licentious humors. Your own Author, on which you so much build, Ruffinus
translated these books of Eusebius, Hi^ro. de Ecclesiast. Scriptoribus in
Euselao.
Ierom commended them, and D^inct. 15. Sancta Romana.
Gelasius an ancient Bishop of Rome with a Council confirmed them. And
touching this very History, Nicephorus largely reports it, and many of the
best Historiographers before our time allege it; not as fable, but for a
truth. As namely, Blondus Decadis 2. li. 5. Nauclerus volumine 2. generat. 2.
Sabellicus Enneadis 7. li. 1. Volateranus. geographiae li. 11. de Sectis
Syriae: Martinus Polonus in Friderico 1. Platina in Lucio 2. I am not alone
then in allowing Eusebius report; Nicephor. li. 2. ca. 7.
but you rather are so headstrong and withal so ignorant, that you censure all
men besides your self.

Defenc. page 203. li. 9.
It is all forged and fowly corrupted for these reasons: First this writing
says that Judas the Apostle was the same, who was also called Thomas the
Apostle. But the Scripture it self shows that Judas and Thomas were diverse
and several Apostles. When you go about to challenge a record, never corrupt
it; for so you challenge your self, and not that How Thomas might be called
Judas.
which you would overthrow. The writing does not say, that those two Apostles
were one, as you dream; but rather observes that with them, Thomas had two
names. Now what inconvenience is in this, that one Apostle should have two
names, or that they should call Thomas also Judas? Peter had three, if not
four names: Simon, Galat. 2.
Cephas, Peter and Bar-Ionas, and Acts 1.
Judas the brother of James Matthew calls Matthew. 10.
Lebbeus and Thaddeus. Matthew was also called Mark. 2.
Leui. It was a thing most usual with the Jews to have two or mo names, as
appears in the genealogy of Christ rehearsed by Matthew and Luke, who use
many words in that Catalogue, no where recorded in other Scriptures. And since
Thom in Hebrew, whence Thomas comes, does signify no more but a Twinne,
which name is common to both the brethren borne at one time; it must needs be
that Thomas then had an other name to distinguish him from his brother. This
therefore is no just exception, to discredit that ancient Record with a thing
most usual among the Jews. Again with the Syria^ not skillful in the Hebrew
tongue, how easy a skippe was it in steed of (...) (...) a Jew, to conceive
(...) Iehudah, which is Judas; ( he and Iod being letters, that are often
changed one from another:) and where the writer would have said; a Ie^ which
was Thomas ^nt Thaddeus, so to set it down as if it were Iehuda, which was
Thomas, sent Thaddeus. Yea the Syriack words for a Jew and Judas, (...) and
(...) differ but a ^od, (...) which in ancient writings is soon worn out of
sight: I omit other diuersiti^s, which might easily happen in the Greek; as
that Iu^as sent Thaddeus, (...) which al^ Thomas did, one small title added to
the Article to make it the ^uter relative; or changing their places, and
saying, (...), Judas and also Thomas sent Thaddeus. There is neither Greek nor
Latin Father, in whose Treatises I will not readily find greater st^ps. This I
may conjecture, because Nicephor. li. 2. ca. 40.
Nicephorus writes, that Judas the brother of James came after to the City of
Edessa, the City of king Abaga^e which also Bed^ in 1. ca. Acto^um.
Bid and Oecumen. prolegom^ in Acta.
Oecumenius do witness and supplying what wanted in Thaddeus ministry,
there ended his life, and so might be one of those that sent him. But you that
think this so great a matter in the records of Edessa, what say you to the
Syriack translatour of the new Testament, who twice calls this Judas the
Apostle, the Luke 6.
Acts 1.
son of James, where indeed he was the brother of James, and the Son of
Alpheus? If you will excuse him, for that he never saw the Epistle of Jude,
where he calls himself the Iudae epist.
brother of James: how great reason then is it to excuse the men of Edessa,
that were ignorant of the Hebrew tongue, and altogether unacquainted with the
Scriptures at that time, when this was written; if they put he for Iod, which
letters are often permuted the one for the other? howbeit, as I first said, I
see no ground of any just challenge in this, that the record, which is
ancient, imports Thomas to be called Judas in the place where he lived and
died far from Iewrie, which was a thing very common among the Jews in their
own country: or Thomas to be called a Jew, and thereby to distinguish him
from others that were not Jews.

Defenc. page 20^. li 16.
Secondly we may probably conceive another error, that this Thaddeus (one of
the 70.) seeme^h to be mistaken in the Syrian writing for Thaddeus one of the
twelve Apostles.] This is rather an error in you to think, that none were
called Apostles but the twelve, or More Apostles then twelve.
that Apostle does not sometimes signify a Messenger. Christ himself is called
the Hebr. 3.
Apostle of our profession. Paul says to the Philippians, Philip. 2.
Epaphroditus your Apostle; and to the Corinthians he says of some sent by him
with Titus, Corinth. 8.
They are the Apostles of the Churches. And to the Romans he Romans 16.
saluteth Andronicus and Iunia, which are honorable (...), in the (number of
the) Apostles. He chalengeth others for 2. Cor. 11.
transforming themselves into the apostles of Christ, not that they affirmed
themselves to be of the twelve, (for Paul himself was none of them) but they
pretended to be sent of Christ, when they were not. And so Christ meant when he
said to the Angel of Ephesus, Revel. 2.
Thou have examined them which say they are Apostles, and are not; that is
which say, I sent them, when I did not. Now the Syriack writer taking
knowledge, that Thomas was Eusebij li. 1. ca. 13.
(...), an Apostle one of the twelve, and that he sent Thaddeus, (...), his
brother one of the number of the 70. Disciples of Christ: how could he after
err so much, as to mean that Thaddeus was one of the twelve Apostles,
specially the next words being: (...), one of the seventy. Wherefore this is
worse then a ca^ill, when the words infer no such thing to collect
contrarieties upon your own conceits. He sent Thaddeus, as Christ's messenger,
(or their Apostle) being one of the seventy.

Defenc. page 203. li. 18.
Further this counterfeit Thaddeus was content to receive (and did receive)
even from a king himself and also (as it seems) from one of his nobles
Adoration and worship. Whereas the true servants of Christ Peter and the Angel
refused utterly the same in such very manner offered unto them by meaner persons
in respect of state. Therefore this Thaddeus was some false Apostle; and came
not by Christ's sending.] By this reason, if it were any thing worth, you may
prove many Patriarchs and Prophets to be idolaters, and as well receivers, as
giuers of that adoration, which you suppose is due to God alone. Omit, that the
word (...) here used, is with Suidas and Phauorinus as much as (...) to
approach or draw near to a man: and that Budeus observes it in the
eccleasticall history to be taken for a reverend salutation; and so the King
approached, or reverently saluted Thaddeus; let it stand for bowing the body,
which is a sign of reverence or submission in the Scriptures; what infer you
thence? that the King, beholding the face of Thaddeus at his entrance in to
shine with a strange and divine brightness, did him reverence contrary to the
custom of Kings, which receive from others, and give not reverence to others?
If you think this word, (...), he bowed himself to Thaddeus, is more then the
godly may yield to men, or take from men; you foolishly deceive your self. Of
Abraham the Scripture says, that speaking with the Hittites for a place to
bury his dead, upon their gentle and friendly answer,

Genes. 23. verse. 7.
(...), he bowed himself to the people of the Land. Of Jacob when he met his
Brother Esau, the Scripture says, Genes. 33.
(...); he bowed himself to the earth seven times: So Ibid. verse. 7. and 6.
Leah and her children, Rachel and Joseph, Jacobs maids and their children,
every troop of them, (...) bowed themselves to Esau. Moses said to Pharoh,
Exodus 11.
all these (thy) servants shall come down to me, (...), and shall bow them
selves to me. So afterward Moses went out to Exodus 18.
meet his Father in Law, (...), and gently or reverently saluted him. Infinite
are the places in Scripture, where the word is used in that sense; and notes
the dutiful, friendly, or favorable respect had to Superiors, Equals, and
Inferiors by bowing the Body. Now whether it were meet for a King gently to
entreat, or reverently to receive the Messenger of Christ, directed to him to
cure him self of his sickness in this life, and to give him assurance of
eternal life, being no subject of his, but a stranger sent unto him; this is
all that can be doubted. Wherein though I be most willing to reserve to
Princes, not only their Sovereignty over their Subjects, but their dignity
toward strangers, yet see I no cause, but when they receive any special
graces or blessings of God by the hands of men not subjected to them, they
should adore the giver, which is God; and acknowledge the bringer. Lnke. 10.
He that despises you, de^seth me, says our Savior excepting no man. The
Apostle commends the Galathians for Galat. 4.
receiving him as an Angel of God; and charge the faithful to receive their
godly Pastors Philip. 2.
with all joy in the Lord, and to have them in honor. You and your adherents,
when you take upon you to censure Princes in your Consistories, will not
absolve them without some sign of submission, such as you like. And call you
Thaddeus, sent of purpose to cure a Prince of his bodily and ghostly diseases,
a false Apostle because the good King glad of his coming rose from his Seat,
and bowed to him, as to the Servant and Messenger of so great a Lord and
Benefactour, as he believed Christ to be?

Peter and the Angel, you say, utterly refused the same in such very manner
offered Angels and good ^en have received the bowing of the body.
unto them by meaner persons.] Have you so little good manner, that you know
not the difference betwixt bowing the body as Abraham did to the Sons of
CHETH, and MOSES to IETHRO; and falling flat at an others feet to give him
worship, as Cornelius did to Peter, and S. John to the Angel? of Cornelius
Luke says, Acts. 10.
(...), falling at (Peter's) feet, he worshipped him. And Saint John says of
himself, Revel. 19.
(...). And I fell down at his feet to worship him. This the Angel refused
in John; but the bowing of the Body even to the ground the two Angels refused
not from Genes. 19.
Loath; and Christ himself said to the Angel of Philadelphia; Revel. 3.
Behold I will make them of the Synagogue of Satan, which call themselves Jews
and are not, to come, (...), and bow themselves at thy feet. Yea David, when
he was a private man, gave this kind of reverence to 1. Sam. 24. ve^s. 9.
Saul; and being a King received it of 1. Sam. 25. ve^s. 23.
Abigail; 2. Sam. 9. verse. 6.
Mephibosheth, 2. Sam. 14.
Ioab, 2. Sam. 14.
Absalon, 2. Sam. 18.
Ahimaas, 2. Sam. 24.
Aranah, and from 1. King. 1.
Nathan the Prophet: which if it wholly pertained to God, could not be given to
men nor Angels without danger of Idolatry. But the devotion of the heart joined
with the submission of the body, and testified thereby, is adoration due to God
alone; and differs much from civil courtesy and duty reserved for
Magistrates, friends, and strangers. Since then there is no such thing reported
of Thaddeus, that the King fell at his feet, why compare you these examples
together, which are so far distant each from other? of Abdus the Son of
Abdus it is said, that having the gout, (and therefore not able to stand)
Eusebij li. 1. ca. 13.
he fell at the feet of Thaddeus, and with prayers and laying on of hands was
healed. Where perchance you will mislike, that Abdus was suffered to kneel,
whiles prayers were said over him; and hands imposed on him, that he might
recou^r; but since this submission was to God, and not to man, and dured the
time, that prayers were made to God for him; I see no just cause of condemning
Thaddeus for suffering men to kneel, whiles they asked ought at Gods hands.

Now what if this were proffered to Thaddeus, does that prove, he therefore
accepted it? had he written the Story of himself, it had been his duty,
^ot only to refuse that, which was unlawful, (if it were more then was
permitted to the servants of Christ, which we do not know) but to witness his
refusal. But others not then well acquainted with Christian Religion being the
writers thereof, how easily might they report the one, and omit the other?
Look to the Story of Daniell, and see whether he does not say of him self,
that Daniel. 2. verse. 46.
King Nabnchad-nezzar fell upon his face, (...), and bowed himself to Daniell,
and willed them to offer Sacrifice, and sweet odours unto him. This the King
proffered by Daniels own confession and though we do not doubt but Den^el
refused it, and otherwise advised the king; yet there is no such thing recorded
in the Text. Hence if you will conclude Daniel to be a false Prophet, you shall
show your self to be a rash, false and wicked teacher: but if you will excuse
him, because he was one that feared God, and knew his duty, though there be no
mention made of his denial; what spleen moves you to condemn Thaddeus,
being not him self the writer of the Story, and one that was not only
trained up in Moses Law, but a Disciple of Christ's, and sent by him to preach,
and which more is, endued with the power of the holy Ghost to heal the sick,
to plant the Gospel, and convert nations unto the faith?

Defenc. page 203. 27.
Fourthly, I do not see how it can possibly be true which this Thaddeus says,
that Christ ascended up to his Father with a great multitude; seeing the
Scripture shows how after forty days he ascended in all their sights alone
up to heaven.] Might Christ do nothing, but he must first acquaint you with
it, that you take so straight a view, who went up to heaven with him? The
Apostle notes that God said of his Son, when he brought him into the world,
Hebr ^.
Let all the Angels of God worship him. Can you tell when this was done? Christ
Coloss 2.
spoiled powers, says Paul, and principalities, and made an open show of them.
It would trouble you to tell; how, where, and when. So, Christ ^phes. 4.
ascending on high, led captivity captive. Who knows how far, or how many?
that he ascended to his Father with a multitude, may be referred either to
Angels, or men. If all the Angels adored him, when he came into the world; what
did they, when he ascended to heaven? Nazianzene says, ^
If Christ ascend to heaven, ascend thou with him; and join thy self to the
Angels, that accompany him or receive him. So Cyprian. ^
Non indiget vectoribus Angelis, sed precedentes and subsequentes applaudebant
victori. Christ ascending needed not Angels to bear him, but they going before
and following applauded him as a conqueror. And Austen. August. in Psalm. 90.
Sublatus est Christus in manibus Ang^lorum, quando assumptus est in caelum,
non quia, si non portarent Angeli, ruiturus erat; s^d quia obsequebantur Regi.
Christ was carried up by the hands of the Angels when he ascended to heaven not
that he should have fallen, if he had not been stayed by Angels; but that they
might serve their King. And touching men, why might not Thaddeus speak this of
those, that were raised out of their graves, when Christ rose from the dead,
since they were partakers of Christ's resurrection, why should they be rejected
from his ascension? They rose from the dead, not to die again, much less to
be left wandering on the earth. Ascend before Christ they could not, he was in
all things as the head to have the preeminence. Then must they ascend with him,
or after him; neither of which is expressly mentioned in the Scriptures. It
appears by Tertullian, the Church in his time was opposite to his conceit,
and made him this answer; Tertull. de anima. ca 55.
Our abode after death, (which there is called sleeping.) is in Paradise, quo
iam tunc and Patriarch^ and Prophetae appendices dominicae resurrectionis ab
inferis migrauerunt; whither the Patriarchs and Prophets, that were dependents
on the Lords resurrection, p^ssed even then (with him) FROM THE PLACES BELOW.
Cyprian says of Christ, Cyprian. de resurrectione Christ's.
spolians Inferos, and captiuos praemittens ad superos, spoiling the places
below, and sending the captives before toward heaven. Austen says, August. de
tempore sermo. 138.
Reddunt Infernavictorem, and superna suscipiunt triumphantem. Hell restores
him a conqueror, and heaven receives him a Triumpher. Where then the Apostle
says, that Coloss. 2.
Christ triumphed over powers and principalities in his own person, and
likewise that he Eph^s. 4.
ascended on high, leading captivity captive, which proves his ascent to
heaven to be the fullness and perfection of his triumph: since triumphs
amongst mortal men are not secret nor solitary; shall we think that Christ's
triumphant ascension Triumphs are not solitary.
to heaven was the close conueying of him alone into heaven, neither Angels,
nor man attending, nor magnifying him? or rather, as Peter says, 1. Peter 3.
he went to hea^n, having Angels, powers, and mights subjected to him, that is
all sorts and orders, were they never so excellent, high, or mighty; serving,
submitting, confessing, and applauding his humane nature, as the subduer of all
his enemies, and Savior of all his Elect?

Where you would feign persuade the world, that the Defenc. page 201. li. 4.
Apostles Creed was not in the primitive Churches, which we have now, yea that
at first it had no exact for me at all; This is the way to discredit all
things besides your own devices. You may say as much against some parts of
the Scriptures, as you do against some parts of the Creed. Some Scriptures
^ncertaine for a t^me as well as the Creed.
For the Scriptures themselves were not fully received in all places, no not in
Eusebius time. He says, the ^useb ecclesiast. ^istor. 3 li.. ca. 25.
Epistle of James, of Jude, the second of Peter, the second and third of John,
are contradicted; as not written by those Apostles. The Epistle to the Hebrews
was for a while Ibidem. li 3. ca. 4.
contradicted by the Church of Rome not to be Paul's. Eusebius report is the
truer, because the Churches of Syria did not receive the second Epistle of
Peter, nor the second and third of John, nor the Epistle of Jude, nor the
Apocalypse; as appears to this day by the translation of the new Testament
into their tongue, which wants all these books, as no approved parts of
Scripture. The like might be said for the Churches of Arabia. Will you hence
conclude, that these parts of Scripture were not Apostolic, or that we need
not receive them now, because they were formerly doubted of? The Creed we do
not urge, as undoubtedly written by all the Apostles, for then it must needs
be Canonical Scripture; but we urge it as the best and perfectest form of
faith, which was delivered to the Christians at the first planting of the
Gospel by the direction and agreement of the Apostles, and kept and professed
in some of the most famous places; which when the Church of Christ had well
considered and examined, she received and preferred before all others. Now that
this form of faith, which we have, was both in ancient times, and diverse
places preserved and professed as coming from the first erectors of the
Churches; you have seen the testimonies of Cyrill for Jerusalem, of
Chrysostom for Antioche, of Austen for Africa, of Ruffine for Aquileia, of
Venantius for Poyctiers: and this very Article, he descended to hell, is by
them witnessed to have been then in their Creedes: of whom no doubt can be
made, save of Austen only, because he sometimes repeateth the Creed without
that clause, which yet he confesses to be a maine point of the Christian faith.

That in all places they did vary from this form, though you pretend the
names of Ignatius, Irenaeus, Iustine, Tertullian, Origin, etc. yet they prove
no such thing. These Fathers do often, as learned discoursers, enlarge the
parts of the Creed; and sometimes, as short comprisers of it, they contract the
sum thereof into fewer words: but yet Twelve parts of the Creed.
the most, and most famous churches had from the beginning a brief collection
of the Christian faith delivered to the simple people to be learned and said by
heart, before they could be baptized. Of this do many learned and ancient
Fathers bear witness. Ambros. sermon. 38.
Duodecim Apostolorum Symbolo sides sancta concepta est. In the Creed of the
twelve Apostles, says Ambrose, is the holy faith conceived (or comprised.) So
Leo Leo epist. 13. ad Pa^cheriam.
Catholici Symbolibreuis and perfecta confessio d^odecim Apostolorum totidem
est signata sententijs. The short and perfect confession of the Catholic Creed
is seal^d up with twelve sentences of the twelve Apostles. So Ierom. Hiero. ^p
61. ad (...) ca^. 9.
In the Creed of our faith and hope, which being delivered from the Apostles is
not written in paper and ^ke, but in the tables of men's hearts, after the
confession of the Trinity, and unity of the Church, all the mysteries of
Christian Religion are closed up with the resurrection of the ^lesh. Isidore
says, Is^orus de e^lesiast. offi^s li. 2. ca. 3.
the Apostles ready to depart one from another, Normam prius sibi futurae
praedicationis in commune constituunt: appoint first in common a sum of that
they would preach, least s^uered in di^ers places, they ^ould propose any
diverse or dissonant thing to those, whom they brought to the ^ertull. de (...)
virgi^us.
^ith of Christ. Rabanus Ma^rus de Institutione clericorum li. 2. ca. 56. has
the very same words. Neither could Tertullian, whose name you use, have truly
said, r Reg^ fidei un a omnino est, sola immobilis, and irreformabilis; there
is but one rule of faith, and only that immooueable and unchangeable, unless
there had been some form of faith received in the Church, which no man might
alter or change. For how could he say there is but ONE RVLE, if every Church
had a several rule? Or how was it immooueable or irreformable, if there were
no certain words or parts, but every man might alter at his will? Tertullian
therefore does not repeat the words of the Creed, which he varieth in every
place where he cites it, but he points to the chief parts thereof; no where
keeping the same words, but in substance the same matter. Against Praxeas the
heretic he says; Tertull. aduers. Praxeam.
Hanc regulam ab initio Euangelij decurrisse: This rule (of faith) has had
continuance from the beginning of the Gospel. Against heretics in general he
says, Idem de praescriptionibus aduersus haereticos.
Haec regula a Christo probabitur instituta: This rule shall be proved to have
bee^e appointed by Christ. And yet in these two places he keeps not the same
words, but the same heads, and as it were the same principles of faith. As
likewise both these differ in words from that rule, which he cited before,
being Idem de velandis virginibus.
omnino vna, every where one, and by no means alterable. Irenaeus says.
Irenaeus li. 5. cap. 2.
The Church throughout the whole world, even to the ends of the earth,
recea^ed from the Apostles and their Disciples, that faith which be bele^eth in
one God, the Father almighty maker of heaven and earth, etc: and in Jesus
Christ the Son of God, incarnate for our salvation: and in the holy spirit,
which preached by the Prophets the dispensation and coming of God; and the
birth of Christ our Lord by the Virgin, his p^ssion, resurrection, and
ascension with his flesh into heaven; and his coming from heaven in the glory
of his Father to recapitulate all: to raise up all flesh; and to give just
judgment in all. Ib. them li. 1. ca. 3.
The faith the Church disp^rsed through the world, having received, faithfully
keeps, and constantly teaches, and delivers these things as it were with
one mouth. For though there be different languages in the world, (...), Yet
the sum and effect of the tradition (or faith delivered) is one and the same.
Neither do the Churches in Germany otherwise believe or otherwise teach, nor
those in Spain, nor those in France, nor those in the East, nor those in
Egypt, nor those in Afric, nor those in the midst of the world. So that all
the churches in the world had one and the same tradition and rule of faith; and
though the words in some places did differ, yet in sense they agreed, and the
chiefer the churches were, the more was their care to preserve this Creed not
written, as Ierom and others confess, but delivered and received by heart even
from the Apostles and their Disciples.

And since the Church of Rome, then one of the most famous Churches in the
world, kept this Creed comprised in twelve sentences according to the number
of the twelve Apostles, as Leo testifies not long after Ru^ines time; and
Ambrose said the same in effect even in Ru^ines time, and other Churches
likewise both East and West had and retained the same from their first
foundation, as Irenaeus witnesses; It can not be, but the Creed, which we
have at this day, was the very same which the primitive churches had and kept;
and these ancient Fathers that allege the authority thereof, bring not
every where the exact words, but the chief parts and grounds thereof, as
appears by Tertullian who says; The Rule, or Creed, is one and unchangeable.
notwithstanding he brings three several variations thereof in words. For the
clause of Christ's descent to hell, I have said before it was retained in many
places, though it wanted in the church of Rome, and some other churches of the
East; and no doubt the Church of Rome and the rest conceived no les^e by
Christ's resurrection from the dead, but that he rose conqueror of death and
hell, as the prophet foretold he should, in saying: O death, I will be thy
death; o hell, I will be thy destruction; as Christ professed he did, when he
said, I have the keys of death and hell: and as the great and general
Councels of Ephesus, Chalcedon and Constantinople did expound that Article of
the Creed, Christ rose the third day, (...) having first spoiled hell. And upon
this resolution of these general Councels, and not as you dream upon the
opinion of Limbus prevailing, the Churches, that wanted that Article which
others had, received it into their Creed, as contained there before in force
and effect, but now they concurred in one consent of faith and words, which
before they did not.

Defenc. page 205. li. 19.
Our third reason is: if there be no certain benefit to the godly by Christ's
going to hell, then doubtless he went not thither. But there is no certain
benefit to the godly by Christ's going to hell. Therefore doubtless he went not
thither.] You profere us reasons very seldom, but when you push them forth,
they want all things that should support them. Your mayor here has no force
in it, your minor has no truth; and so your conclusion is like a forward bud,
that shrincketh before it blows. That Christ should triumph over powers and
principal^ies, and all knees of those in heaven, earth, and hell bow unto him,
was as well for his sovereignty, as for our safety. Your mayor then must have
both those parts in it, that if Christ's descent thither were neither for his
glory not our good, then was it needless. But it was both. He was to rise
superior to all his and our enemies, that as in the cross he submitted his
life to the rage and fury of Satan and his members, so when he rose he might be
made Lord over heaven, earth and hell. It was therefore his right to have the
keys of death and hell, whereby Satan's kingdom as well in hell as in earth
should be subjected to the power of his humane nature, which could not be but
beneficial for us, whose redeemer and Savior he was. Again what need is
there that you should know the depth of Gods counsels, and reason of Christ's
doings in every thing, as though you were to take an account of him, what cause
he had to do, as he did? If the Scripture bear witness, that Christ's soul
was not left in hell, though we could not discern the precise purpose of his
descent thither, we may not therefore reject it as superfluous. But what say
you to those two maine points expressed in Scripture; the destroying of Satan,
and delivering of us from fear of death, which Christ performed by his death?
[ Page 206. li. 11.
The benefits all and every one, (which you every where rehearse) I most
unfeignedly and religiously believe: but what is this to his local being in
hell?] You acknowledge the words, but not the deeds of Christ's destroying and
spoiling Satan, through, but not after his death: and so in name, but not in
proof you make him Lord over hell, as where he never showed the power and
prerogative of his humane nature, but only by taking his body from the grave.
Now this does not answer the real and actual subduing of Satan's strength and
kingdom mentioned in the Scriptures with so magnificent and evident words, as
the Apostle uses; that Christ led captivity captive, and made an open show of
powers and principalities, and triumphed over them in his own person. You call
these Page 2^6. li. 19.
blasts of vanity, because I say they were performed on every part of Satan's
kingdom, and even in the place where his chiefest strength and power was,
which was hell: but your replies are rather beesoms of infidelity, which would
sweep away whatsoever the Apostle says of Christ's most glorious triumph over
Satan and his whole kingdom, with the taking of his flesh out of the grave,
where it lay dead; and ascribe no more to Christ's conquest over death and hell,
then you do to all the faithful, when they shall be raised from the earth to
the fruition of eternal life. This I say is not sufficient in Christ's person.
For he must not only be free himself, and the freer of all his from death
and hell, but all infernal places and powers were to stoop to him, as Lord of
all, when God would bring him to the glory of his resurrection.

Defen^ page 206. li. 22.
This conquest, you say, Christ purchased by his Passion, but he did not
execute it till his resurrection. If he executed nothing till his
resurrection, and purchased all by his Passion, then he did nothing in hell.
For his resurrection was distinctly after his supposed being in hell.] The
Apostles words are plain, that Christ's cross was his humiliation. Christ
Philip. 2.
humbled himself being obedient to death, even the death of the cross. Then
Christ's Passion and death were parts of his debasing, and not his triumphing
over death or hell. After death must his triumph begin, and not before, nor
at the time of his breathing out his soul: but when the time of his
resurrection came, God loosed the sorrows of death before his humane soul,
which was not left destitute of glory and soueraintie in hell, and raised his
body from the grave, restoring him to life as the subduer and Lord of all his
enemies, that is as well of hell as of death. You would calculate the minutes,
and see what distance of time there was betwixt the return of Christ's soul
from hell, and the raising of his body from the grave; but this is like the
rest of your vanities, to be more then audacious in blasing your own devises,
and curious in searching Gods secrets reserved to himself. What time the soul
of Christ ascended to Paradise, or descended to hell, we do not know; we must
leave that to God; it suffices us, that Christ's Soul by the witness of holy
Scripture was not lest in hell, nor his flesh in the grave, but both restored
to life as conquerers of death and hell. Christ's resurrection shows his
conquest over hell and death.
Christ's resurrection therefore contains the bringing of hissoule from hell,
and the joining of it to his body, that both might be restored to celest^all
and perpetual glory; and consequently the subduing of hell, as his soul
returned to his body, is justly reputed a part of the glory of his
resurrection. [ Defenc. page 205. li 32.
I would willingly believe you, but alas who says so besides your self; or
only such as can tell no better then you.] If ancient Fathers and later
writers, if provincial and general Councels did not profess the same that I
do, you might believe as you list; but if they all concur, that this is
testified in the Scriptures, which you labor to elude with phrases and
figures; then pity your self as stretching and shrinking the Scriptures at
your pleasure; pity not me, who have the maine consent of all ages, and
Christian assemblies (from the Apostles to this very time, wherein we live) to
interpret the words of the holy Ghost, as I do; and to make Christ's subduing
of hell consequent to his death and precedent to his resurrection. Neither can
the Apostles words, (that Christ Hebr. 2.
through death destroyed him, that had power of death, and delivered all them,
which for fear of death were all their life long subject to bondage) have any
full or effectual performance, if Christ after death, and before the raising
up of his body, did not in that part of his humane nature, which lay not in
the grave, show himself the conqueror of Satan and his Infernal kingdom,
that by Christ's subduing eternal death, and taking the whole power thereof
into his hands, we might be assured of our deliverance from that, which we most
feared; which was not the death of the body, but the destruction of body and
soul in hell fire. This Conquest we both believe; neither may we much differ
about Christ's manhood must conquer hell.
the time, since it must be through his death, and so after he was dead, and
before his resurrection; the manner is all that is questioned, which you say
was without any presence of his humane soul, and consequently must be referred
to his divine nature. I a^irme the contrary, that this exaltation, to be Lord
over heaven, earth and hell; pertained not to Christ's Deity, which never
wanted that Soueraintie, but to his manhood, which was obedient unto death, and
was therefore advanced to this hight. And since this conquest over hell was
real in proof, not verbal in claim; special to Christ's person, not
general to all his members; and performed after Christ's death, not by
Christ's divine, but by his humane nature; this must needs be referred to
Christ's soul; which might descend to hell, and must before it could show it
self vanquisher of hell; and not to his body, which lay dead in the grave,
and could neither ascend nor descend till it was restored to life. You make
Christ Lord over hell, because he kept himself from thence; but so were all
the faithful, whose souls were not enclosed in hell; whom yet the Scriptures
make not Lords over death and hell, but delivered from both. There must be a
conquest peculiar to Christ, whereby he did take all power from them, and
reserved it to himself, and rose from death, as having the keys of both. The
particular manner whereof in time and other such circumstances, though the
Scriptures do not express, yet must not the general be doubted, because the
Scriptures witness, that Christ's soul was not left, nor for saken in hell of
Gods divine power and presence, but thence returned as conqueror of all Satan's
power and Dominion. This the Church of Christ has always professed, and this
may the godly safely bele^ue, notwithstanding M. Broughtonsbedlom proclamation,
that it is the general corruption of religion, Scripture, and all learning.

Defenc. page 206. li. 34.
Our fourth reason. There is altogether as great reason, and as urgent cause,
that Christ, whole man, (both soul and body) should be present in hell to
free us thence wholly (that is our souls and bodies) as there is that his soul
must be there present to free thence our souls. Here I wish you would answer
my proposition without skoffes and taunts and ^autie disdain, as your manner
is.] You cannot mock, and that is great pity. When your propositions want not
only proof and truth, but learning and understanding, shall I say they be
sage, wise, and Christian resolutions? your devices I call dreams, your
contradictions I call contrarieties, your neglect of all Councels and Fathers I
call presumption; and your shifting, and outfacing, affirming that which is
false, and d^nying that which is true, I call unshamefastness, if not
impudency. What other names should I give them? I profess I cannot flatter
you in your fancies, neither see I any cause, why you regarding no man besides
your self, should think your self fit to be regarded with the disgrace of
all ancients and others. Where the matter is not meet to be rejected with
disdain, I use it not; and where it is, why should I not? Yet now you would
have a direct and fair answer to your proposition; though you little deserve
it, you shall. This which you mention (to wit, our deliverance from hell) was
not the only cause of Christ's descent thither, his own honor and right, that
suffered shame and wrong at Satan's hand on the cross, was the chie^e cause of
his descent, that after death he might show himself in his manhood the
conqueror and destroier of Satan's power. This you clean leave out of your
proposition, because you would be sure to bring nothing that should be sound
and sufficient. Again your proposition, as it stands, has no strength in it
besides your own imagination. For hell once subdued and conquered by Christ
needs not the second time to be conquered. Since then till the day of
judgment hell has no more but the souls of the wicked, (some few excepted
who descended alive to hell;) what needed more then the soul of Christ to
conquer hell? Thirdly, s^ing the body is cast into hell to increase the pains
of the soul; the soul being acquitted and freed from hell, there is no cause
the body should go thither. And so in respect as well of Gods ordinance till
the day of doom, as of the souls preeminence in and over the body, the soul
of Christ after death might justly discharge our bodies and souls from all the
power and claim that Satan had against us. Lastly, the proportion, which
Fulgentius, Athanasius, and others mention, as derived from the Scriptures,
that as the two parts of man after death were for sin appointed to two
several places; his soul to hell, and his body to the grave; so the Redeemer
did ^etch man back again from those two places of condemnation, with the
presence of his soul subduing hell, and of his body resisting corruption; this
p^oportion, I say, g^ounded on the Scriptures is more then you can any way
confute, or open your mouth against with any truth.

You ask, Page 2^7. li. 26.
why this going to hell by our Savior was not rather after his resurrection,
when both pa^ts were joined together. First, because by death, which is the
separating of the soul from the body, Christ was to destroy both death and
hell. Next, he was to rise conqueror of them both; and not after his
resurrection, which was a conquest Christ was to rise full conqueror of hell
and death.
of both, to reconquer them again. This therefore is an unwise demand, and
shows that you do not understand, what belongs to Christ's death or
resurrection, who was to rise the full conqueror and Lord of all his enemies in
his own person, and not after his resurrection to make a new conquest over
them. And therefore your heaping of seuenteen places of Scripture in the Pa^.
207. ad marginem l^. 31.
margin of your book, to show that Christ died and rose again, is to let men
see, that you have emptied your note Book, and there find that Christ did rise
from the dead. To which if you will add, which is the true intent of all those
places, that Christ was to rise a perfect conqueror of death and hell you shall
make so many proofs that Christ conquered both before and with his
resurrection, and by no means after it. For his resurrection was manifest
proof, that neither his soul was forsaken in hell, nor his flesh left to see
corruption in the grave; and therefore both hell and death were perfectly
subdued, when he joined again his soul to his body, and advanced them both to
an immortal and celestial life. Considering then whence the parts of Christ's
manhood were taken, when he rose from the dead, to wit, his soul from h^ll,
where it was not forsaken, and his body from the grave, where it was not
corrupted; you shall easily see, if you do not wilfully shut your eyes, that
the power and force of Christ's resurrection began with the subduing of hell
by his soul, and ouermastering putrefaction by his body. Against whose soul
and body since neither destruction nor corruption could prevail it was not
possible, but he should rise vanquisher and Lord of death and hell. And where
you think it absurd, that one part of Christ, (his soul) should gloriously
triumph, the other, (his body) ALL THIS WHILE lying in humiliation; the time
was not so long, as you would have it seem; since these things were done in
that shortness and neerenesse of ^me which pleased God; and the soul once
removed from the body, whether in heaven or in hell, was first to go toward,
and to the body, before that could receive life from the soul; and so of force
the glory of the soul must begin before the glory of the body. And even
according to your own conceit, if the soul were in heaven all the while, that
the body lay dead in the grave; did not the exaltation of the soul in heaven
begin a good while before the body, which the third day was restored to life,
and till that time lay senseless in the dishonor and dominion of the grave, as
you conceive? And is this so strange a thing with you in Christian religion,
that Christ's soul should enjoy honor, bliss, and glory before the body, when
the souls of the faithful so many hundred years before their bodies are
partakers of heavenly joy?

Your likelihoode, that Defenc. page 207. li. 37.
Christ would clear himself first wholly and entirely in both parts before he
would begin to strip and spoil Satan for us; Page 208. li. 1.
seeing it is a greater degree of victory to spoil the enemy and to tread
him under foot, then to get freedom to himself; Has no likelihood but in
your own eyes. If Christ were in doubt of the victory, or Christ ordered his
conquest most to Satan's shame.
afraid of the enemy, it were good policy first to make him self sure, and
after to help others; but the Son of God, having no such doubt nor dread,
might destroy and spoil those Infernal places and powers, when and as pleased
him self with the most dishonor and shame that might be to Satan and his
kingdom. For as he would die^ show his power in raising himself from the
dead, so when he was dead he would conquer Satan, that his strength might the
more appear in dissoluing the sorrows of death, and returning to life with
the full command over death and hell. And therefore your strong likelihoods, as
you call them, are childish conceits and distrusts of Christ's power and
ability to perform his victory. Like to these are those other points which
you ask. Page 208. li. 15.
Why might not one part of Christ have sufficed in his sufferings,
righteousness and obedience (which Apollinaris an heretic affirmed,) as well
as that one part served to triumph for us in hell?] Christ suffered for us in
this life, where body and soul were joined together in suffering and meriting;
but he conquered hell by death, that is after death, when the Soul was yet
severed from the Body. What Apollinaris the Heretic affirmed, you understand
not, if you think he did hold that the Soul of Christ did suffer or merit
for us: his heresy was, that Christ had no humane Soul, but his Deity did
move and rule his body in steed of a Soul. Next you ask, [ Page 208. li. 18.
Why the body over coming corruption in the grave, which I call a part of
Satan's kingdom, did not thereby destroy the whole kingdom of Satan, and so
save our Souls, that Christ might not have needed to have come to hell for
that purpose?] He that has naught else to doing, may intend to ask such idle
questions. Why God would have the flesh of his Son by resisting corruption in
the grave to assure our bodies of incorruption; and his Soul by subduing hell,
to free our Souls from the power and fear of hell; you were best ask him a
reason, whose will is the rule of all things: but since we were in danger and
fear of both deaths, least the one should lead us to the other, which was most
to be feared; what reason can you bring against the Counsel and wisdom of God
confirming us against the power of death and hell, by the conquest of both
parts of Christ's manhood over both his and our enemies? You would otherwise
have ordered our safety and indemnitie, from death and hell, if your advise
had been asked; but nourish these impieties at home in your bosom; blaze them
not so busily to the world, as if you would believe nothing till you saw a
reason thereof that fitted your fancy. What God might have done, is not for
you nor me to ask; what improportion or discohaerence with the Christian faith
is there in this, that the power of Christ's Soul and Body superior to hell
and to the grave, should assure our Bodies and Souls the victory over both in
such sort and at such time, as God has appointed?

Defenc. page 208 li. 2^.
If they mean, that Christ's flesh being in the grave and his soul being in
hell did severally and distinctly save our flesh and our souls, then how will
you be reconciled to them, who do deny that point? You would feign put down
Fulgentius, Athanasius, and others; as if they did not understand the first
points of their Catechism, that the joint Redemption of our Souls and Bodies
was obtained by the ioynt-sufferings of Christ in Soul and Body on the Cross;
but yet since we are to die, when our Souls shall be severed from our bodies;
to assure us that our Souls are freed by the merits of his passion from the
danger of hell, and our bodies shall be raised from the dust of the earth, why
might it not please the Son of God by the presence of his body in the grave
without corruption to confirm the Resurrection of our bodies from corruption,
and by the presence of his Soul in hell, subduing the power and kingdom of
Satan, to strengthen our faith, that our Souls severed from our bodies shall
be free from all danger and fear of hell, which he has conquered in his own
person, and whereof he has taken the keys into his hands, as him self
affirms? This was no new saving of our Souls and bodies, as you suppose; but
rather the securing of us by his example, that our Souls and bodies severed by
death, shall be subjected to neither, but be reserved to eternal life, that we
may be partakers of his victory.

Defenc. page 208. li. 28.
Further, why was it needful, that an actual presence of his manhood should
be in hell, seeing indeed it is certain, that the whole actual triumph of
Christ over Satan proceeds not of the proper virtue of the manhood, but only
from the virtue and power of the Godhead of Christ? Conflict between the
godhead of Christ and Satan there neither was, nor might Christ's manhood was to
conquer though by power of his Godhead.
be any: but as by Adams disobedience Satan gained us into his possession, so
by the obedience of Christ's manhood even to the death, Satan lost us out of his
power and dominion. Neither might the Deity of Christ through death be made
Lord over all his enemies, except you will touch on a trick of Arianisme; but
the manhood of Christ for his submission unto death received the keys of
death and hell, and power to dispose of Satan's kingdom at his pleasure. Now
had not those Infernal powers been subjected to the Soul of Christ after
death, how should it have appeared that his manhood, not his godhead, had the
conquest over Satan's strongest holds, and that the keves of death and hell were
resigned unto him? for since the Scripture bears witness, that his Soul was
not for saken in hell, that is not there left destitute of his divine power and
glory, what resistance could be made, that he should not return thence the
Lord and Ruler of all his enemies, whereof hell and Satan were the chiefest?
His godhead then was the giver, but his manhood was the receauer of this power
and pre^minence over hell and Satan, that they for ever should stoop to him,
and see both what wrong they did him, and what vengeance was heaped on them; as
also how righteous man's redemption was by the Cross and death; of the Son of
God.

^.
Lastly, why did not the presence of his flesh in the grave keep ours, that it
should not come there, or at least that it should never putrify nor rot, as
his flesh did not?] Even because ^.
such was Gods will, it should not. God by his sentence pronounced on Adam and
his offspring, adjudged them to return to dust, from which Christ shall raise
them at the last day, and not before. And from dust to restore them, shows
greater power in Christ then to preserve them from dust. This therefore
verifieth the justice, and magnifieth the power of God; and for you to ask,
why it might not be as well otherwise, as so; is to enter more saucely then
wisely into those things, which you should religiously and faithfully believe.
And where you say, all these sequels are as good and as li^ly as my assertion.
you show your accustomed boldness, if not haughtiness, that condemn so many
learned and ancient fathers for plain fools in not seeing, what ^urd
consequences depended on their assertion. How beit in the midst of your pride
you show little wit, that all this while you can light on none other reason of
Christ's descent to hell, but only this that we should never come there. This
indeed was one of the causes, even to secure us by his conquest, that he has
the keys of death and hell; and therefore we shall not need to fear either,
since both are wholly subjected and submitted to his power, though he stay the
time prefixed by his father, when we shall be partakers of his victory over
death at the end of the world, as we are over hell at our departing hence;
assuring us in this life by faith in him, that we need not fear either death
or hell, both which he has conquered.

Defenc. page 202. li. 7.
I made this argument in my former Treatise; that Christ's descending into hell
(if ever he did so) could not be judged any part of his exaltation or
glorification. To which your reply is, I know not whether more strange or
skornefull. But you resolve that these words, he descended to hell, imports
his exaltation and triumph.] This argument was drawn from your imagination
taking upon you to dispose of the parts of the Creed as best pleased you,
which because I rejected, as wanting all warrant besides your own note book,
you interpret it to be a strange and skornefull answer. Howbeit there is no
strangeness in mine answer, but to him that never peeped farther then in his
own shell. The Fathers with one consent refer that clause to Christ's
Conquest over hell. Christ Athanas. de incarn. Christi.
had power, (says Athanasius) in the grave to show incorruption, and in his
descent to Hades (hell) to dissolve death, and to proclaim to all
resurrection. Cyprian. Cyprianus de passione Christi.
When in Christ's presence hell being broken open, captivity was captiuated,
his conquering soul presented to the sight of his Father, returned to her
body without delay. Epiphanius. Epiphanius in 80. heresium. anacephalaiosi.
Christ was crucified, buried, he descended to hell in his Deity and his
soul, he took captivity captive, and rose the third day with his holy body.
That he was Idem in Ancorat^.
free among the dead, signifies hell had no power over him, but that of his
own accord he descended to heli with his soul, because it was impossible he
should be held of it. So Austen. August ser^. 138. and 131.
Reddunt Inferna victorem. Hell restored him a conqueror; and whiles his body
lay in the grave, his soul triumphed over hell. The Councels provincial and
general do the like, Concilium Toleta. 4. ca. 10. and Arelatens. ca. 1.
Christ descended to hell, and deuicto mortis imperio, and subduing the
kingdom of death, rose the third day. Even as the general Councels of Ephesus
and Constantinople say. Yea the later writers, as Innocent. de mysterijsmissae.
li. 2. ca. 50.
Innocentius, Durand. in rationali. diuinorum li. 4. rub. de Symbolo.
Durandus, and others join this clause with Christ's resurrection, and make
them both but one Article of our faith, as descendit ad inferna, tertia die
resurrexit, he descended to hell, and rose the third day, they set for the fifth
Article of the Creed; even as that ancient writer among Saint Austens
Appendix de diuersis sermo. 42.
works did before them. So that neither Elder, nor later writers join with
you in this conceit of yours; that Christ's descent to hell was the lowest part
of his humiliation; they directly profess it to be the first part of his
exaltation, and a preamble to his resurrection. And where you think it much,
that his descending should belong to his exaltation, not the place, but the
purpose of his descent makes that alteration. The Scripture says. 1 Thessalonians.
4. ver. 16.
The Lord himself shall descend from heaven with a shoute and with the trumpet
of God, when he shall come to judge the quick and dead: and yet that descent
shall be the greatest part of his glory.

Defenc. page 209. li. 12.
You skoffe at me for the like, as if I had said his descending was ascending,
and heaven was Hell. But herein you affirmevntruely. First I say though his
soul leaving his body ascended, yet this is not meant by that phrase, he
descended to Hades. Secondly, I never said that Hades signified heaven,
although some in Hades are in heaven. Thirdly, much less did I ever say that
hell is heaven.] The interpretation, which you made of the Article, Christ
descended to hell, I said had none other matter of faith in it (except you
thought the Church in her Creed went to varying of phrases) but that Christ's
soul ascended to heaven. For where Hades in the Creed must signify not a
privation, nor a general and indefinite condition, (as if Christ went some
whither, yet no man knew whither) but a determined place, whither Christ's soul
after death repaired; that place of force must be heaven or hell. And since by
no means you will have Christ's soul descend to hell, as the whole Church has
hitherto received and believed, you must acknowledge the meaning of that
Article to be, that Christ's soul ascended to heaven: and so whether you will
or no, if that be the effect and intent of those words in the Creed,
descending must be taken for ascending, and hell for heaven. This is not meant,
you say, by that phrase.] It is one of your skilles to bring Articles of the
Creed to be phrases, as if the Apostles and their followers, which were the
first planters of Churches, had meant to teach the simple people not principles
of faith, but certain Greek or Hebrew phrases. He that will suffer you to
turn his faith into a phrase, let him take heed that instead of heaven he
light not on hell, which is one of your chief phrases. [ But you never said
that Hades signified heaven. You may save this from a lie, if you be not he
that wrote this part of your book; as by the crossing and changing of your
own assertions it is evident to every wise man, you did not: but otherwise, if
the quoting of other men's authority to prove Hades to be heaven, may convince
you to be of that mind with them, whom you cite for that purpose; you have most
plainly avouched hades to import and contain heaven. Whose words are these, I
pray you, in your Treatise? Treat. page 97. li. 28.
This most singular place shows, that Hades with them is not properly for
hell, but for the world of the dead; and SOMETIMES AS NAMELY HERE EVEN FOR
HEAVEN. So in the next page. Page 98. li. 6.
Again he says of heaven, that it is an unseen estate, EVEN HADES, AS IT IS
(COMMONLY) CALLED. li. 10.
Wherefore it is plain by Plato, Hades sometime may be understood for heaven;
yea and with the Grecians it was a common phrase. li. 27.
And Stephan ^iteth Plutarch concerning the godly departing and being in hades,
that is in heaven, he meant I think, and not in hell. Infinite places might be
brought to like purpose, but these may suffice; which whether they, and you by
them avouch hades to be taken for heaven or no, I leave to the judgment of the
Reader, as also whether this be not impudent facing, and worthy of other
words, at which you take so much offense. Yea this very Article Christ
d^scended to Hades, you expound by pretense of Bullingers words, Treat page
102.
he did go to Abraham's ^osome, that is into heaven.

That you avouch Philip. 2. for it, is more strange: where we have not one word
of his local Defenc. page 171.
being in hell. And that the Coloss. 2. should prove it, passes all the rest.
Where, (though we grant you your reading) yet the express text refers that
triumph to Christ's cross: which you openly deny.] You do well to make an
Apology for your impudency and facing, the next sentence before; but if you
reclaim those t^ades of yours, you renounce the most part of your objections
and probations in this your defense. For do I cite either of these places in
the Pages, which you quote, to prove Christ's descent after death to the place
of hell? When you in your proud and scorne^ull humor mocked at Christ's
actual conquest and t^iumph over hell in general, and called it a Treat. pa^.
164.
worthy privilege surely, and very hon^rable, (...) to ^iumph and insult
upon the ^ice miserable and woeful wretches in their pre^t vn^eakable
damnation; adding, Page 154.
Page 156.
All the world knows, it is the most in glorious and vilest debasing; to
repress this disdainful and proud conceit of yours, I told you, Concl^s. pa.
3^.
The Apostle made it a part of Christ's high exaltation, that every knec as
well of things under earth, as of things in heanen should bow unto him; and did
you think it a matter to be mocked and derided? and of the place to the
Colossians I said, Conclus. pa. 358.
What l^iteth then, since these words were not verified on the cross, but
they did take place in his resurrection; and therein, as by the effects it was
most evident and apparent to the eyes of all men, he did spoil powers, and
Principalities, and made a show of them openly, and triumphed over them in his
own person? When I speak of things evident and apparent to all men's eyes, I
speak not of things done in hell, where no man living was present; but proved
against you as well by your own words, as by the Apostles, that this triumph
was not performed and executed on the cross, though there deserved and
purchased. For you your self debase Christ's triumph on the cross, with worse
words then I do; you say, Treatis. page 156.
it was a miserable triumph, yea 159.
a piteous triumph it was indeed where himself remained in such woeful
torment where appeared no show of conquest. I say not so, but that on the
cross Christ humbled himself even unto death, and thereby merited to be
exalted above all names and sorts (of creatures) which God after death most
gloriously performed unto him, when every knee of those in heaven, on earth,
and under earth, bowed unto him, and confessed him to be (their) Lord. This was
all I said in those places; which you traduce; and yet if I had said more, and
applied them to the actual triumph of Christ's soul after death, I wanted not
better authority so to have done, then you have any for so many cart-loades of
conc^its, as you have brought us. But of both these places I have spoken before
what may su^ce, and he that will see more thereof, may read what Zanchius has
learnedly and soberly written of those places, Ephesians. 4. verse, 9. and Coloss.
2. verse. 15. Where he likewise affirms: Zanchius in c. 2. Coloss. v. 15.
Patres sere sic explicant, and ex nostris non pauci, neque vulgares; The
Fathers for the most part do so expound it; and of our writers not a few, nor
the meanest.

Defenc. page 209. li. 28.
That of the Councels, how Christ rose again having spoiled hell, I easily
yield; seeing that proves not his local being there. Then first you yield,
that Hades with all these general Councels signifies hell. Next you yield
that hell was spoiled by Christ before he rose; for he rose having spoiled
hell. Thirdly you yield, that this was done by Christ's manhood, since his
Godhead can be said in no wise to rise from the dead; and consequently by his
soul, since he spoiled hell before he rose, when yet his body was dead in the
grave. There remains no more but this question, whether the soul of
Christdid this absent from the place, or present in the place, which was
spoiled. And since the scriptures avouch, that Christ's soul was in Hades,
which was spoiled; as these three general Councels assirme; it is without
question, that Christ's soul present in hell, spoiled hell before his
resurrection, and so returned to his body; which is the very point you all
this while denied, and with so much lost labor impugned. And least this cause
should depend on your slipper turns and returns, we must understand, that not
only the general Council of Acta conc^ij Ephesians.
Ephesus confirmed and allowed these words in the Synodall Epistle of Cyrill
to Nestorius, but the Council of Chalced. concilium. act. 5.
Chalcedon and the second Council of Constantinop. concilium act. 6.
Constantinople ratified the same. So that what sense Cyrill had in these
words, the same did the Council of Ephesus follow, Cyrill himself there
sitting, and declaring his own meaning. Yea the Treatises of Cyrill expounding
these words are inserted into the Acts of the Council of Ephesus, which the
Councels of Chalcedon and Constantinople do fully approve. Now what Cyrill
meant by spoiling hades, appears in these words. Cyrill de recta fide ad
Reginas li. 2. ca. quod Christus in virtute patris resurrexit a mort^is.
Our Lord Jesus, says Cyrill, (...), (...) having spoiled death, and loosed
the number of souls, that were detained in the d^nnes there, rose the third
day. Idem de recta fide ad Theodosium.
We must not say that the Deity of the only begotten returned from the denns
under the earth, but his soul descended to hades, and using his divine power
and authority, (...), showed it self to the souls there, and said to them in
bands, come forth; and to them in darkness, receive light. This Cyrill took
from Athanasius, whom he much followed, and often cited. Athanas. in ^llud
profecti in pagum inueniet^ pullum alligatum.
Those wretches (the devils) did not know, that the death of Christ should give
us immortality, and his descent (to Hades) should procure our ascent to
heaven. For the Lord rose the third day from the dead; (...): having spoiled
Hades (hell), trodden the enemy under foot, dissolved death, broken the chains
of sin with which we were tied, and freed (us) that were bound, saying, arise,
let us go hence. Being therefore freed from the bondage of the devil, let us
acknowledge our redeemer, and glorify the Father, etc. So elsewhere. What need
had (Christ that was) God, of the cross, Idem de incarnat. Christi.
of the grave, of hell to which things we were subject; but that (in them) he
sought us, quickening us in this manner agreeable to us? Idem contra Arianos
orat. 2.
For if the Lord had not been made man, we had never risen from the dead, as
redeemed from our sins, but had remained dead under the earth; neither had we
been exalted to heaven, but had lain still (...), in hell. For us therefore
and for our sakes it is said, God exalted (him), and gave him (the dominion of
heaven, earth and hell). By which places, as by infinite others in Athanasius
it is evident, that Christ conquered and spoiled hell and Satan for us, and
delivered us thence, as well as those that were formerly deceased; to whom, as
to us, hell had a challenge till the Savior of the world freed both them and us
thence. And this is the true meaning of those provincial and general
Councels, which say; Christ rose the third day, having (first) spoiled hell.

Defenc. page 209. li. 30.
The same I affirm of that Allegory in Luke; which shows Christ's
ouercomming, binding and spoiling of Satan indeed: but not by his local being
in hell. Christ expressly applies it to his dispossessing of Devils out of
men's bodies. I did not allege this parable to prove Christ's going to hell in
soul after death, but to show what parts Christ's conquest over hell and Satan
must have; to wit, that he must subdue, bind, and spoil Satan, before his
conquest over Satan, could be perfect. Other places of Scripture applied these
parts to Christ's rising from the dead, and spoiling the kingdom of Satan; for
this parable it did suffice, that these things here mentioned must be fully
performed by Christ, before he did fully conquer Satan. Now that these things
were thoroughly performed by Christ, whiles he lived on earth, is repugnant to
the Scriptures. For so Christ should never have died, since death was a part of
Satan's power, which Christ was to spoil. It is therefore certain, that
Christ's ouermastering of Satan began here on earth, when he cast him out from
such as were possessed, but Christ's conquest over Satan, had not his sull and
complete higth, no not in his own person, till he rose from the dead, and
ascended to heaven, leading captivity captive. That therefore it began before
Christ's death, I do not deny; but that it was not finished till his
resurrection and ascension, the Scriptures avouch. Christ says Origin, Origin
li. 5. in ca. 6. ad. ^ma.
having bound the strong man, and by his cross conquered him, went even to his
house, to the house of death, and into hell; and thence took his goods, that
is, the souls, which he possessed. And this was that, which he spoke by a
Parable in the Gospel, saying: Who can enter a strong man's house, and spoil
his goods, except he first bind the strong man? So Ierom. Hiero in ca. 12.
Matthe^.
The strong man was bound and tied in hell, and trodden under the Lords foot,
and the Tyrants howsen being spoiled, captivity was led captive. And Zanchius,
Zanchius in 2. ca. ad coloss.
The Apostle to the Ephesians the 4. (where he speaks of Christ's triumph, and
says, he led captivity captive, that is, he led the Devil captive, and
triumphed over him) does not there say, this triumph was made on the cross,
but then performed (that is perfected) when Christ ascended to heaven. Christ
then obtained it on the Cross, but performed it afterward. Ibidem.
Of evil spirits subdued and spoiled, the Son of God triumphed. Whither
pertains that parable of Christ's, when a strong man keeps his house (his
goods are in peace) but when a stronger then he comes upon him, he takes his
spoils from him.

Defenc. page 210. li. 2.
Remember I pray how God showed his displeasure against your wresting of his
word, by that strange terror, that happened even then when you were descended
into he depth of this uncouth doctrine at Paul's Cross. Indeed it may be, that
you and such others were in a strange terror at that time, otherwise there was
no cause, nor harm, but the breakeing of an old rotten form, which men
desirous to hear had over laden, and so where they stood half a yard above
ground before, they were then feign to stand on their feet. But Sir, by what
autho^ity do you take upon you to interpret Gods will by the cracking of an
old stool? Are you of late become a Southsaier, that you profess to declare
Gods meaning by the breaking of an old board in sunder? What say you then to
those Coronations of Princes, and other assemblies, where many have been
slain? What say you to S. Paul's Sermon, where Acts 20.
Eutychus falling down from a third l^ft, was taken up dead? Will you say his
doctrine was uncouth, because the hearers were a while troubled with that
accident? had there any thing indeed fallen out, as God be thanked there did
nothing, you would have played the false Prophet apace to presume of Gods
purpose, when by your own foolish fear upon the cracking of an old form, you
proudely and profanely take upon you to pronounce of Gods pleasure.

Defenc page 21^ li. ^.
Where you charge me in the end arrogantly and absurdly to falsisie the Synod
of this Realm, it is but what your self does in effect. I said our Synod
corrected King Edwards Synod. You acknowledge and profess that in the later
words of that former Synod now left out are three things that cannot be
justified by the Scriptures.] If a man would hire you, you cannot leave this
outfacing and falsifying, no not, when you go about to clear your self of
it, which whether it be absurd or arrogant, I leave to the Reader. Our Synod,
you said, corrected King Edwards Synod.] Said you no more? did you not lustily
conclude; Treatis page 172.
Therefore our Synod renounceth apparently this sense of the Creed, that Christ
descended to the hell of the damned? Now that is nothing so; they thought not
good in this Article of the Creed to express more then was aunciently set
down for the people to believe: but they do not reject as false, whatsoever
they omit of the later words of King Edwards Synod. For so they should reject
this also for false, that Christ's body lay in the grave till his resurrection,
which I trust no Christian man doubts. Three things I said there were, which
the later Synod might conceive to be contained in the former, that could not be
justified by the Scriptures; and in that respect they might leave out those
later words, not cutting of, putting out, or casting away (as you ruffle in
your terms) every thing there mentioned, for so they should cast away as well
the burial of Christ's body, as the presence of his soul in hell, but
refraining to confirm those later words, both because there was somewhat
amiss in them, and they would not impose more on the people to believe, then
was at first comprised in their Creed; as also for that they would not
establish this to be the right and undoubted sense of Peter's words, that Christ
in soul preached to the spirits in hell.

Defenc. page 210. li. 19.
You ^arge these words of King Edwards Synod with two points, which are not in
them. First, that it says, how the spirits of the just were in hell: and that
Christ descending thither, stayed there till his resurrection. In me you would
make this a great matter so to misreport the words of a Synod, which indeed
says nothing hereof.] Were there no more but this in the words of that Synod,
that the preaching of Christ to the spirits in hell is set down The things
misliked in king Edwards synod.
there as the sole cause of his descent thither; or that this sense of S.
Peter's words is imposed on all men by their authority to be believed: either of
these was reason sufficient to omit those later words of King Edwards Synod.
But if we rightly look into the manner and purpose of their speech, we shall
easily see, that I wrong them not. For by those words they meant to show the
places, where Christ's soul and body did abide, after they were severed, until
the resurrection. His body, say they, even until the resurrection lay in the
grave, his soul being breathed out, was (until the same time) Articuli Synodi
Lond^nens. anno. 1552.
with the spirits in prison or hell, and preached to them, as the place of
Peter does witness. To say, that the soul of Christ dismissed from his body,
was not at all in the place, where the spirits of the just were, had been
repugnant to Peter's words in the next Chapter; if we grant as they did, by
these words of Peter, that Christ preached to the dead. For there it is said,
The Gospel (that is, the glad tidings of Redemption performed) was preached to
the dead. Which could not be to the wicked, since the Gospel was not preached
unto the^, but the justness of their condemnation rather published unto them.
Since then as they took S. Peter's words, Christ preached to both the just and
unjust, and by their Article, declaring where Christ abode after death, no more
is expressed, but that Christ was with the spirits in prison and hell, and
preached unto them; How can it in any reasonable man's judgment be avoided, but
that their words implie, the just were in prison and in hell, where Christ
preached? Neither was this so strange a thing in those days, since many
hundred years before it was received in most men's mouths and minds, that the
just deceased before Christ's death were in the same place (called hell) with
the wicked, though not in the same pains; and many of the Fathers directly
affirm no less. Seeing then themselves in their words make no difference
betwixt the just and unjust; and generally avouch, that Christ's soul was with
the spirits in hell, and preached to them, by warrant of Peter's words, who
says, The Gospel was preached to the dead; What reason had I to wrest their
words to any other sense then that, which I saw current in many fathers before
them, whose steps, by the general purport of their words they seemed to
follow? And how justly might the later Synod refuse those words of theirs,
which were either so dangerons, or so doubtful, that they might not safely be
retained?

Defenc. page 210. li. 24.
It is well that you renounce that of Peter (by Austens direction) as making
not at all for any local being of Christ in hell. But yet herein your self
openly refuses the mind of all your Predecessors, yea of our later Synod, if
they believed as you urge they did. For if they liked Christ's local being in
hell, they misliked not the applying of that in Peter thereunto: as by Master
Nowels Catechism may appear.] It is true, that I refrained to bring those
places of Peter, because Saint Austen, though he strongly hold Christ's descent
to hell to be a part of the Christian faith, yet he perceived and confessed
these places might have an other sense, and nothing touch Christ's descent to
hell. Your illation, that if the Synod liked Christ's local being in hell,
they misliked not the applying of that in Peter thereunto, is like the rest of
your collections. As if Saint Austen did not like the one, and yet mislike the
other. Notwithstanding there is difference betwixt liking a quotation as some
way pertinent to the cause, and proposing the same as a part of Christian
Religion for all men of necessity to embrace. The Synod might do the one,
and yet not the other; and so justly leave out that clause of the former
Synod, though Peter's words in their opinions might have some such intent.
Neither do I prejudice any man to like or allege that place of Peter for
this purpose, since I bind no man to my private exposition of the Scriptures;
but rather stand on those places which have the full consent of all antiquity
to pertain directly to this matter. Yet this is no bar, but many ancient
Fathers did use that place of Peter to prove Christ's descent to hell, as
Athanas. episi a (...) ^tum.
Athanasius, Cyrill de fide ad Theodosi^m.
Cyrill, ^ilar. in Psalm. 118. verse. 82.
Hilarie and Ambros in ca. 10. ad Roma.
Ambrose did, though Austen did not; and the Synod in her Majesty's time (that
is now with God) might like thereof, to show that Christ amongst other things
did also confirm by his presence and preaching in hell the condemnation of the
wicked there, though I did not cite those places; because Saint Austen had
otherwise expounded them. For take the word Spirit for the Soul of Christ, as
the same word is taken in the next verse following for the Souls of men, where
it is said, In which he went, and preached to the Spirits in prison: and
expound the word (...), kept ^liue, or continuing in life, as the Syriacke
translator does in saying, Christ died in body, and lived in spirit; in which
sense the Scripture says, A man may Ezechiel 18. verse. 27.
Luke 17. v. 33.
quicken his soul, that is keep it alive; and then the words of Peter run
more easily for Christ's descent to hell, then for his preaching in the days of
Noah. There is no doubt, but Austens sense has some difficulties and must have
some open additions to the text, before it will agree therewith; as by which he
went, and preached to (those that now are) spirits in prison (and were) once
disobedient in the days of Noah. Again, neither wicked men living on earth,
are called (...) spirits, by the course of the Scriptures; neither were the
despisers of Noah's preaching then in prison, when he preached. Besides that
Peter here purposely speaking of the death of Christ, verse 18. persueth the
consequents thereof in order, as his descent to the spirits in prison verse. 19.
his resurrection, verse. 21. his ascension and sitting on the right hand of God
verse. 22. The impediment to the former sense is, that they only are mentioned,
which were disobedient in the days of Noah; where if we make the former words
to be general, in which he went, and preached to the spirits in prison, and
the next special, as the point between may entend, (and) to the disobedient in
the days of Noah; or if this example be produced as the most famous, wherein
the whole and first world was drowned; and so likest to the time of preaching
the Gospel, the contempt whereof should bring destruction on the second world
and the just be saved by water, (as Noah was) through the resurrection of
Christ; that impediment is likewise removed. Howbeit I leave it indifferent to
every man to follow, what sense he likes best, the rather for that many old
and new interpreters refer these words of Peter, that Christ preached to the
spirits in prison, and 1. Peter. 4.
the Gospel was preached to the dead, to Christ's descent to those places,
where these dead were, 1. Peter 3.
both good and bad; though I thought not fit to press them, when Austen had
once resigned them.

And where you cite Master Nowels Ca^echisme to prove that the later Synod
misliked not the applying of Peter's words to Christ's descent to hell, what do
you therein, but as your manner is, take the pains to refute your self? For
if they liked that which Master Nowell has written of Christ's descent to hell,
they allowed as much as I defend; and consequently they did not apparently
renounce the doctrine of Christ's going down to the hell of the damned; as you
did openly, I must not say arrogantly pronounce. It may be you will turn
about, when you see your self thus angled, and say Master Nowell teaches no
more, but that the power and efficacy of Christ's passion was revealed to the
damned: but the first point he teaches, is this, Catechis anno. 1574. pa. 70.
Christu^, vt corpore in terr^ vis^era, it a anima a corpore separata ad
inferos descendisse; Christ, as in body (he went) to the ^wels of the earth
(which was his grave) so in soul severed from his body he descended ad inferos
to hell. The ends of Christ's descent he makes to be three, where he says;
Simu^ etiam mortis suae virtutem at^ efficacitatem ad ^ortuos, at^ inferos adeo
ipsos it a (...), v^ and incredulorum animae etc. And with all (that is
together with his soul) the vert^e and force of his death so p^arced to the
dead, and even to hell it self, that first the ^ules of the ^ithlesse
p^rceaued the condemnation of their in^delity to be most sharp but (...) i^st.
Secondly, and Satan the ruler of hell, sa^ all the power of his t^ny, and of
(...) to be we^ened, (...) (...) (...) (...). Thirdly, (...) (...), and the
dece^d, (...) in their lif^ (...) believe in Christ, perceived the work of
(...) (...) to be (...) (...) and (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) thereof with
most sweet and ^tain con^ort. Here is as much as I desire, grant this and I
urge you no farther. And thus much the late Synod liked and app^ued. if you do
admit, as you do when pleases you, Master Nowell for their interpreter.

De^enc. page 210. li. 31.
Neither misliked they his tarying there till his resurrection, which also
Austen holds as firmly, as that he was there.] If you speak of the later
Synod, you speak more then you can prove. If of others, you must tell us,
whom you mean. It is not true, that Austen fastened Christ's soul to hell for
three days, but rather confessed him to be free amongst the dead, and so left
to his own liberty; though the Scripture in Austens opinion names no place,
where Christ's soul was after death, besides hell. August. contra (...)
Arr^num. ca. 15.
If the soul says he, be straightway called to Paradise, when the body is
dead, think ^e any man so wi^ked, as to dare say, that the soul of our
Savior was for those three d^ies of his bodily death restrained to the custody
of hell? Gregorius Nyssenus does the like. Gregorius (...) in ill^d (...), and
(...) exiuit s^guis and aqua.
That the soul of our Lord commended into his Fathers hands, quum it a bonum
and commodum illi visum esset, etiam ad inferos descendit, went also to hell,
when it seemed good and co^nient unto himself, that (...) might publish
salvation to the souls in hell, and be Lord over quick and dead, and spoil
hell, and might prepare a way for man's nature to return to life* after he
himself had been the first fruits, and first borne from the dead, may be
perceived by many places of Scripture. Anselmus a thousand years after Christ,
shows that the Church in his time held not this so firmly, as you imagine.
For asking by way of a Dialogue, Anselmus in Elu^idario totius Christianae
T^logiae.
whither went Christ's soul after death? He answers; to the heavenly
Paradise, as he said to the Thief, this day shall thou be with me in Paradise.
When then went he to hell? at midnight before his resurrection, at what hour
the Angel destroyed Egypt, at that hour, even at midnight Christ s^oiled
hell, and made their d^kenesse as bright as day. So that you talk out of time,
when you talk so much how long time Christ stayed in hell. The time and manner
of his descent we leave to God; ^t su^iceth us, that the Scriptures witness he
was there, and rose both Savior of his own, and Lord of all.

Defenc. page 210. li. 35.
That our English Clergy generally did or do believe Christ's local descent
to hell (although they read and reh^arse these words so translated) certainly
no man will nor ought to acknowledge. That al did, I never said; we have to
much experience of you and some others, that love always to be opposite to
Laws, Creeds, Canons and whatsoever pleases not your fancies; but that all
should, I do avouch; by reason the Church of England in her public service,
the Synod in their Articles, and the Parliament of this Realm in their
confirmation of both, enioyn^ all men not onl^ to read those words so
translated, but to bele^ue that Christ descended to Hell. If ^ou (...) (...),
they are bound to bel^eue your emphaticall phrase, or your phantastical^
imagination o^ you know not what, general, ind^finite, priuati^e condition of
death, they w^l ^ile at your presumptuous folly. If it be a matter of faith, it
^ no phrase; if we must believe as they teach, that Christ (after his death and
bu^all) de^cended to hell; you must show us some other hell, to which Christ
descended after death; or else I conclude that the Laws of this Land bind all
men to believe and profess, that Christ descended to that hell, which the
Scriptures acknowledge, and not which your roling conc^its and totter^ng tongu^
would establish against the warrant and word of God; whose only will should be
the line, whose only truth should be the guide, whose only praise should be
the end of all our professions and actions.

THE TABLE, SERVING for their use, that are desirous with more ease to find
out the special contents of this book, as they are handled in their several
places.
A
A Brahams bosom. page 552* the place thereof unknown. 656 A^yssus in the New
Testamen^ is hell. 6^9 A^sed, i^nocents and penit^nts ^re not, though hanged on
a tree. 238 Ch^t was no^ A^sed, how great soever his pains we^. 164. 165 S.
Au^s i^dgement how Christ was accursed. 241 Men c^n not be truly bl^ssed and
accurs^d. 253 That is ^cc^ed which God hates. 257 A sac^ifice for sin is not
ac^ursed, but accepted of God 258 Adam sinned as well by body as by soul. 183.
184 Was punished for his sin after Christ was promised. 147 What God
threatened to Adam if he sinned. 177. 178 Aeternall death f^r whom Christ might
fear. 484 Against ae^rnall death, as due to him, Christ could not p^ay. 378.
379 Aeternally God does not punish one for another ^ault. 336 Affections are
p^infull to the soul: 4^9 make sensible alterations in the heart. 193. 194
Good affections of love and zeal are not painful. 26 Evil affections are
punishments of sin. 31 Inward affections make outward impressions in the
heart. 193 The heart is the seat of man's affections and actions. Christ could
repress and increase his affections as he saw cause. 400 The A^xe cleaves to
the Verb and not to the Noune. 216 Affl^ctions of the godly are moderated
punishments 9. 10. 11. 17. manifest Gods displeasure against sin. 14^ Agony
what it is. 339 The pains of hell were not the cause of Christ's agony. 58. 59
The causes that might be of Christ's agony in the ^arde^. 9^. they cross^ not
one another. 97 I di^ not resolve what was the cause of Christ's agony. The
precise cause of Christ's agony is not revealed in the Scriptures. 338. 346.
though the general occasions may be coniectured 346 The parts of Christ's agony.
339 An agony proves rather zeal then fear. 339 Fear and sorrow the
Scriptures witness in Christ's agony. 342 Submission to God and compassion on
men, the general causes of Christ's agony. 347 The first cause co^curring to
Christ's agony. 347 The second. 354 The third. 370 The fourth. 371 The fi^th.
375 The sixth. 399 The Fathers determ^ne not the exact cause of Chr^sts agony.
371 How some use the word agony. 403 The different affections in Christ's agony
had different causes. 558 Amaz^d neither Moses nor Paul were in their pra^ers.
368 Christ was not amazed in his prayer. 369. 479 Christ's prayer proves he
was not then amazed. 469 Christ's ^raier was no amaze. 467 The Defender yeeld^th
perfect knowledge to Christ in his amazednes. 481 Angry God was with our
sins, but not with Christ's person. 463 God is truly angry with his childrens
sins. 14 Angels sinned in their whole nature as men do. 197 Angels and good
men received the bowing of the body. 662 (...) signifies For as well as From.
501 The Apostle. 1. Cor. 15. speaks only of the resurrection to glory. 640.
What his words H^b. 5. infer. 498. 499. 500 Believers may not judge of the
apostles words. 89 More Apostles then twelve. 651 The diverse reading and
translating of the apostles words, 1. Cor. 15. 55. 639 Astonishment what it is.
441 What astonishment with fear is. 468 Christ did not pray in astonishment.
441 Why Christ might be somewhat astonished. 468 Athanasius lewdly falsified by
the Defender. 275 takes Hades for hell. 569. 600. 601 What Athanasius speaks
of Adam, the Defender refers to Christ. 275 Augustine not ignorant of the
Greek tongue. 608 his judgment how Christ was accursed. 241 keeps the sense
of Peter's word, Act. 2. 626 is grossly mistaken by the Defender. 627 (...)
Christ took our natural, but not sinful, affections. 330 Christ might
behold the power of Gods wrath, and yet not fear the vengeance due to the
wicked. 348 Christ prayed for us and against Satan. 352 Christ knew the burden
of our sins must lie on his shoulders. 353 Christ and his members must drink
of one and the same cup. 353 Christ wept for the desolation of Jerusalem, and
sorowed for the reiection of the Jews. 354 Christ wept and sorrowed when he
would. 355 Christ grieved at the wilfulness of the Jews. 357 Christ sorowed
that his death should be the ruin of the Jews. ibid. Christ chose the time
and place to show his vehement affections. 358 Christ could not be content to
be separated from God for us. 367 Christ suffered the likeness of our
punishment, not of our sin. 273 Christ was not ordained to be damned for us.
364 Christ feared not death, but his Fathers power. 370 Christ might pray to
have the deepnes of his sorrows comforted, and pains assuaged. 374. 375
Christ might pray against the sting of death, which he was to feel before he
died. 381 Christ could not pray against eternal death as due to him, but unto
us. 378. 379 Christ was most earnestly to ask, what God had faithfully
promised to grant. 384 Christ felt all our affections not of necessity, but
according to his own power and will. 386 Christ showed in the garden how man's
soul strugleth with the panges of death. 388 Christ was weak to comfort the
weak, but stronger then the strongest on the cross. 388. 390 Christ saw the
whole danger from which he should redeem us. 392. 393 Christ teaches all his
to fear Gods power as himself did in the garden. 393. 394 Christ presented
and dedicated his body in the garden, which he suf^ered on the cross to be
done to death. 399 Christ died not in the garden. 400 Christ could repress and
increase his affections as he saw cause. 400 Christ found no joy in his pains,
but comfort in his hope. 411 Christ emptied himself of glory not of grace. 412
Christ citing the 1. verse. of the 21. Psalm, notes the whole to appertain to
his passion. 434 Christ was mortified in flesh but not in soul. 507 Christ
might pass from hell to heaven. 550 Christ needed no long time to de^cend to
hell. 551 Christ presented himself in every place, 564 Christ was to rise full
conqueror of hell and death. 668 How Christ's death was like the godlies. 7 How
Christ laid down his soul for us. 132. 133 How Christ shall the second time
appear without sin. 27 How far Christ's sufferings must be extended. 343 How
Christ's soul was in his Fathers hands. 549 How Christ was in Paradise the day
of his death. 549 How Christ was like us in all things sin excepted. 86 How
Christ might fear and yet be freed from it. 486. ^87 How Christ loosed the
sorrows of death. 624 How Christ must rise from the dead. 627 What Christ
discerned in all his sufferings. 317 What Christ undertook for us. 324 What
things Christ inwardly beheld in the garden 387 Why Christ might dislike the
death of the body. 398 The joint sufferings of Christ in his bodily death most
available for our salvation. 68 Every thing in Christ was meritorious, but not
satisfactorie for sin. 179. 180 Both body and soul must suffer in Christ.
130. 131 Christ's bodily death part of the punishment of our sins. 11 By
Christ's corporal punishment we are freed from spiritual and eternal. 222. 223
Christ's blood could not be shed but by Satan and his inst^uments. 231 Christ's
recompense for the wrong received at Satan's hands. 232 Christ's suffering
without the gate of the city. 113. 114 Christ's death was most just with God in
respect of his will to save us. 262. 263 Christ's death not exacted as a debt
but ^eceaued as a voluntary sacrifice. 264 Christ's doings above man's reason.
310 The nature, measure, and purpose of Christ's sufferings. 332 The pains of
Christ's soul as of his body were equal to the strength of his patience. 334
Christ's faith did not fail in the sharpest of his pains. 335 All Christ's
sufferings were righteous and holy. 344. 438 Christ's words John 12. avouch not
contraries. 482. are expounded. 483 Christ's senses were not overwhelmed with
fear and sorrow. 477 Christ's fears and sorrows not like the reprobates. 448.
449. 450 We must not increase Christ's sufferings at our pleasure. 478 Christ's
passio did not kill his soul but his body. 528 Christ's conquest secureth our
souls severed from our bodies. 670 Christ's Soul was not tormented with Gods
immediate hand. 34 Christ's Soul suffered but died not for us. 133 Christ soul
suffered by all her powers but not the death of the Soul. 136. 137. 140
Christ's Soul chief patient in pain and agent in merit. 179 Christ's Soul
could not merit, if it wanted understanding and will. 480 Christ's Soul in her
greatest pains did most show the life of patience and obedience to God. 524
Christ's Soul was passible, but died not. 533 Christ's Soul was not fastened to
hell three days. 551 Christ's Soul was in glory before his Body. 669 Christ's
Soul living by grace could no way be dead. 523 Neither Scriptures nor Fathers
vnderst^nd Christ's Soul by his Body. 426. 427 Christ's Soul was not crucified
through infirmity. 510 Christ^ Soul was not under the dominion of death. 650
What we must beware in the sufferings of Christ's Soul. 536 Many writers teach
the sufferings of Christ's Soul, without the pains of hell. 536 Why Christ's
Soul and not his Body was to conquer hell. 668 It is not against the faith
that Christ's Soul should conquer hell. 622 Christ's man^ood prayed for that
with all humility, which hi^ person by ^ight might have challenged. 378 Christ^
manhood might fear the glory of Gods judgment. 380 Christ's manhood mi^ht
fear the power of Gods wrath against our sins, which he was to bear. 380
Christ's manhood might fear the sting of death, as horrible to man's nature. 381
Christ's manhood was to conquer hell. 667. though by power of his Godhead. 670
Christ's flesh found no ease in death though his Soul were full of hope. 424
Christ's flesh was weak though his Spirit was willing. 508 Christ's flesh could
not putrify. 623 Christ's prayer in the Garden was well advised. 397 Christ^
prayer was no maze. 4^7 Christ's prayer was not against his Fathers will. 397.
465. 466. 470. 471. 472 Christ's prayer was full of faith. 474. 475 Christ's
prayer was with condition and reservation of Gods will. 382 Compassion and
pity are always painful. 27 Compassion is affliction though it be a virtue.
438 Christ more compassi^nate then Moses or Paul. 359 Christ's complaint on the
Cross. 409 How many senses it may bear. 418. 420. 421 The first sense. 416
The second sense. 418 The third sense. 421 The fourth sense. 430 The fifth
sense. 432 The sixth sense. 433 The Saints comp^aint in their afflications. 418
The event of Christ's complaint on the Cross. 419 No shame for Christ to
complain on the Cross as he did. 420 Leo makes Christ's complaint on the
Cross an instruction, no lamentation. 432 We were conceived in sin before we
were quickened with life. 173 Man's flesh is defiled in conception before the
soul is created and infused. 174. 175 None can be everlastingly condemned for
another fault. 363 Christ's conquest over hell and death. 667 was ordered most
to Sat^ns shame. 669 Contradictions objected by the Defender are easily
answered. 69 Contradictions in the Defender. 320 A shameful contradiction of
the Defender. 423 The words of the Creed examined. 648 How long this clause of
Christ's descent to hell has been in the Creed. 653. 654 Hades in the Creed
mu^t signify hell. 649 Hell in the Creed is no new translation. 652 The
Creed continued from the Apostles times. 664 Twelve parts of the Creed. ^64
What Cr^sse of Christ it was that Paul so much reoiyced in. 73. 74 75 How the
Fathers and new writers expound that place. 76. 77 How far the Cross of
Christ extends it self by the Scriptures. 79 We rejoice in the effects of
Christ's Cross. 81 Christ was not vo^de of all comfort on the Cross^. 410. 411
What comfort Christ had on the Cross. 412 The death of the Cross the greatest
ex^anition of Christ. 433 Christ's Soul was not Crucified through infirmity.
501 Figuratively the Soul may be said to be Crucified. 80 What Cup Christ
drank of. 373 What Christ meant by the hour and Cup of his Passion. 443
Christ and his members must drink of one and the same Cup. 353 What part of
the Curse Christ bare for our sins. 234. 235 Hanging on a tree was not the
whole Curse of the Law. 236 A double Curse of sin. 236 Two kinds o^ C^rses
in the Law. 239 The bodily death which Christ suffered was the Curse which he
sustained. 240 Cursing and bl^ssing compared do manifest each the other. 249
What is true Cursing and blessing from God. 250 How Christ was made a Curse for
us. 257 Christ's death was a kind of Curse. 259 Christ undertook to satisfy
but not to suffer our Curse 260 The Curse for sin is triple. 266 Cyprian
wrested by the Defender. 274 D
D Amnation, What pains are essential to it. 37. 39 The horror of Gods
judgments not near the pains of the Damned. 227 The Godly in this life feel
not the pains of the damned. 320 Sharper pains are reserved for the damned
then now they feel. 334 Christ was not ordained to be damned for us. 364 David
never felt the true pains of hell. 453 David's fear unlike to Christ's. 442
What Death Christ died. 19 A threefold death the wages of sin. 13^ Corporal
death in all men is the punishment of sin. 149. 150. 151. 176 Death in Christ
was the satisfaction for sin. 176 Everlasting death the wages of sin which
Christ could not suffer. 226 The death of the body is evil in it self though
God to his make it a passage to life. 244. 245 The consequen^s after death do
not prove death to be good. 246 The nature of death not changed in the godly.
252 God so h^teth death that he will destroy it as an enemy. 254 Natural
death came not by the sentence of Mos^ Law. 261 Th^e is no death of the Soul
without sin. 366 All feel the sting of death which Christ expressed before
he died. 389 The death and life of the soul here on earth mistaken by the
Defender. 430 What the second death is in the Scriptures. 492 Eight p^es of
Scripture abused for the death of Christ's Soul. 493 By one land of death
Christ freed us from all kinds of death. 504 To be utterly forsaken of God is
the death of the Soul. 517. 518 The extremest degree of pains where grace
does not fail is no death of the Soul. 524 What things the death of the body
does import. 649 The Defender grossly peruerteth my words. 44. 45 The Defender
cont^adicteth himself. 56. 57 The Defender contemns the Fathers and their
judgments. 82 The Defender deuiseth shifts to decline Scriptures and Fathers
against him. 94 The Defender would make the manner of Christ's dying only
unusual. 95 The D^fender does grossly mistake the reiection of the Jews to
be the meaning of Christ's complaint on the cross. 98 The D^fender not able to
support his errors, does quarrel with the question. 99 The Defender eludeth
the Scriptures with his terms of single and mere. 125. 126. 127 The Defender
clouteth one conclusion out of diverse places. 146 The Defender makes the
sufferings of Christ's flesh needless to our redemption. 168. 169 The Defender
peruerteth the doctrine of the Homilies. 224. 225 The Defender makes Christ
sinful, accursed, and defiled. 265 The Defender would not fail to cite
Fathers if he had them. 273 The Defender compares Christ in want of comfort
with the damned. 291 The Defender vainly presumes all places of his unanswered
to be granted. 319 The Defender has devised torments for Christ's soul. 323
The Defender controleth the words of the holy Ghost by his new phrases. 413 The
Defender in steed of proouing falls to granting his own positions. 5^3 The
Defender misciteth S. John's words and on that error groundeth all his reasons.
644 The Defender giving a reason of n^thing, asks a reason of all things. 415
The Defender claims like reverence to his words as to the Scripture. 325 The
Defender says the Scriptures are ordinarily true, that is, sometimes false.
367 The Defender does every where mistake and misapply what is said. 384 The
Defender forgeth a pace new parts of the Christian faith. 393 The Defender
takes the parts of Christ's agony for the causes thereof. 401 The Defender is
somewhat pleasureable. 528 The Defender corrupts S. Luke. 402. 403 The
Defender ascribes a lively affection to Christ's dead flesh. 422 The Defender
utters a flat contradiction to his own doctrine. 422. 423 The Defender
confesses the Fathers prove my meaning. 425 The Defender is driven to
contrarieties. 431 The Defender takes from Christ inward sense and memory in
his sufferings. 440 The Defender yields perfect knowledge to Christ in his
amazedness. 481 The Defender foolishly proves the death of Christ's soul.
495. 496 The Defender abuses the Scriptures. 534. 535 The Defender cannot
discern a conclusion from a quotation. 568 The Defendours four restraints of
hell pains. 4 The Defendours disdain of the fathers. 98 The Defendours vain
shifts. 114. 115 The Defendours skill in framing arguments. 327 The Defendours
absurd devises. 490 The Defendours manner of reasoning as illogicall as his
matter is false. 336 Dereliction in the Scriptures never implies the pains of
the damned. 415 Deep what it signifies. 566 To what Deep Christ descended
after death. 565 567 The true sense of Paul and Moses words. Romans 10.
concerning the Deep. 568 The who^e church taught that Christ after death
descended to hell. 544. 545 New Writers teach Christ's descent to hell. 546. 547
Christ needed no long time to descend to hell. 551 Of Christ's descending and
ascending. 553 Christ aescended and ascended to be Lord over all. 563 To what
deep Christ descended after death. 565 567 Descending is to places below. 569
How long this clause of Christ's descent to hell has been in the Creed. 653.
654 What Ruffinus means by Christ's descent to hell. 655 Descending to hades
was not the burial of Christ's body. 556. 557. 558 The causes of Christ's
descent to hell. 666 Des^ending to hell was a part of Christ's exaltation. 671
The descent of Christ to hell confessed by the Catechism. 677 The Laws of
this land do bind all to believe Christ's descent to hell. 678 Desperation in
hell is no sin. 71 Desperation is the sorest torment in this life. 238 A
small Difference of words may quite alter the sense. 199 Difference of Christ's
offering and suffering. 276 Difference of outward and inward temptations. 314
Difference betwixt Gods threats and judgments. 472 How the Devil may discern
and incense our affections. 192 The Devil tormented not Christ's soul on the
Cross. 295 Christ suffered as deep pains but not as deep Doubts as we may.
321 E.
ELect. Who is enemy to Gods Elect. 233 The Elect are never truly accursed.
252 The Elect cannot perish. 364 Erasmus foully mistaken by the defendor. 653
Four notable Errors grounded by the defendor upon the facts of Moses and Paul.
363 The first. 363 The second. 365 The third. 367 The fourth. 368 What
impressions Evil makes in the soul of man. 341 Evil past, present, or to
come works sorrow, pain, and fear in the soul of man. 341 (...) what it
imports. 485 Is contrary to fear. 501 Esaias does not touch the death of
Christ's soul. 526. 527 Esaias 14. Shcol for hell. 559. 560 Eusebius report of
Thaddeus allowed by the best historiographers. 660 F
FAthers: their judgments may be called Authorities. 83 The Fathers may be
left in some private opinions. 84 I leave not the Fathers in the grounds of
faith. 85 The Fathers doc not teach that Christ suffered all which we should
have suffered. 138. 139 The Fathers disclaim all necessity in the death of
Christ. 285 The Fathers determine not the exact cause of Christ's Agony. 371
Wherein we should follow the Fathers. 415 Some Fathers expound me in Christ's
words, for my members. 416 No Father avouches the death of Christ's Soul.
142. 143 Diverse Fathers evidently corrupted for the death of Christ's Soul.
428. 429 By the judgment of the Fathers, Christ died no death of the Soul.
519 The Fathers profess true fire to be in hell. 46 The Fathers plainly remove
the death of Christ's Soul from the work of our redemption. 330. 331 All
Christ's Fears were holy. 215 Fear and sorrow in Christ were sufferings for
sin. 345 Christ's Fear in the Garden was religious. 371 Christ's ^eare and
sorrow were painful but religious sufferings. 372 What Fear and sorrow Christ
was to yield unto God, when he offered the ransom of our sins. 374 What
things Christ might justly and greatly fear in the Garden. 380 ^eare may be
intellect^ue or sensitive. 383 Christ might fear many things besides hell
pains. 385 Why Christ feared more then Mattyrs do. 395 Christ might justly
fear the power of Gods wrath. 380 Figuratively the Soul may be said to be
crucified. 80 Fire in hell is not allego^icall. 40. 41. 42. 43 The Fathers
profess true fire to be in hell. 46 It is possible that brimstone may be
mingled with fire in hell. 47 The same fire punish^th the wi^ked both before
and after iudge^ent. 55 What fire did signify in sacrifices. 112. 113 What
fire might note in the holocaust. 116 How Christ was Forsaken on the cross.
409 How far and wherein Christ was Forsaken are the things questioned. 414
What forsaking could not be found in Christ 414 We were forsaken of God till
Christ (...) us by his death. 417 Christ never forsaken of hope and comfo^t. ^7
God showed by the present event that he had not forsaken h^s s^nne. 419 We
st^iue not for the word but for the sense and manner of forsa^ing. 431 G
GEhenna was not used in speaking to the Gentiles. 618 God can doc more then he
will. 23 Gods love to Christ appeared even in his death. 20. 21 Gods purpose in
the death and cross of Christ. 154. 155. 156 God uses means and instruments
in punishing. 33 God tempereth love and justice in punishing his elect. 147.
255 God works good by evil. 254 God is just as well in forgiving as in
punishing sin. 262 God was able to save us otherwise then by Christ's death. 287
God was the author of all Christ's afflictions, but not with his immediate
hand. 298. 299 God vieth his creatures to perform his judgments. 302 God is
the principal agent in all our sufferings, but not with his immediate hand. 302
Gods hand works whatsoever means he uses. 300. 301 Gods love to his son
ouerswaied his hatred to our sins. 268 Gods justice in subiecting Satan's
kingdom to Christ's manhood. 230 The Gospel differs much from the Law. 264
How the Grave is a^ habitation for the godly. 575 God would not have our flesh
as yet freed from the Grave. 670 Christ was not Guil^y of our sin though he
took our punishment on him. 162. 163 The whole man is guilty of all sin. 185.
186 187. 208 Guilty stretches as well to the punishment as to the fact..266 A
mediator not guilty of the sin for which he does mediate. 276 H
HAdes what it signifi^th with the Greek Fathers. 589. 590. 591. 592. 593
Hades what it is with Chrylostom. 589 Ath^nasius takes Hades for hell. 599.
6^0 Hades in Athanasius Creed is not the grave. 659 Hades with Ignatius is not
the grave. 657 The souls of the godly are not in Had^s. 602 Hades is a place
of darkness. 609 How Hades is used in the new Testament. 629 Hades with new
writers is the grave or hell. 609. 610 611 Hades is a place under the earth.
613 Hades an unseen and dark place. 618 Hades in the Creed must signify
hell. 649 Hades is not the ignominy of the grave. 651 Hades was first the name
of the devil. 615 Hades is hell or the devil in the new Testament. 619 Hades
is hell in the new Testament without any figure. 621 Why Hades signifies hell
in the new T^stament. 647 Hades with the Pagans was the place not the state of
the dead. 616 The whole created world is Hades with the Def^nder. 615 Hades in
effect is nothing but death with the Defender. 624 How (...) and Inferi
concur in signification. 579 How the Defender wauereth about Hades. 619 How
Hades is used in the Revelation. 642 How Hades shall be cast into hell fire.
644 S. Luke makes Hades a place of torment. 621 What Hades Matthew. 11. 23. is
threatened to Capernaum. 630 Many Greek copies have Act. 2. 24. the sorrows of
Hades. 625 Hades in the Scriptures opposed to the highest heavens. 635 Christ
loosed the sorrows of Hades. 625. 626 The wall of Hades not broken but by
Christ. 657 Hades has not all the dead. 646 Hades follows after death. 643
Hades taken for the rulers or persons in hell. 647 The souls of the godly are
not in Hades. 602 Hanging on a tree was not the whole curse of the law. 236
Hanging on the cross a cursed kind of death. 237 Innocents and penitents not
truly accursed though Hanged on a tree. 238 Hard speeches should rather be
qualified then strained to the highest. 271 All affections make sensible
alterations in the Heart. 1^3. 194 The heart is the seat of man's affections and
actions. 2^3 The Heart suggesting evil sins. 311 The joys of Heaven are
proper to the place. 455 456 The sight of God in this life ^uch differs from
the sight of his face in Heaven. 456 The Saints of God had some sight of God in
earth, but not comparable to that in Heaven. 460 The souls ^re not yet in the
same height of Heaven where Christ is. 5^0 541 How many Heavens the Scriptures
make 541. 542 The graces of God in earth are not the joys of Heaven. 461 Why
the Heavens are compared with hell in the Scriptures. 634 God is not the
immediate and principal in^cter of Hell pains. 2^. 29 The sentence of the
judge contains the essence of Hell pains. 35 Christ suffered not the
substance of hell pains. 36 Reiection from Gods kingdom essential to Hell
pains. 37. 38 Malediction essential to Hell pains. 38 Hell fire is not
allegorical. 40. 41 42. 43. 49. 53 54 I never said Hell fire was material. 44
The Fathers profess true fire to be in Hell. 46 51. 52 So do later Divines.
49. 50 It is possible that brimstone may be mingled with fire in Hell. 47
Chains there are in Hell though not of iron. ^7 Whether there be true fire in
hell before the judgment is not the question. 54 Christ suffered not the
essential part of hell pains. 56 Hell pains not the cause of Christ's agony.
58. 59 The sharpness of Hell pains. 60 The foretast of judgment in Hell, is
neither full, final, perpetual, nor gen^rall. 210 Positive punishment now in
Hell. 214 The suffering of Hell pains, no way necessary to our salvation. 220
Men may fear, but not feel the tru^ pains of hell in this life. 320 The
pains of hell are no natural affections. 383 Christ might feel somewhat
extraordinary yet not the pains of hell. 391 The vehemency of hell pains
pass the patience of Men and Angels. 450 The true pains of hell are not felt
in this life. 451. 462 The true pains of hell are proper to the place 454. 455
The true pains of hell are above and against nature. 464. 465 We must not
re^oyce in suffering hel^ pains. 441 A broken spirit is not the pains of
hell. 516 Christ brought us back from hell. 607 No place for souls under
earth but hell. 614 It is not against the faith that Christ's Soul should
conquer hell. 622 Christ must rise conqueror of death and hell. 628 The Jews
were promised their Messiah should conquer hell. 628 All the names of hell
prove it to be in the earth. 632 Hell is in the earth and yet some devils in
the air. 633 Why the heavens are compared with hell in the Scriptures. 634 Our
victory against death and hell not full till the last day. 637 638 Christ ^th
the keys of death and of hell. 642. 643 Nothing but persons cast into hell.
645 The Defender makes three hells in steed of one 645 Christ's spo^ling of
hell precedent to his resurrection. 673 Heretic always urged the same places
that the Defender does. 425 What the Holocaust did signify. 111. 112 What ^ire
might note in the Holocaust. 116 I.
IMmediate. What suffering is Immediate from ^ God. 27. 32 God is not the
Immediate and principal inflicter of h^ll pains. 2^. 29 Christ's soul was not
tormented with Gods Immed a^e hand. 34 God can punish the soul by means
without his Immediate hand. 219 God the author of all Christ's afflictions but
not by his Immediate hand. 298. 299 God is the principal agent in all our
sufferings but not with his Immediate hand. 302 How (...) and Infers concur
in signification. What place Tertullia takes Inferi to be. 585. 586 Inferi are
places and persons under the earth. 5^7 Inferi are not now the place and state
of good and bad deceased. 588 Saint Austin takes Inferi for hell, and not for
the state of the dead. 198. 590 The souls of the godly are not in Inferi. 602
Infernus with the latin fathers is more the^ death. 603 Inferi not found in the
Scriptures in any good sense. ^04 Inferi no place for the godly after Christ's
resurrection. 605 Infernus is not the place nor state of all souls deceased.
606 Christ did not suffer pains truly Infinite. 161 Christ's Infirmity was
voluntary. 407 Christ's Infirmity was power. 416 How all the kingdoms of the
earth might be showed unto Christ in an Instant. 308. 309 Irenaeus did write
in Greek. 584 Where Irenaeus thought Christ's soul was after death. 583. 584
The rule of Justice suffers the stronger to bear the burden of the weaker.
292 Gods Justice in subiecting Satan's kingdom to Christ's manhood. 230 Gods
Justice might punish Christ's body, but not Christ's soul with death. 337 The
Judgment of God to which Christ submitted himself for our redemption. 348
Gods Judgment for our redemption concerns Christ, men, and Angels. 348 In
this Judgment God required of Christ satisfaction for the sins of men. 349 K
K (...). what it signifies. 625 Christ has the Keys of death and of hell.
642. 643 Kindred goes by blood and not by the soul. 509 Our natural
Knowledge comes by sense. 196 The means of man's Knowledge. 199 Our love and
joy do follow our Knowledge. 462 L
LEo makes Christ's words on the Cross an instruction, no lamentation. 432 How
Christ was like us in all things sin excepted. 86. 324 Christ not like us in
any sinful affections. 322 How Christ was like us in his sufferings. 323
Christ not like us in any want of grace or touch of sin. 326 To what lower
parts of the earth Christ descended. 554 What is meant by the lower parts of the
earth. 555 The lower earth is all one with the lower Sheol. 556 The lower Shcol
signifies hell and not the grave. 557. 558 The lower earth Ezechiel uses for
hell. 561 The lower parts of the earth are hell. 562 M
MArtyrs and Malefactors have a strong conflict with death though we perceive
it no^. 389 The glory of Martyrs were not great, if their pains were not
great. 390. 391 Martyrs find joy and ease after death, but not in death. 301
Why Christ feared more then Martyrs do. 395 Christ's senses might not be
overwhelmed as Martyrs are. 396 The manner of breathing out Christ's Soul was
miraculous. 87. 88. 89. 90 The Fathers observe that it was miraculous. 91. 92.
93 So do the new writers. 94 Moses prayer for the people examined. 359 The
purpose of Moses prayer for the people. 360 How Moses in his prayer is excused
from sin. 365 Moses face did shine when he know it not. 461 Moses was not
amazed in his prayer. 368 N
THe name of nature in the graces of God and joys of heaven is a vain
distinction. 461 There was no necessity in our redemption but Christ's will,
power, and liberty. 283 284. 285 The Fathers disclaim all necessity in the
death of Christ. 285 No necessity in the death of Christ 286 Christ's fear and
agony came not from necessity but from his humility and feruencie. 339
Neither necessity nor infirmity could oppress Christ. 405 New w^iters teach
the sufferings of Christ's Soul without the pains of hell. 536 New writers
teach Christ's descent to hell. 546. 547 New writers observe Christ's manner of
dying to have been miraculous. 94 O
OLeuians conjectures for his sense of Christ's descent to Hades are but weak.
631 P.
Pains of this life Christ did bear, but not of hell. 217. 218 Christ's
Pains might be unknown and yet not the pains of hell. 161 In outward Pains
men perceive and acknowledge Gods hand upon them. 170 Pains proper to the
soul are not by and by the pains of hell. 214 All Christ's Pains were holy.
215 More required in our ransom then only Pains. 216 We cannot judge of
other men's Pains. 328. Excessi^e Pain brings death. 447 How Christ was in
Paradise the day of his death. 549 The Parable of the strong man bound and
spoiled. ^74 Christ's Patience was greater then any man's whatsoever his pains
were. 394 How Christ's patience exceeded all men's. 395 Christ's patience at the
highest before he complained on the cross. 418 Sa^nt Paul 1. Cor. 15. keeps
the true sense of the Prophet Osee. 641 Paul's wish for the Jews considered.
360 The time was when Paul so wished. Ibid. If Paul spoke of the time when he
wrote, his words were conditional. Ibid. What Paul meant when he wished to be
separated from Christ for the Jews. 361. 362 How the Grecians expound Paul's
words. 361 How Paul in his wish was excused from sin. 365 Paul wished if it
were possible or lawful. 366 Paul was not amazed in his prayer. 368 The true
sense of Paul's and Moses words. Romans 10. 567 568. Positive punishment now in
hell. 214 No Positive thing common to good and bad after death. 581 Christ
suffered not the proper wrath of God. 19 What proper applied to wrath
signifies. 18 The Scriptures often intermingle proper speeches with
figurative. 19 Proper opposed to Metaphorical. 123 A part may Properly
denominate the whole. 124 The joint sufferings of soul and body most proper to
man. 167 The whole suffering of Christ was not Gods proper action. 303 What the
Prophets foretold of Christ's sufferings that the Evangelists confirm was
verified. 299 In punishing his elect God tempereth both love and justice. 147
Corporal death in all men is the punishment of sin. 149. 150. 151 God is
most just in punishing his Saints. 262 The Defenders partition of punishment
applied to Christ is insufficient and impious. 153 All punishment is not for
correction or vengeance properly so called. 154 The godly justly punished for
their offenses. 256 Q
QVaestion. The first quaestion wholly perverted. 3 The chief points coincident
to the first Question. 9 Whether there be true fire in hell before the
judgment, is not the Question. 54 When and how far Christ was forsaken are
the things Questioned. 414 R
Ransom. To whom our ransom was paid. 228 To save from death is to raise from
death. 50 Whence their souls come that are raised to (...) ^25 Redemption by
Christ's blood most sufficien^ 67 The Scriptures teach no redemption bu^ ^y the
blood and death of Christ. 127 Both body and Soul are redeemed by (...) blood
of Christ. 128. 129 The body has not his redemption (...) ^fore the last day.
129. 130 Christ undertook to be our ^demer 4000. years before he was made man
280 The willing offer of the S^e to be our redeemer did induce the (...) the
whole Trinity. 281 The redeemer might pay as well for the prisoners as for him
self. 377 Christ's sufferings (...) way like the sufferings of the reprobate.
331. 332 Christ's fear (...) sorrow not like the reprobates. 448. 449 What is
(...) by sitting at Gods right hand. 651 The claue of Christ's descent to Hades
was in the Cree^e before Ruffinus time. 655 What Ruffinus means by Christ's
descent to hell. 655 S
SAcrifice. Three properties of the true Sacrifice for sin. 99. 100 The
bloody Sacrifices represented no death but only bodily. 105 No Sacrifices of
the Jews figured the death of Ch^ists Soul. 106 What Salt, flower, oil and
wine added to the Jews sacrifices might signify. 109. 110 What fire did
signify in sacrifices. 112. 113 What is consequent to the true sacrifice for
sin. 272 Why the people laid their hands on the head of their sacrifices. 277
Fear and sorrow necessary in the sacrifice for sin. 379 More then
affliction requisite to Christ's sacrifice. 437 A de^d Soul is no sacrifice for
sin. 527 Wh^t the Sacraments of the new Testament import. 117 Sacraments do
constantly and continually signify and represent the same 117 The Spirit o^
sanctification is the holy Ghost. 511 My exception, to the Defenders instance
of the Scape-goate. 106 What was figured by the scape-goate. 107 108 The
scape-goate might in some sort be a sign of Christ. 108 How the Scripture
limiteth Christ's death. 5. 180 What the Scriptures mean by the wages of sin.
12 What they mean by the wrath of God. 15 Phrases of Gods wrath against the
wicked in Scripture are improper. 15. 16 Scriptures never mention that Christ
suffered Gods wrath. 21. nor the death of the Soul. 493. 49. 515 nor the
pains of hell. 399 ^ow the Scriptures speak of Christ's Passion. 22 Scriptures
often intermin le proper speeches (...) figurative 48 The ^riptures sometimes
put a condition all to thin most certain. 473 True (...) how to expound the
Scriptures. 435 Many pla. s of Scriptures have diverse expositions. 4^ which
may be tolerated though they cannon ^e reconciled. 435 The Scriptures (...) the
words but not the errors of the heat. en. 612 Some Scriptures vnc (...) ^ine
for a time. 664 Satan was conquered fast by justice, then by power. 229 Satan's
kingdom subjected to Christ's m^nhood. 230 Satan assaulted Christ on the ^rosse
but by externail means. 296. 297 Satan might do nothing against christ but
what Christ would. 315 Satan works not but where he is. 306 Christ ordered
his conquest most to (...) shame 669 What was impugned in the Sermons. 2 The
text of my Sermons was not mistaken. 72 But rightly and orderly pursued. 78 Our
natural knowledge comes by Sense. 196 Prouocations and pleasures come by the
senses. 200. 201 The soul for want of her senses sometimes cease to sin.
206 Christ's senses might not be overwhelmed as martyrs are. 396 In what sense
Ezekiah uses the gates of Sheol. 247 The lower Sheol signifies hell and not
the grave. 557. 558 Sheol for hell Esaias. 14. 559. 560 The souls of the Saints
are not in Sheol. 571 Sheol is no mere privation of this life. 572 Sheol is
properly a place under earth for the dead. 573 The souls in Gods hands are not
in Sheol. 574 The Sheol of souls is more then a mere privation. 575 What
Sheol is to the wicked and what to the godly. 575 To what Sheol Jacob would
descend mourning 576 Sheol no place for just man's souls. 577 There is neither
knowledge nor praise of God in Sheol. 578 Sheol is no destruction to the godly.
575 What is me^nt by me^nt near to Sheol or (...) most dwelling there. 500 The
Defender abuses Plato and Plato, to have a Sheol for all things. 630 Proves
Moses and David to have a Sheol for all thin s. 631 To what Sheol Corah and his
company descended. 631 The Desendours absurd proofs for the Sheol of all thin
s. 632 The Similitude of an earthly suerty not fit for Christ, though the name
may well be used. 282 283 No humane similitude can thoroughly fit Christ's
sufferings for us. 293 Similitudes are not always of things lawful. 293
Similitude is no equality. 328 How we are freed from Sin by Christ. 152. 153
We inherit sin and death from our parents flesh 171 How sin is communicated
from the soul to the body. 188. 189 All acts of sin by the body. 202 Body
and soul that were joined in sin shall be joined in pain. 209 How sin
makes men unclean. 265 How sin was condemned in Christ's flesh. 268 How
Christ was made sin. 269. 270 Our sins were imputed to Christ, that is, he
was punished for them. 272. 277 Inward and infinite Sorrow for sin must be
found in Christ's sacrifice for sins. 372 Christ must as well sorrow as suffer
for sin. 373 Inward and voluntary sorrow of the soul is a sacrifice to God.
438 Sorrow differs from pain. 444 What sorrow is. 444 We may both sorrow and
rejoice at one time. 489 What means of suffering the Soul has. 24 The
passibilitie of the Soul is but one faculty of the soul. 25 The souls
suffering by the body is the proper suffering of the soul. 26 The means by
which the soul suffers pains. 30 The souls suffering from and with the
body not common with beasts. 31 The substance of the soul suffers in and by
all her powers. 134. 135 The souls suffering by sympathy is the Defenders own
phrase. 170 The soul is not derived from the fathers of our bodies. 171. 172
The Soul chiesly sins and chiefly suffers, but not only. 181. 182 What
powers and faculties of the Soul the Fathers (...) corporal and why. 187 The
Soul joined with the Body has one state, and severed another. 198 The Soul
uses her corporal spirits in thinking and remembering. 207 The Soul leads
and the flesh follows to all sin. 210. 211 The Soul has a ^st of sin
and pain before the last day. 213 The Soul feels pain and grief by her
understanding and will. 344 Whence the^ Souls come that are raised to life.
425 The Soul is a consequent to a living body but no part of it. 426 The Soul
is some time called flesh. 529 The Soul taken for life. 570 The Spirit of
sanctification is the holy Ghost. 511 Flesh and Spirit do not always note the
two natures of Christ. 512 The Spirit signifies the Soul of man. 529 The
preaching to the Spirits in prison. 676 The law which curses offenders
admits no Suerties. 264 Christ no way bound to be our Suertie. 277 Christ a
Surety to us of the new Testament. 278 Though Christ may be called a voluntary
Suerty, yet was he truly a merciful Redeem^r. 280 The similitude of an
earthly Suertie not fit for Christ, though the name may well be used. 282. 2^3
The Law allows no offendois any Suerties. 288 I mislike not the name but the
bondage of a Suertie in Christ. 291. 292 Submission to God and compassion on
man the general causes of Christ's Agony. 347 Submission with great fear and
trembling Christ yields to God sitting in judgment. 350. 351 The correcting
of King Edwards Synod. 675 The things misliked in king Edwards Synod. ibid. T
TArtarus a part of Hades with the Poets. 613 Tartarus with the Pagans is hell.
617 Tartarus taken for the a^e over us. 617 Christ could not be tempted to
evil by any motion of his own heart. 304. 305. 306 Christ was tempted in the
wilderness by the suggestion of Satan. 307 Christ was tempted after 40. days.
307 Christ was tempted all his life long, but not inwardly. 312 Persuasion
tempts as well as compulsion. 314 Difference of outward and inward
temptations. 314 No temptations without desperation kill the soul. 525 The
Terror of God felt by Job and Jonas were not the pains of hell. 452 Tertullian
ascribes all sin to the whole man. 208 What forsaking Tertullian speaks
of. 427 Tertullian names no death but of Christ's body. 428 Tertullian is far
from affirming the death of Christ's Soul. 532 Tertullian admits none to
Paradise before the last day but Martyrs. 594. 595. 596 Tertullian therein
followed Montanus the Heretic. 597 How (...) Hades and Inferi concur in
signification. 579 The story of Thaddeus no fable. 660 Thaddeus did not
receive adoration. 662 Thomas, how he might be called Judas. 660 Evil Thoughts
defile the whole man. 204 Our will the cause of our evil thoughts. 200 Christ's
bodily transfiguration was imperfect and transitory. 458. 459 Triumphs are
not secret and solitary. 664 V
VEngeance proper to the wicked appeared not in the Cross of Christ. 156. 157
All Christ's infirmity was Voluntary. 407 W
What the Scriptures mean by the Wages of sin. 12 A threefold death the
Wages of sin. 13 Weakness, appeared in Christ's flesh, but willingness in
his spirit. 424 Whole redemption, and propitiation are very large and
doubtful terms. 103 The Whole man dies though the soul live. 513 514 Evil
thoughts defile the whole man. 204 The whole man guilty of all sin. 185. 186.
187. 208 Our Will the cause of our evil thoughts. 200 What is meant by the
Worm that never dies. 46 What the Scriptures mean by the Wrath of God. 15
What proper applied to wrath signifies. 18 Christ suffered not the proper and
mere wrath of God. 19. 23 What Wrath of God Christ suffered. 57 58 What is
Gods Wrath against sin. 60 God h^d never displeasure or Wrath against Christ's
person. 61 God wrath against sin has many degrees and ^arts. 157 How the
wrath of God in this life differs from wrath to come. 158 Christ might suffer
the wrath of God and yet not the true pains of hell. 159. 160 Wrath must be
measured by Gods intention, not man's discerning. 165 The trial of Gods Saints
is no effect of Gods proper wrath. 313 What Christ discerned of Gods wrath
against our sins. 333 Christ did not apprehend of Gods wrath as the damned
do. 335 Christ was to see more of Gods wrath against our sins then he felt.
376 Christ might justly fear the power of Gods wrath. 380 Z
ZAnchius what he teaches of man's redemption. 537

Faults escaped should thus be amended.
PAge 4. line 25. for fourth read forth. ibid. l. 34. infimities. r.
infirmities. p. 26. l. 48. neighbor. r. neighbor? p. 38. title to his. r. to
hell. p. 58. marg. of agony. r. of Christ's agony. p. 66. l. 47. death? r.
death. p. 230 tit. in subuerting. r. in subiecting. p. 353. l. 47. what to do.
r. what they do. p. 428. marg. in manibus. r. in manus. p. 466. l. 14. the
comfort. r. to comfort. p. 468. l. 4. thambeesa. r. thambeesai. p. ^69. l. 1.
astonished. r. astonished him. p. 473. l. 38. because God. r. because Jacob. p.
485. throughout, enlabeia. r. eulabeia. p. 487. l. 49. eisaekonstheis, r.
eisakoustheis. p. 488. l. 6. eisakonstheis. r. eisakoustheis. ibid. 26. and in
marg. Zinglius, r. Zuinglius. p. 502. l. 35. in members. r. in my members. p.
597. l. 23. since. r. sense. ibid. 32. affections. r. afflictions. p. 520. l.
20. (...). r. (...). ibid. 22. (...), r. (...). ibid. 24. (...). r. (...). p.
522. l. 17. Vigius. r. Vigilius. p. 523. l. 39. enstranging. r. estranging. p.
528. marg. your, r. the.,

LONDON

Printed by Melchisedech Bradwood for John Bill.


